FT  14 MAY 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Japan faces civil action over
Hirohito coin seizure
THE MURKY mystery involving 11m gold coins worth Y1.1 trillion (million
million) issued to celebrate the late Emperor Hirohito's 60th year on
Japan's Chrysanthemum throne is about to enter a new phase.
On his arrival in Tokyo yesterday Mr Paul Davies, a UK coin dealer, said he
would start a civil court action next week against the Japanese government
and the Tokyo metropolitan government to seek the return of 3,200 Hirohito
coins, valued at more than Pounds 600,000. They were seized 26 months ago by
the Tokyo police at Narita airport. He also seeks compensation.
The police claimed that the confiscated coins were fakes and that they had
uncovered Japan's largest known counterfeiting case. They alleged the coins
were part of a consignment of 107,000, then worth USDollars 70m, suspected
of being counterfeits and imported to Japan from the Middle East through
European intermediaries.
Mr Davies, a 40-year-old barrister who set up a coin dealing business in
Ilkley, West Yorkshire, 19 years ago, has always protested that his coins
are genuine.
He said yesterday that his main motive in taking his case to the Japanese
court was to insist that the relevant government authorities prove, beyond
all doubt, that the coins are fakes. 'If they are unable or unwilling to
substantiate their claims, I should be fully compensated for my losses,' he
said, 'and my tarnished reputation should be unconditionally restored.'
Mr Davies said another aspect of the court proceedings would be to highlight
the contradictory behaviour of Japan's Ministry of Finance, the Tokyo
Customs Office, the Bank of Japan and the Osaka Mint prior to the seizure of
his company's coins.
He suggested: 'Their behaviour, both collectively and independently, clearly
established that the coins are unquestionably genuine.'
The affair began in 1985 when Japan gave the gold market a tremendous boost
by importing 300 tonnes of gold, then worth Dollars 3bn, to prepare for the
issue of the Hirohito coins the following year.
The scheme was controversial from the outset because the gold was imported
via New York in an effort to make the balance of trade with the US look less
favourable to Japan.
It also involved big profits for Japan's finance ministry. The coins were
priced at Y100,000 each, twice the value of the 30 grams of gold they
contained. Consequently, the ministry made a profit of up to Y600bn, worth
Dollars 3.5bn at the time.
However, as the coins were legal tender and the Bank of Japan was obliged to
buy them back at Y100,000 each, there were obvious risks that forgers might
try to cash in on the premium between the gold content and the legal-tender
price. In January 1990 the Tokyo police said that this had indeed happened
and claimed forgers had been at work since 1988.
The Tokyo police and the Finance Ministry continue to deflect questions
about the affair by saying investigations are continuing. But Mr Davies
claimed yesterday the police effectively abandoned their investigations in
the summer of 1990.
He said: 'I have been held as a financial hostage by the Japanese
bureaucracy for over two years and made to pay the penalty for a crime that
does not exist. The financial pressure caused by the prolonged confiscation
of my coins is greatly restricting my business.
'The Tokyo police and the finance ministry are not above the law. They must
be accountable for their actions and cannot be allowed to hide behind a veil
of secrecy.'
His Japanese attorney, Mr Takeshi Sakuragi, will formally lodge the legal
documents at the Tokyo District Court next Tuesday.
