FT  14 SEP 92 / Companies face new fraud threat from Nigeria
BRITISH police say they have uncovered fresh attempts by Nigerian confidence
tricksters to draw UK high street banks as well as businesses into
fraudulent transactions potentially worth millions of pounds.
According to police, a 'hard core of Nigerian fraudsters' has been trying to
engage UK companies in trade involving forged letters of credit and bank
drafts.
The Financial Times has been shown copies of counterfeit letters of credit
purportedly issued by a branch of Standard Chartered Bank and advised by
National Westminster Bank earlier this summer.
The documents covered a planned shipment from The Cooper Printing Equipment
Company, based in Hertfordshire. Police were contacted about the attempted
transaction after NatWest alerted the company that the financial
documentation was fraudulent.
Mr Christopher Cooper, the company's technical director, said: 'Our policy
here is that we release no goods until everything is verified by the banks.
Nigeria is a very unreliable market.'
Police say the potential for fraud of this kind has increased as the
recession continues, putting pressure on companies to secure sales. Methods
used by the Nigerian confidence tricksters have also become more
sophisticated.
Although NatWest has agreed to go public on the issue, other high street
banks are understood to have had their names used in forged documentation
emanating from Nigeria.
NatWest says that although careful handling of documentation should stop
obvious frauds from getting through the banking system, 'during a recession
you can understand how the need for business can cloud someone's better
judgment'.
The latest Nigerian fraud bears similarities to one discovered in January
when British exporters based in Leeds uncovered transactions involving a
fictitious branch of Nigeria's Wema Bank and a bogus finance company in New
York.
Separately, the FT has been passed a copy of a letter from Lagos sent to a
leading London-based car dealer last month offering a substantial commission
for help in transferring Dollars 19m of unaudited funds from Nigeria.
The sending of such letters became widespread last year, leading to a
crackdown involving British police, the Foreign Office and the Department of
Trade and Industry, with the co-operation of the Nigerian government.
Last month's letter suggests that the issue may be about to re-emerge,
together with the more sophisticated fraud identified by police after its
interception by NatWest.
Det Insp Paul Brown of The Metropolitan and City of London Police fraud
squad, said: 'We believe that Nigerian fraud is not as extensive as it was.
But the practice doesn't seem to be going away. It is an ongoing problem.'
According to Confederation of British Industry officials, suspected fraud
reported by its members has in recent months become less widespread than it
was towards the end of last year when it issued the first of several
statements alerting businesses to the danger of multi-million-pound swindles
in fraudulent trade with Nigeria.
An official warned, though, that the continuing practice was still a
potentially destabilising factor in UK links with one of its leading Third
World trading partners.
The official said: 'Nigeria is our biggest market in sub-Saharan Africa.
This sort of thing just knocks it all.'
The letter obtained by the FT explains that the funds derive from 'a
government contract to a foreign firm which is pending payment' and which
was arranged by members of the armed forces linked to the previous regime.
President Ibrahim Babangida, Nigeria's present military leader, seized power
in a coup in 1985.
The implication is that the account has been overlooked in the confusion
surrounding the coup that brought the government to power and that some of
the unaudited funds will be spent on cars distributed by the recipient.
The letter asks the car dealer to send the following documents by courier
service to an address in Lagos: blank-headed letter paper signed by the
dealer; blank pro forma invoices, also signed and stamped; and details of
the company's bank account.
The letter states that military 'friends' of the sender have earmarked how
the alleged funds will be shared out - 'the owners of the business 60 per
cent, the account's owner 30 per cent, for local and international expenses
10 per cent'.
The letter was posted from Nigeria early last month to a leading Mayfair car
dealer, to an address no longer occupied by the company. It was opened by
accident by the present occupant, who passed it to the FT.
The letter does not suggest that there has been any previous contact with
the company. Police have confirmed that the letter bears all the markings of
a fraud that has been widespread practice during the past 18 months with
companies receiving unsolicited letters of this nature from Nigeria.
According to diplomatic sources in Lagos, the financial-document trick is
only one of several with which Nigerian confidence tricksters of
'world-class quality' have been raking in millions of pounds from victims in
Europe, the US and elsewhere.
A Nigerian last month received a four-year jail sentence in a London court
after being found guilty of obtaining money by deception.
The individual was caught after a 'sting' operation involving British police
and a small UK company that had lost more than Pounds 100,000 in a
preliminary transaction.
In recent months the Nigerian government has tried to pursue potential
fraudsters under a special section of the criminal code that covers
obtaining money by deception.
According to British investigators, however, potential fraudsters are
managing to avoid arrest in their own country by using false addresses and
taking advantage of the inadequate resources of the local police force.
They also believe there are numerous British businessmen who have lost
substantial sums through Nigerian fraud but have not reported it for fear of
being implicated in more wide-scale corruption.
