FT  09 MAY 92 / Sport: High noon on the high seas - America's Cup
EVERY SPORT needs a baddie. Right now billionaire yachtsman Bill Koch is
fulfilling the role perfectly for the America's Cup. Koch used dollars
(around Dollars 75m of them) and science to eliminate veteran helmsman
Dennis Conner from the chance to once more defend the Cup for the US. Today
Koch races the Italian challenger Il Moro in the first of a best-of seven
series.
'The Kanza Indians have a saying that the greatness of your tribe is
determined by the greatness of your enemy,' says Koch, whose family hail
from Wichita, Kansas. 'We think Dennis Conner is probably the greatest
sailor that's ever been, so we're ecstatic to have beaten him to get to this
point.
'I would attribute all our success here to Dennis pushing the hell out of
us. We have made some technical innovations in the past month which we
wouldn't have made had there not been this level of competition.'
Nevertheless, a straw poll in the last few days by the Los Angeles Times
among knowledgeable Cup observers failed to find a single one who thought
that Koch would triumph and sailing's oldest trophy would stay in America.
Their confidence in Il Moro's chances stems largely from the Italian yacht's
breathtaking feat in coming from 1-4 down against the Kiwi favourites to win
the challenger series 5-4. Skipper Paul Cayard was almost alone in still
believing he could best the New Zealand sailing machine. Back at the Il Moro
base his shore crew were already breaking camp for the trip back to Venice.
By using the pressure from the bowsprit controversy Cayard was able to break
the Kiwis, particularly skipper Rod Davis, pyschologically. Everyone
involved with Cayard refers to the 32-year-old's enormous mental strength -
combined with an intuitive sailing flair which makes him Conner's natural
heir.
It is a potent combination to pit against a cumbersome America3 brains'
trust which Koch is skipper and steers once the boat is ahead, Olympic gold
medallist Buddy Melges, 62, steers the tricky legs, and starting helmsman
Dave Dellenbaugh looks after the aggressive pre-gun manoeuvres.
Do they have trouble making decisions? 'Sometimes yes, sometimes no,' laughs
the delightful Melges. Like Conner he grew up near the water, talking his
way aboard the boat of anybody who would give him a crew job. His father was
a boat-builder and Melges sailed solo at the age of six on Lake Geneva,
Wisconsin.
'We weren't well-to-do,' recalled Melges. 'I couldn't afford a bike until I
was in high school. Sailing to me was a form of transportation. I'd sail
over to a friend's house and then we'd race back to mine for supper.'
He has moved into a different world now. Il Moro has a counterpart to Koch
in financier Raul Gardini. The two men have a great deal in common. Both
syndicate leaders have inherited sums in the region of Dollars 500m from
family businesses and both have used lawyers to secure the money from their
nearest and dearest.
They have lavished similar amounts on their Cup campaigns and both are
former maxi-yacht world champions. Where they differ is in their attitude to
sailing. Koch has a hands-on approach, asking why he should pay for another
helmsman's ego trip; whereas Gardini prefers to be the paying passenger.
He often occupies the spot aboard the IACC yachts reserved for the 17th  -
non-participatory - man. Cayard refers to Gardini as 'the man who looks as
if he is on fire', a reference to the boss's two-packs-per-race cigarette
habit. There is no love lost between the two owners.
'Raul spent five to 10 times what I did on his maxi-yacht and I still beat
him,' said Koch. 'And I look forward to beating him again.' Koch's maxi
Matador2, world champion in 1990 and '91, was the product of five year's
research and a testament to her owner's faith in science, rather than art,
making boats go fast.
To become defender of international sport's oldest trophy Koch has formed a
huge team, dominated by technology rather than sailors. More than half the
175 people on the America3 payroll are scientists.
'We are based on two principles,' says Koch. 'Science prevails over art in
terms of achieving boatspeed and teamwork prevails over egotism.'
Predictions about who will win the America's Cup are thicker in the air than
LA smog. Rod Davis, skipper of New Zealand's beaten challenger, is adamant
that the Cup is bound for Italy. 'I haven't decided whether it's going to be
4-1 or 4-0 yet,' he said.
'But I think Il Moro is going to give America3 a pretty good thrashing.'
Dennis Conner, beaten by more than five minutes by America3 in the last race
of the defender trials, tends to the opposite view. 'Koch's yacht is a heck
of a good boat,' says the helmsman who hasn't been dumped from an America's
Cup since 1974. 'If they can sail it, we'll win.'
Since the two boats have yet to meet head-to-head the form book is
non-existent. Yet computer analyses from the dozens of races in the two sets
of elimination trials suggest that America3 is marginally faster - about 1m
32s around the 20-mile course.
However, if it were settled on the quality of invective one might feel that
Gardini is already 3-0 up and ahead in the fourth race.
'I see Koch has suggested a new regulation where the owner has to steer
sometimes,' says Gardini. 'It would be a silly rule if we all steered like
he does. The only time we raced together directly, he lost.'
Whether the Cup comes to Europe or is successfully defended in California,
one name is already on the board for 1995. Dennis 'don't look back' Conner
is even now stalking America's boardrooms, and has sponsors in place.
'I'll be back, stronger than I was this year,' predicts the maestro. 'I've
had worse defeats. Heck, I lost the thing in 1983 and it turned out to be
the best thing that ever happened to the event. It put the cup and Dennis
Conner on the map.'
