FT  18 JUL 92 / Books: Breaking the code of science
THE CREATIVE MOMENT by Joseph Schwartz Jonathan Cape, Pounds 16.99, 252
pages
CURRENT controversies might suggest that among the reasons for science's
equivocal position in contemporary society is its conflict with religion.
But in Joseph Schwartz's view, the main problem with science is its
inaccessibility.
Non-scientists find science difficult to understand and are therefore afraid
of it; but this is a recent phenomenon, Schwartz argues, and there is no
good reason for it. Until a century ago science was - or at least could be -
anyone's business. Now it is as arcane and complicated as the most secret
mystery cult and in consequence has alienated itself from our culture.
Schwartz aims to show that science need not be mysterious. If all of us, or
more of us, were scientifically literate there would be no 'two-cultures'
problem, and the people who walk the corridors of power, most of them arts
graduates, would no longer be strangers to science but brothers to its
practitioners. Among the gains would be a dispelling of fears and false
hopes alike: fears about the harm science might do, and false hopes about
the problems it might solve and miracles it might perform. There would also
be an end to such fruitless enterprises as the quarrel between religion and
science.
Schwartz holds that people misunderstand science chiefly because of the
obscurity in which it cloaks itself. On an old-fashioned view science is the
quest for objective truth. But to Schwartz science is not a search for
truth, and it is not objective. Rather, it is a search for understanding,
and it proceeds by trying to persuade us to a perspective on the world
constructed from interpretative evidence and argument.
In the jargon of the philosophy of science Schwartz is an 'instrumentalist'
as opposed to a 'realist'. Realists hold that science discovers
independently existing facts about the world, and that therefore scientific
theories are objectively true or false. The instrumentalist, by contrast,
regards science as the product of our creative efforts.
It is a narrative devised by ourselves to explain ourselves and the world.
This does not mean that it is arbitrary or fanciful, for it is sharply
constrained by experience. But it is the product of our own creativity
nonetheless.
Accordingly, our theories are to be viewed as instruments used to predict
the course of natural phenomena and (to the extent possible via technology)
to control them. No one asks of an instrument, such as a knife or a garden
spade, whether it is true or false; one asks whether it does the job it was
designed for. Scientific theories are instruments in the same way: they are
not true or false, just more or less useful. Once one has grasped this,
Schwartz says, one sees that our view of science is outdated and
unnecessarily obscurantist.
To demonstrate his thesis Schwartz takes us through some of the central
'creative moments' in the history of modern science: Galileo's discoveries
with the telescope, Newton's work on mechanics, Einstein's relativity
theory, the Manhattan Project, the bizarrely beautiful theories in current
elementary particle physics.
Schwartz's account is fascinating and wonderfully clear. Its chief
contention is simple: without derogating from the individual achievement of
the thinkers concerned, these 'creative moments' have to be understood as
complex social events, and that understanding them reveals the true meaning
of the scientific advances they represent.
Schwartz's concern is that in the course of these developments science has
ceased to be a universal possession and has transformed itself into
impenetrable specialisms, so that there has come to be a division not merely
between scientists and non-scientists but between deciders and doers in the
realms of industry and technology, with many negative consequences. Only if
science can be integrated into a single cultural outlook, Schwartz argues,
will it help us cope with the immense problems - environmental, demographic,
and others - facing the world.
Schwartz makes a good point. The future is a minefield for the peoples of
this dirtied, overburdened planet, so it is imperative that we should all
grasp how to think about nature and the technologies which our view of
nature generates. Science is too important to be left hidden behind the
veils of specialism and technicality.
