FT  17 JAN 92 / China's 'economic tsars' rise to fame: A Beijing
Correspondent describes two leading candidates for the top leadership
WITH speculation continuing about China's future leadership after
elder-statesman Deng Xiaoping and other ageing officials pass from the
political scene, more and more attention is being focused on two men who
have emerged as the country's 'economic tsars'.
Vice-Premiers Zhu Rongji, widely viewed as a reformer, and Zou Jiahua, seen
as a more cautious state planner, have played an increasingly important role
during the past six months as Beijing wrestles with one of the most serious
economic issues to threaten the ruling Communist party: how to deal with
China's bloated, state-run enterprises.
'These two men are the country's real economic brain trust,' says one
western diplomat. 'They are the heads of the most powerful pieces of the
Chinese government.'
Vice-Premier Zhu is director of the State Production Office, whose task is
the day-to-day management of the debt-ridden state sector; Zou runs the
State Planning Commission, which determines long-term strategies for medium
and large state-run enterprises. Both are seen as possible contenders to
become prime minister if the man now holding that office, Li Peng, is pushed
or steps aside.
The differences between Zhu and Zou are significant.
'Zhu is the action man, the spark plug,' the diplomat says. 'He's the man
who brings energy. He wants to get things done.' Zhu has charisma. A western
banker who has dealt with him says that he 'exudes a sense of confidence and
leadership. He is direct and emphasises practical issues.'
Zou, however, 'doesn't have the moral authority Zhu has,' the diplomat says.
'But he is an effective spokesperson for his brand of reform, which is
mainstream.'
Their handling of the troubled state sector illustrates both the contrasting
styles of the two men and the contradictions the party they serve faces in
resolving these problems. After a decade of market-oriented reform, private
and collectively-owned enterprises have sharply outperformed the state
sector, which now accounts for about 55 per cent of the country's industrial
output, compared with about 80 per cent in the early 1980s. Even according
to the Chinese, nearly a third of the country's thousands of state-owned
enterprises are in the red. Western estimates place the figure closer to 70
per cent.
There is no doubt Beijing recognises that there is a serious crisis. It has
chosen Zhu as the most likely candidate to salvage the situation. He was
given the extremely difficult task of raising the efficiency of the state
enterprises and reducing both the country's huge 300bn yuan domestic
inter-company debt and its enormous stockpiles of unwanted, shoddy goods.
Zhu's selection was believed to be an opportunity for him to demonstrate
whether he has the qualities to become the country's next leader. Observers
said his task was not only one of the most important but at the same time
one of the most difficult.
In fact, Zhu appears to have had some modest success in reducing China's
stockpile of cigarettes and textiles. There is also speculation that he is
responsible, at least in part, for recent moves calling for greater autonomy
of state-run enterprises.
Nonetheless, the problems are deep-seated and cannot easily be resolved
without raising the even more profound issue of the eventual elimination of
the state sector, a prospect which would threaten the very identity of the
Communist party and the core of the socialist economy. Zhu faces some
hostility from conservatives and hardliners who see his appointment as such
a threat to their interests that they hope he will fail, say western
analysts.
On the other hand, while Zou is not as vigorously involved in the daily
management of the state sector's many difficulties, he must provide
significant input for the country's Five Year Plan and take a longer-term
view of the economy.
'Zhu is a trouble-shooter who breaks up bottlenecks, whereas Zou is a more
conservative gradualist,' western diplomats say, adding that both believe
economic reform is the only way the Chinese system can improve.
Zhu supports the revitalisation of medium and large state enterprises, but
without relinquishing party control. He firmly believes that the radical
measures such as privatisation that were adopted in eastern Europe are not a
viable option for China. 'He has consistently argued for central, top-down
planning.'
Each man has powerful connections with China's party elders. Zhu's patron is
Deng Xiaoping himself. Zou is linked to the older generation of China's
revolutionary idols. His immediate benefactor is the economic planner Chen
Yun.
Although both are from Shanghai, their backgrounds are as different as are
their patrons.
Like Premier Li, Zou studied in the Soviet Union and has extensive ties to
the country's military-industrial complex, including reportedly having
worked for Norinco, one of the country's largest arms exporters.
Zhu began to acquire more prominent recognition when he became mayor of
Shanghai in 1988 and is remembered for his cool-headed approach in Shanghai
to the 1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown.
Chinese respect Zhu as a very efficient, tough-minded decision-maker who is
unafraid to sternly criticise bureaucrats, even publicly.
But this last attribute has earned him enemies and he seems recently to have
adopted a lower public profile. And while he plays down ideological
concerns, he has carefully avoided disputing openly the party line that
state enterprises must remain in public hands.
He apparently enjoys bold, dramatic moves and is responsible for the
construction of two Shanghai bridges. They are spectacular engineering feats
that cross the Huangpu, linking the city-centre with the Pudong investment
zone in the eastern suburbs. 'These were very expensive solutions to
crossing a river,' a western banker said. 'A tunnel would have been much
cheaper, but nobody would see it. These bridges are monuments to him and
Shanghai.'
Unlike Zhu, Zou lacks charisma, but has a reputation as an effective
technocrat who understands complex economic issues. Despite his trip to
Europe this autumn, he has less of a public persona than Zhu and fewer
details are available about his life. 'Like Li Peng, he doesn't look good in
public, but he is a power broker,' one western observer said.
If both were given the chance to become premier, analysts believe Zhu would
bring change, while Zou would continue current policies. But their true
colours may not surface until one of the elderly leaders dies or leaves the
political scene.
