FT  08 OCT 92 / A week of woes batters the bunker: Citicorp is reeling from
the surprise resignation of its president and poor earnings forecasts
The executive suite at Citicorp, remarked a former member of the bank's
staff a few hours after the surprise resignation on Monday of Mr Richard
Braddock, Citicorp's president, 'is beginning to resemble a bombed-out
bunker'.
While unkind, the description appears increasingly apposite as the battle
scars left by huge loan losses, management shake-ups and an unusual amount
of regulatory attention become apparent. Still left standing - although only
just, in the view of many on Wall Street - is Mr John Reed, Citicorp's
embattled chairman.
It has been quite a week for the bank that ranks as America's biggest, with
total assets of Dollars 219bn. It has also proved one of the worst weeks for
Mr Reed since he took over as chairman and chief executive eight years ago.
First came Mr Braddock's resignation, which has left banking analysts
baffled. Citicorp's president was not only seen as Mr Reed's heir-apparent,
but also as his closest friend and collaborator inside the bank. An hour
later, the bank disclosed that its third-quarter earnings would be hit by
large write-offs, including Dollars 870m in the consumer division. This
comes on top of its well-publicised bad debt problems in the property
market. Third-quarter net earnings, the bank said on Monday, would be no
higher than 13 cents a share, or about half the figure many analysts
expected.
The bank, which has been scrambling this year to bolster its capital by
disposing of assets and issuing stock, picked a bad time to announce Mr
Braddock's departure. Today, Morgan Stanley, the investment bank, will meet
institutional investors to begin promoting a Dollars 650m preferred stock
offer for Citicorp. Wall Street observers also believe the bank is planning
an offer of up to Dollars 1bn of ordinary shares to further strengthen its
capital base.
After Monday's announcements, Citicorp's share price fell by 5 per cent to
Dollars 14 3/4 , bringing the overall fall to almost 25 per cent over the
past 60 days.
The slide in the share price appears to stem partly from criticism by US
bank regulators. In August regulators forced Citicorp to reduce its
previously reported second-quarter earnings by Dollars 28m because the bank
had overstated the value of its mortgage-servicing business.
At the same time it emerged that the Federal Reserve and Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) had also pressed Citicorp to sign a
memorandum of understanding to accept closer oversight by the regulators.
Yesterday Citicorp disclosed that the restrictions include a ban on new
acquisitions or adding to assets without regulatory approval.
Last month, in an embarrassing leak of a report from the OCC, criticism of
Citicorp's mortgage business was detailed, including allegations that there
were serious management and credit-quality problems at the bank.
Despite these problems, Citicorp appeared to be back on the road to recovery
during the second quarter. But persistent bad debts in the property market
as well as the latest profit forecasts have caused Mr Tom Hanley, senior
banking analyst at First Boston, the investment bank, to slash his 1992
full-year net earnings estimates from Dollars 218m, or 60 cents per share,
to Dollars 73m, or 20 cents a share, and 1993 estimates from Dollars 728m,
or Dollars 2 per share, to Dollars 546m, or Dollars 1.50 a share.
The bank's prospective underlying financial performance thus seems weaker
than it did a few months ago. Its most recent return on assts, released on
June 30, was 0.30 per cent - about half the average of the US banking
industry. But it is not merely the bank's financial performance that has
attracted negative attention from Wall St: observers have been angered by
the bank's failure to offer more than an anodyne explanation for Mr
Braddock's departure.
Mr Raphael Soifer, a bank analyst at Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company, the
investment bank, has noted that Mr Braddock's departure 'raises a lot of
questions about the management of Citicorp'. The decision by Mr Reed not to
appoint a successor has compounded concerns. 'As we all know, John Reed is
on the road a lot. That means a lot of times Citicorp is being run by
committee, which doesn't make a lot of sense to me.'
Mr George Salem, of Prudential Securities, put it more bluntly. It was
ironic, he said, that Mr Braddock should be leaving the bank 'because
Braddock was a stronger manager than Reed'.
The Braddock resignation followed the departures of two other top Citicorp
managers with close ties to Mr Reed - Mr Michael Callen, the head of
corporate and investment banking in Japan, Europe and North America who was
replaced last January and Mr Lawrence Small, the vice-chairman who left in
June 1991. Several observers suggest that both Mr Braddock and Mr Callen
have been made into scapegoats for Citicorp's recent loan problems and
encouraged to leave by Mr Reed to show bank regulators that he is making
crucial management changes in important areas. Some middle-ranking
executives at the bank, especially those associated with Mr Braddock, are
said to be concerned about their own job security.
The news of Mr Braddock's departure has renewed doubt about the future of Mr
Reed himself. Citicorp, however, has denied that his tenure as chairman and
chief executive is in doubt.
A senior Citicorp executive yesterday acknowledged that there had been 'a
lot of speculation over the past 18 months about John's future'. He added,
however, that 'if anything, the departure of Braddock should put that
question to rest'. Mr Braddock's resignation left Mr Reed unchallenged at
the top of the bank.
The A-team at Citicorp is now a five-man group, led by Mr Reed and including
Mr William Rhodes, the veteran Third World debt specialist who has taken
over responsibility for problem loans. Also on the team is Mr Paul Collins,
another Citicorp veteran in charge of corporate matters and the bank's
capital position. Mr Pei-yan Chia, promoted to head the bank's consumer
division, is the fourth man on the team, which is rounded out by Mr Onno
Ruding, the former Dutch finance minister who is described by the bank as
the architect of its global finance strategies.
At the time of Mr Ruding's appointment last January Mr Reed said he was
moving the bank's top management to 'a much more primitive structure' to
achieve better credit controls. Mr Reed also admitted: 'One of the things I
have been correctly criticised for is that the management (of the corporate
division) has produced some pretty horrendous results. We are guilty of
having run the business a bit cavalierly.'
These sort of mea culpas from Mr Reed - and there have been several over the
past two years - have had the effect of fuelling more speculation about his
future rather than dampening such talk on Wall Street. Proof of solid
management, evidence of recovery in earnings and improved capital ratios
will be needed to lay such speculation to rest.
