FT  13 NOV 92 / Asia warned of high costs of Aids epidemic: UN report urges
efforts to stop virus spreading so fast
THE Aids epidemic sweeping Asia will wreak social and economic devastation
if left unchecked, the United Nations Development Programme warned
yesterday.
In a report released at an international conference in New Delhi on Aids in
the Asia/Pacific region, it urged efforts at prevention to reduce the rate
of spread of the HIV virus, which causes the disease, and the costs of the
condition on society.
The seminar, sponsored by the UNDP, the World Health Organisation and the
Indian government, concluded that Aids could seriously threaten the economic
well-being of Asian nations, which by the year 2000 would account for 42 per
cent of the world's projected 100m cases.
The UNDP urged policy-makers in Asia to focus on broader social, economic
and political factors, such as endemic poverty, which contribute to the
spread of the virus.
Endemic poverty facilitates the spread of the virus, and is often a cause
for migration and family fragmentation. Current research demonstrates that
the epidemic appears to be a regressive disease, imposing relatively larger
costs upon the poor than on the rich.
The UNDP forecast that Aids would soon have a big impact on the work-place,
especially in India and Thailand, where cases are growing at an alarming
rate.
Productivity in transport, tourism, entertainment, mining and fishing are
likely to be affected, as well as the armed forces and agriculture.
Companies would suffer heavy losses in work days, trained manpower,
recruitment costs, and burdens on benefit schemes.
A separate economic study on Aids to be released by the UNDP next month
shows that lost income because of people dying of Aids ranges from Dollars
10,000 per case in India to over Dollars 240,000 per case in South Korea.
Medical care costs associated with detection and treatment of Aids range
from Dollars 1,100 per case in India to over Dollars 4,000 per case in South
Korea.
The study projects the cost of the epidemic in India, where 1m cases are
projected by the year 2000, at Dollars 11bn. Some sectors are particularly
vulnerable, such agricultural sector in Laos, the long-haul truckers in
India and Thailand, and migrant contract workers in the Philippines.
The reports conclude that financial and economic costs will be difficult for
developing countries to bear unless they develop a fuller understanding of
the costs and consequences and allocate resources wisely to counter the
epidemic.
Aids and Asia: A Development Crisis, UNDP.
Economic Impact of Aids In Asia, UNDP (to be released in December).
