FT  18 JUN 92 / Telecommunications In Business (27): Still only the tip of
the iceberg - Chargecards
IF your wallet is already bulging with bank cards and your head has been
tied in knots by different personal identification numbers, you might not
take kindly to BT's suggestion that your life would be made easier with one
of its Chargecards.
But this is the message that Beattie has been putting over to television
audiences for the past year. And judging by Chargecard subscriptions, the
message has been getting through.
BT has supplied 700,000 Chargecards since January 199I, having distributed
only 500,000 cards in the previous five years following its launch in 1986.
BT believes that this is still only the tip of the iceberg. It wants people
to view the Chargecard as an extension of their home or office, using it to
access other services such as voice or electronic mail and facsimile.
Mr Tony Vardy, BT's director of service development, acknowledges that most
people still associate Chargecards with public payphones. The point that
Beattie was making in her Chargecard commercial is that you can use the
Chargecard from any phone and the call will automatically be billed to your
home or office account.
In the advert, Beattie wanted to make a call from a clothes shop and had to
reassure the shop assistant that using the shop's private phone did not mean
that it would have to pay.
Chargecards are free, like credit cards used to be. They look like bank
cards, with the cardholder's name, his or her account number and an expiry
date.
When you need to make a call, you dial 144 on those phones which have number
pads, and get recorded message which asks you to tap in your PIN, and
proceed to make your call.
Calls made with a Chargecard are billed at the same rate as public
payphones, which is more than if the call is made from your home or office.
When BT first launched its Chargecard service, calls had to be routed via a
BT operator. If you still have a phone that uses the old dial mechanism, you
still have to use an operator. This makes the Chargecard more expensive and
slower than using the new system.
Increasingly, BT is looking to the Chargecard to increase its revenues from
people calling home while they are away on business or on holiday. Abroad,
the card can be used in the same way as in the UK. It can avoid problems of
finding the right coins to make calls, and can save money for those people
who usually make calls from hotels - which often charge four to five times
the standard rate.
The Chargecard can be used from 63 countries around the world, but it is not
yet possible to call a third country using a Chargecard. If you were in
Milan and needed to make a call to Paris, you would either have to use a
public payphone or phone from your hotel room.
However, three American telephone companies, American Telephone and
Telegraph, Sprint and MCI, have launched services for third party calling
for their American chargecard customers in the past few weeks. BT hopes to
start offering a similar facility to its Chargecard customers this summer.
It will be called UK Direct.
The improved ease of use and the new UK Direct service have combined to make
the Chargecard a more attractive service than when it first came out. But
there is one aspect of the service that is giving considerable cause for
concern both for BT and other operators of chargecard services.
Fraud affects BT's Chargecard service as much as it does banks with credit
cards. When a Chargecard call is made, the caller has to tap in his PIN on a
number pad in the same way as you would enter enter your PIN number at a
cash dispenser.
If someone sees the number you are dialling, he can use it to make calls
that will be charged to your account without even needing to use the card.
At airports and railway stations where there are likely to be a number of
Chargecard users, fraud has become big business and when a PIN is obtained,
it is rapidly passed on to a number of people ready and waiting to make
costly overseas calls.
BT reckons it has cut down fraud by 'putting up warning flags' when a
Chargecard holder makes calls that do not coincide with his normal calling
patterns. But fraud is still a worry and will have to be eliminated if users
are to have the confidence to use Chargecards for new services that often
involve sending and receiving sensitive commercial information.
The Chargecard is not the only piece of plastic that can be used to make
calls. Both BT and Mercury Communications, its domestic rival, have pre-paid
phone cards as an alternative to coins.
Calls can also be made with credit cards and an agreement between BT and
Visa last month means that the benefits of the Chargecard will be extended
to owners of Visa cards worldwide at the start of next year.
Part of the thinking behind this is that 'people who come to the UK don't
make anywhere near as many phone calls as we'd like them to,' according to
Mr Vardy. The VisaPhone service, as it is called, will permit visitors from
abroad to make calls from telephones in the UK which will be billed to their
Visa card in the local currency.
BT may embark on similar ventures with other leading credit card companies
in the future. But BT still sees itself 'working with, rather than competing
against, credit cards,' according to Mr Vardy, and will not follow the
example of American Telephone and Telegraph in the US which has set up a
joint venture with American Express to supply cards that combine the
functions of chargecards and credit cards.
