FT  26 JUN 92 / Survey of Norway (7): A global dialogue - Energy
NORWAY this year overtook Britain as western Europe's biggest oil producer.
Daily production exceeded 2m barrels and has remained at or slightly above
this level.
More than one-half of western Europe's remaining proven oil and natural gas
reserves are found on the Norwegian continental shelf (NCS). According to
the Norwegian Petroleum Directorate (NPD), the energy watchdog, discovered
and recoverable NCS reserves stood at 5.3bn tonnes of oil equivalent (t o e)
at the end of last year. Of the total, 40 per cent is said to be oil and 60
per cent gas.
The NPD estimates that at current production rates, these reserves are
enough to allow oil production for the next 17 years and gas production over
the next 111 years. If 'enhanced petroleum recovery' technology is utilised,
the NPD believes that these time horizons could be doubled.
In addition to discovered reserves, the NPD reckons that 'undiscovered but
likely-to be-found' reserves comprise 3.5bn t o e of which 30 per cent is
believed to be oil and 70 per cent is thought to be gas.
Exports of oil and gas account for more than one-third of Norway's total
exports and petroleum activity this year will account for more than 15 per
cent of the gross national product (GNP). In 1991 Norway's petroleum
industry employed more than 63,000 workers.
Norway is ranked eighth in the world league of oil producers and is the
biggest crude oil exporter outside the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (Opec).
Exports of natural gas meet more than 10 per cent of western European demand
and account for 25 per cent of the Community's gas imports. Contracted gas
will see annual gas sales expand to 45bn cubic metres (bcm) by 1999 from
about 28 bcm today but, with the green environmental wave sweeping Europe
gas exports could swell significantly higher. Gas is considered a much
cleaner alternative to coal in power generation.
Last year Statoil, the Norwegian state oil company, placed contracts worth
more than NKr21bn with the petroleum service industry but total industry
contracted expenditure was close to NKr32bn, with Norwegian companies
gaining about 60 per cent of the business.
At a time when it is argued by many that oil has lost its prime spot on the
world political agenda, Norway refutes this in the promotion of what it
calls 'global energy policy inter-relationships'. For Norway this is an
important foreign policy objective, since oil continues to influence and be
influenced by international politics, it argues.
The country sees as one of its main foreign policy tasks to not only promote
but also stimulate a global energy dialogue. 'Within the IEA (International
Energy Agency) Norway has emphasised the need to pursue a more long-term
foreign policy endeavour to build confidence and dismantle confrontational
attitudes between oil-exporting and oil-importing countries,' says Mr Arne
Walther head of the energy section at the foreign ministry.
'Long-term security of oil supply can be promoted by more orderly relations
and greater mutual understanding between oil-exporting and oil-importing
countries.'
For example, when the oil price plunged below Dollars 8 a barrel in 1985-86,
Norway helped Opec prop up prices by implementing a 7.5 per cent
self-imposed production restraint. The support was unilateral in form and
limited in time.
Opec this year appealed to Norway to reinstate a production restraint policy
but this time it was spurned.
During Iraq's invasion of Kuwait last year, Norway within the IEA helped
form a contingency plan which aimed to secure energy supplies and weaken an
expected dramatic rise in oil prices. 'The Gulf crisis underscored the close
relationship between energy and political power and confirmed a community of
interests in avoiding excessive volatility in the oil market and in securing
the supply of oil,' Mr Walther says.
In keeping with these political efforts, Norway last month hosted a meeting
of IPEC (Independent Petroleum Exporting Countries) and next month will host
a workshop of governmental leaders, at ministerial level, in which 20
countries are expected to exchange information and policy views to promote
common understanding of common energy-related problems.
According to a report by Edinburgh-based analyst County NatWest WoodMac
(CNWM) the state, through direct financial investment, owns 44 per cent of
all petroleum reserves, 44 per cent of commercial reserves and 42.5 per cent
of technical reserves. In addition, the state owns 28 per cent of total
production for the 1992-95 period and holds 41 per cent of the total
licensed acreage.
The report estimates 1992-95 average daily production at 2.128m barrels of
oil, 132,000 barrels of natural gas liquids and 2.948m cubic feet of natural
gas. it says Statoil, Norsk Hydro and Saga Petroleum, the three Norwegian
oil companies, control more petroleum reserves than the combined 10 European
companies or seven US companies operating in Norway.
The Norwegian companies own 25 per cent of the commercial reserves, 25 per
cent of the technical reserves, 29 per cent of total production in the
period 1992-95 and hold 23 per cent of total acreage awarded, says CNWM.
