FT  03 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Institutions oppose RHM 'war' - Richard
Gourlay and Roland Rudd find institutional investors less interested in who
finally wins Ranks Hovis McDougall than in what price is paid for the
breadmaker.
INSTITUTIONAL investors overwhelmingly believe Hanson should not get
involved in a bidding war with Tomkins, which last week trumped the rival
conglomerate's bid for Ranks Hovis McDougall with a higher offer.
Most, however, did not believe that Lord Hanson, the UK's best exponent of
the takeover game, would increase his Pounds 790m cash bid for the UK
milling, baking and grocery products group.
Shareholders appeared less interested in whether Tomkins or Hanson would
better manage RHM and were rather more concerned about the price being paid.
As one opined: 'If Hanson offered 220p a share first time around it would
look odd, to say the least, if it increased its offer by another 30 per cent
or so in order to outbid Tomkins.'
Another said 'I think Hanson had a higher price in mind but not as high as
Tomkins has bid.'
Most investors expressed confidence that the two conglomerates would not get
carried away in a bidding war. 'Both Tomkins and Hanson are very sensitive
to whether this deal dilutes shareholders' value,' said one large
institutional holder of shares in both conglomerates and RHM.
A significant group of shareholders believe Tomkins should be given the
benefit of the doubt over what one called its 'change of direction from
low-tech engineering to bread making'.
Mr Greg Hutchings, Tomkins chief executive, has begun trying to convince
shareholders that acquiring a food company was not a radical departure for
the group. After Tomkins launched its Pounds 935m recommended bid for RHM,
Mr Hutchings began calling institutions to reassure them the deal would not
dilute earnings, even without the sale of some of RHM's grocery brands.
The suspicion of institutions, however, is that Tomkins would be unwilling
over the long term to own and run RHM's grocery brands.
For the first time in Tomkins' 10-year history Mr Hutchings would begin to
operate more like his mentor, Lord Hanson, rapidly selling some of the
assets he hopes to buy.
'My best guess is that after one year and a half the brands will be sold or
about to be sold - particularly to foreign companies like BSN or Philip
Morris which want to get involved in the UK but do not want a hostile
takeover battle,' one investor said.
Most investors did not think it unusual that one of Tomkins' top
institutional investors - Gartmore, which owns 4.4 per cent - should have
chosen not to support the rights issue. But Mr Hutchings still has an uphill
struggle to convince institutions that he has not overpaid.
'Tomkins' rating is going to take a long time to recover from this,' said
one institutional shareholder. 'Instead of being at a premium to the market
I think Tomkins' rating is going to be in line or even below the market
average.'
Pessimism about Tomkins' rating is shared by other shareholders. 'The price
that Tomkins is offering for RHM is more surprising than the change in the
conglomerate's direction,' said one.
'On balance, its offer should be accepted. But I think Tomkins will have to
prove itself quite quickly if it's going to have any chance of returning to
its premium rating of 10 per cent plus to the market.'
Another investor supported this relatively relaxed view about the company's
change of direction. 'Most of what Tomkins has kept fits into the
engineering and capital goods operations,' one institutional investor said.
'Tomkins is still a small company and if he (Hutchings) wants it to be
another Hanson it will have to diversify.'
