FT  23 JAN 92 / Wise men bring gifts to Clarke
THE government's assault on 'trendy' and 'progressive' teaching methods in
schools took the high ground yesterday when Mr Kenneth Clarke's self-styled
'three wise men' supported the education secretary's view that 'back to the
basics' is the way to counter falling standards.
If the wise men prevail, out will go general projects, child-centred
teaching and classrooms with a hubbub of noise coming from children grouped
around a dozen or more tables. In will come formal instruction, grouping of
children by ability, and sitting behind rows of tables, facing the front,
quietly taking it all down.
'At school level, teachers will need to abandon the dogma of recent
decades,' say the wise men. It is a calculated bid to subvert the 1967
Plowden report, which the right - explaining away Lady Plowden, a prominent
Tory educationalist - blame for what they see as a generation of damaging
teaching practice.
And not just the right: yesterday, only the diehard National Union of
Teachers condemned the report out of hand. Mr Jack Straw, Labour's education
spokesman, said the authors had shown 'commendable independence' in their
work.
The political motives behind Mr Clarke's determination to rush out a report
a mere seven weeks after appointing the inquiry are clear enough. Even so,
the credentials of his wise men - Professor Robin Alexander of Leeds
University, Mr Jim Rose, HMI's chief inspector of primary schools, and Mr
Chris Woodhead, chief executive of the National Curriculum Council - are
weighty, and their report will command wide respect.
How deep 'progressive dogma' actually penetrated is questionable. Pressed on
the issue yesterday, Professor Alexander backtracked on his own report and
said it was 'not as widespread as often alleged'. Mr Clarke himself
emphasised that 'there is not a single element of these proposals which is
not being practised somewhere in the country'. Spreading existing best
practice to all schools is the priority.
Moreover, beneath the headlines, the report contains far more than
Plowden-bashing. Two themes in particular may embarrass the government if
fully exploited.
First, the wise men stress the need to increase resources for primary
schools. They do so obliquely, pointing to the wide and unjustifiable
disparity between funding for the last primary and first secondary year (ie
when children are between ages 10 and 11), and urging the need for schools
to have access to specialist expertise in all nine national curriculum
subjects.
In both cases, only a significant increase in overall funding is likely to
meet their objectives. The extensive teacher retraining implicit in their
recommendations will add to the bill.
Second, the wise men note that in recent years the task of the primary
teacher has changed dramatically, with the national curriculum, in
particular, imposing greater demands than formerly. Hence, in part, their
emphasis on formal subject instruction and access to teaching expertise
across the curriculum.
