FT  05 NOV 92 / Tory ex-minister knew exports could make Iraq arms
MR Alan Clark, a former minister in the Thatcher administration, approved
the export of machine tools to Iraq knowing they could be used to produce
arms, he told an Old Bailey court yesterday.
Mr Clark, who was serving at the Department of Trade and Industry at the
time before moving to the Ministry of Defence, also admitted that he advised
Matrix Churchill and other British toolmakers exporting machines capable of
making arms to draw up specifications emphasising their peaceful, rather
than military, applications.
However, he denied that that showed companies how best to circumvent
government guidelines on arms exports to Iraq.
Mr Clark said he thought the government's guidelines were 'tiresome and
intrusive' and that it was in Britain's best interests for the Iran-Iraq war
to continue as long as possible.
The former minister was giving evidence in the trial of three former
directors of Matrix Churchill, the Coventry machine tool company, who are
accused of deceiving DTI by pretending that equipment exported to Iraq was
for civil, not military, use. Mr Paul Henderson, the company's former
managing director, Mr Trevor Abraham, its former commercial director, and Mr
Peter Allen, the former sales director, all deny breaching export
regulations.
In January 1988 Mr Clark met a number of representatives of the British
machine tool industry, including Mr Henderson, who were concerned that the
DTI had frozen their export licences after earlier shipments had been
suspected by intelligence services of going to Iraqi munitions factories.
Mr Clark told them to draw up specifications with their customers that
emphasised peaceful rather than military purposes.
When something was capable of dual use, the use that was within government
guidelines should be emphasised, Mr Clark told the court.
The suggestion involved 'our old friend 'economical'', he admitted to Mr
Geoffrey Robertson QC, for Mr Henderson.
'Economical with the truth?', Mr Robertson responded.
'With the actualite,' Mr Clark replied.
It was not misleading or dishonest to have made such a suggestion and did
not amount to a tip-off he said. It was, however, a case of 'Whitehall
cosmetics' to keep the records ambiguous, he agreed.
Mr Clark agreed that intelligence reports were confused over whether the
machine tools could be used to make munitions.
The trial continues today.
