FT  12 NOV 92 / Synod backs ordination of women
ENGLAND IS set to have women priests within two years, following a close
vote in the Church of England's general synod yesterday.
A passionate debate ended with a measure making it lawful for women to be
ordained to the priesthood being carried in all three houses of the synod -
bishops, clergy and laity. The measure required a two thirds majority in
each house.
The vote among the laity was expected to be close, and the result was 169
votes to 82. Had only two lay members voted the other way, the ordination of
women would have been blocked. The bishops voted in favour by 39 votes to 13
and the clergy by 176 votes to 74.
Legislation now has to pass through parliament and, although there are more
than 1,000 women deacons waiting to become priests, the first ordinations
are not likely before late 1994.
While parliament usually accepts decisions of the Church, there may be
opposition to a proposed scheme of financial compensation for male priests
who resign when women are ordained.
The historic decision was greeted by potential women priests singing by
candlelight outside the synod meeting at Church House, London.
Some opponents spoke against the ordination of women on theological grounds.
Others opposed the nature of the legislation which will enable individual
parishes to decide whether they want the ministry of a woman.
But many of the Church's most senior figures strongly supported the
proposals. Dr George Carey, archbishop of Canterbury, argued that the
Church's voice was in danger of not being heard in 'an increasingly confused
and lost world' if women were 'exercising leadership in every area of our
society's life save the ordained priesthood'.
The Rt Rev Robert Williamson, bishop of Southwark, said that in his south
London diocese he had to confront some of the chronic injustices in society.
He said he could not do this with integrity in the face of the apparent
injustice of the church denying women the opportunity to test their vocation
to become priests.
The Church faced divisions whichever way the vote went. A hint of the
potential difficulties surfaced in the debate when the Rt Rev David Lunn,
bishop of Sheffield, said that if the changes took place he did not see how
it would make sense for a diocese to have a bishop who, like himself, could
not wholeheartedly support the new arrangements.
The Rev June Osborne, a woman deacon in east London, pleaded with the synod
to allow her to carry out her ministry as a priest.
But Mr John Selwyn Gummer, agriculture minister and a member of the synod,
responded that the only way in which Ms Osborne could test her vocation to
the priesthood would be by removing the vocation from a number of male
priests who felt they could not remain in the church if women were ordained.
Mr Gummer had suggested that he might leave the Church of England over
women's ordination, and last night Ms Ann Widdecombe, a parliamentary
colleague and social security minister, said that she intended to leave.
