FT  07 FEB 92 / Ulster killings prompt Major to call for talks
MR JOHN MAJOR is to hold a meeting with Northern Ireland's political leaders
following the escalation in sectarian killings in the province.
The meeting will be the first of its kind in Downing Street. It marks a
recognition by the government that it cannot allow Northern Ireland policy
to stagnate before the general election, even if local politicians fail to
agree on starting round-table talks.
Mr Major wants local politicians to take more of a leadership role in
Northern Ireland following the government's failure to restart the talks on
the province's political future. But he looks set to rebuff Unionist demands
for the internment of terrorist suspects.
Mr Major's initiative was reinforced by Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish
Republic's premier-elect, who set Ulster as a priority issue.
Speaking of the recent spate of killings, he said: 'We must not spare any
effort and take every possible initiative to put a stop to it (the
violence).' He said he looked forward to talks with Mr Major and broader
cross-border relations when all options would be open for discussion.
The Downing Street meeting, expected early next week, will be specifically
on security issues. But Mr Peter Brooke, Northern Ireland secretary,
portrayed it as part of a wider process of building a dialogue.
Last month, when shelving his attempts to start formal political
negotiations until after the election, Mr Brooke said local politicians
would continue to meet to discuss matters of common concern.
In a Commons statement yesterday, Mr Brooke was forced to defend the
government's handling of security in the province following the outbreak of
terrorist violence in which 26 people have been killed so far this year.
In Belfast the recent killings have created a sense of shock and foreboding,
even in a community which has become hardened to violence.
The security situation 'is not and will not be allowed to get out of
control', Mr Brooke said. But he met protests from Unionist MPs, anxious for
the government to take tougher measures, who argued that 20 years of 'direct
rule' meant responsibility for security lay with ministers. When one Tory MP
warned that the province was 'quite close to sliding into civil war', Mr
Brooke replied that it was essential for the government, like the local
community, 'to keep its nerve'.
He described the recent incidents - the latest of which saw five Catholics
killed in a Belfast bookmakers - as 'part of a wider tragedy in which the
whole community shares'.
Internment remains on the statute book but Mr Brooke gave no indication that
it was being considered. Northern Ireland Office officials said the
circumstances of strife and a breakdown in law and order justifying such a
drastic measure were 'a long, long way off'.
During Commons questions, Mr Paisley told the prime minister that talking
would not solve the security problem.
Mr Major replied: 'I believe it would greatly assist the search for peace if
the clearest possible lead was given by all politicians in this country and
in Northern Ireland.'
