FT  02 SEP 92 / International Bonds: Export-Import Bank of Japan in CDollars
350m offering
THE Export-Import Bank of Japan yesterday launched a CDollars 350m 10-year
offering, leading an expected surge of new issues, as the Eurobond market
revives after its traditional summer break.
Although many borrowers are well advanced in their 1992 funding programmes,
they are likely to press ahead with further financings planned for this year
sooner, rather than later.
'A lot of borrowers are well ahead of schedule, but there is the French
referendum later this month and the US election in November,' said one
trader. Borrowers are unlikely to wait until December to complete this
year's financings, in case markets prove unfavourable.
The malaise of the European bond markets ahead of the French referendum is
likely to channel funding to the dollar and Canadian dollar sector. Heavy
redemption flows in these markets are helping to sustain investor appetite.
A handful of Euroyen offerings yesterday for Sapporo Breweries, Japan
Airlines, Sumitomo Chemical and Hankyu Corporation were targeted at Japanese
investors.
However, a number of other borrowers are eyeing the Euroyen market,
including the Japan Development Bank, which is said to be preparing a Y100bn
seven-year deal.
Other borrowers considering the Euroyen sector include the European
Investment Bank, the World Bank and the African Development Bank, according
to dealers. However, they added that the market could easily become
overloaded.
'The Euroyen market is quite thin,' said one trader. 'Some borrowers may
decide to switch to the dollar sector, where they can lock in historically
low rates.'
Among yesterday's new issues, the Export-Import Bank of Japan's CDollars
350m deal via Swiss Bank Corporation, priced to yield 37 basis points over
the 10-year Canadian government bond yield, met firm demand from Japanese
investors. The deal was bid at 99.55 at the end of trading, unchanged from
the fixed reoffer price.
In the sterling sector, National Provincial Building issued Pounds 150m of
floating rate notes, due 1997, via UBS Phillips &amp; Drew, which was targeted
at UK-based investors.
