FT  08 AUG 92 / Finance &amp; The Family: New Peps look to the long term
COMPETITION in the personal equity plan market increased this week with the
launch of two unusually structured plans designed to encourage long-term
investment.
Scottish Equitable's new Premier Pep replaces the initial charge - normally
5 per cent of the amount invested - with a flat administration fee of Pounds
45 plus VAT. And even that fee will be waived for those who invest before
September 4.
In most normal unit trusts (and unit trust Peps), investors buy units at the
offer price. When they want to sell, they receive only the bid price,
normally around 6-7 per cent lower. The difference mainly reflects the
initial charge made by the manager.
At Scottish Equitable, investors will pay the 'creation' price. This is
below the offer price but slightly higher than the bid price, to reflect the
cost of actually buying shares for the trust (all shares have their own
bid-offer spread). So investors will still face a spread but, at around 1
per cent, it will be much lower than normal. In addition, those who hold
their Pep for eight years will receive a loyalty bonus, equivalent to 1 per
cent of the bid value of their units.
But Scottish Equitable has to make its money somewhere, and there are some
higher charges which counterbalance these attractions. The first is an
annual Pep charge of 0.875 per cent which is imposed on top of the annual
managers' charge (between 0.75 per cent and 1.25 per cent) on the trust.
The second is a withdrawal fee imposed on those who take out money before
the end of the fifth year. The charge in years one and two will be 4 per
cent of the amount encashed. It will be 3.5 per cent in year three, 2.5 per
cent in year four and 1.5 per cent in year five.
It seems a good idea to introduce fees that encourage investors to hold
their Peps for the long term. The question is whether the extra annual
charge will outweigh the benefit of the reduced initial spread.
Much could depend on the performance of the trusts. Scottish Equitable
allows investors a choice of six: UK Blue Chip, High Income, UK &amp; Global,
European, Europe 2000 Tactical and Ethical. All but the two European trusts
have above-average performances for their sectors over two years.
Metropolitan Unit Trust Managers has launched a new personal equity plan
with an unusual structure. The Triple A Pep is designed for those who are
prepared to commit their Pep allowance to Metropolitan for a number of
years.
In the first year, Metropolitan 'allocates' only 85 per cent of the
investment. This is on top of the 6 per cent initial charge on the unit
trust. The effect is that, if you invest Pounds 1,000, the immediate re-sale
value is just Pounds 790.
In subsequent years, however, Metropolitan will allocate 104 per cent of
your investment to units. This means effectively that Metropolitan is giving
up most of its initial charge on the investment. The immediate re-sale value
of a second year Pounds 1,000 investment would probably be just shy of
Pounds 980. Metropolitan says that, compared with a traditional Pep, its
plan structure starts to make savings after five years and keeps improving
thereafter.
The investment performance might well prove more important than the charges.
In this case, the Pep is based on Metropolitan's Eurogrowth Plus fund
(managed by Mercury Asset Management), which has been 14th out of 88 in its
sector over the three years to August 1.
