FT  16 OCT 92 / The Property Market: A profession at the crossroads -
Radical changes look set to overhaul the UK's conservative surveying sector
A quiet revolution is under way in the UK's chartered surveying sector. The
growing pressures on the property industry have plunged this most
traditional of professions into a unprecedented period of soul-searching and
restructuring.
The forces at work were illustrated by two events yesterday. First, the
announcement of a merger between Clive Lewis &amp; Partners and Edward Erdman to
create one of the UK's top seven property advisers.
The other was an extraordinary general meeting at the Royal Institution of
Chartered Surveyors (RICS), the profession's ruling body, which agreed
proposals to allow chartered surveying firms to appoint partners from
outside the profession. At present only firms in which all partners or
directors hold RICS' qualifications may call themselves chartered surveyors.
This radical proposal was designed to allow chartered surveying firms to
improve their management and services, by permiting up to a quarter of their
partners or directors to be drawn from other professions such as accountancy
architecture, economics and planning. The proposal would also halt the
decline of the term 'chartered surveyor', since a greater number of the
large practices which already have non-surveyor partners would be allowed to
use the name.
Neither of yesterday's events were isolated incidents. The creation of
Erdman Lewis International from the merger of Edward Erdman and Clive Lewis
is just the latest in a series of recent tie-ups. de Groot Collis, Vigers,
Baker Harris Saunders and Richard Ellis have found partners in Chesterton,
Grimley JR Eve, Herring Son &amp; Daw and Hepper Robinson respectively; Debenham
Tewson &amp; Chinnocks and Bernard Thorpe are the latest to announce merger
talks, which if it goes ahead would create the UK's largest surveying firm.
Similarly, yesterday's vote on RICS' rules was the latest in a series of
structural reforms in which the body has attempted to become more responsive
to the needs of its members and the industry.
Those who argue that change is inevitable say that the surveying sector is
merely following the path of other professions. In the 1980s, chartered
accountancy firms opened up their partnerships to non-accountants in much
the same way as the RICS initiative.
Mr Clive Lewis, who founded Clive Lewis &amp; Partners 30 years ago, is
convinced that the surveying industry - like accountancy following the spate
of mergers in that sector in recent years - will become dominated by a few
broadly based, large, international firms.
Mr Lewis predicts that the pace of mergers is accelerating. The top 24 firms
will be reduced to 16 within a year and 10 in three years.
Some mergers will be a partnership of equals, designed to give the combined
entity a better spread of clients and markets. More, however, will stem from
a financially distressed firm's bid for survival.
Mr Lewis says he was approached by 14 firms over the past six months seeking
a merger. 'Most of the people who are knocking on the door have sizeable
overdrafts, decreasing fee income and are staring down the end of a barrel.'
The spate of mergers and the reform of RICS are rooted in the recession, the
most severe in the property industry for more than 50 years. Surveying firms
realise that they must either offer a fuller, better service to clients, or
cut their overheads and become a niche business serving a specialist market.
Likewise, the depressed state of the industry has given RICS the authority
it needs to ensure its radical proposals are accepted by its members. In the
past winning the support of members has not been easy. The RICS leadership
was, for example, badly bruised in 1989 when a majority of members voted
against its recommendation to merge with the ISVA, a rival professional
body.
Once again, some firms view the current upheavals as a self-serving exercise
by the big London practices. Critics believe the relaxation of rules on the
'chartered' designation will dilute a respected title, earned after years of
training, which differentiates surveyors from unqualified rivals.
But the argument that 'if it ain't broke, don't fix it' that prevailed in
more prosperous times no longer applies. When Mr Christopher Jonas, this
year's president of RICS, recently made his presidential address, he called
for the profession to 'look hard into some of the dark corners which past
boom conditions have allowed us to ignore'.
The surveying industry has to acknowledge that its problems do not just stem
from the recession. Deeper flaws in the industry were highlighted in a
report entitled 'Market Requirements of the Profession', commissioned by
RICS and published last year. The report suggested that the industry had to
become better organised and more responsive to the market.
RICS argues that its new structure, which has resulted in a shift of
decision-making to 'skills' and 'markets' panels, will help address these
complaints. But some tough questions remain. Are the tasks of surveyors too
wide-ranging, diverse and fragmented to be embraced by a single profession?
What value, for instance, does a surveying qualification bring to the
residential property market?
'We must consider whether we can sustain the concept of a single profession
over the longer haul,' says Mr Jonas. 'It will not be good enough for us to
find a fudged solution now and leave our successors with the continuing
doubts we have inherited.'
Already, it is clear that the next generation of surveyors will face
daunting hurdles. One of the foremost is the challenge beyond its borders.
Property is increasingly traded across barriers. 'It will not be sufficient
for us to continue to operate exclusively on a domestic basis . . . over
time we shall just end up a minority specialist group on the world stage,'
says Mr Jonas.
Mr Jonas's sombre and thoughtful assessment should not disguise several
notable achievements in recent years. The industry has been energetic in its
establishment of international networks, for example. While some firms have
failed, several have established enviable reputations in foreign markets.
While surveyors accept many of the criticisms heaped on their profession,
there is also a sense of frustration that their achievements are not better
acknowledged. 'I think it is time the property profession started to fight
back. We have been hiding our light under the bushel,' says Mr Lewis, who as
vice-president of RICS will succeed Mr Jonas next year.
In any event, there can be no doubt that the pressures on the profession are
intensifying. Only if it takes advantage of the downturn to question
established orthodoxies can it emerge from the slump in a more competitive
state. The challenges and opportunities are immense, according to Mr Jonas.
'The profession is at a crossroads,' he says.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
CAPITAL GROWTH (%)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                    Retail    Office    Industrial    All Properties
Year to Aug 92       -0.3     -13.4       -4.2            -6.2
Quarter to Aug 92    -0.7      -4.1       -2.8            -2.4
Month of Aug 92      -0.5      -1.5       -1.0            -1.0
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Investment Property Databank
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
