FT  03 DEC 92 / Ministers to discuss violations by Serbia
TOUGHER action against Serbia, possibly including military action, will be
discussed by foreign ministers from 30 countries at a conference in Geneva
on December 16, convened to discuss the rapidly deteriorating situation in
Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The conference, to be co-chaired by Lord Owen and Mr Cyrus Vance, the
European Community and United Nations mediators for a peace settlement in
the former Yugoslavia, is due to decide on a joint international response to
the growing violations by Serbia of ceasefire agreements, human rights and
the UN's 'no-fly' zone.
Faced with growing evidence of the death and suffering wreaked on the Moslem
population by the Bosnian Serbs' policy of 'ethnic cleansing', both western
and Islamic countries have been persuaded that diplomatic action and
economic sanctions may not be enough to bring about a Serbian change of
heart.
At a meeting of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC) in Jeddah
yesterday Moslem countries appeared ready to make a formal appeal to the UN
for international military intervention.
The consultative assembly of the nine-nation Western European Union defence
organisation, meeting in Paris, has also recommended that member countries
should study the possibility of military intervention to stabilise the area
and end ethnic cleansing.
However, there is no evidence that the western powers, particularly the EC,
are on the point of agreeing to military action that goes beyond the
protection of humanitarian aid convoys, presently undertaken under the
umbrella of the UN.
Among the leading western powers, only the US, which unlike Britain and
France does not have any troops on the ground in Bosnia or other areas of
the former Yugoslavia, has indicated that it would be ready to support
military steps to enforce the UN ban on military flights over Bosnia. But
British officials stressed in London yesterday that full-scale military
intervention was only one of a range of options. The one-day conference was
originally proposed by France as a full-scale emergency ministerial meeting
outside the Geneva-based UN-EC peace talks on the former Yugoslavia.
But that idea was dropped after Britain, current chairman of the EC and host
of last August's London conference on Yugoslavia, insisted that it should be
in the form of an expanded steering committee of that conference.
None of the parties to the Yugoslav conflict have been asked to attend, as
they were to the London conference, in the hope that their absence will
facilitate agreement on effective international action.
