FT  06 MAR 92 / Management: Hospitals get the quality treatment / A look at
magic moments in America
Mike Matzinger, a paramedic, entered the hospital ward carrying a shopping
bag. He was visiting a boy knocked down by a car the previous day whose
school uniform Matzinger had cut during treatment. The paramedic had just
gone out on his day off work and bought a replacement set.
The incident at Williamsport Hospital in Pennsylvania is one of 1,000 'magic
moments' listed by the hospital as the result of its six-year Total Quality
Management programme. Williamsport is a pioneer, but is far from alone in
trying to apply TQM in a health setting.
In the last two years, American health managers have become fascinated by
quality. It now takes second place only to cost containment in a country
where 13 per cent of the gross national product is spent on an largely
insurance-based health care system.
TQM can create big financial savings. Research has indicated that companies
often spend between 25 and 30 per cent of operating budgets rectifying
errors in the production process. Exponents of TQM claim it can save about
half of those costs by getting things right first time.
The whole notion of quality has a particular significance in medicine. Cars
built with defects may be re-worked, but patients who are treated wrongly
will suffer unnecessarily and may not recover at all.
So far, most health care improvements have been administrative. A team of
physicians and managers halved the number of unavailable out-patient records
at the Walnut Creek Medical Center in California by using problem solving
techniques, common in industrial engineering.
Similar successes were reported in an eight-month national demonstration
project. The project matched 21 experts in quality management from
corporations, universities, and consulting firms with management teams from
health organisations.
Each team selected a problem area at their workplace and applied a TQM
solution. The problems included telephone response times, transfer of data
between sites and improved billing; none covered clinical subjects, or broad
corporate change.
After six years of the TQM programme at the Williamsport Hospital, Donald
Creamer, chief executive and president, can produce a list of ment teams' as
part of the hospital's 'Making People Well and Happy' campaign. They
include:
Raising the rate of improvement in post-heart attack patients undergoing
rehabilitation from 66 to 80 per cent.
Achieving significantly lower mortality rates than other hospitals with the
same mix of patients.
Responding to parents' wishes not to be parted from their children before
they are anaesthetised for operations.
Timothy Manello, the hospital's vice president for human resources, says the
programme has depended on involving and looking after staff. There is an
extensive programme of staff training and rewards designed to inculcate
values and standards in all employees.
Apart from monthly awards, the two employees of the year receive Dollars
500, a silver tray and a week's family holiday in Florida.
Another hospital with interesting results is the Department of Veterans
Affairs Hospital in Kansas City. Managers claim that since the introduction
of a Quality Management Programme, they have cut the number of deaths in the
hospital by 20 per cent.
The hospital has a small team of specialist nurses who monitor 15 types of
untoward incidents, including all in-patient deaths. After the team
presented results to physicians and ward teams, clinical and administrative
policies were changed.
These American experiments have lessons for Britain. The National Health
Service Management Executive has invested Pounds 2.5m over the last three
years in supporting local TQM initiatives. This financial year, 12 sites
have shared Pounds 1m.
The projects are now being examined by a team from Brunel University, and
early evidence suggests that the NHS experience compares well with the US.
In my own health district of Worthing in Sussex, some tangible results have
been achieved:
At Shoreham Health Centre, doctors, nurses, receptionists and the caretaker
worked together to improve patient waiting areas, signposting and access to
the premises.
At Worthing Hospital, the porters were issued with walkie talkies to improve
response times.
The ambulance service introduced radio-cassettes to entertain patients
travelling to out-patients' wards.
But despite the hopeful evidence from both sides of the Atlantic, there are
some important questions to be answered before the case for TQM in health is
fully made.
The first is whether TQM can be transported from the private sector into the
public sector.
There seems little reason to think that the main thrust of the approach
cannot be transferred, but there are harder questions about its techniques
for involving staff.
One of the exciting components of TQM is the idea of encouraging staff to
take responsibility: this approach can cut across the bureaucratic style of
public services.
Trust hospitals now have a clear interest in delivering the services
required by customers - purchasing health authorities and fund-holding
general practitioners. They also have more freedom to devise their own staff
reward packages to encourage quality.
A bigger unknown is whether TQM can be applied to clinical areas. The
evidence from the US is so far unconvincing. In theory, there should be no
problem. The systematic, disciplined method at the heart of the TQM reflects
the clinical approach of doctors.
However, doctors may resist because they see it as a cunning way for
management to become involved in monitoring the work of doctors.
Alternatively, they may regard participation in problem-solving teams as a
waste of time or fail to see that many unsatisfactory clinical outcomes stem
from system failures.
A further set of questions surrounds the problem of defining quality in
health care. Is quality to be judged by compliance to agreed procedures? Or
is it by the condition of the patient on discharge? Or is a longer term view
of the outcome for the patient necessary? And what part should the patient's
experience in hospital play in judging quality?
In the industrial setting some of these questions can be answered by asking
the customers to rank quality components. In many cases, this is not so easy
in the health setting.
Despite these difficulties, the potential prizes to be reaped from TQM make
it well worth exploring on a more serious basis in the NHS. If it works
well, it could result in big improvements of the sort witnessed in
successful Japanese and American companies.
At a minimum, it could result in more medical records being found and some
telephones being answered more quickly. Small gains like that should not be
dismissed lightly.
Alan Randall is chief executive of Worthing district health authority. He
studied US health care as a 1991 Harkness Fellow of the Commonwealth Fund,
New York
