FT  18 JUL 92 / Sport: Watch out for the axemen - Olympic Rowing / The
rowers and oars which will dominate in Banyoles
ROWERS often feel they are on the fringe; a restless minority striving for
the recognition on the world's sporting stage. The site for rowing at the
Olympics seems to support that view. The regatta, on a lake at Banyoles,
north-west of Gerona and 124 km from Barcelona, is well away from the heat
of the foot lights.
However, the lake is almost perfect for the athletes because it is a fair
course. Many courses are affected by the weather. On some courses the
outside lanes suffer more from cross winds. At some, such as Holme
Pierrepont in Nottingham, a few crews shelter in the lee of a bank if there
is a cross wind, as others battle their way through white water. There
should be no such problem at Banyoles. Furthermore, to avoid the glare of
the noon sun, racing will start at 8 am and finish by 11.30 am.
The sun may have set on East Germany, but its athletes, especially the
women, are still shining in the unified German team. At the Lucerne regatta
in June, the last international competition before the Olympics, Germany won
six gold medals out of a possible 12 in events that are in the Olympic
programme. German women took three golds out of a possible five with Canada
breaking the clean sweep by winning the coxless pairs and fours.
A test of strength in depth in any squad is the performance of the eights.
Germany won men's and women's eights at Lucerne. The men's eight has been
unbeaten for four years. Its present line up is unbeaten this year and it
has defeated the US, Canada and the China. Unless the New Zealanders or
Australians have been cooking up something special, the gold medal will be
on its way to Germany.
The women's eights event is more open although the Germans are favourites.
The Russians, British, Canadians and Chinese have useful crews but the best
of the rest are the Romanians. Television coverage of women's rowing is
sparse but look out for the slightly smaller but ferocious Romanian eight
and its aggressive attack.
Britain's gold medal hopes rest with Steve Redgrave and Matthew Pinsent in
the coxless pair. Redgrave was off colour at Lucerne and the pair did not
race. But under the watchful eye of former East German are fully fit for
Banyoles. Redgrave and Pinsent expect a stiff challenge from the Germans.
The 39-year-old Pertti Karppinen of Finland will be going for a record
fourth gold in the single scull. His first win in 1976 coincided with the
introduction of women's rowing at the Olympics. Karppinnen joined the
three-golds club in 1984 but failed to make the final in Seoul. He showed
some of his old form coming third in Lucerne with a glorious charge for the
finish line. However, he was four seconds behind the winner, the formidable
Thomas Lange of Germany.
Lange has dominated men's sculling since he won the world championships in
1987. Since then he has taken the Olympic crown in Seoul and gold in world
championships in 1989 and 1991. He won the FISA World Cup this year by 11
points from Vaclav Chalupa, from Czechoslovakia, who may well split
Karppinnen and Lange on the medal rostrum.
Lange, a medical student in his mid-20s, is a product of the old East
Germany. His father, a high ranking Stasi officer, committed suicide in the
year the wall came down. Lange is a firm believer in the old East German
system and has stayed in the east.
The main talking point at the games will be the oars. Since March the rowing
world has been in the grips of a blade revolution. It was then that a new
asymmetric blade took to the water in the US. The spoon had been redesigned
and made 20 per cent bigger with a larger area below the shaft. It resembled
a hatchet and looked ugly.
Since then the blade has been surrounded in mystery and controversy. Some
coaches claimed they represented unfair competition. Technology was winning
over technique and the poorer clubs and nations would be left behind.
In the spring, some US colleges called for a ban on the hatchet. Some
mediocre crews were getting good results with them. The blades were not
banned and the crews that had complained opened their cheque books and
bought the hatchets just to keep up with the Joneses.
At Henley Royal Regatta, at the beginning of July, the majority of
successful crews had the mystical hatchet. However, Pangbourne College,
using traditional blades, dealt a notable blow for commonsense when they
defeated Westminster School, using hatchets, in the final of the schools'
event.
Although no test has proved whether the new blades have magic properties
they have prompted a sheep-like rush of orders and they will provide a
useful topic for anxious commentators to fill any awkward silences.
