FT  14 MAY 92 / Survey of World Electricity (16): Nuclear hazards intensify
 -Andrew Holmes on the power stations that Communism built
THE recent incident at the Sosnovy Bor nuclear power station near St
Petersburg has given rise to fears of another nuclear accident on the scale
of Chernobyl.
While the Sosnovy incident - a leak of radioactive gas on March 24 - bore no
relation to the Chernobyl disaster, it took place in the same reactor type,
the RBMK, and occurred only months after a fire at the Chernobyl 2 unit.
Another RBMK, lgnalina in Lithuania, has been the subject of safety reviews
by Swedish nuclear experts and, by all accounts, is in an alarming
condition.
Aside from the technical fallibility of these stations, reports from
Norwegian nuclear inspectors who have visited the Chernobyl and lgnalina
plants suggest that corruption has become endemic in equipment ordering and
in payment for repairs which are never actually carried out.
As one of the Norwegians put it in a recent interview with the
environmentalist newsletter, NNVF Bulletin, 'in a country with an economic
system where keeping accounts and auditing are unknown, fraud is an easy
business'. The command and control system in the USSR nuclear industry,
which was never very effective at the best of times, has now gone
altogether, leaving a dangerous vacuum in the oversight of nuclear
operations.
The RBMKs, and the whole nuclear sector, represent only one aspect of the
problems besetting the electricity industries of the former Comecon
countries.
It is nuclear power, however, which is causing the greatest alarm, not just
in the west, but in former parts of the USSR. Estonia was among the first
countries to demand a shutdown at Sosnovy Bor.
Nuclear power also poses most urgently the question which faces much of the
decrepit and highly-pollutant plants in eastern Europe: should technical
help from the West aim to refurbish the plants, or get rid of them?
Apart from the RBMKs, the nuclear plants which cause most trepidation in
neighbouring countries are the four pressurised water reactors at Kozloduy
in Bulgaria. The various western inspection teams which have visited the
site have reported a station which is badly maintained, run by an
under-trained and low-paid staff and in need of basic repairs at every
level.
A reactor in a similar condition, Greifswald in east Germany, was shut down
soon after German unification. Unlike east Germany, however, neither
Bulgaria nor any of the former regions of the Soviet Union which house RBMKs
can fall back into the arms of a rich western nation like West Germany.
Kozloduy exemplifies the key problem in the 'patch up or close down'
dilemma. Nuclear power provides more than a third of Bulgaria's electricity.
The country's hydro supply is limited and irregular at best, while its only
domestic fossil fuel sources are low-quality coal and highly-pollutant
lignite. The Ukraine, which houses 12 PWR units as well as the three
surviving units at Chernobyl, is in much the same condition.
The initial instincts of the numerous western companies which flocked into
eastern Europe when the Iron Curtain fell were to bring the stations up to
something approaching western safety standards. Experience has shown that
stations designed and built to such a low level of safety requirements are
in many cases beyond redemption. In any event, public pressure from the
Scandinavian countries, Germany and Austria is pulling governments and aid
agencies away from such solutions.
However, new power stations cost money. In the case of nuclear power, there
is also a large price to be paid in getting rid of the stations and the
enormous volume of waste which they leave behind in the form of irradiated
steel and concrete structures.
Outside the nuclear sector, there are other horrors such as the Polish
lignite-burning power stations which have turned parts of the country into a
poisonous wasteland.
A government survey in 1988 designated 27 areas as 'ecologically hazardous'.
These areas cover 11 per cent of the Polish land mass and house over one
third of the population. Power stations are only part of the problem, but
they are a large part. All but a tiny fraction of the nation's electricity
comes from coal of one type or another. The country's venture into the
nuclear sector proved short-lived and Poland has few if any other resources
which can be used in the short term.
Not all eastern European countries face problems on this scale. Hungary, for
example, is making swift progress, though even here, according to a recent
report by the International Energy Agency, the break-up of the centralised
Comecon nuclear structure, in which the USSR provided treated fuel and took
away waste for disposal, has presented the country's nuclear station, Paks,
with a new set of problems. These are tending to offset the good
performance, in technical terms, of the station itself.
Hungary is also suffering, like many former Comecon countries, from a lower
availability of Soviet electricity imports. The lEA sees positive signs that
an energy economy such as Hungary's can, with a cautious approach to
privatisation of basic industries, begin to get its energy market working on
something approaching western lines.
The dilemma which faces all these countries, however, is the most basic of
all, the pricing of energy supplies. In Russia, the 'liberalisation' of
energy pricing, involving an eight to ten-fold rise in consumer prices, due
to have taken place at the end of this winter, has now been delayed until
the end of the 'spring sowing season', in May or early June.
Further delays are possible, not to say probable, as the opposition to
market-based pricing grows. Liberalisation of pricing is a precondition
imposed by the International Monetary Fund on loans to Russia and the rest
of the ClS countries, but few if any will go ahead with price liberalisation
if Russia stalls.
It is, perhaps, difficult for westerners to appreciate the trauma which lies
ahead for every sector of the population in the ex-USSR and other countries
in the region, who have been taught to regard electricity as a basic
amenity, like bread and water.
It is here, at the most basic level, that the opportunity for change, in the
short term, must lie. The introduction of basic metering of electricity, and
the removal of incentives to waste it, could mark the way forward to the
beginnings of a more rational use of the vast resources of Russia and other
republics. Time, however, is pressing.
The eastern European countries do not have sufficient time to introduce
gradually the metering and payment systems which might ease the way towards
a more efficient use of energy sources.
Pressures from the lMF, among others, to raise revenue from energy tariffs,
along with even more misguided pressure to disaggregate and privatise the
electricity industry, threaten to make an orderly transition to energy
markets - as opposed to allocation systems - impossible.
In the meantime, western nations, and in particular the near neighbours of
the former USSR, need to find a way through the nuclear power problem. It is
already clear that neither privatisation nor the disaggregation of
monopolies will do much to improve these potentially lethal machines and end
the mismanagement which now makes them doubly dangerous.
The writer is editor of the FTBI newsletter Power in Europe
