FT  13 OCT 92 / UK Company News: Lucas puts new components in place - Paul
Cheeseright details the three-year programme designed to meet changing
markets
LUCAS INDUSTRIES has joined the lengthening list of large engineering groups
engaged in changing the shape of its business.
A three-year programme, embracing the normal gamut of cost reduction moves,
seeks to bring the group more closely into tune with the changing
relationship between component manufacturers and the assemblers of finished
aircraft and motor vehicles.
Competition in the aerospace and automotive industries, where Lucas does the
greater part of its business, has become harsher as recession has deepened.
At the same time, the main vehicle and aircraft manufacturers are reducing
the number of their suppliers. They prefer the stability of a long-term
relationship with a limited number of suppliers to a shifting free-for-all
based on tenders for a particular product.
As its customers change their habits, Lucas changes its own. But it is
changing them against the background of a deteriorating financial position
which has pushed it, like GKN, Glynwed and a host of other engineering
groups, into a search for economies.
The most obvious manifestation has been the growing number of job losses,
which at Lucas will take the size of the payroll to fewer than 50,000 from
more than 57,000 in July 1990.
The changes at Lucas include following the conventional dictum of cutting
back to core activities. It is putting up for sale companies which could
raise about Pounds 100m during the current financial year. The first four to
go have combined sales of about Pounds 150m a year and employ in the region
of 2,000.
The biggest is the fluid power distribution business, which has most of its
sales in the US, Autocentres, a vehicle parts business in the UK with 65
outlets, Defence Fabrications, which makes missile casings in Burnley, and
Aircraft Transparencies, a Luton company making aircraft windows.
The group has also started to consolidate its plants, narrowing the
geographical range of its factories, to have, for example, one product made
in one factory and not in three.
Thus, in Buckingham, where Lucas had three assembly test operations, it has
closed one. It has closed one small plant in Germany and another in France.
Seven units from the group's applied technology division, the largest
employing 250 people, have closed in the US. A Los Angeles plant in the
aerospace division has shut. But new plants have opened in Cleveland,
replacing an outdated one, and in Salt Lake City.
There will be more, so far unspecified, plant closures, with the loss of
jobs evenly split between the UK and other countries. But Sir Anthony Gill,
the chairman, made clear that the UK is likely to remain the group's
manufacturing base.
Although 81 per cent of Lucas's products are sold outside the UK, half of
them are manufactured in the UK. 'There may be an increase in UK
manufacturing. This is a good base,' Sir Anthony said, although he warned
the government to keep inflation down.
Yet there will be shifts in the nature of the manufacturing. Lucas, it is
now clear, will be buying in more components for its systems.
'Opportunities have been identified for more outsourcing, to achieve cost
savings and to enable investment within Lucas to be concentrated on our own
more valuable, specialised and sometimes unique capabilities,' said Sir
Anthony.
The more Lucas concentrates on the higher value-added parts of production
and the more it rests its future on its ability to design products at the
higher end of the technological markets, the greater the need for
investment. Research and development and capital expenditure held up over
the last financial year, but Sir Anthony is making it clear that the group
would like to spread development and investment costs.
Lucas is no stranger to joint ventures. It recently announced two new
partnerships, with Sagem of France and Autobrzdy of Czechoslovakia. And it
wants more.
'What we'd look at is an area where we have a unique capability which we can
exploit more quickly if we go in with somebody else, that's the nature of
the trade-off,' Sir Anthony said.
The search for joint ventures, the simplification of the Lucas manufacturing
network and the re-shaping of the group will be under the control of a new
and, Lucas hopes, streamlined and more responsive senior management.
Following tension on the board earlier this year and the appointment six
weeks ago of Mr John Grant as finance director, Lucas has now decided to
strip out a tier of management. The effect will be to cut central overheads
by 25 per cent. Throughout the group the number of management positions will
be reduced by 250.
Lucas used to have a series of group, sector and divisional executives.
These have been scrapped and replaced by a new and small group executive,
each member of which will be responsible for one of the five portfolios into
which Lucas businesses have now been grouped - aerospace, applied technology
and three automotive areas.
