FT  24 APR 92 / World Stock Markets: Hardly a squeak from Canadian
cheerleaders - The damage done to Toronto stocks by the crisis at O&amp;Y and
weak gold prices
Between the travails of Olympia &amp; York, sagging gold and oil prices, and
only the faintest signs of an upturn in the Canadian economy, the Toronto
Stock Exchange has had little to cheer about lately. So it is not surprising
that while share prices on Wall Street have been climbing from one record to
another, Toronto remains in a rut.
Except for a maverick bounce earlier this month, the TSE 300 index has been
steadily losing ground all year. It has dropped more than 8 per cent since
mid-January. The index closed at 3,368 on Wednesday, far off its all-time
high of 4,112 in August 1987. Most of the damage has come from O &amp; Y
fall-out and from the sliding gold price.
With Canadian banks being O &amp; Y's biggest creditors, the TSE banks index has
slid by more than 18 per cent since mid-January. National Bank of Canada,
the smallest of the big six banks but with the heaviest exposure to O &amp; Y
relative to its size, has seen its share price drop by a third.
The banks' exposure to O &amp; Y itself, totalling about CDollars 3bn (Dollars
2.5bn), is only part of investors' concern. Even the developer's main
lender, Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, could not absorb a big
write-down on its O &amp; Y loans without serious capital impairment.
More worrying is the effect that O &amp; Y may have on the real estate market as
a whole. Sales of buildings at firesale prices, coupled with even more
intense competition for office tenants, could force the banks to reassess
the value of a much bigger slice of their real estate portfolios.
This concern is reflected in the share prices of other heavily indebted
property companies. Calgary-based Trizec, which is North America's biggest
publicly traded real estate group and 35 per cent-owned by O &amp; Y, has been
trading this week at its lowest levels in more than two decades.
Bramalea, one of Canada's biggest homebuilders and a Trizec subsidiary, sank
below CDollars 3 a share this week. The shares lost 10 per cent of their
value on Wednesday alone, and are now more than a quarter below the price at
which a flopped rights issue was pitched earlier this month.
The gold mining index has fallen by 14 per cent from its late-January peak.
In spite of a 49 per cent leap in first-quarter income, American Barrick,
long an investor favourite, has sunk from a record CDollars 34.75 to
CDollars 27.75. The realisation is apparently sinking in that even astute
hedging cannot protect a commodity producer forever from the unpleasant
realities of the spot market.
Investors have even recently shunned some of Canada's best-known industrial
companies. Northern Telecom, propelled by 13 consecutive quarters of
earnings growth to a record CDollars 58.50 earlier this year, has since
retreated below CDollars 53.
Dofasco, the country's biggest steelmaker, is trading close to its 52-week
low. Shares of Air Canada, which is in a fight-to-the-finish with its rival,
Canadian Airlines International, are now at just half the price at which the
government sold its remaining stake to the public in July 1989.
Amid the gloom, lower interest rates and some cyclical stocks appear to be
pointing to better times ahead. Canadian Pacific Forest Products, for
instance, has gained more than 10 per cent in recent months.
But until more solid evidence of a broad-based business recovery appears,
the heftiest profits in Toronto are likely to come from more speculative
plays.
Two oil and gas producers - BP Canada and Ocelot Energy - have benefited
handsomely from a huge natural gas discovery in north-east British Columbia.
Mr Jim Doak, analyst at First Marathon Securities, expects the discovery to
boost BP Canada's net asset value by about 50 per cent by the end of 1993.
The shares of Ocelot (its biggest shareholder is the German metals group
Metallgesellschaft) have rocketed 70 per cent since November.
