FT  18 MAR 92 / Leading Article: From here to Hongkong
CROSS-BORDER bank mergers are notoriously difficult to pull off. Indeed, the
recent histories of both Midland Bank and Hongkong and Shanghai Banking
Corporation offer a perfect illustration of the hazards and pitfalls.
Midland's disastrous acquisition of Crocker in California in the early 1980s
provided business schools across the world with a classic case study in how
not to conduct an overseas acquisition. Hongkong and Shanghai's losses at
Marine Midland in New York state were on a smaller scale than Midland's but
point to the same question. Would a takeover of Midland by the British-based
parent of the Hong Kong bank have any remote chance of success?
In all bank mergers there are regulatory obstacles to be overcome at the
outset and in the present case they are compounded because of the
sensitivities of the People's Republic of China before the formal hand-over
of power in Hong Kong in 1997. But it would be surprising if the Bank of
England attempted to block the proposal, as it did with the Hong Kong bank's
bid for Royal Bank of Scotland in 1981.
In the earlier case, the Bank of England was piqued that the Hong Kong
bankers had attempted a bid for a British clearing bank without its fiat.
Its officials claimed before the Monopolies Commission that the transfer of
control overseas of a significant part of the British clearing bank system
would be detrimental to the public interest because of an inherent conflict
of interest. The Hong Kong bank's primary loyalty was, they suggested, to
the people and territory of Hong Kong.
Thin argument
The argument looked thin at the time; and while the approach of 1997 may
lend it more force, it is hard to believe that adequate arrangements to
protect Midland's depositors from financial crises in Hong Kong could not be
made. More to the point, the Hong Kong bank is an exceptionally well
capitalised institution. It is doing the Bank of England a favour by
offering a solution to the weakest link in the British clearing bank chain.
The Bank of England conceded in its evidence to the Monopolies Commission a
decade ago that cases might arise where 'a United Kingdom bank might be so
clearly in need of fresh blood and impetus that a bid from outside would on
balance be preferable to the status quo'. That is manifestly the case with
Midland. It would be absurd for the Bank of England, weighed down as it is
by the general consequences of lax monetary control and more specific
questions over prudential supervision at BCCI and elsewhere, to suggest
otherwise.
Competition policy
There are no problems here for competition policy. By bringing its strong
balance sheet backing to Midland, Hongkong and Shanghai will, if anything,
intensify competition in British banking. No doubt some bankers will argue
that this is unfortunate, in that Britain is overbanked. But the case is
scarcely persuasive when the immediate threat to the economy is that capital
constraints in banking could hold back credit growth, thereby threatening
recovery.
The really difficult question here is for the shareholders in the Hongkong
and Shanghai Banking Corporation. The bank's greatest merit has been to be
in the right place at the right time to play host to some of China's most
dynamic entrepreneurs as they fled from communist China. That is how it came
to be transformed from a sleepy provider of trade credit to the Asian
economy to a regional banking giant. Its attempt to move to global status,
meantime, has met with singularly mixed fortunes.
It would be hard to argue with the timing of the bid. Many of Midland's
skeletons have been cleared out and the profits stand to benefit
disproportionately, relative to the other clearing banks, from recovery. Yet
the move into Midland means that the Hongkong and Shanghai shareholders'
stake in one of the world's most dynamic economies could be significantly
diluted. Admittedly the China factor muddies the argument. But why not, in
view of the unhappy experience of past acquisitions, leave it to
shareholders to take out their own insurance?
