FT  15 JUN 92 / Leading Article: A better way for buses
BRITAIN NEEDS its buses. They make much more efficient use of road space
than private cars. By far the quickest and cheapest way to tackle urban
traffic congestion would be to persuade more people to use them.
Instead, buses are in a spiral of decline. People have left them for the
greater speed and convenience of the car; the cars have worsened the traffic
jams; the jams have played havoc with the bus services; and so more people
have switched to cars.
In 1985, the government set out to reverse this decline by deregulating the
market (though initially excluding London). Hitherto, a highly restrictive
route licensing system had effectively ruled out competition between
operators. That was swept away, leaving anyone free to run a service
wherever they liked. The state-owned National Bus Company was broken up and
privatised, and the municipal bus companies were put on a commercial footing
in readiness for a gradual sell-off.
In theory, deregulation should have led to a proliferation of bus services,
greater efficiency, lower fares, and a rise in passenger numbers. Indeed, it
did score successes: efficiency soared, largely because of reductions in
wage costs, and subsidies were more than halved, largely because local
authorities were no longer allowed to operate low-fare policies.
By the most significant measure of all, however, deregulation has proved a
disaster. The decline in bus use, far from slowing, has accelerated:
passenger numbers outside London have fallen by 19 per cent since
deregulation, and by 26 per cent in the metropolitan areas.
Disappointing record
Perhaps the biggest single reason for this disappointing performance is the
government's failure to realise that, in the bus business, the operator who
wins the most passengers is not the one who offers the best service or the
lowest fares, but the one who gets to the bus stop first.
Thus many an established operator has been driven to the wall by cut-throat
competition from new entrants of indifferent quality; and the passenger's
experience of deregulation has too often been one of high fares, chaotic
services and an increasingly decrepit bus fleet.
All this would be less alarming were it not combined with the government's
frequent boast that bus mileage has risen by 19 per cent since deregulation.
The result is that significantly more buses are running around fighting over
significantly fewer passengers, particularly in urban areas. In other words,
buses are worsening congestion instead of relieving it.
Second thoughts
Extraordinarily, in the face of all the evidence pointing to deregulation's
failings, it remains the government's avowed intent to extend it to the
capital. And yet, in recent weeks, there have been glimmerings of second
thoughts. There was no mention of the necessary legislation in the Queen's
Speech, and the transport department has unexpectedly set up a consultative
forum on the topic.
If a reappraisal is indeed under way, it is to be strongly welcomed. It
should start by noting that, in the period during which bus passenger
journeys fell by 26 per cent in the metropolitan areas which had been
deregulated, it rose by 4 per cent in still-regulated London. It should also
note that the capital's buses have seen big increases in operating
efficiencies over the same period, and that this has been achieved without
impeding the capital's traffic. The reason is that a third of London's bus
routes are now operated by the private sector under franchise from London
Transport, after bidding through a competitive tender against London Buses
for the exclusive right to operate them.
This surely shows the way forward for buses in Britain. It cannot make sense
to open up the capital's routes to a free-for-all when experience elsewhere
has shown that it threatens traffic chaos. Having missed the opportunity to
franchise out the management of Britain's airports and water authorities,
the government now appears to have come round to an appreciation of
franchising's merits for British Rail's passenger services. It should now
see the virtue of franchising for the bus industry - not just for London,
but for the long-suffering regions, too.
