FT  07 DEC 92 / Talks likely to put EFA back on track
A THREATENED collapse of the four-nation partnership working on the European
Fighter Aircraft is expected to be averted at a meeting this week in
Brussels. But differences over the aircraft's planned capabilities and the
timing of production have still to be resolved among the partner countries -
Britain, Germany, Italy and Spain.
Defence ministers and chiefs of staff of the four countries are due to hold
talks on the future of the Pounds 20bn project on Thursday, when they are in
Brussels for a two-day meeting of Nato's defence planning committee.
British officials said they were 'reasonably confident' the meeting would
secure Germany's continued participation in EFA development.
Germany announced in June it did not intend to proceed with the project,
arguing the EFA was too costly and unsuitable for post-cold war needs. About
Pounds 5.5bn of the Pounds 8bn development cost has been spent.
Mr Volker Ruhe, German defence minister, has since come under strong
internal pressure to drop his campaign for a totally new European project
and to proceed with the current airframe and engines.
The other partners are expected to hold out an olive branch to Mr Ruhe,
acknowledging his success in bringing about significant cost reductions
through a rethink on the project.
Development is expected to continue on the present basis, with the UK and
Germany each taking 33 per cent shares, Italy 21 per cent and Spain 13 per
cent. But the shares will have to be readjusted when the fighter goes into
production, according to the number each partner plans to buy.
Ministers will approve a joint document on revised operational requirements
which was signed by the four chiefs of defence staff in Rome two weeks ago.
This is seen as allowing for a 'family' of aircraft of varying capability,
which might mean Germany opting out of the new British-led ECR90 radar.
A decision on investment to set up production was scheduled for next summer,
but the date is expected to slip. Germany is reluctant to commit funds
before elections in 1994 and does not want the EFA in service before 2002.
This conflicts with British and Italian plans.
