FT  25 NOV 92 / World Bank debates its role as lender / Assessing a damning
report on the bank's portfolio
THE World Bank's executive board yesterday began discussion on one of the
most comprehensive reviews of its portfolio management, based on a study
that has opened up a fierce debate over how well the Washington-based
multilateral institution is fulfilling its role of development lending.
The report, produced by a taskforce under the chairmanship of Mr Willi
Wapenhans, a World Bank veteran, paints a stark picture of the deteriorating
quality of the bank's portfolio of projects in the 1980s.
World Bank staff are used to being criticised for clumsy bureaucracy,
tax-free salaries and lending to environmentally damaging projects, but the
Wapenhans report suggests the bank is failing even on its own terms. The
proportion of projects showing major problems in the World Bank's Dollars
138bn (Pounds 91bn) loan portfolio rose from 11 per cent in 1981 to 20 per
cent a decade later. Of projects in their fourth or fifth year of
implementation in 1991, 30 per cent had substantial problems, with project
categories such as water supply, sanitation and agriculture demonstrating
particularly severe difficulties.
In addition, the bank is finding that it takes an average of two-and-a-half
years longer to complete a project than its staff estimates.
Much of this deterioration can be attributed to factors outside the control
of any institution, such as the oil shock, debt crisis and steady worsening
terms of trade for developing nations. The taskforce suggested it may also
reflect more realistic assessments of performance by bank staff.
But the report points to severe shortcomings in the conception and appraisal
of projects, shortcomings deeply rooted in the bank's corporate attitudes -
a culture that promotes loan volume as the measurement of success - and an
arrogance that leads the bank to impose its own projects on borrowers,
rather than responding to their needs.
'Bank staff take a negotiating, not a consulting position - they know what
they want from the outset and aren't open to hearing what the country has to
say,' the taskforce concluded after consulting representatives from
borrowing countries.
In fact, the Wapenhans report finds, the more time bank staff spend on the
preparation of a project, the less likely it is to succeed - perhaps because
these are the projects to which the borrower is least committed.
Borrowers complain staff may make matters still worse by imposing endless
and unhelpful conditions to ensure the bank board will approve the loan, and
by adding in elements of the 'policy du jour' - be it import substitution,
export promotion, women's programmes or environmental concerns.
Other critics say one of the reasons why portfolio supervision has
deteriorated is that many of the bank's engineers, who revelled in getting
their boots dirty in on-site inspections, have been replaced by economists
who stay in their hotels reading reports.
Yet, say some World Bank insiders, those hands-on engineers tended to
promote their own specialities, whereas the economists take a broader view
of a country's needs.
'If you had a port engineer in south Asia, you could be pretty sure you
would get one or two port projects a year in south Asia,' said one bank
director.
The Wapenhans report comes on the heels of a fiery debate inside and outside
the bank over its handling of the Dollars 3bn Sardar Sarovar dam and
irrigation projects on the Narmada river in western India.
Environmentalist groups have for years complained that the bank ignored all
the warning signs about the Narmada dam's impact on the environment and on
peasant farmers.
Despite a damning independent report from a commission headed by Mr Bradford
Morse, a former administrator of the United Nations Development Project, the
World Bank board decided last month to allow the project to go ahead,
although the executive directors, who represent member countries, set strict
benchmarks to be met by April.
'The problem is that institutionally there is no incentive to slow down
projects for environmental or social quality reasons. Your career incentives
are to push projects through,' says Ms Lori Udall of the Washington-based
Environmental Defence Fund.
'If they cannot suspend a project when the evidence is so overwhelming, when
are they going to?' she asks.
It is nothing new for the World Bank to be scratching its head over its
missions and its corporate culture. Former presidents Tom Clausen and Barber
Conable each implemented his own management overhaul. Mr Lewis Preston, the
former chairman of Morgan Guaranty who took over as president last year, has
made his own reforms, and hundreds of bank employees are now waiting for
reassignment.
However, by commissioning the Wapenhans taskforce in February, Mr Preston
had in a way answered a central criticism of the report it was to produce.
'Successful implementation of approved operations outweighs new annual
commitments as an indicator of the bank's development effectiveness,' he
wrote.
Already the bank's traditional emphasis on global loan volume as a measure
of its success in transferring resources to third world customers has been
somewhat muted. The latest annual report shows signs of fewer loans rushed
through before the end of the fiscal year to burnish the statistics.
Many non-governmental organisations, however, complain that the entire
career structure has been unchanged by top-down reforms, and continues to
reward employees largely on the basis of their loan volume.
But some are encouraged by Mr Preston's recognition of his organisation's
problems; perhaps he will be able to change its culture in a way that has
eluded his predecessors.
