FT  16 MAY 92 / Hint of new pay offer in German engineering row
GERMANY'S engineering employers yesterday hinted at an improved pay offer
and new talks with the engineering workers were agreed for today, the first
ray of hope in the country's embattled industrial relations.
Negotiations will be reopened in Karlsruhe for the key north
Baden-Wurttemberg area, home to such big engineering employers as
Daimler-Benz and Robert Bosch, and to 700,000 of Germany's 4m engineering
workers.
The region is the one which produced a breakthrough in each of the past two
years of engineering industry wage negotiations, giving rise to a degree of
optimism otherwise scarcely justified by the progress of the talks so far.
Mr Hans-Joachim Gottschol, president of the Gesamtmetall employers'
organisation, indicated in a radio interview that a new offer was probable,
but he also insisted that the 5.4 per cent pay award agreed in the public
sector could not be a target for the engineering industry.
Mr Dieter Hundt, leader of the employers' side in north Baden-Wurttemberg,
said that after the collapse of last-ditch negotiations in both Hesse and
North Rhine-Westphalia it was still important 'to use every chance, however
slim, to come to an agreement at the negotiating table'.
At the moment the gap between IG Metall, the huge engineering workers'
union, demanding a 9.5 per cent pay rise, and Gesamtmetall, offering 3.3 per
cent, seems dauntingly wide.
Although some union leaders have suggested that a deal could be done around
6 per cent, the employers insist that is still too high.
After the talks were agreed, the IG Metall regional leaders agreed to
postpone the meeting of their wages commission until tomorrow, when it will
have to decide if the negotiations have failed, and whether to call a strike
ballot.
On Monday, the national leadership of IG Metall will decide which regions of
the country will hold strike ballots. and therefore which regions will be
hit by strike action from May 25, if no deal is forthcoming sooner. The
employers have threatened a widespread lock-out.
