FT  15 OCT 92 / Letter: Coal - a private industry alternative to closure and
pointing finger of blame
Sir, Much of Britain's remaining coal mining industry, it has been announced
('Anger erupts at coal pit closures', October 14), is to be closed with the
shut-down of 30 of the remaining 50 pits, the loss of 30,000 mining jobs
and, presumably, many more mining-dependent jobs in areas close to those
pits.
At any time such an announcement would serve as a chilling reminder of the
seriousness of the decline of Britain's basic industries but today it also
raises important questions about the proper role of government (Conservative
or otherwise) in industry and the policies which really underly the current
plans for the further privatisation of British industry.
If British Coal cannot run 50 pits at a profit with the energy requirements
of a population of 57m in the UK, could one or two of our leading industrial
groups be asked if they would like to try before the pits are closed and the
near irreversible process of geological collapse begins?
The president of the board of trade has announced his willingness to
intervene in British industry before breakfast, lunch, tea and dinner. Could
he choose one of those occasions this week to call Lord Hanson and find out
whether Hanson would like to acquire any of the mines scheduled for closure.
Lord Hanson and his colleagues appear to have done a fair job in getting to
grips with the large Peabody coal mines in the US. Why not let them try in
the UK? Should any such bidder be interested, presumably the price could be
set at a nominal Pounds 1, coupled with some enforceable undertakings about
employment numbers.
I am sure the Union of Democratic Miners would be interested in discussing
any such plans - possibly with some no-strike profit sharing deal.
Perhaps the fear is that mines acquired in this way 'on the cheap' would
provide unfair competition for the rump of British Coal and so spoil the
government's plans to privatise that too.
Let the president do his job, create some real competition in the energy
industry and in the process perhaps just save some much needed jobs.
William J Heard,
49 Park Lane (5th floor),
London W1Y 4EQ
