FT  29 MAY 92 / Union dilemma as Spanish strike fizzles: Clashes after
government orders police to break up public transport pickets
SPAIN'S trade unions face some tough political decisions after failing
yesterday to bring the country to a halt during a half-day general strike in
protest at government spending cuts.
The morning strike, which the unions claimed had been supported by an
overwhelming majority of Spaniards, had little effect in Madrid and other
big cities.
Minimum public transport services decreed by the government in the face of
fierce union criticism were exceeded in the capital. The government also
held firm to its promise to use police to break up pickets trying to stop
people using public transport. Most shops and businesses opened normally,
though people were slow to get to work either because full transport
services were not operating or had decided to spend most of the morning at
home.
There were some arrests around the country in sporadic clashes between
police and pickets, but apart from stopping work at large industrial plants,
the strike had nothing near the effect of the last national stoppage - a
full day strike in 1988 - when Spain came to a halt.
One measure of the strike's effect on business is that electricity
consumption, which fell 55 per cent in the 1988 stoppage, was yesterday down
just 13 per cent by early morning and had risen to 93 per cent of normal
national consumption half way through the morning.
The government's readiness to use police to prevent pickets stopping people
travelling is something new for Mr Felipe Gonzalez, the prime minister. But
it speaks for the confidence with which his government is facing off the
union challenges to its economic policies.
Those policies include freezing public sector subsidies and to lowering
unemployment benefits. They are part of government efforts to ensure that
Spain meets the convergence criteria set down by last year's Maastricht
agreement on European economic and monetary union.
Yesterday's uneven strike means that both government and Socialist party may
be less disposed than ever to negotiate elements of the convergence plan
with the unions. It also places an enormous political burden on union
leaders.
The latter have to decide whether to continue with the protests - and a full
day general strike in October - or let the issue drop and hope the
government will allow them to save some face by at least discussing marginal
changes to policy.
That may happen. A general election has to be held by October next year and
some peace with the unions may make the difference between an overall
Socialist party victory and the need to form a coalition with other parties.
Many analysts believe yesterday's strike marks the beginning of a long
election campaign.
Editorial comment, Page 16
