FT  27 JUL 92 / Paisley demand clouds Ulster talks
TENSIONS between parti-cipants in the adjourned talks on Northern Ireland's
political future appeared to be mounting yesterday after the Reverend Ian
Paisley, Democratic Unionist leader, warned that the talks would fail if the
Irish Republic did not agree to drop its territorial claims to the province.
The mainly Roman Catholic Social Democratic and Labour party said that Mr
Paisley's remarks were 'not encouraging'. His attempts to turn the
abandonment of the Republic's constitutional claim over the province into a
pre-condition for continuing the talks conflicted with the principal
accepted by participants that nothing would be agreed formally as long as
any issue was still outstanding.
Mr Paisley challenged Dublin to remove two articles in the Republic's
constitution. 'If they continue to say 'no, we have a claim over you' . . .
then they will have brought the talks to an end,' he said.
In a fresh move, the Democratic Unionists intend to use the five-week summer
recess in the talks to send other participants a 'shopping-list' of
'problems' that the party has with their respective positions and would want
them to address.
'Strand two' talks between leaders of political parties in Northern Ireland
and the British and Irish governments adjourned on Friday with an invitation
to participants to 'prepare papers to assist the progress of deliberations
following the recess'.
When they reconvene on September 2, the hard bargaining - if there is to be
hard bargaining - will need to begin, building on this month's preliminaries
where participants set out their starting positions.
The new timetable was facilitated by an agreement to put back until the week
beginning September 28, the earliest date on which the next meeting of the
Anglo-Irish Conference would take place.
Meanwhile, a meeting between the British and Irish governments in Dublin
this week will mark the start of 'strand three' - a new phase in the complex
talks structure.
This is regarded as particularly significant by Unionists as the 1985
Anglo-Irish Agreement, which they oppose because of the role it gives
Dublin, will be on the negotiating table.
