FT  07 SEP 92 / Morocco votes to reform constitution
MOROCCO has over-whelmingly endorsed constitutional reforms aimed at
liberalising one of the Moslem world's oldest monarchies, where all power
has traditionally been vested in the head of state.
However, the size of the majority officially reported - up to 100 per cent
in some areas - is likely to be met with some scepticism abroad.
According to the Ministry of the Interior, 99.96 per cent of the vote in
Friday's referendum endorsed the reforms. This rose to 100 per cent in the
main cities. The ministry also reported that three of the four Western
Saharan provinces, which, though occupied by Morocco since Spain left in
1976, are not recognised as Moroccan by the United Nations and the main
western powers, also voted 100 per cent in favour.
This comes even though leading opposition parties called on their supporters
to abstain and the two main trade unions urged a No votes.
The 100 per cent figures smack of eastern Europe before the fall of
communism, and, in the Western Sahara, such figures could make UN efforts to
implement plans for a referendum even more difficult.
As for Morocco's well-wishers abroad, they can only be embarrassed. While
the country has travelled a long way towards modernising its economy, the
need for a more modern political systemis pressing. King Hassan is well
aware of that need, but his powerful minister of the interior, Mr Driss
Basri, may not have helped by providing such neatly tailored results.
Nevertheless, the referendum was considered by many Moroccans as a trial run
for three elections due in the next few months: for local councils, and
professional bodies (which provide a third of all members of parliament),
and then a general election.
The reforms would not turn Morocco into a western-style constitutional
monarchy, but King Hassan has indicated he wants to delegate some powers in
recognition of changes in the kingdom over the past 20 years, requiring a
more modern political machine.
The new constitution requires Moroccan governments to reflect the balance of
forces in parliament and submit their programme to a vote of confidence. his
New laws will automatically be promulgated a month after they are approved
by parliament rather than await the monarch's approval, which some never got
or got only belatedly.
The new constitution has a strong commitment to human rights, but the
unofficial Moroccan human rights organisation, Organisation Marocaine des
Droits de l'Homme, says there are still at least 300 political prisoners.
The authorities deny this.
