FT  05 DEC 92 / Fashion: Learning to love older women - A look at a change
in the fashion industry's priorities
LAST week a colleague at Vogue was getting ready to take to the studio a
rail of flared trousers. 'Now these,' she said, excitedly, 'are going to be
the star of the shoot. Even my mum would love them.' Everyone in the fashion
room promptly placed an order.
There was a time, not so long ago, when finding something in your wardrobe
that your mum or, come to that, your daughter would wear would not be a
source of pride. It probably meant you were either a frump or a piece of
mutton dressing as lamb.
Now, astute designers, retailers and fashion magazines are concentrating on
clothes with cross-generational appeal.
'It gives me a kick to think that my mother's friends wear my clothes. Why
not, if they look great?' says British designer Pascale Smets, who produces
intelligently wearable clothes that combine simplicity with elegance. Smets
is one of a group of designers - such as the New York-based Ralph Lauren,
Donna Karan and Calvin Klein - who believe that so far as clothes are
concerned, age is no longer relevant.
The encouraging thing is that this feeling seems to be percolating down to
all levels of the market. Partly because of a recession in which no business
can afford to alienate customers on such a flimsy pretext as age, and partly
because women increasingly refuse to be segregated by the date on their
birth certificates, market research shows that age is less of an issue in
what we choose to wear than it has been for decades.
'What does count,' says Fiona Harrison, chief executive of Jaeger, a chain
that has broadened its appeal in the last year, 'is attitude. In the past
couple of years we've realised that there are 60-year-olds with great
figures who want to look fashionable and 30-year-olds who want to look smart
and there'll be quite a few of our designs - the jodhpurs, the military
jackets, the pea-coats and the long, slim button-through skirts - that
answer both sets of requirements.'
You can find mothers, daughters and grandmothers browsing in Jigsaw, Jaeger,
Next, Joseph and, if they have the money, the designer shops that line Bond
Street. Of course, it helps that classics - the kind of clothes such as
blazers, twin-sets, long skirts that young women might want to subvert a
little by mixing them with unexpected accessories and older women might
choose to play really straight - are in fashion.
American designer Isaac Mizrahi says: 'It's not that teenagers suddenly want
to look 35 the way they did in the fifties. It's just that it's no longer so
crucial to be seen as young, young, young . . . also there is the immutable
fact that older women tend to have most of the spending power.
The fashion and beauty worlds know this, which is why, although they might
exaggerate their products for the catwalk, pinning the decollete just a
little deeper, pulling the hipsters just a little lower over the model's
stomach, they are taking pains to ensure that by the time they reach the
shop windows, the products strike a chord across the age spectrum. Why else
would Calvin Klein hire 40-something model Lisa Taylor for his autumn
campaign? Why is Lancome paying 40-year-old Isabella Rossellini to continue
as their 'face' and why did Yves Saint-Laurent earlier this year sign
47-year-old Catherine Deneuve to advertise its skin care range?
Naturally, fashion being fashion, the backlash against this age-democracy is
on its way. Adolescent waif-like models - chief among them the British Kate
Moss - have been declared the faces of the moment. The recent spring /
summer collections from Milan, Paris and London showed an alarming
preponderance of droopy, hippy styles while New York's designers, for so
long the fountain-head of practical, wearable clothes rebelled with
something called grunge fashion - layers of gruesomely scruffy clothes that
have to be topped with lank, straggly hair.
But the chances are, that this is just designers being truculent after three
years of coming to terms with recession. By the time these clothes reach the
shops most will have been modified and customers of all ages will find
perfectly wearable clothes, only a little more casual, romantic and floaty
perhaps, than for a few years.
After all, as Karl Lagerfeld, whose four collections this season for Chanel,
Chloe, Fendi and his own label Karl Lagerfeld all contained hippy references
says: 'I don't design specifically for 50-year-olds because the last things
50-year-olds want to look is their age. At the same time 25-year-olds have
to go out and earn a living, often in an office. They can't always live in a
corset and torn jeans. So what do I do? Design a boucle Chanel jacket that
can be worn in completely different ways so that it appeals to both of them.
Today it's about what shape a woman's in and how she feels. Age? It's
totally irrelevant.'
