FT  16 SEP 92 / International Company News: Foster's deficit disguises
strong breweries side
FOSTER'S Brewing, the Australian beer company, yesterday reported a fall
into net loss for the year to June. However, the result, following ADollars
1.19bn (USDollars 872m) asset write-downs, disguised a strong performance by
the company's breweries.
The group's directors announced it had turned net profits of ADollars 234.4m
into losses of ADollars 950.8m for the 12 months, on a fall in sales to
ADollars 10.37bn from ADollars 10.63bn. The final dividend is being omitted.
The result followed abnormal losses of ADollars 1.31bn, mainly reflecting
write-downs of ADollars 1.19bn affecting the company's pastoral, finance and
investment operations.
But brewing profits before interest and tax rose 13 per cent, with UK-based
Courage emerging as the company's strongest performer. Gross brewing profits
rose to Dollars 551.9m from ADollars 488.2m, with Courage lifting its
contribution to ADollars 242.4m from ADollars 167.9m.
This comfortably exceeded earnings from the Australian-based Carlton and
United Breweries, down to ADollars 189.5m from ADollars 231.8m, with
Canadian-based Molson Breweries up to ADollars 119.9m from ADollars 88.5m.
Directors said Courage had consolidated its position as the UK's second
largest brewer after the 1991 purchase of Grand Metropolitan's brewing
business.
'Trading conditions in the UK continue to be depressed by the recession.
However, Courage is determined to withstand market pressures and is now
structured for business retention and growth in both on and off-trade
sectors,' the directors said. 'In continental Europe, Courage's business
continues to flourish, led by a comprehensive marketing approach to Foster's
which had a 14 per cent increase over 1991 volumes.'
Almost ADollars 840m of the write-downs announced yesterday came in Foster's
finance division, mainly reflecting its exposure to property markets. But
another ADollars 228m came from Inntrepreneur Estates, the company's pub
joint venture in the UK with GrandMet.
The directors said Inntrepreneur, which operates about 7,000 pubs, had been
hit by recent legislative changes requiring the disposal of a significant
numbers of pubs.
The group has also been affected by falling beer consumption and a recession
in property markets. The directors said a pub valuation in January this year
had reduced values by an average of 3.2 per cent. Given an expected further
decline in pub values, a ADollars 228m provision against the value of
Courage's investment in Inntrepreneur reflected the present and medium-term
view of value, they said.
Grand Metropolitan, the UK food, drinks and retail group which is Foster's
50:50 partner in Inntrepreneur Estates, said that Foster's provisions
brought its accounting treatment in line with UK standards. GrandMet said it
did not need to make any new provisions against its stake.
