FT  02 MAR 92 / Economics Notebook: Little for Lamont to crow about in
needle match
MR Norman Lamont has had little to crow about recently.
One of the few achievements about which he has been able to boast was the
opt-out clause in the Maastricht Treaty that gives the UK the right to
decide whether or not to move to stage three of European economic and
monetary union, with its single European currency and central bank.
However, it now looks as if Germany is going to make its move to the final
stage of Emu in the late 1990s depend upon decisions of its own parliament
without having bothered to negotiate a special protocol at Maastricht.
Moreover, Germany is likely to use its emerging hard-line approach on Emu in
support of its efforts to base the planned European central bank in
Frankfurt rather than in the City of London, or elsewhere in the community.
When the Maastricht treaty comes before the German parliament for
ratification this year, it is expected that both chambers of parliament  -
the Bundestag and Bundesrat - will demand the right to 'take stock' of Emu
in 1996 before moving to the third and final stage of the project.
German monetary officials insist that they will not be seeking the
equivalent of Britain's opt-out clause. But parliamentary pressure will
clearly be used to ensure that Emu does not fall short of the traditional
German goals of price stability and tight monetary management.
It is also becoming increasingly apparent that the German authorities regard
the location of the future European central bank in Frankfurt as an
important guarantee that Emu will conform to German standards.
The sub-fusc world of European central banking does not normally witness
heightened passions. But something approaching a needle match has broken out
between the Bundesbank and Bank of England over the site of the European
central bank.
Both institutions realise that in the long term it could determine where
Europe's premier financial centre will be based.
Last week, Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the deputy governor of the Bundesbank, raised
the stakes on Frankfurt's behalf by saying that the European Monetary
Institute - the forerunner of the ECB  - should be based in Frankfurt to
compensate Germany for the loss of the D-mark in the move to Emu. He pointed
out that the decision about where to base the EMI has to be made this year
and the city which lands the EMI is generally expected to be the home of the
ECB. 'A decision for Frankfurt would be a demonstration by Europe that
European monetary policy would follow the German tradition of stability and
the single European currency would be a worthy successor to the D-Mark,' he
said.
Such statements could be dismissed as so much fine rhetoric, if it were not
for the fact that Emu will be a hot topic in the German parliament this
year. Having woken up late to the implications of the Maastricht treaty for
the D-Mark, the German public and media are not going to let the treaty's
ratification pass without subjecting it to fierce scrutiny and conditions.
Already German officials are warning that the pressure of public opinion
would make it very difficult for the Bonn government to approve placing the
EMI and the ECB outside Frankfurt.
Such warnings have serious implications for those of Germany's EC partners
(all except Britain and Denmark), which have committed themselves to Emu. If
they do not back Germany in its wish to have Frankfurt as the home of the
ECB, they could find Europe's most powerful economy threatening to stay
aloof from the project when the German parliament 'takes stock' of Emu in
1996.
Last month, Mr Lamont told the Commons Treasury and Civil Service Committee
that Britain would argue for the EMI to be based in the UK. There are
doubtless many reasons for pressing such a case - not least the strong
position that the City has built up in markets for the Ecu, the embryo EC
currency.
But will the other EC member states defy Germany over the home of the ECB if
Emu itself is at stake?
And why should they support London, so long as Britain's commitment to Emu
is still hedged by the opt-out clause so carefully negotiated by Mr Lamont?
Costly support
RARELY can a Budget have generated so much heat in advance as that which the
chancellor will deliver next week. But with attention focused on likely cuts
in personal income taxes, the pros and cons of suggested tax breaks for
industry have been neglected.
One idea supported by organisations as diverse as the Confederation of
British Industry, the Engineering Employers' Federation and the Labour Party
is an increase in depreciation allowances on plant and machinery investment.
The three groups differ over precisely what changes they would make to
existing corporation tax allowances to boost investment. The CBI wants a
permanent 40 per cent depreciation rate rather than 25 per cent at present.
The EEF wants at least 40 per cent, rising to 100 per cent by the mid-1990s.
The Labour Party has still to make a final decision. But it has toyed with
temporarily increasing the depreciation rate on plant and machinery to 40
per cent and has considered the possibility of a temporary 100 per cent
allowance.
Until now, little attention has been given to the cost of such measures. But
work by the independent Institute for Fiscal Studies suggests it could be
high. The IFS calculates that a permanent change to 40 per cent in the
Budget would reduce tax revenue by Pounds 2bn for two years starting in
1993-94 and cost around Pounds 11.6bn over 10 years.
A temporary 40 per cent allowance for one year would cost Pounds 2bn in
1993-94 while a 100 per cent temporary allowance would cost nearly Pounds
11bn in 1993-94. However, the high initial costs of the temporary schemes
would be offset by lower claims on allowances in later years so that around
60 per cent of the one-year cost would be clawed back.
Even so, the IFS argues the state would find it was helping to finance much
investment that would take place any way. It would also run the risk
inherent in all stop-go policies of applying a temporary tax boost when the
economy might be recovering of its own accord. Taken together, these
considerations might enhance the attractions of other ways of helping
business in the Budget - such as easing the burden of the uniform business
rate, which hits all companies, whether they are making a profit or not.
