FT  21 MAY 92 / US takes up offensive against Serbia: Washington revokes
landing rights as UN considers sanctions
THE US yesterday revoked landing rights for JAT, Yugoslav airlines,
signalling the beginnings of a much wider diplomatic offensive to isolate
Serbia.
'Serbia has gone beyond the bounds of what is tolerable,' a senior western
diplomat said.
He added that members of the Islamic Conference, which includes Arab
countries, Malaysia, Pakistan and Indonesia, were shocked at the cruelty
inflicted on the Moslems in Bosnia-Hercegovina, and what might happen to
them in (Serbian-controlled) Kosovo.
Pressure to impose a comprehensive package of sanctions increased as masked
Serb gunmen yesterday held hostage in a sports stadium 5,000 people who are
mostly Moslem women and children. They are trying to escape from the
fighting in Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital.
Western diplomats said the UN is considering a range of sanctions. These
include blocking off Serbia's air and surface transport links, imposing an
oil embargo and freezing Serbia's Dollars 2.9bn in assets which were in
western banks at the end of last year. But he did not say how these
sanctions would be implemented, and warned of the difficulties in
implementing them.
Some western diplomats said UN troops, backed by an air-defence system,
should be sent to gain control of Sarajevo airport. 'This has been
mentioned. But, as yet, there is no concrete proposal on the table,' a
diplomat said.
The UN still faces opposition from countries, including Russia, (it has
traditional Slav connections with Serbia), India, a prominent member of the
non-aligned movement, and Greece, which opposes independence for the former
Yugoslav republic of Macedonia.
'With growing pressure from the Islamic Conference, and the appalling evil
of the war, there is growing consensus to slap sanctions on Serbia and make
them stick. Serbia must be stopped. The war must not spread,' a western
diplomat said.
Yesterday gunmen fired a mortar at UN peace-keepers trying to free Moslem
refugees held hostage by Serbs outside the embattled city of Sarajevo. It
was the latest in a rash of assaults on international relief and
peace-keeping personnel in the Balkan state.
A volunteer for the International Committee of the Red Cross died on Tuesday
in a rocket attack on a humanitarian aid convoy.
Yesterday Serb irregulars demanded the delivery of food to besieged army
barracks in the centre of Sarajevo in exchange for the release of the
hostages held in Ilidza, a Sarajevo surburb.
Earlier Radio Sarajevo said Serb irregulars were launching mortar attacks on
the city of Bihac in northwestern Bosnia from the surrounding hills. It said
the railroad station was repeatedly hit. Hundreds of thousands of people are
stranded in the city without water or electricity. Food supplies are nearly
exhausted.
