FT  10 FEB 92 / The European Market: Spain braces for shakeout in its steel
industry - Basque workers are opposing plans to scrap furnaces
MARIA Ang-eles is everything a fine Basque lady should be; tall, proud, warm
and revered. Thousands of tough Basque steelmen have sworn to protect and
preserve her. For Maria Angeles is blast furnace 2A at the sprawling
integrated steelworks of the Altos Hornos de Vizcaya (AHV) alongside the Rio
Nervion just outside Bilbao.
If the Spanish Industry Ministry in Madrid gets its way, she is about to be
shut forever.
Spain is fast approaching a steel shakeout. Its two integrated (makers and
rollers of steel) producers are thought to have lost about Pta50bn (Pounds
276.24m) last year after a recovery in the steel price in 1988 and 1989
faded away.
The only two integrated producers - state-owned Ensidesa, and AHV, which is
effectively state controlled - are floundering in three large, overmanned
and badly co-ordinated sites in the Basque country and the principality of
Asturias with little hope of economic recovery unless their steelmaking
capacity is cut and restructured.
It costs AHV about Dollars 380 (Pounds 209.9) to make a ton of hot rolled
steel and Dollars 350 at Ensidesa; on average their EC competitors can do
this for Dollars 285 a ton. And Spain is no longer a low-wage paradise. In
the last four years wages have grown at 11 per cent and 9 per cent annually
at Ensidesa and AHV.
In these, probably the two most heavily unionised, regions of Spain workers
have thrown themselves into a series of intermittent strikes to agitate,
paradoxically, for a restructuring plan. Between 7,000 and 9,000 of the
23,000 jobs at both Ensidesa and AHV will go. The government's proposals,
due out later this month, will probably cut steelmaking capacity, now at a
theoretical 6m tonnes a year, by 25 per cent.
When the European steel industry first began to make big capacity cuts after
the 1973 oil price shock, Spain was undergoing a tense political transition
following the death of General Franco. It was only after the present
socialist government came to power in 1982 that the authorities began to
take steel seriously.
In 1984 the government closed down the Altos Hornos de Mediterraneo
integrated works outside Valencia, shed jobs at Ensidesa and AHV and pumped
Dollars 900m into a new steel shop at Ensidesa's works at Aviles in
Asturias. It is now Europe's most efficient. In all, the restructuring cost
Dollars 5bn.
But steel's sad story has caught up with Madrid again.
Spain has not been able to subsidise steel shrinkage and losses the way the
European Commission allowed UK, German and French producers to do in the
1970s. By the time it joined the EC in 1986, tougher regulation was in place
and price floors had been abolished. Even worse, the sharp decline in flat
product prices in Europe in the last two years has been heightened in Spain
by the quick abolition of import tariffs required by the EC.
The Industry Ministry has already made a first move to merge Ensidesa, which
belongs to the state holding company INI and AHV which, although a private
sector company, has had to be rescued so often by the state that the
official industrial credit bank now owns about Pta50bn worth of convertible
bonds - and thus a majority shareholding - in it.
Last year the Integrated Steel Corporation was created and this year the
chairman of it and Ensidesa, Mr Jose Manuel Garcia Hermoso, will probably
take over at AHV as well. A long-serving state sector corporate doctor, Mr
Garcia Hermoso is the mastermind behind the restructuring plans about to be
presented.
These are likely to include the scrapping of AHV's three blast furnaces in
Bilbao and the four old furnaces Ensidesa has at Aviles, leaving just two at
the Ensidesa plant at the nearby port of Gijon functioning. Although the
Aviles steel shop would then become the star of the newly merged company,
managers at Ensidesa say it could easily be fed with pig iron (raw material
made in blast furnaces) from Gijon.
The problem then would be the AHV works at Bilbao. The Basque country is
politically volatile and it would be asking too much of any government in
Madrid to stop making steel there.
Madrid thinks it can get around this by shutting one AHV furnace quickly and
allowing Maria Angeles a few more years of life while the ISC builds what
will, for Europe, be a revolutionary new mini-mill.
Mini-mills make steel by melting scrap in normally small electric arc
furnaces, avoiding the heavy and expensive process of making pig iron. But
Nucor, the maverick anti-union mini-mill producer in the US, has pioneered -
with European technology - a giant mini mill in which steel is poured into
continuous casting machines and, from there, straight on to a hot strip mill
without having to make slabs first. The energy savings are immense.
Madrid is considering building such a mill in Bilbao to produce 800,000 tons
a year. That, however, would only promise profitability if the unions
accepted adequate job losses. They will only do that in the Basque country
and Asturias if the government is able to guarantee sufficient new
infrastructural investment in the north to attract new industries.
Thus Madrid's partly successful efforts at last December's EC summit in
Maastricht to force the creation of a Community cohesion fund - to channel
development funds to poorer EC members who prove they are meeting
disciplined EC economic targets - are crucial. Without the funds, the
communications infrastructure required to lock the mountainous north into
the rest of the country and Europe cannot be put in place. Maria Angeles and
her admirers would then be condemned to a less dignified end than is about
to be tabled.
