FT  27 APR 92 / Work, learn and don't procreate: America
How should a wealthy society treat those who cannot (or will not) help
themselves? In the US, patience with passive welfare policies seems suddenly
to have snapped. State legislatures of all political hues are experimenting
with policies designed to change behaviour. Sensing an issue with political
mileage, President Bush has just approved radical welfare experiments in
Wisconsin.
Mr Tommy Thompson, the Republican governor of Wisconsin, is pioneering a
policy known as 'wed fare' or 'bridefare'. This aims to encourage teenage
mothers to marry by allowing them to keep benefits even if their husbands
have a modest independent income. At the same time, Wisconsin plans to
penalise welfare mothers who have additional children. At present, teenage
mothers get Dollars 440 a month, rising to Dollars 517 for two children and
Dollars 617 for three. In future, the payment for a second child will be
reduced to Dollars 479 with no further increment for larger families. Under
a scheme known as 'learnfare', the state has already cut the welfare cheques
of teenage mothers who fail to attend high school.
In New Jersey, liberal Democrats are taking the lead. Mr Wayne Bryant, a
black representative from a poor district, dismisses conventional welfare as
a modern form of 'slavery'. He says wage earners do not get a pay rise just
because they have another child, so why should welfare mothers? Mr Jim
Florio, the state's liberal governor, aims to 'wean people off welfare' by
forcing them to become responsible for their actions. He wants to cut
welfare payments for extra children and implement a form of bridefare.
California is leading a pack of other states considering similar reforms.
The reformers - dubbed 'new paternalists' by their critics  - say their aim
is not to save money. Policies aimed at changing behaviour will require
additional resources: clients have to be monitored more closely while
schemes such as learnfare involve higher education spending.
However, with state budgets under intense pressure because of the prolonged
economic slowdown, the reforms are being introduced in a climate of
austerity. Economies are often the main priority: 14 states have cut
benefits for able-bodied adults, including Michigan, which has abolished all
such assistance. In California, the most controversial reform is a planned,
across-the-board cut of up to 25 per cent in family benefit rates.
The drive to modify personal behaviour - to make the poor adopt middle-class
attitudes - is a natural progression from the last big welfare reform, the
Family Support Act of 1988. This aimed to encourage self-sufficiency by
requiring states to enrol a gradually increasing proportion of welfare
recipients in work or training programmes. Critics are already dismissing it
as too timid: exemptions mean that its 'workfare' provisions may eventually
apply to only a small fraction of welfare rolls.
Is the new paternalism desirable? Libertarians will argue that unconditional
payments - a basic income or negative income tax  - are preferable to social
engineering. Yet given the failure of passive policies, a determined attempt
to influence behaviour seems worth trying. For many families, the difference
between poverty and prosperity will be determined by attitudes to work,
study, marriage and lifestyle. The proof lies in the success of many
immigrants who arrive with few skills or resources.
But the morality of punishing parents by cutting their children's benefits
is questionable. It is also nave to expect quite small financial incentives
to make a huge difference. Welfare is needed precisely because a fraction of
the population will not or cannot respond readily to economic signals. In
the past two decades, the real value of US welfare benefits has fallen by an
average of 27 per cent, without curbing welfare rolls. There is also little
correlation between state benefit rates - which vary enormously  - and
welfare populations.
This is because welfare dependence partly reflects structural economic
change. The sharp decline in the relative pay of unskilled workers has
created a trap: after allowing for childcare, transport and other costs of
work, many single heads of household cannot earn enough to replace even the
shrunken benefits now offered. In many cases, the only viable alternatives
are welfare or two wage packets - and I doubt if bridefare will miraculously
alter attitudes to marriage.
The trouble with policies to mould behaviour is that they rely too heavily
on sticks and not enough on carrots. Neither federal nor state government
yet seems prepared to fund even the modest job training provisions that form
the core of the 1988 law. Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York
Democrat who fathered the bill, reckons that federal funding needs to be at
least quadrupled from today's miserly Dollars 1bn a year.
Pending fundamental changes in attitudes to family formation, the surest way
to reduce welfare dependency is to boost the earning power of single
parents. That means much greater investment in training and perhaps
experimentation with public sector programmes that guarantee jobs for
long-term welfare recipients. The new paternalists are right to attack the
culture of dependency. But they do not deserve to be taken seriously unless
they back reforms with more hard cash.
