FT  28 SEP 92 / Cold winter looms for Serb textiles: UN sanctions have hit
clothing sector hard
MR Dragoslav Kojic dreads the next few days. As manager of the Kluz textile
factory in the south of Belgrade, he will have to tell his 3,000 employees
that he is switching off the machines, turning off the lights, and closing
the gates.
The United Nations sanctions imposed on Serbia in May have beaten him. 'What
can I do? I cannot export. I have no more stocks. I have run out of oil. I
have no money to pay my staff,' he says.
Kluz is just one of many textile factories in Serbia which have been forced
to close or put their workers on half pay because of the sanctions. Indeed,
the textile industry is probably the sector hit hardest by the UN's trade
embargo.
This is because over the past two decades, the textile industry in Serbia
had built up excellent contacts with German and Italian companies.
For instance designers, such as Boss, sent patterns, colours, cloth, thread
and buttons to Kluz. In return, thanks to cheap labour and a highly skilled
work force, Kluz was exporting practically 100 per cent of its finished
product to its European partners. 'We relied totally on the export market.
Now this is closed to us,' said Mr Kojic.
Before the sanctions, Kluz was recording a monthly turnover of DM4m (Pounds
1.5m). It had paid off its debts of over DM100m, and was looking forward to
expanding. The sanctions have put paid to that.
'I am in contact with my German partners almost every day. My greatest fear
is that they might start looking for new partners if the sanctions last for
a long time. It is going to be difficult to recoup these markets,' says Mr
Kojic.
Outside Belgrade, the Serbian capital, the picture is grim.
Mr Gradomir Cvetkovic, general secretary of the Textiles Association of
Serbia, says the Serbian government is to set up a social fund for the
sector's workers.
Mr Cvetkovic knows that as winter approaches, and inflation continues to
soar, these benefits will not go far.
'The sector, which covers textiles, shoes and leather goods, employs 200,000
people, or about a quarter of the total labour force,' he explains.
'It was also the most successful arm of the Serbian economy. Between 60 and
80 per cent of the industry's total turnover was earmarked for the export
market. The sector accounts for 20 per cent of Serbia's total trade.'
About 60 per cent of the textile industry's turnover was exported to the EC,
and the rest to the US, eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. Last
year, textile exports from Serbia totalled Dollars 1.1bn (Pounds 643.2m) and
imports Dollars 600m.
Both Mr Kojic and Mr Cvetkovic are pinning their hopes on Prime Minister
Milan Panic. Mr Cvetkovic says that if the sanctions are not lifted in a
month, he will find it difficult to support Mr Panic. Mr Kojic is less
optimistic: 'The sanctions will not be lifted for some time. Everybody knows
that. We must rally around Panic. He is our only hope, especially for the
business community here in Serbia. They identify with Panic because he is a
businessman,' he said.
But in Centrotextil, the top-heavy foreign trade organisation which
represents about 500 Serbian and Montenegrin enterprises, the mood is
stubborn, if not defiant.
'I do not trust Panic to help us,' says Mr Branislav Backovic, director of
the shoes and sports department. 'The main problem we face is oil. There's a
little coming in from Greece. It is not enough. But I know the Serbs. We
will sit this one out,' he says.
But managers like Mr Kojic and Mr Cvetkovic are more realistic. 'We have to
change the mentality of the Serbs. For years they have been indoctrinated
with communist nonsense and incompetence. What this republic needs is
managers and entrepreneurs, not bureaucrats,' says Mr Kojic.
Yet that view offers little succour to his workers in Kluz. Already, Mr
Kojic has closed down three other factories in Serbia. 'I do not know what
to tell them. The workers still trust me. But they have to face the
prospects of no work, a cold winter, and little to hope for. The months
ahead are not going to be easy for any of us.'
