FT  24 APR 92 / TI launches Pounds 482m hostile bid for Dowty
TI GROUP, the specialist engineering company, yesterday launched a hostile
Pounds 482m takeover bid for Dowty Group, the aerospace components
manufacturer which made the landing gear for every RAF aircraft in the
Second World War.
If successful, the bid could significantly consolidate the UK's aerospace
industry which - along with its global competitors - is in the midst of the
toughest recession in 40 years.
Mr Bruce Ralph, Dowty's chief executive, emphatically rejected the bid as
underestimating Dowty's potential and is meeting his board this morning to
discuss a response.
Dowty's advisers said Mr Christopher Lewinton, TI's chairman and chief
executive, was only offering the same strategy of cost-cutting and the sale
of non-core businesses that Dowty had already outlined last year when it
reported pre-tax profits down 73 per cent at Pounds 10m.
TI's four-for-15 share offer values the Cheltenham-based Dowty at Pounds
482m, or 178.4p a share, after the 47p fall in TI's shares yesterday to
669p. Dowty shares closed up 32p at 177p, just 2p above TI's fully
underwritten cash alternative.
The acquisition would give TI a third strategic branch in addition to its
automotive tubes and industrial seals divisions. Since he took over in 1986,
Mr Lewinton has strengthened these areas, while disposing of old businesses
such as Raleigh Bicycles.
Aerospace experts said a successful takeover was unlikely to disrupt the
industry, where TI was already well known. It might be welcomed by some
airframe and aeroengine makers as strengthening an important supplier.
The London stock market had been expecting a bid for Dowty since last year
as the 60-year-old company was pushed into financial difficulties.
Analysts' initial reaction was that TI had priced the bid at a generous
level designed to be a knock-out blow. Dowty might have to struggle to find
a white knight to come up with a friendly alternative deal, they believe.
Mr Lewinton said he had approached Dowty three times last year with a
detailed plan for a friendly merger but was rebuffed both by Mr Ralph and
his predecessor, Mr Tony Thatcher, who left in June.
Mr Lewinton said he would 'lie in a ditch' for a friendly merger but that,
after three attempts to show the logic of his plan, he was turning to
Dowty's shareholders.
'We think Dowty shareholders will welcome this opportunity to join with TI
Group shareholders in creating one of the UK's leading specialised
engineering companies,' he said.
The acquisition would also enable the combined polymer businesses, which
make specialised seals, to compete worldwide. Mr Lewinton said that the bid,
the first of any size since the general election, had been dusted off as
soon as the Conservatives were returned to power.
Since taking over at TI, Mr Lewinton has developed a City following as a
result of the substantial reorientation of TI away from the UK. In a series
of deals, TI has been refocused, returning to its core industry in tubing.
It has developed a global market with a strong sales in the US.
Mannesmann, the German engineering group with a 7 per cent stake in TI, said
it will participate in the underwriting of the offer so that its stake is
not diluted.
In addition to the one-for-four ordinary share offer, TI is offering 45
ordinary shares for every 400 Dowty convertible preference shares.
TI is advised by Baring Brothers and Dowty by Lazard Brothers.
Lex, Page 18
Paying the price of a loss of focus, Page 19
London stocks, Page 38
