FT  21 JUL 92 / Commodities and Agriculture (Farmer's Viewpoint): A powerful
alternative to set-aside - Growing crops for energy may be preferable to
leaving fields fallow
CAN IT really be sensible in this over-populated continent of Europe to pay
farmers not to produce crops? Will taxpayers tolerate such payments in the
long term? And if they will not and farm input costs continue to rise, what
will happen to the already questionable viability of farming and the rural
areas that rely on the industry for survival? More to the point, are there
any alternatives?
Well, yes there are. Let us accept for the sake of argument that surpluses
of some farm commodities have reached unsustainable levels in the European
Community; that it is inevitable a proportion of the land be taken out of
food production - in short, that land set-aside to limit the production of
cereals for food consumption is necessary.
But having accepted that situation, it surely does not make long-term sense
to pay farmers substantial sums by way of compensation for loss of income
from land taken out of production in order to enable them to survive in
business, yet demand no end product. Moreover, the result of set-aside is
quite likely to be less acceptable to taxpayers than the thought of
financing large intervention stores full of grain, which at least is
available if needed.
Set-aside will only produce weeds. And it will not contribute much to
desirable conservation. Indeed by virtually insisting that set-aside takes
place on different fields each year, the European Commission has lost much
of the opportunity there might have been to develop long-term habitats for
fauna or favourable conditions for flora.
Certainly set-aside will do little to improve the landscape. It could be
claimed in fact that most of its effects will be antagonistic to the desires
of taxpayers who have shown themselves willing to pay part of their taxes
towards conserving a better environment. Moreover, the considerable sums of
public money that will be devoted to set-aside could even conflict with the
much more modest government and EC aid for the enhancement of nature.
What is needed, surely, is some means of bringing together the legitimate
objective of reducing production with the equally desirable aim of improving
the environment in its widest sense. In other words a system of land
management which allows full cropping and full management yet produces end
products which are both desirable and environment friendly.
The organic movement has for years evangelised that the right way forward
was to convert to their chemical-free methods of production, which they
rightly claim would cut the quantities produced. A recent study of organic
farming by the University of Cambridge has revealed, however, that in spite
of the premium prices organic product can command, it generally fails to
provide those who grow it with a viable living. And the study was conducted
before reform of the EC's common agricultural policy. Now that organic
farmers, too, must set aside 15 per cent of their cereal land their their
chances of reasonable profits would seem to be even slimmer.
In any case organic food is never going to be more than a niche market.
But we all use energy. Furthermore much of that currently used is derived
from non-renewable resources such as oil, gas and coal; all well known to
produce 'greenhouse' gases and all helping to blow holes in the ozone layer.
The answer to all these problems could be biomass. That, at least, is the
view of many Germans, including agricultural engineering company, Claas.
Last week I went to Westphalia to attend a demonstration of various kinds of
biomass and to listen to a series of experts telling how the material could
be used to produce energy. It was well timed; only a few days before the
agriculture ministers of the EC, in their CAP reform package, had
specifically permitted non-food crops to be grown on set-aside land.
Most promising of the biomass alternatives is probably willow coppice. Grown
from cuttings, the trees increase in timber volume at a phenomenal rate to
reach, within three years, heights of 12 to 15 feet and a ground level
diameter of three to four inches. Claas has developed a machine to harvest
the crop and chop it into dice-sized pieces ready to be fed mechanically
into a furnace. There the material can either be used to produce heat for
industrial or domestic purposes or to generate electricity.
Another crop that can be used for similar purposes is elephant grass. It,
too, has the ability to produce enormous amounts of combustible material
over a relatively short growing period and could, it is claimed, be grown
and harvested mechanically in northern Europe.
In pursuit of rather different industrial uses, Claas also showed how flax
(from which linen is traditionally made) could be used as a fibre base,
mixed with a vegetable-derived plastic and made into very effective moulded
vehicle interiors. What is more, the products are biodegradable so that, in
theory anyway, when your car is worn out you can compost the door panels and
fascia and spread the result on your garden as organic fertiliser.
Claas was also advocating the expansion of the use of biofuel or rape methyl
ester, derived from the oil seed rape crop, which is already well advanced
in a number of European countries lacking their own oil reserves.
At this point in the discussion the oil lobby begins to get agitated. In
spite of the possibilities for such biological technology to extend the life
of their non-renewable products and be more environment-friendly, there are
fears it may affect short-term profitability. Claas has apparently
anticipated such a reaction by persuading other prominent German
industrialists, including some in the oil business, to become involved in
the developments and to advocate them as enthusiastically themselves.
For the greatest danger, despite the pioneering work Claas has done, is that
farmers may be persuaded to produce such crops (and instinctive antagonism
to set-aside has already made them very interested) only to find there is no
market. The secret, as Claas has recognised, is to try to make biomass a
demand-led industry.
Such an achievement, however, would require government and/or EC assistance
to bridge the admitted price gap between biomass as an energy source and
oil. But would it not be better to divert some of the cash currently
destined as payments for set-aside and devote it instead to developing and
subsidising biomass-using industries across the EC?
The cost need be little more than already allocated to finance set-aside.
The prizes would be a well managed countryside that would be more acceptable
to taxpayers; an improved environment both on farms and in the atmosphere,
which may help delay global warming; and a community of farmers who, by
growing crops instead of weeds, would regain their self respect.
The UK minister of agriculture, Mr John Gummer, has already said that he
does not like set-aside and only accepted it because he believed there was
no alternative. Biomass may be that alternative and enable him to turn an
unfortunate necessity into a valuable opportunity.
