FT  15 JUL 92 / Business and the Environment: Recycling group for
electronics
To counter the vast amounts of scrap electronics equipment dumped in the
UK's landfill sites, the computer and electronics industry is forming a
recycling association to promote the reuse and recovery of electronic
equipment.
The Industry Council for Electronic and Electrical Equipment Recycling
(Icer) brings together electronics companies, retailers and waste disposal
experts for the first time in the UK.
'Icer grew out of a report produced by the Centre for the Exploitation for
Science and Technology on end-of-life electronics,' said Graham Marson,
chairman of the new group.
'The companies who have joined already have an interest in being
environmentally sensitive and have established environmental policies and
strategies. Our diverse interest and backgrounds led us to believe we should
work together.'
Electronic and computer manufacturers Hewlett-Packard, IBM, ICL, BT,
together with retailers Thorn EMI Rentals and Boots have joined the group,
which also includes Dow Chemicals and ICI. Waste disposal companies Mann,
Mayer Cohen and the Bird Group represent the recycling industry.
According to Marson, Icer will be formally launched this autumn. Membership
is open to companies involved in electronics in the widest sense. Boots
became involved after considering how best to dispose of the hundreds of old
televisions, radios, kettles and toasters returned to its shops which no
longer work.
Cest predicts that 6m items of electronic equipment will be dumped into
British landfill sites by 1995. The waste will include 120,000 photocopiers,
800,000 personal computers, 1.3m televisions and 2m microwave ovens.
Marson hopes Icer will develop an infrastructure that will make electronics
recycling a commercial proposition. Icer will also lobby for what Marson
calls 'pragmatic legislation' to counter German recycling laws which require
electronics companies to take back all their old electronic equipment by
1994.
