FT  18 MAR 92 / Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Bank/Midland Bank: Proposed deal fuels
speculation on further mergers
IF THE deal goes through it will bring about the greatest change to the
structure of UK banking since the merger wave 25 years ago. But will it have
a knock-on effect, either by triggering further mergers, or by forcing the
banking industry to come to terms with a much strengthened competitor?
Midland's transformation from the perennial banking weakling to a member of
a muscular financial group would be bound to have an effect on other banks.
Midland would be able to lend more, and invest more heavily in improved
services. But the City expects Midland to proceed cautiously, particularly
with the UK banking market in its current ravaged state.
Mr Peter Toeman, banking analyst at UBS Phillips &amp; Drew, said he had not
downgraded his profit forecasts for the other clearing banks in light of the
proposed merger. If anything, he said, the prospect of the merger would put
even greater pressure on other banks to reduce their costs and expand their
profit margins.
Ironically, the merger could even reduce competitive pressures. Desperate as
it has been to regain its market position, Midland has been one of the most
aggressive banks recently, and has often been a leader on the price-cutting
front. It might not need to push so hard knowing that it had the Hongkong
Bank behind it.
As for the prospect of further mergers, banking stocks leapt ahead yesterday
on speculation about more bids. But these seem unlikely, at least among the
large clearers. The recent row over alleged overpricing and bully-boy
tactics by banks in the small business market, and constant rumbles of
discontent over their treatment of the private customer have not endeared
them to the fair trading authorities. Any proposed bank merger would be
guaranteed a monopolies referral.
Speculation about mergers is probably more apt for smaller banks, the
Trustee Savings Bank and the Abbey National.
Although the Midland-Hongkong deal has yet to obtain Bank of England
approval, the fact that it has even got this far reinforces the message that
UK clearing banks are available to overseas bidders. Mr Robin
Leigh-Pemberton, the Governor of the Bank of England, has said he thinks
that 'core banks' should remain under British control. But his policy
statement is now five years old, and under the EC single market rules, he
could not stop an EC clearer buying a UK clearer purely on the grounds of
nationality.
News of the deal could provoke a counterbid, though analysts said yesterday
that it was hard to identify any banks that would have the means to top any
offer from the Hongkong.
Meanwhile, the Bank of England will want to ensure that any deal safeguards
Midland from 'contagion' from the Hongkong group should, for example, Hong
Kong undergo some China-related crisis.
