FT  08 OCT 92 / Survey on Denmark (11): Fertile project exploits recycled
wastes - Industrial Symbiosis
A few years ago, the local authorities were on the brink of stopping
industrial expansion at the small harbour town of Kalundborg on the west
coast of Sjaelland.
Environmental officers totted up the pollution from the four plants on which
the town relies and concluded that it was as much as the local environment
could stand.
This was bad news for the town, as well as for the plants - an oil refinery
operated by Statoil, the Norwegian state oil company, the 1.5MW Asnaes
coal-fired power plant, the fermentation plants used by Novo Nordisk in the
production of insulin and enzymes, and Gyproc, a Swedish-owned producer of
plasterboard for the building industry.
The plant managers, however, found an error in the West Sjaelland county's
arithmetic. Totalling the waste from each plant gave the wrong result
because a considerable proportion of the waste from each plant was re-used
by the other plants.
From this beginning, what might have turned into an acrimonious battle
between the county and the industrialists has turned into a fertile project
to exploit the potential for recycling wastes from each of the four plants -
a process which they call industrial symbiosis.
The more the plants consider the problem, the more ways they find for
re-using each other's waste products, which come in the form of water,
steam, gas, gypsum, and sulphur.
'Finding new projects has become a sport for us all,' said Mr Valdemar
Christensen, station superintendent of the Asnaes power facility.
For the companies, and for the town of Kalundborg, the bottom line is that
that the industrial operations are expanding fast and relations between the
local community and its industries has improved dramatically.
The Statoil refinery is in the middle of a DKr2.2bn investment to increase
capacity by 50 per cent to 4.8m tonnes of refinery products a year. Novo
Nordisk and Gyproc are also increasing production capacity substantially in
Kalundborg.
The project in which the plants are engaged is not being carried out as a
philanthropic contribution to local development. 'In the end it is strictly
commercial, and there are knife-edge price negotiations between us,' said
Statoil manager, Mr Mogens Granhoj.
Asnaes sells hot water to the town for district heating, steam to Statoil
and Novo Nordisk, warm water to its own fish farm, where sea trout and
turbot are produced, gypsum from de-sulphurisation of smokestack emissions
to Gyproc and sulphur to fertiliser producer Kemira for sulphuric acid
production.
Statoil sends cooling water and waste water to Asnaes, which uses some of it
for keeping down coal dust, recycling some of the water back to Statoil in
the form of steam.
Gas, usually flared off by oil refineries, is sent by Statoil to Asnaes and
Gyproc as part-replacement for oil and coal.
Novo Nordick produces large quantities of biomass in the fermentation
process used in production of enzymes and insulin. This is used as
fertiliser by local farms.
Industrial symbiosis in Kalundborg gives a saving in use of resources of
30,000 tonnes of coal, 19,000 tonnes of oil, 1.4m tonnes of water and 80,000
tonnes of gypsum, the plants calculate.
The reduction in pollution through waste products is 200,000 tonnes of
carbon dioxide and 1,000 tonnes of sulphur dioxide, 135,000 tonnes of fly
ash, 80,000 tonnes of gypsum, 0.9m tonnes of water and 2,900 tonnes of
sulphur.
The potential for reducing pollution and saving resources is by no means
exhausted. The plants are developing new ideas all the time.
One of them, said Mr Christensen, is a heat conversion project to produce
cold water - 'district cooling' - but there is no large plant in the area
which requires very cold water. However, he thinks that the idea of district
cooling could have a big future in hot countries.
The use of biomass for power production is another idea under serious
consideration.
The managers have also developed a concept of reducing pollution through
waste products to zero through industrial symbiosis, but that, they admit,
is still a long way off.
The Kalundborg project would never have got off the ground if it were not
for close and trusting relationships between the plant managers, said Mr
Kurt Hvalso, Gyproc's manager.
He thinks that this has a lot to do with Scandinavian management style, with
a high degree of decentralisation to local managers. 'If we had all had to
ask group headquarters every time we wanted to go ahead, the project would
not have worked. In other countries, strong central control would strangle a
project like this,' he said.
It is essential, say the Kalundborg managers, that there is sufficient trust
between the plants for them to be able to talk about what they will be doing
in five year's time. Without this exchange of information, it would be
impossible to get the project to hang together.
The Kalundborg process has had several interesting spin-off effects on the
local community.
'We used to be on the defensive in the public debate,' said Mr Granhoj. 'Now
we are on the offensive. The county has even awarded us its environmental
prize.'
Success in co-operation between the industries has also spilled over into a
project, in co-operation with the local community, to upgrade the Kalundborg
region, more especially by improving educational facilities and making it
more relevant to the needs of local enterprises. The coming buzzwords in
Kalundborg are now 'regional symbiosis'.
