FT  15 APR 92 / World Court rejects Libyan plea to prevent sanctions
UNITED NATIONS sanctions against Libya, including an arms and air embargo,
are due to take effect today in spite of last-minute efforts by Tripoli to
head off their imposition.
The World Court yesterday rejected Libya's plea that it should bar the US
and Britain from taking punitive measures to oblige Tripoli to hand over two
men suspected of the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am airliner over Lockerbie in
Scotland.
The ruling by the International Court of Justice in The Hague coincided with
last-minute attempts by the Arab League to head off the imposition of
sanctions. A renewed Libyan offer to yield the two suspects to a 'neutral'
party was expected to be dismissed by the Security Council. The White House
said it was pleased with the World Court ruling.
In rejecting Libya's plea, the judges of the court said that the Security
Council Resolution 748 imposing sanctions should override all other
international agreements.
Libya defiantly isolated itself from the world yesterday by declaring a 'day
of mourning' and cutting external air and telecommunications links. The
national news agency Jana said the 'day of mourning' had nothing to do with
the sanctions threat but was a mark of respect for the 37 Libyans who died
in US bombing raids on Tripoli and Benghazi in April 1986.
'The Arab people, in commemorating this anniversary, wants to reveal that
this Arab nation is the victim every day of terrorism and abhorrent racism,'
a statement issued by the Libyan embassy in Cairo said.
Dr Esmat Abdel Meguid, the Arab League secretary-general, said that he hoped
an offer by Malta to accept the two accused Libyans would help to defuse the
crisis, but western officials said it was unlikely that the Security Council
would delay the imposition of sanctions.
The US and Britain are demanding the unconditional surrender of the two men
suspected of planting a bomb on the airliner which exploded over Lockerbie
killing 270 people.
France is pressing Libya to grant it access to four Libyans, including
Colonel Muammer Gadaffi's brother-in-law, for questioning over the 1989
downing of a French UTA airliner over Niger in which all 171 passengers and
crew perished. Most Arab states indicated they would reluctantly fall into
line with the air embargo, but both Egypt and Tunisia are planning to
facilitate travel across their frontiers with Libya.
Some 30 offices of Libyan Arab Airlines were expected to be closed worldwide
and Libyan diplomatic representation will be thinned out under the terms of
the UN resolution. The sanctions will not affect Libyan oil exports or
shipping services.
