FT  20 OCT 92 / Perkins wins Chrysler US order worth Dollars 100m
PERKINS GROUP, the Peter-borough-based diesel engine manufacturer, has won a
big order from Chrysler of the US for high-technology 'green' engines to
power a new range of Mexican-built Dodge trucks.
The order will be worth Dollars 100m (Pounds 58m) for Perkins over the next
five years, and is its first contract with one of the big three US motor
companies since the North American Free Trade Agreement recently initialled
by President George Bush and his Mexican and Canadian counterparts.
The deal, won against tough international competition, comes nine months
after Perkins won a Dollars 1bn, 10-year contract to supply engines to
Caterpillar, the US construction equipment group.
Mr Tony Gilroy, Perkins Group managing director, said the Chrysler order
came against the backdrop of a fairly depressed UK market and 'not very
buoyant world markets'. It would bolster the group's ability to maintain
current employment at Peterborough, where the workforce has fallen by 10 per
cent to 3,000 during the current recession.
Mexico had been a big market for Perkins for many years, but had assumed new
strategic importance because of Nafta, Mr Gilroy said.
Although the initial engines for the Dodge contract will be supplied from
Peterborough, assembly will soon be transferred to Mopesa, a Perkins
associate company based at Toluca in Mexico. Eventually, Mexico could be
used to source key engine components.
Mr Gilroy said the order was 'yet another significant expression of
confidence from a leading internationally known automobile customer in our
ability to meet increasingly stringent environmental and performance
standards'.
The new Phaser engines being supplied to Chrysler are six-cylinder,
turbocharged units which comfortably meet current US federal emission
standards. For Chrysler, the engines also suit demand in Mexico for
low-pollution trucks.
Low-emission diesels are one of the main focuses of the industry's
technology efforts as it grapples with more demanding emission regulations.
Perkins' Phaser family is designed so that, with modification, it can meet
the forth-coming US 1994 and European Community 1996 emission regulations.
