FT  12 MAR 92 / Sikh extremists massacre factory managers: Fifteen
non-Punjabis lined up and shot at textiles plant
SIKH militants murdered 15 senior executives and technicians of a textiles
factory in the north Indian state of Punjab late on Tuesday night.
Four militants entered the residential area of the Indian Acrylics plant and
forced all residents to gather at one spot. They then separated the
non-Punjabis from the Punjabis and opened fire on the non-Punjabis, killing
15 and wounding two. According to one report, an American executive was held
briefly and then released.
The attack was the most serious strike by militants - who are fighting a
decade-old campaign for an independent Sikh homeland - since elections in
Punjab last month.
The Rs2.2bn (Pounds 47m) synthetic fibre factory in Gadhwan Kothe village,
near Patiala, was set up recently in collaboration with Du Pont. The US
company supplied the machinery for the plant's second phase, due to come on
stream next month, making it the largest acrylics plant in Punjab.
The first phase of the plant opened last September and employed 600 people.
Du Pont's office in New Delhi said yesterday that the US company's
involvement involved a one-off sale of technology. The massacre would not
affect its investment plans in India.
However, the incident is bound to have some effect on investment in the
country, which recently liberalised its foreign investment policies. Mr P V
Narasimha Rao, India's prime minister, recently estimated that Rs10bn of
foreign investment had taken place since the liberalisation and he expressed
hope that this would double in a few months.
Many workers of Indian Acrylics have run away in fear and the incident has
caused alarm in factories throughout the state, in spite of an appeal by Mr
Beant Singh, Punjab's newly-elected chief minister, to non-Punjabis not to
leave their posts.
Militants have adopted this tactic to force non-Punjabis to leave the state
and to deter others from seeking jobs there. This factor, coupled with the
fear of repeated random attacks, is likely to retard industrialisation in
Punjab.
Following elections in the state last month, Congress formed a government
which ended nearly five years of direct administration from New Delhi.
President's rule, as this is called, had failed to check militancy in
Punjab.
