FT  01 JUL 92 / Management: Cutting HQ down to size - Andrew Jack looks at a
new trend towards hiving off specialist work functions to outsiders
At a tense meeting in Cleveland, Ohio next week, four consulting firms will
put their case for taking over an important headquarters function of BP: the
preparation and submission of all state and federal tax returns for the
group's US operations.
The contract - which should be awarded by the end of this month - will be
the latest in a series of such moves by the hard-pressed oil company in
recent months. On both side of the Atlantic, these are contributing heavily
to BP's ability to cut sharply and repeatedly the size of its various head
offices - divisional, regional, and corporate.
The contract also represents part of a new trend throughout industry of
handing to outside contractors the operation of functions that are not part
of a company's core business. The idea of 'contracting out', or facilities
management, is not new. Catering, cleaning, transport, internal mail and
security have long been managed externally. One recent estimate put the size
of the existing UK market at Pounds 4bn a year, dominated by giant business
services companies such as BET.
But in the last few years, a new type of function has begun to be awarded to
a new breed of outside contractors, which is often labelled 'outsourcing'.
It involves a different kind of contract, covering much higher-level
headquarters functions such as computing and accounting services. It rests
on the doctrine propounded by consultants and business school academics in
the last few years that companies should concentrate on their 'core
competencies', while leaving other functions to specialist contractors.
David Andrews, head of financial markets at Andersen Consulting in London,
draws a clear distinction between two types of contracting out. The first -
the old-fashioned facilities management function - is at what he calls the
commodity-end of the business. 'The tasks are simple, well defined, and
choice is based on price,' he says.
The second, on which Andersen Consulting is concentrating, has emerged
during the last five years. It involves, says Andrews, contracts based less
on price than a range of more intangible benefits, with a strong continuing
relationship between the client and contractor.
Andrews stresses that some functions - particularly policy and
decision-making - will always remain with senior internal management. But
many others can be hived off. He says the litmus test is that management
remains in control of the product or service it is delivering to customers,
and not whether it controls the resources which contribute to that
end-product.
Peter Falconer, an associate director of Hoskyns Group, a consultancy which
specialises in information technology work, is rather more sceptical about
the labels being attached to the trend.
'The definitions have been over-complicated by marketing people,' he says.
He classifies contracting-out as the day-to-day management of service
functions by an independent company, while facilities management
encapsulates a wider range of projects to bring about change for a client.
He says that outsourcing is merely an American phrase for contracting-out.
Whatever the concept is called, there is no question that there is growing
demand for more sophisticated, higher-level functions to be handed to
outside contractors, albeit with a close level of supervision. 'Two years
ago it was difficult to find a financial organisation willing to even
contemplate outsourcing its services,' says Falconer. 'Today they are the
most active.'
The attractions can often include substantial cost savings. But they also
include the benefits of economies of scale, as well as intangibles such as
the expertise that a specialist contractor can bring, and the ability to
release management time for more important issues.
In April, the International Stock Exchange in London appointed Andersen
Consulting on a five-year contract, believed to be worth more than Pounds
60m. It has taken over operation of the computer systems, and brought 305
staff onto its own payroll. A further 30 were made redundant. Over five
years, it expects to reduce its IT costs by 40 per cent.
Jane Barker, finance director at the exchange, says management recognised
that its systems were becoming elderly and increasingly difficult and costly
to maintain. 'We knew we had to do something and to do something quite
fast.'
Barker says that outsourcing has enabled the exchange to focus on its core
purpose, which is running and regulating the market. Andersen has brought in
the skills to bring about change in the operations needed to achieve that
end.
While most outsourcing has been focused on the operations and management of
information technology, it is also now spreading into other headquarters'
functions. Last June, BP Exploration (Europe), now based in Glasgow but
scheduled to move to Aberdeen, announced that its accounting services would
be handed to Andersen Consulting on an initial four-year contract.
Since then, 300 people have been transferred to a special Andersen centre in
Aberdeen. A further 60 were offered severance payments, and now some new
employees have been recruited. Colin Goodall, chief of staff and general
manager for business support, will only say that the savings negotiated will
be more than 20 per cent in the department, which had a budget of Pounds 13m
before the contract began.
He says the oil industry has had a long tradition of contracting out
services. But the need to reduce costs even in headquarters has been
triggered recently by the stable price of crude oil, and disappointing
corporate results. 'Outsourcing is part of our drive to reduce costs and
improve efficiencies,' he says.
'Many of the savings not were not immediately apparent,' he says. 'We are
increasingly recognising intangible benefits that we could not quantify. We
are adding value as well as reducing cost.'
In London, BP's corporate headquarters has also begun to apply more of the
lessons of outsourcing. Two years ago, most of its IT work was contracted
out.
Its corporate tax work has just been contracted to Price Waterhouse, which
will assume responsibility for 19 of its existing 22 staff in July. BP
continues to make important decisions on the tax returns once they are
prepared.
Aside from the preparation of federal and state taxes for its US operations,
BP is also considering outsourcing its petroleum revenue tax work in the UK,
and some personal tax work for its expatriate staff.
Peter Hobbs, head of tax, says one of the main difficulties about
introducing outsourcing was persuading his own management that it would not
be compromised by allowing sensitive material to be handled by those outside
the organisation.
He says that the issues of confidentiality and staff sensitivity were among
the most testing during the initial negotiations. 'Outsourcing is not a
popular thing at any level. A lot of time needs to be spent trying to win
over the staff.'
