FT  17 MAR 92 / International Company News: Pacific Dunlop lags 22.5% at
halfway
PACIFIC Dunlop, the diversified Australian manufacturing group, yesterday
reported a 22.5 per cent cut in interim net profits to ADollars 106m
(USDollars 79.6m) for the six months to the end of December. Turnover
improved 14.5 per cent to ADollars 2.9bn.
Mr John Gough, chairman, said the result was a 'satisfactory' outcome for
the 'very difficult' period. The result was in line with forecasts in the
annual report.
Mr Gough said demand had been flat in all the group's main markets in
Australia and New Zealand, and the impact of the recession had spread from
consumer products to those associated with the construction and automotive
industries.
The Petersville Sleigh foods subsidiary, acquired from the Adelaide
Steamship group in September, had returned a 'satisfactory' profit, he
declared. Sales were slightly down on the comparable four months of the
previous year.
Mr Gough said demand for consumer products was improving and some signs of
recovery had been evident in the automotive replacement market. However,
demand for industrial products continued to be depressed.
He added that an improved performance from the group's international
businesses should lead to an improvement in profits for the second half,
unless the Australian economy deteriorated further.
The group was expected to report lower profits for the full year, however,
because of the slower-than-expected recovery of the Australian economy.
The directors declared an unchanged interim dividend of 10.5 cents per
share, but itwill be franked to 55 per cent, compared with 100 per cent in
the previous first half.
Mr Gough said the reduction in franking was in line with advice to
shareholders in the annual report that the company's franking capacity in
the current year would be abnormally low.
This was because of the slow economic recovery, the increased dividend
servicing requirement resulting from an ADollars 644m rights issue last
year, and the minimal franking capacity contributed by Petersville Sleigh.
