FT  07 NOV 92 / Norway's PM quits as party leader
MRS Gro Harlem Brundtland, prime minister of Norway, last night resigned as
leader of the Labour party.
Her unexpected departure is likely to switch the party's focus from the
internal dissent, which has swelled to unprecedented proportions in recent
months, over the government's inability to stem a continuous rise in
unemployment, which now stands at a post-war record of 7.6 per cent.
Mrs Brundtland delivered her decision to 300 delegates at the Labour party
congress who had gathered in Oslo on Thursday to rewrite their political
manifesto.
The congress will end tomorrow after voting on whether Norway should reapply
for membership of the European Community. The country has applied on three
previous occasions, but in 1972 rejected membership in a bitterly divisive
referendum.
Although the proposal for EC membership is expected to be accepted, it has
alienated some regional party members, particularly in the north, where
unemployment is highest and where fears run deep over threats that
membership is said to pose to the region's main livelihoods of fishing and
agriculture.
Labour has suffered a sharp decline in popularity, partly because of its
record on unemployment and the likelihood of a vote in favour of the EC.
In an opinion poll published by the Oslo newspaper Aftenposten yesterday,
24.6 per cent of those asked supported the party, its lowest figure since
the 1920s. Two years ago, more than 40 per cent of those asked supported the
party.
Labour also now faces the task of naming Mrs Brundtland's successor,
although she had earlier pointed out the qualities of Mr Thorbjoern Jagland,
who was expected to be named vice-leader.
Mrs Brundtland said she had not discussed the resignation with even her
closest party allies, but based it on family reasons.
Her son committed suicide last month. Most of the Norwegian media did not
report his death, out of respect for Mrs Brundtland's privacy. However, she
stayed away from the public eye for only a week before returning to what
appeared to be business as usual.
'I can no longer be both the leader of the party and prime minister at the
expense of my family,' she told delegates in an emotional state she has
rarely demonstrated in public before.
Many of the delegates shed tears at the announcement but publicly stated
respect for her decision.
Mrs Brundtland has for 12 years led the Labour party through a
transformation which her critics claim takes it far from the ideology on
which it was founded.
She was elected party deputy leader in 1975 and became chairwoman in 1981.
She has been prime minister three times. In 1981, she was appointed by her
party. Her government lasted seven months until Labour was swept away in an
election wave of conservatism.
She returned to power in May 1986 when a Conservative-led coalition
resigned, but she resigned after setbacks in the 1989 national elections.
She formed her third government two years ago, after a centre-right
coalition collapsed.
