FT  16 OCT 92 / Race for the White House: Republicans may decline to 40
seats in Senate : Many more women will enter Congress, says George Graham
A NEW Congress will take office in January. It is already sure to wear a
face very different from that of its predecessor. One member in six is not
standing for re-election on November 3. A handful of House of
Representatives members has switched to run for the Senate, but most of the
departures are caused by retirement or by defeat in primaries.
The Republicans' anticipation that this wholesale change would present an
opportunity to break the Democrats' domination of Congress is being rapidly
evaporated. A year ago, Republican organisers had hoped that, in the Senate,
where 36 of the 100 seats are at stake in the election, they might be able
to break the Democrats' 57:43 majority.
Today, the Republicans face the ominous prospect of falling as low as 40, a
critical level because it would give the Democrats the 60-member majority
required to shut off debate through a 'cloture' motion, so depriving the
Republicans of the ability to block legislation by filibustering.
Democrats are strongly placed to gain two seats, in California and
Wisconsin, and have reasonable prospects of ousting Republican incumbents in
at least two more states, New York and Oregon. Pollsters give the
Republicans only an outside chance of picking up two Democratic seats, in
Ohio and North Carolina.
In the House, where members are elected for only two years rather than the
six-year Senate term, the Republicans hoped to gain from the 10-yearly
redrawing of congressional district boundaries to take account of new census
data.
Re-districting alone had been projected to cost the majority Democrats
perhaps up to 40 of their total 266 seats. Besides faster population growth
in Republican areas, and the likely undoing of some of the more egregious
gerrymanders of 1982, new court interpretations of the Voting Rights Act
compelled the creation of more districts with predominantly minority
populations.
This has resulted in the drawing of some overwhelmingly Democratic
districts, but left the Republicans stronger in many others by siphoning off
black voters, who remain, for the most part, strongly Democratic. The
Democrats are still likely to lose seats, but the Republicans have been
declining rapidly. Mr Charles Cook, a respected election handicapper, last
week forecast a 16-seat gain for the Republicans, which would give the
Democrats control of the House with 252 seats to 182 for the Republicans,
with one Independent.
Congress's reputation with US voters has been unusually low over the last
year. Mounting public concern over the huge federal budget deficit has
focused unfavourable attention on Congressional spending habits. Many
legislators, too, became disillusioned and retired. They range from such
familiar figures as Senator Warren Rudman, co-author of the Gramm-Rudman
legislation that tried vainly to curb the budget deficit in the 1980s, to
such promising youngsters as Congressman Dennis Eckart of Ohio.
Voters who for years had split their votes between Republican presidents and
Democratic Congress memebers, and showed every sign of liking the idea of
divided government, began to complain about Washington gridlock, a complaint
that President George Bush tried to exploit in his re-election campaign.
Mr Bush's pitch does not appear to have worked; indeed, if the gridlock is
to be broken, it now appears far more likely to come about by ending
Republican control of the White House than by ending Democratic control of
Capitol Hill. Many Republican Congressional candidates are painfully aware
of this, and are busily trying to distance their own candidacies from the
top of their party's ticket. The Washington Post reported this week that
only two dozen of more than 400 Republican Congressional candidates had
accepted an offer to be seen with the president on their campaign
advertisements.
One maverick factor in the congressional elections is the revived popularity
of Mr Ross Perot. Although few believe that he still has a realistic chance
of the presidency, he could bring to the ballot box many who are inclined to
vote systematically against the incumbent, of whatever party. That could
lead to an even more extensive turnover in Congressional membership.
Whatever happens, the new members are already certain to include a great
many more women. The new Senate could boast as many as seven female members,
more than double the current tally; in the House, the number of women
members should rise by at least 12 from the present 29. But all the new
members may not serve as long as their predecessors. Voters in 14 states
will have the chance to take part in referendums on whether to limit the
number of terms a legislator may serve.
Colorado has already introduced such limits, but a ballot measure in
Washington state was narrowly defeated last year, thanks in large part to
the campaigning of Mr Tom Foley, Speaker of the House and representative of
eastern Washington since 1965. Term limits now seem to be winning support of
about 70 per cent in most states where the issue is on the ballot.
