FT  30 MAR 92 / Spanish strike looms over convergence plan: Big shake-up in
labour market proposed
THE Spanish government and the country's main trades unions are gearing up
for what may become their most disruptive dispute since the Socialists came
to power in 1982.
Both the main socialist and communist unions are now toying with calling a
general strike in protest at a reform of the labour market being proposed by
the government as the linchpin of its new strategy to converge with the
leading European Community economies and so be able to enter into monetary
union by 1997.
The convergence plan, which is aimed at taking Spain to within the economic
convergence limits decided upon at the EC summit in Maastricht last
December, was agreed by the cabinet on Friday.
Designed by finance minister Carlos Solchaga, the plan recognises the fact
that Spain has done little to combat its growing public deficits and left,
for the past five years, control of the economy largely to monetary policy.
Nevertheless, Mr Solchaga's plan calls for the general public sector deficit
to fall from around 4.4 per cent today to just 1 per cent by the end of
1996, a herculean task feasible only if massive cuts are made in public
spending.
These, it is clear, will be made in the labour market. The government would
cut subsidies to employers for creating jobs and extend the time in which
temporary job contracts remain valid from six months to a year. Normally,
after six months on a temporary contract, a worker has the right to a
permanent job. The measures will also mean it will take a year's work
(instead of six months) to be eligible for full unemployment benefit.
The government also plans to 'encourage' unemployed workers to look more
actively for jobs, and will penalise people not seeking jobs or failing to
accept offers away from their homes. While the plan is to be discussed with
the unions, Mr Solchaga said on Friday their support 'is not a key to its
success. It is not a wage negotiation.'
Mr Solchaga also said he wanted to stop runaway health service spending, and
the government may introduce measures to devolve managerial decision-making
to hospitals or clinics, and to make them responsible for their own
financial performances. While this would not be a Thatcherite privatisation,
many regional health ministers have already begun to pressure Madrid not to
cut health spending.
Union leaders warned over the weekend that the convergence plan represented
probably a bigger threat to their members than the job-creation programmes
that triggered a successful one-day general strike on December 14 1988.
Unemployment in Spain is running at around 16 per cent and though Mr
Solchaga has tried before to push tough spending cuts through the party
machine, he has always failed.
The labour market reforms will be seen by the unions and the political left
in Spain as a threat but this time Mr Solchaga appears to have won the
support of the prime minister, Mr Felipe Gonzalez.
A strike now would be a serous threat to Mr Gonzalez, disrupting Spain's
1992 celebrations and establishing a climate of confrontation ahead of a
general election expected to take place in about a year.
France has arrested the top military leader of Eta, the Spanish Basque
underground movement, French interior minister Philippe Marchand said
yesterday, Reuter reports from Paris.
Mr Marchand identified the arrested man as Francisco Garmendia, alias
Artapalo, believed to be the overall commander of Eta guerrillas operating
in Spain. Two aides were arrested with him.
