FT  30 APR 92 / World Stock Markets: Escudo's ERM entry lifts Portuguese
shares - Interest rate cuts also bring relief, though exporters may have
problems
Portuguese stocks were given a welcome boost by the escudo's entry into the
European exchange rate mechanism (ERM) on Monday, April 6, but after the
initial excitement the market has stabilised at higher levels.
The announcement was made late on the previous Friday, and by the close on
the following Monday, the Banco Totta &amp; Acores (BTA) index had risen by 26.2
to 2,052.5 - a gain of 1.3 per cent, compared with the 2.5 per cent advance
made since the beginning of the year. The market has since benefited from
renewed foreign investor interest, and the BTA index closed at 2,121.6, up
4.7, yesterday.
Shares gained at the expense of government securities - receiving additional
help from the Bank of Portugal's decision the same week to cut its two key
interest rates. The bank reduced the top rate, at which it injects liquidity
into the money market, by a full point to 17.9375 per cent, and the rate at
which it drains liquidity from the market by 1/4 percentage point to 15.375
per cent.
The ensuing cut in rates by commercial banks has given some relief to
Portuguese companies, which have complained loudly that they were being
penalised by high domestic interest rates in the face of foreign
competition. This is especially true of the construction sector, which
labours under high indebtedness.
For exporters, however, the escudo's ERM membership could cause some
problems, as they will no longer be able to profit from the currency's
depreciation. 'In the short term they will have to cut prices or face the
prospect of losing markets, because the alternative of increasing
productivity is difficult and takes a long time,' says one analyst.
Lower interest rates at a time of rising costs are expected to erode profit
margins in the banking sector. 'Margins are coming down fast and costs going
up,' says another analyst. 'This will show in this year's annual accounts,
and especially next year's'
Government securities have reacted more calmly. Many traditional investors
in Portuguese state paper had to some extent anticipated the decline in
interest rates, so there was no rush to buy. The escudo had been shadowing
the ERM basket of currencies for some time, and entry formally anchored it
to the system, though at a higher rate than the government had wanted.
Most analysts, however, have welcomed the move. 'It will give greater
security to foreign investors by reducing the risk of foreign exchange
losses,' says an analyst with Gestifundo, the fund manager.
Further cuts in interest rates will depend on reducing inflation. Reversing
a trend of several months, prices rose by 0.9 per cent in March, bringing
the year-on-year rate to 8.5 per cent. Prices are expected to rise again in
April when the one-off effect of a new value added tax, introduced at the
end of March, is fully felt.
Economists hope that if inflation resumes its downward trend in the next two
months, as is officially hoped, further interest rate cuts are likely. But
Mr Miguel Beleza, who takes over as central bank governor in May, is by
nature cautious and unlikely to take any precipitate action.
Many company results for 1991 have now been published, and as expected,
earnings have fallen. The appreciation of the escudo in real terms and high
interest rates are mostly to blame, while restructuring costs have been an
additional burden for some companies. Recession in large international
markets impaired the performance of exporters.
The government has resumed its privatisation programme, but the results have
been disappointing as far as the market is concerned. The partial
privatisation of Petrogal, the big oil group, found only one taker - a
consortium led by Total, of France, with Portuguese partners. This month's
public flotation of insurance concern Mundial Confianca failed to attract
enough investors and 35 per cent of the company's equity remained with
underwriters.
Small investors stayed away, confirming that, short of the prospect of a
quick gain, most Portuguese prefer to hang on to their savings.
