FT  04 AUG 92 / The delicate art of persuasion: Italy's government has yet
to convince investors of its commitment to budgetary reform
Summer heat and tourists are usually enough to persuade the citizens of Rome
to head out of town. But Italy's current economic crisis means there are no
holidays for government ministers and Treasury civil servants this year.
Mr Giuliano Amato, prime minister for a month, has acted fast since he came
to office. Last Wednesday, he hustled through parliament, using a vote of
no-confidence, an emergency budget package which includes L30,000bn of tax
increases and spending cuts.
Yesterday's half-point cut in the discount rate (the rate at which Italy's
central bank lends to commercial banks) to 13.25 per cent is a reward for
such swift action. But the financial markets remain unconvinced that Mr
Amato has either the courage or the political clout finally to bring the
budget deficit under control without resorting to inflation and devaluation.
Investors are still commanding higher short-term interest rates than at any
time since 1986, despite the easing of rates over the past week. This rise
in rates has happened at precisely the time when a new government appears
determined to cut the bloated public sector and when parliament may be too
weak to oppose such reform.
'We are paying the price in high interest rates for past inaction at the
very moment when we have a government prepared to do something,' argues Dr
Fabrizio Sacconmanni, head of the Bank of Italy's foreign department.
In addition to its emergency package, the government has started to tackle
the public sector. Privatisation remains a long-term goal, but transforming
the four large nationalised concerns to joint stock companies under Treasury
control is a necessary first step. The abolition of the system of indexing
wages to the inflation rate, the scala mobile, confirms that both employers
and trade unions recognise the need for change.
But for all its tough talk, the Amato government has yet to prove decisively
that it has broken with Italy's dismal tradition of overborrowing.
Successive governments, unable to cut spending or raise taxes, have closed
the budget through borrowing and inflation. Repeated attempts to cut the
budget deficit have been sabotaged in parliament. This year's package has
avoided that fate, but is too small to stabilise Italy's rapidly expanding
government debt, let alone set it on a downward path.
The package contains largely temporary measures while leaving important
areas such as Italy's generous pension system virtually untouched. Despite
its L30,000bn of cuts, it will leave the deficit some L30,000bn higher than
was originally envisaged for 1992.
So Italy's public debt will remain high. At a little over 100 per cent of
gross domestic product it places a heavy burden on the budget and causes
severe problems. The larger the debt, the greater the interest payments. The
Italian Treasury expects the primary budget deficit, which excludes interest
payments, to show a small surplus of L8,000bn this year. But interest
payment on past debt will amount to L171,000bn, converting this small
surplus into a budget deficit of 10.8 per cent of GDP.
Therefore, the government's fiscal strategy is still vulnerable to the mood
of the market. The recent rise in short-term interest rates is having a
devastating effect on the budget deficit: 28 per cent of the government's
debt is financed by three-month Treasury bills. The Treasury forecasts
assume average short-term rates of 13.5 per cent this year. Every percentage
point on short-term rates increases debt interest by a further L15,000bn.
Short-term rates eased slightly to close yesterday at 15.7 per cent.
The financial markets had been losing patience with successive governments
before Mr Amato took office. They have been stepping up demands for higher
interest rates as the price of investing in Italian government debt and
because they feared a government might devalue the lira and pursue an
inflationary economic course.
Until the Danish referendum rejected the Maastricht Treaty on European
Union, with its austere limits on budget deficits, Italy's politicians
appeared to have an incentive to control public spending. Since the
ratification of Maastricht now appears in doubt, the markets suspect that
Italy's politicians may not be willing to undertake the tough measures
needed, under the convergence criteria of the treaty, to bring the economy
into line with the rest of the EC.
The rise in interest rates since the Danes voted no is more than offsetting
the impact of the government's emergency package. Perversely, the higher the
Bank of Italy pushes up interest rates to persuade investors that the
government will use spending cuts rather than inflation and devaluation to
fund the deficit, the larger the fiscal adjustment needed to stabilise the
debt, and the more nervous the markets become.
For interest rates to fall decisively, the markets must believe that the
government is getting the budget under control. 'There is a risk that the
package will not be seen as a strong signal,' says Dr Stefano Micossi,
research director at Confindustria, the employers' association. Mr Stefano
Patriaca, economics director at CGIL, the largest trade union, agrees. 'You
cannot simply touch things up. You have to go to the heart of the problem
and close the deficit.'
Treasury officials reject the criticism that they are going too slowly. The
government promises its public sector reforms will be placed before
parliament in early September. 'We have spent the last 10 years worrying
about the next six months,' argues Mr Franceso Giavazzi, its chief
economist. 'In the past, we have introduced temporary measures which never
deal with the source of the problem.'
In an effort to prevent parliament thwarting its structural reforms, the
government intends to bring in next year's budget without the customary
detailed discussions. It will ask parliament only to agree the budget's
broad principles, leaving it to work out the details. The aim is to reduce
the budget deficit from 10.8 per cent of GDP this year to 10.2 per cent next
year, and 8.3 per cent in 1994.
The government needs to persuade parliament to accept next year's budget
plans in early September, to convince investors that it is serious about
tackling the budget deficit and thus to encourage them to accept lower
interest rates. For now the government has little option but to bear the
pain of high rates.
A devaluation now, before the 1993 budget package has parliamentary
approval, would spell disaster. A weaker government would be sorely tempted
to turn to direct monetary creation by selling debt to the central bank.
This would lead to a loss of confidence, devaluation and possible
hyperinflation soon afterwards. Both the government and the Bank of Italy
say they are committed to maintaining the lira within its current ERM bands.
'The immediate impact of devaluation would be a loss of credibility,' says
Mr Sacconmanni. The Treasury agrees. 'Now it would be the worst possible
thing that could happen to the budget.'
Yet were the Amato government to be defeated in parliament through a vote of
no-confidence, and to step down, a devaluation would probably be inevitable.
'We are close to the end of the line,' says Mr Giavazzi of the Treasury. 'If
things do not go through parliament then the next thing that happens is a
really big financial crisis.'
