FT  24 JUL 92 / 'Hour of truth' on unification has arrived, warns Kohl
THE 'hour of truth' has come for west Germans who believe their expansive
lifestyle can go on unchanged after unification, Chancellor Helmut Kohl
warned yesterday.
Rebuilding the east must have absolute priority over new developments in the
west, he said at a pre-holiday press conference.
'The truth of the matter is that we must use substantial contributions from
our customary yearly earnings increases for the economic and social
reconstruction in the east of our fatherland.'
The economy could no longer afford luxuries such as extravagant pay rises,
earlier retirement, and the shortest machine running times in the west, he
said.
Rejecting tax rises and further state contributions for health and welfare,
he said an answer had to be found to the question: 'How will Germany master
the future?"
Echoing Mr Kohl's concerns, an independent council of advisers to the
economics ministry yesterday suggested the answer was 'unpopular cuts'.
Total state debt of DM1,300bn (Pounds 448.2bn) would rise to DM1,900bn by
the end of 1995, it said. Bonn, the federal states and local authorities
must cut spending, pay must be restrained, and privatisation speeded up. If
these policies were not carried through, tax increases were the 'second
option'.
Recent government austerity proposals have run into strong resistance
outside the ruling coalition group. A plan to cut state subsidies to the
health service by DM11bn a year - by freezing drugs prices, reducing the
number of registered doctors and increasing patients' charges - has hit
opposition from all groups.
However, Mr Kohl pointed out, health care payments were growing at twice the
rate of contributions.
A scheme to pay for care of the elderly by withholding sick pay for the
first day of absence from work has stirred strikes among union members. The
4m-strong IG Metall metalworkers' union has promised national strikes after
the summer break.
Mr Kohl said progress in the east would be slower and more costly than first
thought, although recent forecasts suggest accelerating growth of just under
3 per cent for the whole of Germany next year.
The first signs of an easing in price increases came yesterday from North
Rhine Westphalia, which reported nil month-on-month growth in July and an
annual rate of increase of 3.3 per cent. This is one percentage point below
the national figure of 4.3 per cent for June.
