FT  13 APR 92 / Smith and Gould set to vie for Labour leadership
MR JOHN SMITH, the shadow chancellor, and Mr Bryan Gould, the shadow
environment secretary, emerged over the weekend as the main challengers in
any race for leadership of the Labour party.
Mr Neil Kinnock, the Labour leader, and Mr Roy Hattersley, his deputy, are
expected today to announce formally that they will not be seeking
renomination to their posts in the wake of last week's general election
defeat.
Several other possible contenders are understood to have opted not to run
after it became clear that Mr Smith, aged 53, the odds-on favourite, had
already received firm pledges of support from many leading Labour MPs and
trade unions.
The hard-left Campaign Group is expected to put forward Mr Ken Livingstone,
MP for Brent East, or Mr Dennis Skinner, MP for Bolsover, in a largely
symbolic gesture. The group has protested against a rule that candidates
need the backing of 20 per cent of the parliamentary party - 55 MPs in the
new parliament - which it believes it will be unable to attain.
Mr Kinnock, aged 50, is said to be anxious for a quick transition, so there
is a possibility that a special party conference - sitting as an electoral
college - could be convened as soon as June. A vote on the leadership
normally takes place at the party conference in October.
The option of a June conference, opposed by Mr Gould, 53, could be agreed at
a specially convened meeting of Labour's national executive committee this
week. Normally, the NEC meets at the end of the month.
The fiercest battle could be for the deputy leadership which Mr Gould may
also contend, alongside Mrs Margaret Beckett, the shadow chief secretary,
and, possibly, Mr John Prescott, the left-wing transport spokesman.
Speculation that Mr Gordon Brown and Mr Robin Cook, the Scottish trade and
health spokesmen, might put in a leadership challenge has been firmly
denied. Both men support Mr Smith and are determined not to split loyalties
within the Scottish Labour party at a time when divisions are emerging as to
how to react to the election defeat and the consequent collapse of Labour's
plan for a Scottish parliament.
Last night, Mr Donald Dewar, Labour's Scottish secretary, attempted to
pre-empt pressure for an alliance with the Scottish National party by
demanding a referendum on the country's constitutional future.
In a parallel development, Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader,
made clear he would consult today with parliamentary colleagues about an
appeal to the Labour leadership for a cross-party commission on electoral
reform.
He plans to write to Labour calling for an inquiry along the lines of the
Scottish constitutional convention. It would be aimed at winning greater
public support for proportional representation.
Under Labour's rules, the leadership is decided by the party conference
sitting as an electoral college with the trade unions commanding 40 per cent
of the votes and MPs and the constituency parties holding 30 per cent each.
Mr Smith is widely expected to win outright in all three divisions.
Supporters of Mr Gould believe that his best hope is if there is a lengthy
interval before the election takes place. Mr David Blunkett, Labour's local
government spokesman, warned against an early rush to select a new party
leader.
Election 1992 Pages 6-7
Editorial Comment Page 14
A cautious step into the future Page 30
