FT  11 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Estate agency loss leaves Hambros lower
HAMBROS, the merchant bank and financial services group, yesterday reported
a fall of 8 per cent, from Pounds 80.4m to Pounds 74.4m, in pre tax profits
for the year to March 31, mainly due to losses in the group's estate agency
business.
Mr Charles Hambro, chairman, said: 'Economic conditions both at home and
abroad continue to remain somewhat uncertain.'
Retail financial services, which consist mainly of Hambro Countrywide, the
estate agency operation, incurred losses of Pounds 6.3m compared with Pounds
800,000. The losses were largely due to the Pounds 4m cost of setting up
non-mortgage products.
Although Hambro Countrywide increased its sales of houses by 8 per cent to
over 40,000 in a declining national market, the merchant banking and
financial services group said the year had started very slowly.
Since the general election there has been increased activity in the housing
market but Mr Hambro warned that 'more time and solid evidence' was still
needed before one could speak of a firm recovery.
A strong performance from the banking division, which increased profits from
Pounds 69.2m to Pounds 73.4m, was mainly due to Eurobond and Treasury
operations. Income from corporate finance also increased on the back of some
big rights issues in the UK and European cross-border transactions.
Provisions for bad debts were higher at Pounds 13m (Pounds 8m). However, Mr
Chips Keswick, deputy chairman, said the largest single debt was Pounds 3m
and there were no loans to the property market.
Hambros is also involved in eastern European privatisation, such as the
paper and pulp mills in Czechoslovakia and Poland and is working as
contractors for the government know-how fund in the Ukraine.
Profits from direct investments fell from Pounds 28m to Pounds 24.1m.
Berkeley Hambro increased its retail income by 18 per cent but had to
provide against a fall in asset values.
On the UK investment side the group said it was working on five unlisted
investments with a book value of Pounds 4m.
Fully diluted earnings per share were 25.4p (27p). The final dividend is
increased to 9.6p (8.8p) making a total of 13.8p.
