FT  12 MAY 92 / Commodities and Agriculture (Farmer's Viewpoint): Milking
profits in the Mediterranean sunshine - Dairy producers are cashing in on
many natural and political advantages in Italy's Po valley
SHE WAS one of the biggest dairy cows I have ever seen. From her tail to her
shoulders she stood over five feet tall, and the top of her great head was
level with mine. For the record, I am over six feet.
Last week she was not being milked. Indeed, her udder was dry because she
was heavily pregnant with her fifth calf. In her fourth lactation she gave
13,600 litres of milk. Her name was Del Santo Fulvia, and she was one of the
best cows in an outstanding herd of Holstein Friesians on a dairy farm a few
kilometres south of Milan.
The top yielder in the herd, I was told, had given 16,000 litres in a
one-year lactation, and the herd average was 9,600 litres. Moreover, most of
the dairy herds in this part of the Po Valley are averaging more than 8,000
litres per lactation. To put those figures into perspective, the average
yield of British dairy herds is between 5,500 and 6,000 litres, and those of
Holland around 7,000 litres. Furthermore, the average yield of all the dairy
herds in Italy is down at about the same level as the UK.
So, why is the Po Valley so special, and how is it that this area alone is
responsible for 70 per cent of Italy's milk production?
The answer is a combination of factors, chief among which are the breeding
and genetics of the cows, the way they are managed and the diets they are
fed. For the origins of the present Po Valley dairy herd owe as much to
North America as to Europe.
When the qualities of the black-and-white cows that had been developed over
generations in the north Holland province of Friesland were recognised by
the farmers of other countries at the turn of the century, they began to be
exported all over the world. In Europe, most breeders continued to favour
the traditional Dutch type of cow, which gave a good milk yield but whose
surplus male calves, not needed for breeding, were also suitable for beef.
The Dutch Friesian was the ultimate dual-purpose animal.
In America and Canada, however, farmers selected animals for milk yield
alone, and, although the black-and-white colour remained, the conformation
and size of the North American Holstein Friesian gradually became very
different from that of its Dutch ancestors. So, too, did its ability to
produce large quantities of milk.
Meanwhile, most British dairy farmers continued with their meatier
dual-purpose animals. But in the Po Valley, uniquely in Europe, dairy
farmers decided to follow the American pattern and in 1929 imported the
first Holstein Friesian bull to come back across the Atlantic. The result is
the present high milking-capacity of their cows, which, incidentally, are
little use for beef. Indeed, Italy now imports many of its beef animals, as
calves, from France. Nevertheless, in the pursuit of yield and profit other
European farmers are now attempting to follow the US and the Po Valley
farmers' example.
How successful they will be is open to conjecture. For another of the
factors that has enabled these northern Italian dairy farmers to achieve
such production is the fact that, like Californian dairymen, they do not
allow their cows to graze. Instead, in order to ensure that the animals
receive the optimum diet for maximum milk-production every day of the year,
they are kept in open concrete yards and have their specially formulated
feed delivered to them.
Every effort is made to make the cows as comfortable as possible and, during
the hot summer months, massive electric fans blow across the feeding areas
to cool their backs as they feed.
To achieve maximum yields, it is necessary for the cows to eat as much of
the milk-making fodder as possible. Anything that might inhibit this high
intake has to be avoided - hence, the crude air-conditioning. But whether
such conditions could economically be reproduced in northern Europe's
harsher climates remains to be seen.
Similarly, the basic vegetable diet the cows receive requires a warmer
climate in which to grow than that which we normally get in countries like
Britain. It is based on maize and Lucerne, or, as the Americans call them,
corn and alfalfa. For this, too, is copied from North America. Both fodder
crops need hot summers and plenty of irrigation in order to produce the most
economic yields and the best quality for the promotion of milk-production.
But the Po Valley is ideally situated. The Mediterranean sun shines reliably
most of the summer and melting Alpine snow fills a series of enormous lakes
that overflow down a network of rivers and converge to make the mighty Po.
The whole valley, which is 600 km (370 miles) long and 200 km wide at the
river's mouth, centred on the eastern Italian port of Ravenna, is composed
of rich, deep, fertile, alluvial soil. Italians have been building
irrigation canals across it for 1,000 years and today the comprehensive
network allows almost every farmer in the valley to flood-irrigate his
crops.
In addition to all these natural advantages, however, Italian dairy farmers
also appear to have some political ones. For, although milk quotas to reduce
production and surpluses were introduced in the European Community eight
years ago, they have still not been applied in Italy.
Questioned as to why this is so, farmers complain that the government is
corrupt and that the whole situation is chaotic. They then go on to say that
the original milk quota allocated to Italy represented only 38 per cent of
domestic need and that consumption has risen since then.
They feel, therefore, that they are justified in producing at least 10 per
cent more than their national quota allows, and see no inconsistency in the
fact that the quota system was intended to deal with over-production in the
EC as a whole.
In any event, eight years on, the milk quota system remains to be imposed in
Italy, and, in the meantime, farmers are happily maximising their production
and paying no super-levy - the punitive fine imposed on farmers in other
countries of the EC if they exceed the permitted amount. And they are doing
it, apparently, without too much hassle from Brussels.
It made me wonder if a touch of Italian-style chaos in regulation-ridden
Britain would not be preferable to our national compulsion to obey rules. If
the experience of the farmers in the Po Valley is any guide, it would
certainly be more profitable.
