FT  18 JAN 92 / Markets: Lonrho tackles the tycoon-bashing factor - The
Bottom Line
SINCE THE market has developed an appetite for tycoon-bashing, the one thing
that Tiny Rowland's Lonrho cannot afford to do is unveil any surprises when
it publishes its year end results on Thursday.
The shares of the international trading company traditionally perform
strongly in the period between the September year end and the publication of
the results in January. This is because of the high yield on the final and
interim dividend, which are announced simultaneously.
Yet Lonrho's share price has recently fallen to a four-year low. It
yesterday closed at 150p. Just over two years ago it stood above 300p. When
Robert Maxwell died at the end of last year it was 250p.
The so-called 'tycoon factor' is still Lonrho's greatest problem. Following
the spectacular downfalls of Polly Peck, Brent Walker and the Maxwell
empire, the stock market has become increasingly nervous about companies
where one man dominates. Since November the market has been full of stories
that Rowland, now 74, was ill and even that he had fallen out of a plane
over Africa. As Paul Spicer, a Lonrho director, pointed out at the time, the
rumours were all untrue.
There is still a great deal of concern about the lack of any obvious
successor to Rowland.
One fund manager said: 'Lonrho has an impressive record of increasing
shareholders' funds. But there is a succession problem which was not helped
by Rene Leclezio's appointment as chairman, and was made worse by Terry
Robinson's departure to Union International'. Robinson had been with Lonrho
for 20 years and a director for 10 years. Rene Leclezio, aged 71, has been a
Lonrho director for 15 years.
However, the tycoon factor, while important, is by not means the only
problem facing Lonrho. The share price took a hammering at the end of last
year when James Capel cast doubt on Lonrho's ability to maintain its
dividend and pointed out the company's exposure to the recent sharp fall in
rhodium prices.
The price of rhodium has fallen from a recent high of Dollars 7,000 (Pounds
3,910) an ounce to around Dollars 2,000. Lonrho owns a 75 per cent stake in
Western Platinum, the South African mining company which produces 45,000
ounces of rhodium a year. A slump on such a scale could reduce Lonrho's
gross earnings from rhodium by about Pounds 100m.
James Capel duly reduced its profit forecasts for Lonrho in the current year
from Pounds 270m - last year's figure was Pounds 273m - to Pounds 240m.
Other brokers followed suit, although Warburg Securities did not cut its
Pounds 260m forecast.
Capel's has also drawn attention to the fact that the dividend of 16p a
share last year was covered less than 1.5 times by earnings of 23.6p. The
implied drop in earnings this year to around 21p could put the dividend at
risk.
County Natwest has cut its payout forecast to 12p. Lonrho pays three
dividends a year and analysts believe any change is more likely to affect
1992's first interim payment - 3p for the last three years.
Nonetheless, on balance most analysts do not believe that Rowland will be
prepared to cut either the final or interim dividend. As one put it: 'Tiny
is a contrarian who will not want to be bludgeoned into cutting the dividend
just because the market says he will.'
The group also has significant levels of net debt and difficulties in
generating cash from organic activities. The 1990 report and accounts show
that Lonrho had net debt of Pounds 936m and shareholders' funds of Pounds
1.38bn. The net debt increased to Pounds 1.06bn and shareholders' funds to
Pounds 1.4bn by the interim stage of the 1991 year. Warburg Securities has
estimated that the debt will have risen to more than Pounds 1.1bn by the
year-end.
Planned disposals, such as its 50 per cent stake in German freight forwarder
Kuehne &amp; Nagel and the Ashanti gold mine in Ghana, would help cut debt but
have yet to materialise.
Lonrho is also expected to suffer a significant downturn in its motors
division, which includes dealer Dutton Forshaw and Volkswagen/Audi
distributor VAG in the UK, as well as assorted African interests. Here,
pre-tax profits are expected to fall by about Pounds 10m to around Pounds
35m over the year.
The group also needs to find a stream of UK earnings which is
cash-generative. Lonrho is not making sufficient profits to offset against
its advanced corporation tax (ACT). In the year to September 30 it had a
contingent liability of Pounds 79m against ACT.
Thus its flirtation with buying Brent Walker's William Hill betting shop
chain and brewery and later Mirror Group Newspapers. Both came to nothing,
but they were highly revealing of Lonrho's thinking and problems.
Week Ahead: Page IV
