FT  18 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Broker seeks winding up of Alliance
Resources
GIROZENTRALE Gilbert Eliott, the London stockbroker, has filed a petition to
wind up a natural resource company which it brought to the market just last
year.
The broker claims that Alliance Resources, a Louisiana oil and gas producer
floated in March 1991 at 40p, owes it Pounds 38,346 for services rendered.
In July of this year, the broker served a 21-day demand for payment upon the
company, which it says 'remains unanswered and unpaid'.
Thus, Gilbert Eliott alleges in the petition, 'the company is insolvent and
unable to pay its debts. In the circumstances, it is just and equitable that
the company should be wound up.'
Mr Stuart McCullock of Lovell White Durrant, solicitors to Alliance, said he
was unaware of any such petition.
Gilbert Eliott refused to comment on the case, while Mr John O'Brien,
Alliance chairman, was unavailable yesterday.
Alliance was originally a Canadian company called United North American
Resources. In December 1990, shareholders approved a reorganisation plan to
allow the firm to come to Britain under the name Alliance. A petition was
lodged to dissolve UNAR after its assets were transferred to Alliance.
Alliance was capitalised at Pounds 8.8m in its London flotation. The shares,
which hit a low of 7p in April, closed steady last night at 10p.
In May of this year, Mr O'Brien, managing director of Manx Petroleum, became
the company's new chairman. Manx is now in negotiations to take on
Alliance's assets, in return for paying off the US-based company's
creditors. Some three months ago, the Manx board voted to advance Pounds
200,000 to Alliance to meet its commitments. It is unclear whether this has
yet been paid.
Mr Algy Cluff, non-executive chairman of Manx Petroleum, said the petition
for winding up Alliance could threaten the proposed deal.
It is uncertain whether the petition has been served. The case is due to be
heard in the Royal Courts of Justice in London on October 28.
