FT  27 OCT 92 / UK Company News: New faces shine in Wellcome beauty contest
 -A search for fund managers
IT HAD to have been one of the hottest competitions for a fund management
mandate in some time. Wellcome Trust, the medical charity, announced last
March it was seeking a group of managers for its entire Pounds 2.75bn
investment portfolio and would keep an open mind about applicants.
Not only was it the largest mandate ever awarded in Britain, the portfolio
is among the most prestigious yet put out to contract.
The result was that 237 hopeful fund managers announced their desire to
enter the beauty contest, some of them the brightest stars of the business.
The intense competition was even more surprising given that Wellcome made it
clear it intended to pay what are euphemistically known as competitive fees
for the business.
Yesterday, Wellcome Trust announced the results of its search. While some of
the winners would have been obvious candidates to any casual observer of the
industry, the list contained several surprises.
It was, according to Mr Roger Gibbs, chairman of the Trust, a fascinating
exercise.
To assist in the task, Wellcome appointed R Watsons, a firm of consulting
actuaries which frequently advise pension funds and investment bank J Henry
Schroder Wagg. The initial exercise cut the list to 55 potentials, who,
after further investigation, were pared down to 20.
The 20 managers were invited to a 'beauty parade' at the end of September
and early October.
'All 20 had something to offer,' Mr Gibbs said. 'It was an extremely
difficult decision.' Of the 20, 15 were extremely strong candidates, he
added.
The selection criteria specified the most recent five year investment
performance and performances stretching back as far as could be determined.
Furthermore, Mr Gibbs said, Wellcome was looking for quality of management
with a view to security.
Mr Gibbs declined to be drawn on which firms made presentations at the final
beauty parade. But the shortlist did include the four managers which had
originally been appointed in 1986: Fleming Investment Management Ltd,
Henderson Pension fund Management Ltd, Morgan Grenfell Asset Management and
James Capel, the stockbroker. Fleming's corporate finance team had also lead
managed the sale of the Wellcome shares.
When the eight winners were chosen however, two of Wellcome's current fund
managers, James Capel and Morgan Grenfell Asset Management were conspicuous
by their absence.
Also absent was the UK largest and most formidable pension fund manager,
Mercury Asset Management, which is believed to have been 'disappointed' at
its failure to be selected.
As a charity, the Trust had not only to choose those advisers it considered
best, but had to be seen to be doing so as well.
As a consequence, the winners will have survived one of the most rigorous
selection processes in recent memory.
The size and prestige of the business, and the Trust's charitable status,
also appear to have enabled the Trustees to negotiate remarkably slim
management charges. Thus, the financial gains may be a lot slimmer than
usual.
Wellcome is believed to be paying at or just below the bottom of the scale
for pension funds under management at 0.15 per cent of funds under
management.
Pensions consultants said that Wellcome's list of chosen managers in many
ways reflects a growing trend in the industry to shift money to 'specialist'
fund managers with a particular style focusing on a narrow market segment.
While the selection of Edinburgh-based Baillie Gifford is likely to raise
eyebrows, pension consultants said its reputation has been quietly growing
for some time. Acquiring a reputation as a retail fund manager, Baillie
Gifford has recently won a number of pension fund accounts.
The firm has won kudos for its investment approach that, instead of
assigning fund managers to individual accounts, divides investments up
geographically.
Thus, several fund managers may be responsible for a single account and as
the firm shifts its view of various markets, funds will move about within
it.
Newton Investment Management Ltd, winner of a 'performance' mandate from
Wellcome, has made its reputation as an aggressive investor in equities.
'The key to Newton's success is that they back their convictions to the
hilt' said one pension fund consultant. As a result, the firm has stayed
with investments other fund managers might have abandoned and achieved
impressive returns.
Wellcome Trust's portfolio was swollen in the summer when it sold some of
its shares in Wellcome, the drugs company.
The sale added more than Pounds 2bn to its investment holdings which had
first been put out to fund managers in 1986 when the Trust floated the
company's shares. The Trust also retains a 40 per cent stake in the company,
valued at Pounds 3.5bn.
Apart from the eight fund managers chosen, the Trust also employs Morgan
Stanley to run an international fixed interest portfolio. Barclays de Zoete
Wedd Investment Management set up a Pounds 500m index fund when the sale
closed at the end of July.
 ------------------------------------
       THE WELLCOME TRUST
      Investment managers
 ------------------------------------
Ballie Gifford &amp; Co
Fleming Investment Management*
Gartmore Pension Fund Managers
Hambros Bank
Henderson Pension Fund Managers*
Newton Investment Management
Phillips &amp; Drew Fund Management
Schroder Investment Management
Morgan Stanley
  - Fixed Interest Portfolio**
Barclays de Zoete Wedd
Investment Mangement
  - UK Equity index fund**
 ------------------------------------
*Existing mangers reappointed
**Appointed earlier this year
 ------------------------------------
