FT  15 SEP 92 / The Liberal Democrats At Harrogate: Leadership defends
free-market strategy
THE STRONG commitment to market economics espoused by the Liberal Democrat
leadership faced sustained attack from activists yesterday as the party
began to set the basis of its policymaking over the next three or four
years.
After a succession of speakers questioned the ability of market mechanisms
to deliver social welfare and adequate employment levels, the party's policy
committee said it would reconsider whether it had moved too far in a
free-market direction.
Amid a mood on the floor of the conference that the party risked shifting
too far to the right, Mr Alan Beith, the party's economics spokesman,
insisted that it maintain its unequivocal refusal to support devaluation of
the pound as a route out of the recession.
Echoing the government's argument that a realignment of sterling within the
exchange rate mechanism would lead to higher rather than lower interest
rates, he dismissed as 'dangerous nonsense' the idea that devaluation would
resolve underlying economic problems.
Mr Beith coupled the commitment to the present ERM parity with a demand that
the government adopt a package of measures both to bolster confidence on
financial markets and to stimulate economic growth. He suggested that a move
to the narrow band of the ERM and independence for the Bank of England be
coupled with a bold programme of spending on public infrastructure projects.
But during two fractious debates on the economy and on the party's broader
policy objectives, the party leadership faced a succession of calls for
policy to be directed towards economic growth and employment creation rather
than reassurance of the financial markets.
Mr Michael Smart, a delegate from London, caught the mood of the activists
with his comment that: 'The market is incapable of ending the growing evil
of mass unemployment, with all the human waste and misery it entails'.
The grassroots concern over a perceived shift to the right was reflected
also in an attempt by activists to throw out a paper that Mr Paddy Ashdown
had billed as the centrepiece of policymaking in the approach to the next
election.
The attempt was defeated by only a handful of votes and Lord Holme,
vice-president of the policy committee that had drawn up the consultation
document, conceded that the leadership would have to look again at the
balance the document struck between the role of free markets and the state.
Entitled Challenge, Opportunity and Responsibility, the document seeks to
reposition the party's policymaking on the themes of opportunity and
responsible individualism. It underlines a commitment to the market as 'the
best basis for providing opportunity and prosperity' alongside a drive to
create a high-skill economy through better education and training. It also
calls for environmental policy to be 'integrated' into the market through
taxation and environmental 'pricing'.
The emphasis on individual opportunity is designed to fill what the party
sees as a gap between Labour's domination by vested interests and the
'selfishness' promoted by the Conservatives.
Joe Rogaly, Page 18
