FT  02 JUL 92 / International Company News: Healthy market for
pharmaceuticals - The growing accessibility of Japan's drugs sector
AFTER years of sitting in the back seat, the world's leading pharmaceutical
companies operating in Japan have started to gain presence in what used to
be one of the most introverted sectors in the country.
Until recently, Japanese drug companies had the market virtually to
themselves, with imports accounting for less than 10 per cent of total
sales. However, recent falls in asset values, along with industry
restructuring, have created chances for international drug companies to
expand their Japanese operations.
The country's drugs market, the second-largest in the world after the US
with annual sales of Y6,000bn (Dollars 47bn), holds substantial potential
for further growth as the population ages rapidly and Japanese consumers
become increasingly health-conscious.
Mr Thomas Hofstaetter, executive managing director at Hoechst Japan, says:
'For a pharmaceutical company to be truly global, it must maintain presence
in US, Europe and Japan.' However, until recently, most foreign companies,
lacking distribution networks, were forced to rely on tie-ups with Japanese
companies.
Although acquisitions by leading foreign companies date back as far as 1983,
when Merck of the US purchased 55 per cent of Banyu Pharmaceutical, a
medium-sized listed company, such cases were rare. The recent fall in the
stock and real estate markets have triggered activity among foreign drugs
companies.
Earlier this year, Pfizer, the US drugs and chemicals group, announced plans
to buy Koshin Medical, a privately-owned medical equipment distributor, for
an estimated Y3bn. Last year, Monsanto of the US acquired 12 per cent of
Hokuriku Pharmaceuticals for Y14.5bn, and Roussel Medica merged with
Morishita Pharmaceuticals.
Other leading European drug groups have also shown interest in purchasing
Japanese companies. Bankers point out that some smaller Japanese drug makers
and wholesalers are welcoming foreign drug companies which have comparative
advantages over their Japanese counterparts.
The price cuts by the Ministry of Health and Welfare, implemented every two
years from 1981 and averaging from 10 to 15 per cent, have squeezed profits
at drug manufacturers. The small and medium-sized companies, which lack new
innovative drugs, face increasing difficulties.
Japanese drug wholesalers have also been forced to change their business
strategies because of to the price cuts. In the past, the manufacturer and
wholesaler had special keiretsu - corporate grouping - type relationships.
However, the price cuts are continually depressing profit margins, and
wholesalers now need to distribute a wide range of products, rather than
those of just one manufacturer.
Last April, Japan's Fair Trade Commission banned manufacturers and
distributors from manipulating drug prices, and that has also broken their
cozy relationship. Mr Kenji Wakamatsu, at Sandoz Pharmaceuticals, says:
'Since wholesalers have more freedom it's much easier for foreign companies
to establish ties.'
Foreign companies that entered the Japanese market early have started to set
up their own sales and marketing operations. Sandoz, which entered the
market in the 1960s through a distribution tie-up with Sankyo, the
second-largest Japanese drugs maker, set up its own distribution network in
1990. Bayer also ended its sales tie-up with Takeda, the industry leader, in
1990.
Mr Hofstaetter at Hoechst says the key to success is to have a number of
strong products.
Bayer's Adalaat, a calcium antagonist, posted sales of over Y50bn last year,
becoming the second best-selling drug in Japan. Nippon Roche's Furtulon, an
anti-cancer agent, is also seeing brisk sales. Mr John Wilson,
pharmaceutical analyst at James Capel in Tokyo, says: 'Japan is a profitable
market for foreign companies, since they already have effective drugs and do
not need to spend a fortune on research and development.'
Many foreign companies are in final stages of setting up full operations
with production, sales, and research and development. Bayer is investing
Y20bn in its new research centre, while Sandoz expanded its production plant
north of Tokyo and expects its new Y15bn research laboratory to be completed
next year.
In contrast to foreign car and electronics makers, foreign drug companies,
which hold about 20 per cent of the market, say they are treated equally
with the Japanese.
One problem which remains is clinical testing for new drugs, where foreign
companies must present data from clinical trials in Japan. However, the
Ministry of Health and Welfare is loosening its grip as more Japanese
companies venture abroad, and with some drugs, overseas data from
pre-clinical tests are accepted.
 ---------------------------------------------------
TOP TEN FOREIGN DRUG COMPANIES IN JAPAN
 ---------------------------------------------------
                     1991 sales     %  change
                        (Ybn)         on year
 ---------------------------------------------------
Banyu (Merck)           105.1          +4.8
Bayer                    91.2          +7.8
Hoechst Japan            77.1          +3.6
Sandoz                   75.4          -2.8
Scherling                59.3          +6.5
Pfizer                   57.5         +14.1
Ciba Geigy               50.5          +1.3
Glaxo                    43.2          +4.3
ICI                      39.0          +4.3
Roche                    37.0         +14.7
Figures are as of Dec 91, except Banyu (Mar 92) and
Glaxo (June 91).
 ---------------------------------------------------
Source: Nikkei Sangyo Shimbun; James Capel
 ---------------------------------------------------
