FT  22 APR 92 / Tory leadership seeks to play down Thatcher's attack
THE TORY leadership yesterday sought to play down the impact of a remarkable
series of comments by Mrs Margaret Thatcher in which she issued a blunt
warning to the government to control public spending.
Her remarks that Mr John Major was 'not his own man' and that there was no
philosophy of 'Majorism' attracted immediate controversy. But concern about
public expenditure is set to be the subject of continuing tension within the
party in the run up to what is expected to be a fiercely contested autumn
spending round.
The debate over Britain's Pounds 28bn public sector borrowing requirement
will be revived next month as Tory backbenchers have opportunities to
express unease over public finances in debates on the finance bill and the
economy as a whole.
In a characteristically forthright article in the American magazine
Newsweek, Mrs Thatcher wrote: 'There are many new, young Conservative
members of Parliament who are as orthodox on finance as I am. They know they
must start to get government borrowing down, and therefore constrain public
spending.'
With the election won, senior ministers are much less concerned about how
far Mrs Thatcher's words are seen as a criticism of Mr Major, while some
Tory backbenchers were angry at what they saw as unhelpful sniping by the
former prime minister.
Mr Douglas Hurd pointed out that the prime minister himself had said there
was no such thing as 'Majorism'. The foreign secretary said that Mr Major
was 'putting his own stamp on the future course of the government'.
Downing Street maintained a studied silence over Mrs Thatcher's remarks. Her
supporters said she stood by her comments and would continue to speak out
for the things she believed in.
In the article, Mrs Thatcher warned the government over public spending and
industry policy. She reiterated that the government's task was to have sound
finance with low public expenditure and borrowing.
Under the headline, Don't Undo My Work, Mrs Thatcher wrote: 'People are
asking, is John Major free to go his own way? He is - within the constraints
of the principles set out in the Conservative manifesto. Don't forget, I set
out our principles before we came into power so that people knew exactly
what we stood for.'
Her criticism of an interventionist stance and a belief that government
could successfully second-guess industry appeared to be directed against Mr
Michael Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary, whose leadership
challenge led to her downfall.
The backbench attack on Mrs Thatcher was led by Mr William Powell, Tory MP
for Corby and Mr Heseltine's parliamentary private secretary.
He said on the Radio 4 Today programme: 'Her whole analysis is quite
extraordinary. What won the election was Conservative policy. She seeks to
wrap Conservative policies in a cloak called Thatcherism. This whole article
reeks of the kind of triumphalism which people found so objectionable in Mrs
Thatcher.'
Don't Undo My Work, Page 8
Lex, Page 20
