FT  29 JUL 92 / UK Company News: A more compact product in a crowded market
/ A look at the future direction of Amstrad in the wake of a difficult week
THE SUCCESSION of disturbing news last week from Amstrad, the UK computer
and electronics group, left the distinct impression of a company in turmoil.
On Wednesday, Mr Ken Ashcroft, Amstrad's corporate finance director,
resigned from the group's board to join Betacom, a telephone equipment
distributor 71 per cent owned by Amstrad.
That news was followed by a profits warning on Thursday and the sudden
resignation of Mr Peter Thoms, group finance director, the next day.
Amstrad's share price has duly fallen to 26p against cash balances which
equate to 20p a share. 'It really puts a derisory value on the business,'
says Mr Evan Miller at Shearson Lehman Hutton Securities.
The sudden departure of two finance directors within days would have been
alarming news from any company at any time. But coming from a company that
faces the challenges Amstrad does it could not have failed to raise serious
questions about the future of the UK group.
There is no question yet about whether Amstrad has a future.
While the group now expects the loss for the year to June 30 to be Pounds
65m, or Pounds 25m more than previously estimated, and the outlook for its
markets in electronic products does not look particularly bright, Mr Alan
Sugar, its founder and chairman, has managed the balance sheet effectively,
and raised the group's cash from about Pounds 60m a year ago to Pounds 100m.
Amstrad has also managed to win markets with its lower-priced fax machines
and double decker video cassette recorders and has an established reputation
in the satellite dish market.
It has a number of new products lined up, based on the bright market ideas
that are its hallmark, such as a user friendly personal organiser/word
processor, a combined but compact telephone/fax machine and a consumer
videophone.
But the question that keeps cropping up, as Amstrad has found its revenue
bases eroded one by one by slow demand, tumbling prices and intensified
competition from larger concerns, is where the group is going from here.
One suggestion is that Amstrad is shrinking to a size more appropriate to
the role it can play in the industry.
The recent resignations seen against the fall in the company's sales base
from a peak of about Pounds 625m three years ago to about Pounds 300m, has
prompted Mr Paul Norris at BZW to ask whether Mr Sugar is not already
'restructuring the infrastructure of the business to smaller proportions, to
a size similar to what it was when he was younger.'
It would not be surprising if that were the case.
Amstrad has grown by providing markets with consumer products based on
bright ideas at low prices.
That strategy is now under question as the sharp fall in prices in its main
market and the slump in others have hurt.
Doubt is mounting about whether a group that has grown by bringing
low-priced but quality products to fill a gap in the market has a place in
the rapidly-changing electronics world of today.
For example, it is increasingly difficult to see Amstrad succeeding in the
PC market, which contributed 54 per cent of turnover last year, on the basis
of low prices when prices are falling in the market virtually across the
board and market leaders such as IBM and Compaq have been affected enough to
launch their own lower-priced PCs.
'Trying to be a low-cost supplier in this market is suicidal,' says Mr
Miller. 'They are a gnat in the PC market compared to the elephants that are
the Japanese and US players which are becoming increasingly aggressive in
the European market. The nature of the competition is such that it is
difficult to be optimistic.'
Meanwhile, the bright product ideas that Amstrad has come up with to attract
consumer demand, are not considered innovative enough to produce the large
consumer hits that it desperately needs.
The Notepad, a new user-friendly portable PC that performs the functions of
a personal organiser, calculator and word processor may address an untapped
market of computer-illiterate consumers but it is a concept that has been
seen on the market before.
The videophone, which is another potential hit, given that price will be a
decisive factor for the home market, is dogged by the lack of an
international standard for the kind of videophones based on analogue
technology that Amstrad is launching.
Amstrad could soon find itself in the middle of a standards war, or worse
yet, on the losing side.
Another pitfall in its bright ideas strategy is perhaps the fact that any
feature added to a product soon becomes taken for granted by consumers and
loses its added-value appeal.
But the greatest problem may be that Amstrad's markets are simply
overcrowded.
Even the telecoms market, which the group is targeting, is not likely to be
as smooth going as Amstrad would like.
Mr Sugar, who has bright visions for Amstrad's telecoms business, expects
telecommunications-related businesses to comprise as much as 30 to 40 per
cent of total sales in two to three years' time.
Amstrad is not, however, alone in identifying the telecoms market as a
growth business. 'If the PC market is crowded the telephone equipment market
is inundated,' says Mr Miller.
If Mr Sugar is indeed slimming down the business it may be that several
years from now Amstrad will be a smaller but profitable business.
But judging from the recent performance of Amstrad's share price few people
it seems are as yet willing to bet on that.
