FT  23 SEP 92 / International Company News: Rand Mines to split into four
units
RAND MINES, which in the past year has been transformed from a diversified
mining group into a coal mining business with some marginal gold mines and
exploration interests, is putting its operations into four independent
business units: coal; property; gold and exploration; and platinum.
The South African company last year consolidated its successful coal mining
interests in Witbank Colliery and renamed it Randcoal. This company and Rand
Mines Properties are already listed in Johannesburg. It has now applied to
list the other two units, Goldco and Platco, on the Johannesburg stock
exchange.
Analysts suggested the impetus for change came from Barlow Rand, Rand Mines'
controlling shareholder, which lost patience with its subsidiary's
unsuccessful diversification away from its core coal business.
In the past year Rand Mines has sold its:
platinum interests to Impala Platinum;
vanadium operations to Vanadium Technologies;
chrome business to Samancor;
forestry operations to Sappi, and;
granite mineral rights to Genmin.
Analysts suggest there is not much left in the gold and platinum operations.
Rand Mines retained a shareholding in Barplats, its platinum company, but
had to take on millions of rands in debt in the process.
The company manages four struggling and marginal gold mines -
Blyvooruitzicht, Durban Deep, East Rand Proprietary Mines and Harmony - but
has reduced its shareholding in each below 10 per cent.
Mr Derek Cooper, managing director of Barlow Rand, said the restructuring
would enable the different businesses to be evaluated on their merits
without the confusion of cross-subsidisation. Secondly, respective
managements could now clearly focus on their businesses without the
distraction of other, in some case, unrelated activities.
'Thirdly, it allows investors, including Barlows, to take a view on each
business and scale their investment accordingly,' he said.
Mr Cooper stressed, however, 'this is not the precursor of an unbundling of
Barlow Rand'.
Barlow Rand has set up a new division, Barlow Rand Mineral Resources, which
will contain the restructured mining interests and Pretoria Portland Cement.
The restructuring had been well signalled, and Rand Mines' share price ended
unchanged at Pounds 6 yesterday.
