FT  24 MAR 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (8): An upper-crust account
COUTTS &amp; CO. 1692-1992: THE PORTRAIT OF A PRIVATE BANK by Edna Healey Hodder
&amp; Stoughton Pounds 25, 488 pages
COUTTS &amp; Co has always enjoyed understatement. An account-holding friend
once entered the Strand bank to withdraw funds, offering no identification
but a name tag in his underpants. The response? 'That won't be necessary,
sir.'
There is sparse understatement in Edna Healey's sprawling portrait of
Coutts; little is omitted in the 300-years history of this private bank. It
is a thorough, hefty book ripe for tasting rather than digestion.
Since its foundation in 1692 by the Scottish goldsmith John Campbell, Coutts
has been a civilised and discreet institution, polite yet apart. Healey
rightly sets Coutts's history in a political and economic context. Her
complicity with the Bank's long view can at times make the narrative
clogged. But the long view is the right perspective from which to see, for
example, the 1577 Usury Law (initially limiting lenders to 10 per cent
interest, although further changes reduced the rate) which remained in force
until 1857.
Moreover, Healey everywhere makes plain that Coutts is a long-term survivor.
From the madness of the South Sea Bubble (1719-20) and the great South
American investment crisis in 1820s England, it endured the speculation
mania of the 1840s, typifying the Victorian perception that the aristocracy
of wealth now nicely balanced that of descent.
Then in 1892, in the wake of the Baring crisis over the Buenos Aires Water
Supply and Drainage Co, Coutts became a joint stock bank with unlimited
liability; as Walter Bagehot said: 'A bank lives on credit. Till it is
trusted it is nothing; and when it ceases to be trusted it returns to
nothing.' Its affiliation with the National Provincial Bank since 1920 and
with National Westminster since 1969 provided stability without quashing
independence. Now Coutts sees itself as a worldwide but select private bank.
Healey everywhere stresses the resilience of Coutts as an institution; she
values the dynasties within the partnerships, such as that of Edmund
Antrobus, Edward Marjoriebanks and their respective juniors who spanned 1777
to 1870, those 'quiet men of business' whom Walter Bagehot so esteemed.
Confidence and continuity were paramount. When Coutts became a joint stock
bank of unlimited liability, a brief explanation was sent to Queen
Victoria's private secretary: 'We trust that this explanation may enable you
to convey such information as you may think proper with our humble duty to
Her Majesty whose Gracious patronage of our House has ever been our most
cherished privilege.'
That royal connection has undoubtedly carved out a public image for Coutts.
Perhaps there are other markets to conquer: the wife of the present chairman
of Coutts &amp; Co Group has in her car a window-sticker which reads 'Carpenter
of Nazareth requires joiners'; does this mean that the bankers to royalty
will soon become bankers to deity?
