FT  03 JUL 92 / Survey of Corporate Finance (5): Frightening moral tale -
Profile / Brent Walker
THE story of Brent Walker's financial rescue is a frightening moral tale. At
the end of March the leisure and property group finally completed a Pounds
1.65bn refinancing package with its multitude of banks, the largest such
deal ever seen in the UK market.
The refinancing involved a Pounds 250m debt-for-equity swap, giving Brent
Walker's banks over 50 per cent of its shares and an agreement by the banks
to roll up or take in preference shares much of their interest payments. The
aim is that by the end of 1997 there should be sufficient value in Brent
Walker's businesses to put its balance sheet back on to a more normal
footing.
There are many lessons to be learnt from the case and other companies
entering the refinancing process would do well to follow them.
The first lesson, though, is too late for many of them. Brent Walker and its
banks should never have got into the mess that they did. It is hard to
apportion blame between a company which over-expanded in what now seems a
foolhardy way and the banks that were only too willing to finance the
headlong rush.
Under Mr George Walker, its former chairman and chief executive, Brent
Walker had wheeled and dealed its way to a Pounds 1.3bn debt mountain
borrowed from a total of 60 different banks. There were a multiplicity of
lenders for acquisitions such as the Pounds 685m purchase in late 1989 of
William Hill, the betting office chain.
In many ways this reflected the break-down of old-fashioned relationship
banking in the 1980s as the competition between banks to lend became
frenetic. It meant that banks were lending millions of pounds without seeing
the total picture - not knowing what Brent Walker had borrowed from other
banks.
Nor did they make sufficient effort to find out about the economics of the
businesses they were lending on. Bankers were taken on a grand tour of the
group's property developments, numbers were flung at them and they
apparently made little attempt to work out the projections - for example, on
likely sales of apartments at the holiday complexes.
Mr Richard Heley, head of corporate finance at Hill Samuel, the merchant
bank which advised Brent Walker through the refinancing, suggests that banks
should always take security for such loans. The security itself may not
prove much comfort when property values fall, but obtaining it would force
the banks to check titles to properties and planning consents, get
independent valuations done and so on.
The second lesson is to avoid relying on uncommitted loans. When it came to
the crunch, Brent Walker suddenly found that money which it thought was
available was not. That threw the group on the mercy of the money markets
where it scooped up loans, bringing a number of banks into its circle of
lenders late in the day.
Another piece of advice comes from Mr Nick Lyle, the partner of accountants
Touche Ross, who headed the team which prepared a report on Brent Walker's
business for the banks. He says that many businesses fail because, when
trouble strikes, they do not go to their banks early enough.
Brent Walker's problems had been mounting throughout 1990, but it attempted
to paper over the cracks, by announcing a Pounds 100m convertible bond issue
in September of that year and in the same month publishing interim results
which are now the subject of a serious fraud office enquiry.
It was not until Hill Samuel, which was only appointed in September 1990,
started working on the document for the bond issue that it became apparent
how severe the group's problems were.
Then it was a matter of getting a standstill agreement with its banks as
quickly as possible. A standstill is the first step in a refinancing and
essentially stops everything while a more detailed plan can be drawn up.
The standstill was tied up in a matter of weeks. But a couple of serious
mistakes were made in formulating it. First, although it called for a
strengthening of the board. the agreement did not demand that Mr Walker
leave the group, The consensus now is that an entrepreneur who has built up
a business is more likely to hinder than help a rescue.
A second error was to grossly underestimate the time required to do the more
detailed refinancing. The standstill was signed in November 1990 and
stipulated a final solution to be agreed within three months. In the event
it was to take 16 months. In the meantime, interest outstanding accumulated
adding to the debt and the group needed fresh financing to continue capital
spending.
The main difficulty in the Brent Walker refinancing was getting agreement
between a disparate group of bankers with different interests and exposures.
None were willing to give anything up for a general settlement.
Mr Heley acknowledges that it would be easy to be depressed by the
experience. He says the basic principles of the refinancing were thrashed
out in four-to-six weeks, but the banks' minor tinkering with the outline
agreement took as many months.
The only reason the refinancing could succeed was that underneath all the
debt Brent Walker had two businesses which were capable of holding out hopes
of the group trading its way out of its financial difficulties. The pub
business in particular was vital. While the discussions with the banks
continued the group was working to build a chain of pubs leased from the
large brewers, which would form a cash generating subsidiary.
The whole exercise has cost the group Pounds 53.8m in fees - nearly three
times its residual market capitalisation. It has also left a company with a
pro-forma, post-restructuring, balance sheet carrying debt of Pounds 1.5bn
and negative net worth of Pounds 177.1m.
