FT  12 NOV 92 / Book Review: Castro's ticking clock
CASTRO'S FINAL HOUR By Andres Oppenheimer
Simon &amp; Schuster, Dollars 25, 462 pages
CUBA AFTER COMMUNISM By Eliana Cardoso and Ann Helwege
The MIT Press, Dollars 24.95 in Europe (Dollars 17.95 in US), 148 pages
Fidel Castro, leader of the Cuban revolution and head of one of the few
remaining hard-line communist states, is now courting foreign capitalists in
an attempt to sustain the island's economy and his grip on power.
Since the fall of his Soviet benefactors, which removed a vital source of
aid and trade, Castro's regime has struggled to find the hard currency it
needs to import food and the luxury goods required by its tourist industry.
Though it has had some success in attracting investment through joint
ventures in tourism, other initiatives have been less successful. A lack of
clear rules about property rights is one important reason.
Castro seems to think he can create islands of capitalism in a socialist
state. But seeking to encourage profit-seeking companies from abroad while
repressing local entrepreneurs is contradictory and unlikely to work, as
these two books make clear.
'Attracting capital to modernise and expand Cuba's productive capacity
requires privatisation. Joint ventures alone will not do the job. Cuba needs
more than big hotels; it needs everything from hot-dog stands to fax machine
outlets,' say Cardoso and Helwege, two US academics.
Castro's willingness to get close to foreign capitalists shows his pragmatic
nature. Expelling foreign investors was, after all, one of the tenets of his
revolution. However, he has opposed the measure that would do most to
increase Cuba's own food output: allowing smallholders to sell surplus food
at market prices.
Castro tried this in the early 1980s, but banned it again in 1986. Perhaps
the main reason for his change of heart was a fear that further development
of the market would have proved impossible for him to control.
In this respect - the preservation of control - Castro's political acumen
should not be underestimated. According to Oppenheimer, a Pulitzer
Prize-winning journalist on the Miami Herald, Castro understood long before
most of his subordinates the threat posed by Gorbachev's reforms for the
Soviet Union and, by extension, for Cuba.
Castro has also been skilful in his dealings with the opposition. By
allowing opponents to leave the country, he has deprived the growing numbers
of disaffected Cubans of a focus. The vociferous right-wing exiles may think
of themselves as the country's next leaders, but they have little support
inside Cuba. For one thing, as Oppenheimer points out, Cuba is
overwhelmingly black and the exiles overwhelmingly white.
Greater equality between races was one of the achievements of Castro's
revolution. The others - good healthcare and education and reasonably fair
distribution of income - have set it apart from the rest of Latin America.
But much of this was made possible by big subsidies from the Soviet Union
and now the subsidies have gone.
Castro's Final Hour does a fine job of reporting recent developments in
Cuba, some little known until now. Oppenheimer has pieced together, for
example, the politicking behind the Fourth Communist Party Congress in 1991.
Reform-minded party members in Cuba had hoped that this would start the
process of change; instead Castro blocked reform. Since then, the Cuban
regime has become more repressive.
Cuba After Communism looks forward to what Castro could do to avoid a
violent end to his revolution and what action the world should take to
ensure a peaceful transformation in Cuba.
Both books forcefully outline Castro's dilemma. He could embrace reform
wholeheartedly, and risk losing control of the country but perhaps preserve
some social benefits of the revolution. Or he could take the course he seems
to have decided upon: make minor adjustments but allow no big change to the
economic structure. Both books agree this will not be enough; in all
probability, it will bring the economy closer to collapse and the revolution
to a violent denouement.
Oppenheimer's book convincingly argues that Castro's Cuba cannot survive in
its current form. However, despite its somewhat hyperbolic title, it fails
to make the case that the end is necessarily imminent.
Castro's character suggests that, anachronistic as his regime may now seem,
he is unlikely to give up. He has been in even more desperate straits. His
tiny band of 82 men was routed soon after landing in Cuba in 1956. But the
men regrouped and gradually expanded their influence. Nor are there obvious
leaders to organise a rebellion - since Castro has neutralised them - or
mechanisms through which popular discontent could be expressed.
Those who want to see Castro ousted must therefore await a spontaneous
revolt, the unlikely prospect of foreign military intervention or his death.
Castro is only 67 years old; the final hour could yet be a long one.
