FT  21 OCT 92 / Survey of European Business Locations (6): Geographically
handicapped - Ireland
LOCATED on the north-west edge of Europe, the island of Ireland suffers a
geographic disadvantage not shared by most other EC regions. To move
products to the main population centres of Europe requires one, and often
two, sea crossings. Bad weather can disrupt sailing schedules of the ferry
services, and for companies working on 'just-in-time' inventory control,
this can signify unexpected and possibly unacceptable delays in delivery
times.
Nonetheless, this has not prevented more than 1,000 foreign companies
establishing manufacturing bases to service the EC market in the Irish
Republic and scores more in Northern Ireland over the past 20 years. Leading
industrial names in diverse manufacturing sectors such as Coca-Cola, Apple
Computers, Motorola, Intel Corporation, Fruit-of-the-Loom, and Microsoft,
have all chosen to establish continental-scale production facilities in
Ireland.
The shopping list of grants and incentives on offer are those that can be
expected in most regions throughout Europe seeking to attract mobile inward
investment. Capital grants, training, R &amp; D and marketing grants, advance
factory facilities, and tax incentives are available in both parts of the
island, although these vary considerably from project to project. A standard
corporation tax rate of 10 per cent for manufacturing until the year 2010,
is an attraction for many companies to the Republic, as is the government's
commitment to a stable exchange rate policy and the country's earliest
possible inclusion in a single currency area within the EC.
Improvements in telecommunications on both sides of the border have
facilitated the development of service industries especially in
'back-office' data processing in the public and private sectors. Northern
Ireland now claims to have one of the most advanced fibre-optic
telecommunications networks anywhere in Europe, with all trunk routes
converted to the new technology. Practically any location in the province
can have special fibre-optic cable laid to the office or factory door at
reasonable cost, signifying that all present and planned technologies,
including High Definition TV (HDTV), Integrated Services Data Networks
(ISDN) and ultra-high speed data communications will be available through
the network.
Similar developments are taking place in the Republic, although the
fibre-optic network is not yet widespread.
On both sides of the border, schools and universities give a high priority
to training in information technology, resulting in well-trained workforces
with high levels of computer literacy. High-technology and high value-added
industries such as electronics and software development have thus been
attracted to Ireland, as have the 'back-office' service industries looking
for lower-cost locations and lower staff turnovers.
Many employers have found that staff loyalty is much greater in Ireland than
in large urban centres such as London or New York, and that emigration in
search of higher salaries is often not the preferred option for most
employees.
Indeed, the quality of life is widely considered to be an important location
factor for many companies conscious of staff morale. The clean environment
and easy access to the countryside and coastline, offers recreational
opportunities that are not easily matched in other parts of Europe.
The transport infrastructure still shows deficiencies in the Republic in
spite of large infusions of cash from Brussels over the past decade.
Transport planning has the appearance of being piecemeal and overly
influenced by powerful lobby groups at local and national level, leading to
the construction of little-used dual carriageways in locations such as
Shannon on the west coast, while main trunk routes still wind their way
through the high streets of market towns just a few miles outside the
capital.
A motorway ring route around Dublin is unlikely to be completed before the
end of the decade, while planners still appear unable to decide whether to
go ahead with building a light-rail transport system for the capital, in
spite of predictions of an exponential worsening of traffic congestion in
Dublin in the immediate years ahead.
Northern Ireland, in contrast, has a well-developed road and rail network,
and port facilities which are envied in the Republic to the extent that many
road hauliers in the south prefer to use Belfast and Larne rather than
Dublin, as their sea route to the UK mainland.
Northern Ireland, however, continues to suffer from its 'image problem', as
a result of the political violence which this year claimed its 3,000th
victim since 1969. Although only very few people and firms are directly
affected by the violence, the Industrial Development Board (IDB) recognises
it is an uphill task to convince foreign companies to risk their employees
or investments in the province.
Industrial policy is undergoing a thorough reappraisal on both sides of the
border. Economic efficiency is being increasingly stressed in the use of
grant-aid for industrial developments as opposed to simple job-creation
criteria.
The IDB in Northern Ireland spends some Pounds 80-Pounds 100m a year in
financial assistance to industry, but this year 'the rise in unemployment in
July alone exceeded the combined annual job promotions of the IDB and the
Ledu (a small-enterprise promotion body) in 1991-92', according to the
autumn economic review of the Northern Ireland Economic Council (Niec). The
Niec says that the 46 per cent fall in job promotions over the past year, is
largely due to the IDB's new efficiency criteria but notes that the
'implementation of the new strategy was causing a significant degree of
confusion both in local industry and within the development agencies
themselves as to how the 'backing winners' approach was being implemented'.
In the Republic, where IPounds 130m is spent per year in industrial
promotion, the government announced last month that in future it is to give
greater emphasis to the promotion of Irish indigenous industry. This follows
criticisms made in an industrial policy review published earlier this year,
that Ireland has become over-dependent on overseas-owned industrial
enterprises in developing its industrial base. 'The balance needs to be
redressed to achieve greater output and employment growth in the indigenous
sector. Existing policies and promotional arrangements have not succeeded in
doing this,' said Mr Des O'Malley, the industry and commerce minister.
This does not mean that new inward investment will not still be welcomed in
Ireland, but it will have to compete more closely with Irish industry for
grants and may be subject to tighter performance targets.
