FT  08 DEC 92 / Survey of Derivatives (10): Currency upheaval wins converts
 -The corporate users, the variety of applications is widening
MANY COMPANIES have now been using derivative products of various sorts for
more than a decade. They have advanced further down this route than
investment managers, but there is still considerable scope for growth.
Most large companies - such as BP, which runs its large treasury operation
as a separate bank - are already sophisticated users of derivatives. But
smaller companies are also venturing into the market.
Meanwhile, the variety of applications is widening, with a number of
companies now hedging their exposure to commodity prices, as well as the
interest rate and foreign exchange movements. However, many companies remain
rather cautious about using so-called 'exotic' options, which involve
complex variations to shift exposure.
In a recent survey, in the financial monthly Institutional Investor, more
than a third of US companies questioned said they use derivatives to hedge
overseas investments.
More than 82 per cent had been using derivatives for more than two years,
including 12 per cent for more than 10 years. Interest rate swaps are the
most popular instruments (79 per cent use them), while 40 per cent use
foreign exchange options and 64 per cent use foreign exchange forwards.
The turmoil in Europe's foreign currency markets this autumn has created
more converts. Treasurers can no longer feel comfortable with large
exposures to foreign currencies, even within supposedly fixed-exchange rate
systems.
Companies are 'suddenly much more aware of the risks. The dealings and
profits which a company has at any moment can be wiped out in hours, let
alone days,' according to Mr Les Halpin, a director of Record Treasury
Management.
A survey by the management consultants Touche Ross showed that 85 per cent
of companies had selective hedging cover last year. Interest has grown even
more sharply in recent months. 'We advise 25 of the FT-SE 100 companies, and
quite a large number have increased their hedging activity since Black
Wednesday,' said Mr Derek Ross, a Touche Ross partner.
Currency risk management is no longer relevant only to exporters and
importers, because many companies now have overseas operations.
Derivative products allow companies to fix costs and income flows in
advance, which is particularly valuable for companies under pressures as a
result of economic recession.
But companies are also aware of the risks inherent in the use of these
complex financial instruments.
The loss of Pounds 150m in foreign exchange dealings last year by the
treasury department of Allied-Lyons, the UK food and drinks group, clearly
illustrated the potential dangers, if corporate treasury operations are not
carefully controlled. The problem stemmed from the practice of writing
currency options, which can lead to unlimited losses. Usually, only banks,
which manage their risks on a continuous basis, take on that sort of
exposure.
But paradoxically, the recent turmoil in the foreign exchange market could
encourage some companies to take greater risks. Those companies which hedged
foreign currency exposure by buying options before the start of the
onslaught in the summer were able to buy options cheaply. That is because
the largely successful operation of the exchange rate mechanism, until that
point, had reduced volatility in the foreign exchange market. Since
volatility - historic and implied - is a key component in the pricing of
options, companies who bought options earlier this year, and were then
protected during the subsequent upsurge in volatility, got excellent value
for money.
However, the extremely volatile market conditions which have persisted
during the autumn have pushed option prices through the roof. In addition to
the greater volatility, prices have been edged higher by some banks which
had suffered losses by selling options cheaply in the past.
Now, the expense of buying options is proving prohibitive for some
companies. Treasury operations which are operated as profit centres rather
than cost centres are particularly loath to pay up.
Instead, many more are opting for 'dynamic' hedging, which involves managing
risk on a continuous basis, by using the forward and spot foreign exchange
markets.
Treasurers have also been finding their interest rate exposure more
difficult to manage, due to difficult market conditions. Swap market rates
have generally been unattractive, making it harder than ever for companies
to borrow cheaply.
During the 1980s, companies were able to borrow at levels well below the
London interbank offered rate (Libor), by swapping the fixed-rate money they
raised through bond offerings into floating-rate financing. Now, only the
best-rated borrowers can hope to do this.
In the US, borrowers have been unwilling to lock themselves into medium-term
fixed-rate interest costs, given that short-term rates are extremely low,
and rates are expected to ease further. The result has been a lack of
companies or institutions willing to pay the fixed-rate leg of a swap
agreement, reducing opportunities to manage interest rate exposure through
the swaps market.
'Swaps and bonds have become much more closely correlated. Those who want
cheap funding are now having to take risks to get it,' said Mr Nick Burge,
executive director at Nomura International.
However, one benefit of the Allied Lyons debacle was that it prompted many
companies to strengthen the ties between the treasury operation and the rest
of the company, especially the main board. As more complex derivative
products are introduced, stringent controls become imperative.
The crux of the matter is that the job of the treasurer is to 'keep the
company's options open, so it can launch a new product or open a new
factory,' believes Mr Gerald Leahy, director-general of the Association of
Corporate Treasurers.
 ---------------------------------------------------
WHICH DERIVATIVES DO CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICERS USE?
                                              (%)
 ---------------------------------------------------
Foreign exchange forwards                    64.2
Interest rate swaps                          78.9
Forex exchange options                       40.4
Oil- and energy-linked swaps                 11.9
Other commodity-linked swaps                 14.7
Listed interest rate futures and options     29.4
Listed forex futures and options             11.0
Listed equity futures and options            10.1
OTC interest rate futures and options        13.8
Equity-linked swaps                           4.6
OTC equity swaps                              2.8
'Exotic' options, or options with limits      8.3
Others                                        5.5
 ---------------------------------------------------
Source: Institutional Investor
 ---------------------------------------------------
