FT  09 OCT 92 / International Company News: Discount brokers take a beating
in US - Patrick Harverson on how the decline in investor activity has
affected margins
THE perils of discount broking were brought painfully home to US investors
last month when the share price of Charles Schwab, the country's biggest
discount broker, plunged more than 20 per cent.
The plunge followed a warning that the company's third-quarter profits would
be much lower than expected because of a sharp drop in customer trading
activity.
Although the warning surprised investors, it should not have come as a shock
to anyone who understands discount broking - a business more closely tied to
market cycles than almost any other.
In the past decade, the San Francisco-based Schwab has become the biggest
discount broker in the US by allowing individual investors to buy and sell
shares cheaply and quickly, and by providing them with information and
research they can use to make investment decisions. Unlike other
'full-service' brokers, such as Merrill Lynch and Shearson Lehman, Schwab
does not advise its customers where to invest.
When the market is booming, and investors are trading in and out of stocks
constantly, discount broking is a very profitable business. But, when the
market slumps, as it has done recently, the revenues of a firm relying on
trading volume to generate the bulk of its income tumble.
This is what happened to Schwab in the third quarter, when daily
transactions by its customers averaged 18,000, well below the peak of 27,000
recorded in the first quarter and the 22,000 in the second quarter. Although
18,000 trades a day is still a good year for Schwab, the company's expenses
over the past year have risen 15 per cent because of heavy spending on
advertising, branch expansion and the introduction of new products and
services.
To make matters worse, Schwab's profits in the third quarter were also hit
by the recent introduction of low-margin products, such as no-fee individual
retirement accounts, which were designed to boost the firm's share of the
discount broking market.
The end result is that Schwab is expected to make a profit in the third
quarter of between 15 cents and 18 cents a share, against the 34 cents a
share it earned a year ago.
When market cycles move against full-service brokers, they can turn to
fee-based revenues from corporate finance and asset management to make up
the shortfall.
Schwab, however, does little trading for its own account, and its asset
management business is still small, albeit growing. At the moment,
commission fees account for a remarkable 80 per cent of its non-interest
revenues.
Schwab has learned to live with the market swings, says Mr David Pottruck,
the company's president: 'We will always have volatile revenues because we
work in a volatile business.' It is a point forcefully echoed by Mr John
Keefe, an independent securities industry analyst in New York: 'They're a
brokerage firm, and its tough to get away from that.'
Instead of worrying about customer activity, Schwab concentrates on
increasing the amount of dollars in its custody. 'Our growth is a function
of how many customers we have . . . The more money that's here, the more
money that trades,' says Mr Pottruck.
In the past few years, the amount of money at Schwab has grown dramatically.
As of June, Dollars 54.3bn was held in 1.8m customer accounts - thanks
primarily to heavy advertising and some astute marketing. The firm recently
opened an office in San Francisco staffed by Chinese-speakers to serve the
city's Asian community, and one in Miami with Spanish-speakers to build
business among the Hispanic community.
Schwab also relies heavily on technology to reduce the costs of handling its
dollars. Mr Pottruck says: 'Years ago, all of our trading was done by people
sitting in branches. Today, 50 per cent of our phone calls go to
TeleBroker,' a service that allows customers to buy and sell stocks on their
touch-tone telephone.
Although Schwab is building up its asset management business to protect
itself against market-related earnings volatility, the company is treading
cautiously. 'We're not looking to become money managers,' says Mr Pottruck.
What Schwab is doing, however, is linking up with the money managers through
its Financial Advisors Service. Launched in 1987, FAS provides investors
with lists of independent investment advisers who work solely for fee. In
return, the advisers route transactions and account servicing to Schwab,
which earns commissions on the business. Today, almost 3,000 advisers and
money managers use the programme, and assets held by Schwab for its 100,000
FAS clients total more than Dollars 10bn.
Although it is dwarfed in size by the full-service giants, Schwab is easily
the biggest discount broker, with a 46 per cent share of the market. It is a
market that is expanding. In 1985, discounters earned 6 per cent of all
broking commissions in the US, but today they earn 11 per cent.
The full-service brokers claim not to be overly concerned about this loss of
business. Some even argue that discount brokers are sowing the seeds of
their own decline by remaining reliant on revenues tied to investor
activity.
One leading executive at a full-service securities house says: 'Schwab are
in a commodity business that has no value-added component to it and that is
very cyclical in terms of order-flows. Schwab are getting themselves into a
problem position.
'They're neither fish nor fowl - there are lots of discounters around where
you can do trade for a lot cheaper than they can, so they don't offer the
lowest price and they don't offer the most service. It creates a
what-do-you-want-to-be-when-you-grow-up syndrome?'
While it is true that other discount brokers, such as Fidelity, Olde, and
Quick &amp; Reilly, charge lower transaction fees, Schwab has built up a good
reputation among individual investors for high quality execution and account
service.
It believes strongly that demographic trends are going its way.
Mr Pottruck maintains that the baby-boom generation, which each year takes
up a larger proportion of the investing population, is becoming increasingly
wary of the traditional client-broker relationship, and of the potential
conflicts between the retail broking and institutional interests within the
big full-service firms.
