FT  25 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Making management options crystal clear -
Tim Coone on the latest phase of Waterford's rationalisation proposals
THE TOWN of Waterford in southern Ireland, was first known for its port
rather than its famous crystalware factory which, just a few years ago,
employed a third of the town's workforce.
The main road through the town, even today, leaves an overriding visual
impression of maritime bustle and cargo ships harnessed by hawsers to the
high street.
For the coachloads of foreign tourists though, the magnet for their
attention is the factory of Waterford Crystal, the troubled division of
Waterford Wedgwood, the Irish luxury crystal and ceramics manufacturer.
Last week the crystal division announced its fifth rationalisation plan in
as many years. The plan involves 500 redundancies by January from the 1,900
workforce, across-the-board wage cuts, and a five-year industrial peace
agreement. The redundancy scheme becomes compulsory next year. Rejection of
the plan by the trade unions could mean the death-knell for Waterford, one
of Ireland's best known companies and exporters.
At the height of the tourist season, there can be more visitors to the
factory in one day than there are people working in it. Now looking more
like a live exhibition in a museum, the glassblowers and cutters perform
their tasks impassively in front of silver-haired couples from the US,
excitable groups of gesticulating Italian teenagers, and wide-eyed Japanese
who ask their tour guides why men and not machines do these jobs.
Over in the office buildings Waterford's management team has been struggling
with the same question. Chronic cost problems have been developing for many
years but were masked in the late-1980s by the booming market for luxury
goods. The group's results were also helped by contributions from Wedgwood,
the English fine china maker it acquired for IPounds 260m in 1986.
But from that high point, life for the company has been far harder.
To bolster the group's finances in 1990, Mr Tony O'Reilly, the Irish
businessman, and Morgan Stanley, the US investment bank, between them took a
29.9 per cent stake for IPounds 80m. And Waterford and Wedgwood were
separated into two virtually autonomous units.
Waterford Crystal has lost IPounds 66m in the past six years. Rising costs,
declining markets, and growing competition, exacerbated by the recession,
have gouged the company's balance sheet and forced a major reappraisal of
the company's future.
Some 1,000 of the workforce were laid off during 1987 and 1988, bringing
numbers down to 2,300. Then as further rationalisations and pay cuts were
planned in 1990, the employees revolted, ensuing in a bitter 14-week strike
which cost the company IPounds 10m. A voluntary redundancy scheme has seen a
further 400 go since then and short-time working was introduced in 1991.
A year ago the company introduced its new 'Marquis' range into the US market
and has had considerable success with it. Cut by machine in Germany and
Portugal, and made of lighter crystal than the traditional ranges made at
Waterford, it is marketed under the Waterford label but is cheaper and aimed
at the lower end of the market.
Losses have been trimmed substantially, falling to IPounds 1.2m last year.
But sales of the traditional lines have failed to pick up, necessitating
further restructuring.
Encouraged by its success with the 'Marquis' range, the company is now in
the process of introducing more stemware from Germany, partly
machine-manufactured, and which will substitute for some of the ranges
currently being produced at Waterford.
The redundancies and sourcing of stemware from outside Ireland has deeply
upset the trade union, although reaction on the shop floor is one of
resignation. 'We knew it was coming. It was just a matter of when,' said one
cutter who has worked 20 years for the company.
Fifteen to 20 years' service with the company is typical for most of the
glassblowers and cutters, all of whom have had to complete five-year
apprenticeships to gain their status as craftsmen. Most are middle-aged with
families and outstanding mortgages, and have few possibilities of finding
alternative employment.
Yet the onward march of technology and mass production techniques are making
their skills redundant. The replacement of ceramic cutting wheels with
diamond ones over the past two years for example has vastly increased
productivity. The present redundancy plan calls for a shedding of 180 of the
280 cutters' jobs.
The trade union, while recognising the problem, has not ruled out the
possibility of industrial action if the workforce decides to press for
better redundancy terms and job guarantees for the remaining 1,400
employees.
Mr Pat Fitzgerald, chairman of the factory's branch of the Amalgamated
Transport and General Workers' Union said: 'This is the fifth plan to save
the company. The trouble is we don't believe it is going to consolidate the
workforce at 1,400. The sourcing of stemware from Germany may end up in
further job losses. Come again in 18 months time, and we'll probably be down
to 900'. Mr Patrick Galvin, Waterford's chairman and chief executive, warned
last Friday that another strike would most likely finish the company.
Labour relations at Waterford Crystal have thus arrived at a showdown.
Acceptance of the new rationalisation plan by the workforce will give the
company a new lease of life, although it is becoming increasingly apparent
that lower-cost manufacture abroad will steadily displace production at
Waterford.
Market research has shown that most customers do not identify the brand name
with Ireland. Production could therefore be gradually moved to a country of
lower labour costs, such as parts of eastern Europe where there is already a
tradition of crystal manufacture, without affecting the brand image. This
would seem to be a logical and probable strategy, perhaps eventually only
retaining a much-reduced core of craftsmen to supply products for the most
up-market segments.
Sensing this to be the case, the union might prefer to opt for a radical
solution rather than a slow death of the factory by a thousand cuts. The
question then is could the company itself survive, shifting production of
its products to a foreign base in a much shorter period of time? Clearly
some tough negotiations lay ahead.
