FT  07 OCT 92 / Germany forms a united bourse: Frankfurt takes vital step in
efforts to become a world financial centre
THE FRANKFURT Stock Exchange, the largest in Germany, will today announce
that it has reached agreement with the country's seven other exchanges to
form Deutsche Borse - a single exchange for Germany.
The agreement, which has taken three years to put together, will be heralded
as a vital step in the campaign to turn Frankfurt into an international
financial centre to rival London, New York and Tokyo.
Other reforms to bolster the standing of Germany's stock market have been
delayed.
For legal and other reasons, reforms promoted by Mr Theo Waigel, the finance
minister, will not be completed until at least the end of next year, 12
months later than planned.
These include the introduction of an insider dealing law, the creation of a
supervisory body for the securities industry, new shareholding disclosure
rules and more sophisticated electronic share trading.
The announcement of agreement on a national German stock market comes 10
months after Mr Waigel urged its creation as part of an ambitious package of
measures designed to strengthen 'Finanzplatz Deutschland' - Germany as a
financial centre.
Protracted wrangling between Frankfurt and the smaller exchanges in recent
years had slowed the development of the preoject.
German financiers hope that the move will in time reduce the costs of
dealing in the German equity market and enhance liquidity, thereby winning
back some of the sizeable amount of business in German shares that is
carried out in other financial centres, predominantly London. Up to 10 per
cent of turnover in some large German companies is routinely conducted in
London.
Deutsche Borse will be based on the present Frankfurt Stock Exchange.
Under the agreement, the seven smaller stock exchanges - in Dusseldorf,
Munich, Hamburg, Stuttgart, Berlin, Hanover and Bremen - will buy 10 per
cent of a new holding company and be given a total of four seats on an
enlarged supervisory board.
The holding company will also buy the Deutsche Terminborse - the German
screen-based futures and options exchange - and acquire the Deutsche
Kassen-verein, an independent body which handles securities settlement.
Mr Rolf Breuer, head of capital markets at Deutsche Bank, Germany's biggest
bank, will take over as chairman of the supervisory board when the structure
takes effect in January.
Mr Friedrich von Metzler will step down as chairman of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange.
