FT  04 NOV 92 / Australian treasurer under fire over loans
AUSTRALIA'S Labor government suffered a serious setback yesterday when the
left-wing Democrats joined the conservative Liberal and National parties to
force a Senate inquiry into government borrowing practices.
The inquiry will investigate opposition allegations that Mr John Dawkins,
the treasurer (finance minister), concealed a ADollars 1.3bn (Pounds 570m)
increase in borrowing by the former Labor government of the state of
Victoria.
The increase breached guidelines set down by the Loans Council, an
inter-governmental monitoring body chaired by Mr Dawkins which co-ordinates
federal and state borrowing.
The conservatives claim the debt increase was kept secret by Mr Dawkins to
assist the re-election prospects of the Victorian Labor government, which
was defeated in a landslide earlier this month.
Mr Peter Reith, the conservative treasury spokesman, said the inquiry would
provide evidence to force Mr Dawkins to quit. However, Senator John Coulter,
the Democrats' leader, refused to support calls for the treasurer's
resignation 'at the moment'.
He said the Democrats would try to ensure that the inquiry focused on the
structure of the Loans Council, which appeared to be 'totally inadequate'
for controlling public borrowing. The conservatives claim Mr Dawkins knew in
June that Victoria's debt would exceed Loan Council guidelines, but that he
knowingly included incorrect figures in the August federal budget.
Mr Dawkins said the federal government has no power to control the borrowing
practices of individual states, or to query the figures supplied to the
treasury by state governments. He also released papers showing that he was
advised not to publicise Victoria's debt problems by the federal treasury,
which feared the news would exacerbate nervousness in the financial markets.
The controversy has contributed to recent weakness in the Australian dollar
and an increase in bond yields which has added about ADollars 30m to the
Victoria's debt servicing costs this year.
Mr Dawkins agreed on Monday night to support an application to the Loans
Council by the new Victorian government for a ADollars 1.6bn increase in its
borrowing limit to cover existing debts and fresh spending announced last
week.
The announcement of a Senate inquiry revived speculation that the government
will call a federal election before the end of the year, rather than wait
until mid-1993, when the inquiry would have reported.
