FT  11 MAR 92 / The Budget (News): Construction sector's hopes dashed -
Industrial Reaction
HARD-pressed manufacturing and construction companies yesterday expressed
deep disappointment that there was no help for them, though the measures
were welcomed by small businesses and car manufacturers.
Computer manufacturers and software suppliers complained that the Budget had
done nothing to unlock capital spending by industry and commerce. Retailers,
however, were pleased by moves to ease the burden of the uniform business
rate.
Mr Joe Dwyer, chief executive of Wimpey, a large contractor and Britain's
second largest housebuilder, said: 'The chancellor appears to have a higher
regard for car dealers, bookmakers and film producers than he does for a
construction industry suffering from the worst recession for half a
century.'
Mr John Gardner, managing director of ICL (UK), the UK-based computer
manufacturer 80 per cent owned by Fujitsu, said: 'As the managing director
of a large company it did little for me. There were no real measures to help
break the capital expenditure block; nothing to encourage large companies to
spend more money.'
Glaxo, the UK's largest company by market capitalisation, said it would be
hardly affected by the budget. Most of the company's sales were outside the
UK; it therefore welcomed the prospect of changes to advance corporation tax
for big overseas earners. Sir David Lees, chairman of GKN and the CBI's
economic and financial policy group, described the budget as 'prudent'.
He said the main reforms, the tax cut, changes to the uniform rate and the
halving of the tax on cars to 5 per cent, would only cost an estimated
Pounds 1.5bn compared with the CBI's call for Pounds 1.7bn of spending. 'It
was a remarkably smart budget; the tax cuts were progressive rather than
regressive.'
Many engineering and manufacturing companies were bitter that there were no
measures to stimulate investment. Industry leaders in particular were upset
at Mr Lamont's failure to increase capital allowances, though there was some
praise for the reduction in special car tax. Mr Mike Bright, chairman of FMT
Holdings, the Brighton-based machine toolmaker, queried the rationale for
write-offs of film costs over three years on a straight line basis without
considering similar concessions on special projects for manufacturing
industry.
Sir Allen Shepherd, chairman of Grand Metropolitan, said the chancellor got
the Budget 'about right both politically and economically'. He described the
5p reduction in income tax to 20p for the first Pounds 2,000 of taxable
income as 'politically clever'.
Sir Denys Henderson, chairman of ICI, said the halving of car tax was
helpful - the motor industry provides up to 7 per cent of chemical industry
sales. Small businesses welcomed moves to prevent large customers delaying
payments to their smaller suppliers and contractors, and the decision to
remove most family-owned businesses from the inheritance tax net.
Mr Barry Baldwin, economic adviser to the Union of Independent Companies,
said: 'The greatest thing in this Budget is the encouragement to the owners
of independent businesses that they can keep their companies intact.'
Mr Neil Arnold, regional chief of the North Eastern Co-operative Society,
said moves to restrain the impact of the uniform business rate would
encourage further retail developments.
