FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (10): Export controls and
the end of history - Trade
EXPORT CONTROLS IN TRANSITION edited by Gary Bertsch and Syeven
Elliott-Gower Duke Univ. Press Pounds 54.65/Pounds 20.85, 355 pages
ONE HAS TO make forgive the authors for apparently deciding to end history
with the reduction of East-West strategic trade controls agreed in 1990. So
much has happened since that it grates to read about the 'Soviet' threat.
It is worth overcoming this. The book becomes interesting not so much for
what it prescribes for the future, but more for its analysis of the mesh
between security and trade policy.
The basic justification for the strategic export controls introduced after
World War Two was that technological superiority would give the US and its
allies a defence edge over the Soviet Empire. The US defence establishment
was also able to drive that technological advance because it was the main
customer of US high-technology industries, which dominated world markets.
By the 1980s this had changed. There was a greater civilian application of
high-technology processes. Technological skills spread through the
industrial world. During the last decade military procurement represented
only 10 per cent of the US semiconductor market. The US Department of
Defense had stopped being a leader of innovation.
One consequence was that US companies lost their competitive edge to
Japanese counterparts. US national security was threatened because
indigenous firms could not supply the technological goods the military
required.
Against this it is easier to understand the US debate on export controls.
One response to worries about declining innovative skills was to redouble
efforts to impede Soviet advances. That meant reinforcing controls and
ensuring that they were applied rigorously by other countries.
On the other hand, there was a growing feeling that the controls were
counterproductive. They were weakening the ability of US companies to
compete globally. In 1987 the US National Academy of Sciences estimated that
US companies were losing Dollars 9bn (Pounds 5bn) a year in sales because of
the controls. There was a further loss of Dollars 6bn in sales to Western
companies which had stopped buying US components because of re-export
restrictions imposed by Washington. It was thus possible to argue that it
was in the interest of US national security that a reduction in controls
would strengthen domestic industry and national security.
This school came to dominate. Moreover, the desire by European countries to
liberalise technology trade with the reforming East bloc was so strong that
international cooperation would have become impossible had not the US agreed
to soften its hard line. This is not say that liberalisation has proved
easy.
One prime political objective of easing trade restrictions with former
communist countries is to give them access to the technology and
infrastructure needed to be generate a level of prosperity that will sustain
democratic reform.
Central to the development of any modern economy is telecommunications, but
modern telecommunications can be turned to military use. Since the most
advanced communications are almost impossible to tap, the prospect of their
falling into the hands of a potential enemy is worrying. Yet for the same
reason, access to secure communications also strengthens opposition groups
and could reinforce democracy in the former Eastern bloc.
Export controls can also play into the hands of protectionists whose
concerns are unrelated to security - arguably the case with US sanctions
against Japan's Toshiba company after it was discovered to have sold
submarine manufacturing technology to the then Soviet Union.
The conclusion remains that export controls are still needed. There is no
guarantee that Russia will remain friendly. Future controls will have to
involve sensitive application of a consensus surrounding a limited number of
processes and products. As for the US, it needs to rationalise the dispersed
bureaucracy that has been responsible for the controls.
Whether that will suffice to produce an effective system is another matter.
As the authors admit, technological skills are widely available even in
newly-industrialising countries. Finally, one question is barely addressed:
how does the West keep dangerous technology out of the hands of madcap
dictators such as Saddam Hussein? Maybe that question is altogether too
difficult. If so, it is a pity, since that is where the threat increasingly
seems to lie.
