FT  16 JUN 92 / International Company News: Glass group reflects on the
future - Plans to privatise a Czechoslovak enterprise
ALONG with thousands of other business managers who have presented
privatisation projects to the Czechoslovakia government in recent months, Mr
Karl Ludvik, the general manager of Preciosa, has put together a plan for
the future ownership of the state-owned company he has headed for eight
years.
But while other managers grew weary jet-setting around the world to find a
foreign investor, Mr Ludvik has stayed in his office in Jablonec, a run-down
industrial town near the Polish border. He did not need to move. Since it
was created in 1948 when various workshops were grouped together, Preciosa
has accumulated large profits from the assortment of glass (jewellery,
chandeliers) it sells to 70 countries worldwide.
Mr Ludvik says he intends to keep the company in Czechoslovak hands. His
words echo those of the government who, eager to reassure a public worrying
that the best of Czechoslovakia is being sold to foreigners, decided that
traditional Bohemian enterprises, such as the breweries, crystals and
porcelain makers, would be privatised locally.
Mr Ludvik says his factory is anchored in the Bohemian glass-cutting
tradition. In common with many Czechoslovak managers, he believes he does
not need a foreign partner. 'We have enough financial resources for our own
development. It doesn't mean that we want to lock ourselves in our own house
and be closed to foreign opportunities. We are interested in obtaining
financing from abroad. But we don't want our capital to be even partially in
foreign hands.'
Mr Ludvik is not alone in Czechoslovakia. Foreign investors attempting to
form joint-ventures with profitable local enterprises say they often face
closed doors. 'Many managers just think they can do it all on their own,'
says Mr William Harter, from Proctor &amp; Gamble who last year bought a local
detergent company. 'Foreign investors are often not taking enough time to
explain to their partners why they may be needed.'
But there are other reasons why some managers are less than willing to forge
joint-ventures with foreign partners. In the two years since the overhaul of
the communist regime, many managers have taken advantage of the existing
legislative vacuum. Often, for example, they have been plundering the
state-owned companies they manage by transferring orders and profits to
personal private companies.
Today, as privatisation projects are hastily approved by government
officials, they hope to continue benefitting personally from the change.
Such attempts have stirred a bitter controversy both in the public and
within governmental circles in Czechoslovakia. Officially, government
members have declared their intention to prevent managers from receiving
large portions of their enterprises' shares. But there have been a number of
notable instances of managers influencing officials.
Mr Ludvik is confident his privatisation project will be approved, despite
the fact it would give 30 per cent of Preciosa to employees, of which the
bulk would be owned by a few 'keepers of the know-how', as he calls them.
'Our aim is not to loose these people whose skills have been passed on from
generations to generations' he says. Instead, the enterprises will be owned
by some employees, municipalities and local banks. Eager to get a share of
the pie, banks have been vying to be included in Preciosa's privatisation
project, offering as a bait loans which are twice cheaper than the market
rate.
In common with many other managers in the country, Mr Ludvik intends to
avoid the distribution of part of Preciosa's capital to the public under the
government mass-privatisation programme. According to the eastern Europe
scheme, over 3,000 enterprises will be distributed to the public in the form
of vouchers which are expected to be converted into shares by the end of the
year. 'We are afraid of vouchers and we have good reasons to be' Mr Ludvik
says. 'Some investment funds will be buying the future shares and sell them
to foreign companies. We don't want our capital to be even partially in
foreign hands.'
But government officials are not all lured by the patriotic intentions of
managers. 'In most cases, when managers say their companies will stay in
Czechoslovak hands, they intend to launch management buy-outs,' says Ms Eva
Klvacova who works at the Czechoslovak privatisation ministry.
