FT  03 OCT 92 / International Company News: Japanese banks 'need more aid'
JAPANESE BANKS will need more government assistance than has been announced
if they are to overcome quickly the burden of non-performing loans, a study
by Moody's Investors Service, the US credit rating agency, recommended
yesterday.
The agency examined the likely impact of tax and other concessions granted
by the government, and suggested that the measures, including the
establishment of a land purchase agency, will have a 'limited effect on the
banks' asset quality'.
Meanwhile, the Ministry of Finance yesterday indicated that it would tighten
control over non-bank financial institutions, such as leasing and consumer
credit companies, by requiring those with loan portfolios of more than Y50bn
(Dollars 416.7m) to report their non-performing loans at the end of this
fiscal year.
The Japanese government has tended to blame 'non-banks' for the feverish
lending of the late 1980s, in an apparent attempt to divert attention from
the role of mainstream institutions, though many of these non-banks are
actually affiliates of the leading banks.
About 300 of Japan's estimated 37,000 non-banks would be subject to the new
rule, if implemented.
It is clear some non-banks have a heavy burden of non-performing loans, but
the ministry may not release that information for fear of undermining
confidence in the financial system.
In mid-August, the government announced a package of concessions designed to
restore confidence in the banking system and lift stock prices. Banks were
supposed to have marked their stock portfolios to market levels for the
first half ending last month, but the finance ministry gave them a reprieve.
The government lifted a limit on dividend payout ratios, broadened tax
concessions on the write-off of bad debts, and proposed the establishment of
a body that would attempt to stimulate the ailing property market by
purchasing land used as collateral.
Moody's said the banks' balance sheets would be improved if the government
made loan losses fully tax-deductible and if problem property assets were
purchased by a government agency at book value.
However, the agency said these measures would involve 'very costly
subsidies' and need political support that now appears to be lacking.
