FT  26 MAR 92 / EC attack over Bush's line on environment
THE DIVIDE between the US and other industrialised countries over a
commitment to reduce greenhouse gases widened yesterday after the European
Community had charged that Washington was jeopardising the outcome of the UN
Earth Summit, to be held in June.
Mr Carlo Ripa di Meana, EC environment commissioner, said President George
Bush's refusal to commit the US to greenhouse gas reduction targets was an
'attack on the very heart of the conference', implying that the president
was using the issue to garner domestic political support among car-users and
industry.
In Washington, Mr Bush, who is expected to announce soon his decision to
attend the summit, in Rio de Janeiro, reiterated his opposition to the
imposition of targets for reducing carbon dioxide emissions - a goal of most
other countries to attend the conference.
In a message to the US Congress, Mr Bush said he hoped to reach agreement in
Rio on 'a global framework convention that will commit as many nations as
possible to the timely development of comprehensive national climate action
plans.'
He said, however, that these plans should fit each country's particular
circumstances. 'This approach is preferable on environmental and economic
grounds to the carbon-dioxide-only proposals that others have espoused,' he
said.
The EC has set a goal to stabilise CO emissions at 1990 levels by 2000, this
to be achieved in part through a controversial plan for a mixed carbon and
energy tax which would levy the equivalent of Dollars 10 per barrel of oil
on all forms of non-renewable energy by 2000. The bulk of the charge would
fall on fossil fuels.
But the EC Commission fears its 12 member states, wary of European industry
incurring a competitive disadvantage, will not endorse such a tax unless the
US and Japan adopt similar measures.
Mr Bush's name is the most conspicuous omission from the list of heads of
government who have agreed so far to go to the summit. His absence would
mark a serious, perhaps fatal, setback for the event.
A senior US administration official said he believed an announcement about
Mr Bush's plans would be made after the preparatory meeting for the summit,
now taking place in New York and due to finish on April 3.
Officials have hinted that Mr Bush is withholding acceptance as a bargaining
counter in the preparatory talks, where the US has been thrown on the
defensive over a number of counts, including its resistance to demands for
sharply increased environment-targeted aid to the Third World.
Mr Bush said this week that he would not subscribe to any Earth Summit
measures which might affect US jobs, though he appears to have softened his
position on aid. The feeling among delegates at the preparatory meeting is
that Mr Bush will have no choice but to go.
THE MEXICAN government has announced an ambitious scheme to force the
capital city's industries to clean up their impact on ther environment,
requiring them to cut emissions of some dangerous pollutants by 90 per cent
in 18 months, reports Damian Fraser from Mexico City.
The government will offer all of Mexico's industry 4,000bn pesos (Dollars
1.3bn) this year in subsidised loans to meet new environmental requirements.
