FT  01 DEC 92 / Friendly society stops taking business after Pounds 4.3m
write-off
LANCASHIRE &amp; Yorkshire Assurance, a friendly society, closed to new business
yesterday after revealing that a fund advertised as investing only in cash
deposits and gilts had suffered a Pounds 4.3m property write-off.
The society, which took in Pounds 10.151m in new premium business last year,
said it would resume writing new business only after the high court had
reached a decision on how much compensation was payable. It said this could
take many months. It will continue to pay claims on maturing policies.
Insurance brokers felt that the society could not continue trading, and
would seek a 'rescue' from another friendly society. About 69,000
policyholders have money invested in the society's Capital Secure fund,
which included the property, a motorway hotel development.
Of these, about 36,000 made their investment before January 1987, when
property was specifically excluded from the range of assets in which the
fund could invest. Only investments in the Capital Secure fund, which
dropped by 9 per cent in value as a result, are affected.
Mr John Ramsden, chairman of the society, said the problem came to light
early this year, when investors queried their returns on maturing policies.
All the present board members have been appointed since June 1990. Mr
Ramsden said that one option may be to transfer L&amp;Y's interests to another
friendly society, but this would be clear only after the court ruling.
He added that it was unclear whether compensation should be paid, as there
was no legal precedent for the case, and that the society had held
discussions with the Registry of Friendly Societies and with Lautro, the
life assurance regulator, before deciding to seek a high court ruling.
Mr John Richards, a Bristol-based insurance broker who has done business
with L&amp;Y said: 'I think they are cutting the ground beneath their feet by
closing to new business. In these times it could be financial suicide.'
Mr Colin Boylett, an independent financial adviser, said: 'We had been given
direct assurance. I fail to see how they can possibly not compensate on that
basis.'
Policyholder Mrs Margaret Harvey, a London journalist, said her policy was
inflexible, making it difficult to switch between funds.
Ms Jean Eaglesham, head of the money policy group at the Consumers'
Association, said: 'We would obviously be extremely concerned if they were
not covered by the compensation scheme. It's very much in the interests of
the friendly society movement to set up some kind of ex gratia arrangement.'
