FT  05 JUN 92 / Leading Article: How not to cut public spending
THE PRIME Minister has warned his cabinet that this year's public spending
round will be especially tight. At the Treasury, the Chief Secretary, Mr
Michael Portillo, flag-bearer of the Thatcherite tendency, should be true to
the prime minister's word. He needs to be. But he should also eschew the
standard Treasury approach, which ensures that the government does too much,
all of it equally badly. What is needed is a more radical rethinking of
public spending.
So naturally unradical a prime minister will find this uncomfortable. But
powerful forces will drive Mr Major in that direction: foremost among them
the state of the public finances. The chancellor of the exchequer insists he
is sticking to his forecast of a Pounds 28bn public sector borrowing
requirement this year. If so, that would be the only forecast he will be
able to stick to. Growth will probably be lower than the 1 per cent forecast
in the budget. Unemployment is also bound to be higher than the forecast of
2.4m, on which the spending estimates were based.
Nor are slow growth and high unemployment the sole reason for the fiscal
deterioration. Over the past year, discretionary increases have done almost
as much as recession to boost public spending, now some 43 per cent of gross
domestic product.
Economic growth cannot be relied upon to come to the rescue. The Treasury
has consistently hoped that the economy would start to grow strongly in the
not too distant future. It has proved consistently wrong. Since the public
sector deficit is highly sensitive to the rate of economic growth, slow
growth, never mind continued recession, would play havoc with Mr Portillo's
sums.
The prime minister has also chosen two rods for his back. First, his
citizen's charters impose standards on the public sector that people will
expect to be met. Second, he has committed the country to the Maastricht
convergence criteria, prominent among which is a target of 3 per cent for
the ratio of the general government deficit to GDP, this being well below
current magnitudes.
The standard Treasury response is penny pinching. The heaviest cuts will
fall on the least well defended programmes, with investment cut most savage
of all.
There is another way, one that only a government at the beginning of its
term could attempt. The watchword should be the chief secretary's words:
'unlike the Labour party,' he has said, 'we do not believe in the inexorable
growth of the reach and size of the state. Nor do we believe that the state
can and should try to solve all our problems.'
How might these words be put into practice? First, valuable investment
should be defended from the squeeze on spending. More fundamentally, the
government should ask of every area of activity whether the public sector
need to do this at all and, if it does, whether users should make a
financial contribution.
Mr Major will shy away from such questions. But he must accept the
implications of failure to do so: either the government will be driven
towards higher taxation or it will fail to deliver the high-quality services
it has promised. Government need not be a penny-pinched nanny. Mr Major
should ensure it is not.
