FT  06 OCT 92 / Tories take a rose-tinted glance back: Philip Stephens says
that in these troubled times the party is taking refuge in nostalgia
WHEN the Conservative party is in trouble, its first instinct is to take
refuge in nostalgia. So as Mr Norman Lamont scours the Treasury's filing
cabinets for an economic policy to replace the European exchange rate
mechanism, the Conservatives are rediscovering a new golden age.
The economic 'miracle' of the late 1980s, when the then Mr Nigel Lawson came
up with the hat-trick of lower taxes, higher public spending and a
public-sector surplus, is not a contender. The economy after all is still
suffering the hangover from that particular party.
Instead, Tory MPs are looking back to the first term of the then Mrs
Margaret Thatcher.
Through the flattering prism of time, the ideological certainties of the
early 1980s offer a seductive alternative to the confusing and chaotic
pragmatism of the start of the 1990s.
The picture being painted by many among the younger generation of Tory MPs -
as well as those like Lord Parkinson and Baroness Thatcher herself - is of
an era when the Conservative party knew where it was going.
It was not that life was easy then - the recession was deeper than now and
unemployment was rising more quickly. But the government (or at least Mrs
Thatcher) was resolute and stuck to its principles. That ushered in the
period of steady economic growth and low inflation that foundered only when
Lord Lawson started shadowing the D-Mark.
The distorting simplicity of the analogy is taken further. The early 1980s
were a period when economic policy could be set in splendid isolation from
the rest of Europe. What mattered was not the exchange rate but Mrs
Thatcher's magic money supply targets. Interest rates could be slashed
without reference to the value of the pound. The government then was serious
about cutting public spending and made the hard decisions that allowed the
subsequent tax cuts.
There is an obvious symmetry in the parallel with Mr John Major's present
predicament - even if it ignores the awkward fact that this time the Labour
party cannot be blamed for runaway public spending and a soaring budget
deficit.
Senior ministers admit that the monetary policy that Mr Lamont will preview
this week will bear a remarkable resemblance to that followed by the then
Sir Geoffrey Howe and Lord Lawson before the latter became mesmerised by the
exchange rate in 1985.
There will be targets for broad and narrow money, the value of the pound
will be taken into account, and Mr Lamont will keep an eye on the prices of
houses and shares. The devaluation of the pound will be have to be offset by
a tighter fiscal policy.
There are obvious political attractions. The message that Sir Norman Fowler,
party chairman, will spell out at the opening session of the conference this
morning is that the party came through the troubles of the early 1980s by
sticking together. It can again make a virtue out of its willingness to take
the 'tough decisions'.
However, while the comparison is seductive it does not stand up to scrutiny.
Those who look back to the party conferences of the early 1980s through
other than rose-tinted spectacles recall not a united front but a bitter
struggle between the 'wets' and the 'dries' over economic policy.
They remember also that, for all the talk that a free-floating pound
provides complete freedom, to reduce borrowing costs, the level of interest
rates only once (and then for just two brief months) fell below 9 per cent
during Lady Thatcher's first two terms in government.
And as Mr Lamont admitted in a speech as long ago as July, the policy
eventually was jettisoned because the same people who are now reconstructing
it decided that it did not work. But then, nostalgia never did have much
respect for reality.
