FT  08 JUL 92 / World Trade News: Rotterdam of the east takes shape - Yvonne
Preston reports on Asia's dream port project
PLANS for a vast port complex and trading zone in north-east Asia, sprawling
over the boundaries of China, North Korea and Russia, are under way after
securing the support of no fewer than six governments.
The Tumen River Area Development Programme (TRADP) is centred on a key Sea
of Japan coastal area and is optimistically described as 'the future
Rotterdam of the Far East.' Its estimated cost is at least Dollars 30bn
(Pounds 15.7bn) over 20 years.
The main achievement so far of TRADP, which is sponsored by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), has been the diplomatic feat of
bringing together government delegations from the two Koreas, China, Russia,
Mongolia and Japan.
It would be hard to imagine six more disparate countries. The two Koreas,
locked in mutual hostility for 40 years, signed a non-aggression pact only
last December, and China has yet to establish formal relations with South
Korea. Russia was not even an independent country when the TRADP inaugural
meeting took place in February last year. Japan has no diplomatic relations
with North Korea and is in bitter dispute with Russia over the Kurile
islands, which were occupied by Soviet forces after the second world war.
No other intergovernmental organisation exists in this part of the world,
the UN development agency says, and the formation of a TRADP management
committee is the first time the six countries agreed to work together under
UN auspices.
The 516km Tumen river rises in China's Jilin province and has been the
border between China and Korea since ancient times. Sino-Soviet rivalry, the
Korean war and Japanese militarism have kept the area backward and
undeveloped. The dream is to turn the marshes and rice paddies of the Tumen
River delta into a metropolis of 500,000 people and entrepot to rival
Rotterdam and Hong Kong. UNDP officials acknowledge that the project is
still only a dream.
The delta provides landlocked Mongolia with its nearest outlet to the sea.
The hinterland is rich in resources, and the scale of the trading bloc could
rival the European Community.
The regional co-operation project consists of an inner economic zone of
around 1,000 sq km. A second and broader development area takes in the
Russian port of Vladivostok, Chongjin in North Korea and the Chinese city of
Yanji. The outer North-east Asia Regional Development Area occupies an area
of 370,000 sq km.
The Asian Development Bank and the World Bank have shown interest in the
project, which will also seek funds from Japan and South Korea. The next
stage is an initial feasibility study for which the UN agency has allocated
Dollars 3.5m.
The involvement of North Korea in the planned development represents the
country's first step towards opening its economy after decades of isolation.
