FT  18 SEP 92 / Survey of Pakistan (5): Soft-sell becomes harder / A look at
prospects for winning foreign investment
PAKISTAN now offers a more liberal package for foreign investment than any
other country in Asia, according to finance minister Mr Sartaj Aziz.
With tax holidays and no restrictions on foreign ownership or foreign
currency repatriation, the gauntlet has been thrown down to overseas
corporations to ignore the exotic allure of the South East Asian export
processing zones and come to Pakistan; so far they have shown little
interest.
The country offers a buoyant economy, cheap labour force and a government
commitment to privatisation, deregulation and development. But there are
still numerous obstacles to be overcome before it can beat the aggressive
competition for limited capital flows.
One impediment appears to be its desire to copy the blueprint for foreign
investment set down by Thailand and China, instead of concentrating on its
own individual strengths and admitting its not insubstantial weaknesses.
A local economist claims there are four major keys to bringing in foreign
capital: the government's big initiative on privatisation and deregulation
has to be seen to work; the government must develop a coherent strategy on
how to facilitate inward investment; it has to be able to delineate and sell
its strengths; and there has to be a nationwide commitment towards wanting
foreign interest.
'The Pakistanis aren't very good at selling themselves', he argued. These
are not insuperable problems, but they are not helped by the unrewarding
complexity of doing business in Pakistan.
Japanese posted there complain of working in an alcohol-free and
entertainment-free environment. While almost all overseas investors
encounter an alien business culture, where the threat of Islamisation may
have little real impact, it certainly serves as another psychological
barrier.
But prime minister Nawaz Sharif's attack on so-called 'red-tapeism',
combined with the most aggressive privatisation programme to hit Asia, is
undoubtedly the right way forward and it is already having some positive
repercussions.
Mr Naseem Mirza, chairman of ICI Pakistan, says that under the previous
regime he spent much of his time commuting to the capital Islamabad, because
committee approval was required for everything. This has already changed.
ICI is making the most of the current deregulative environment. It is to
spend Rs1bn on the expansion of its soda ash plant, which supplies material
to the glass industry, and on its own power station, to protect itself from
local electricity shortages.
Pak Suzuki, a joint venture between Suzuki and the government, controls more
than 70 per cent of the local market and has recently expanded capacity,
despite complaints over the government control of pricing. Suzuki is
interested in buying out the government's stake and Toyota is setting up an
assembly plant.
Foreign companies are also involved in developing the country's backward
infrastructure. But these are all small gestures and go little way towards
absorbing the 13 per cent of Pakistan's workforce that is officially
unemployed, and providing a much-needed source of foreign income, to offset
reliance on foreign loans.
At present, Pakistan has only one sizeable industry, textiles; but it is an
industry where it has major advantages which could be further exploited
through the use of foreign capital and technology.
Pakistan has the world's third largest cotton crop and a large and skilled
workforce. This is mainly employed in spinning yarn, but the Government is
providing incentives to encourage higher value added weaving and garment
manufacturing, with reductions on export duties and indirect tax.
Foreign business could play an important and profitable role in this
transformation. Agri-business is another potential target. It has been the
major engine of economic growth, but could benefit from further western
expertise.
So far, there has been a muted reaction to the new Special Industrial Zones.
Seven more zones are to built along the new Lahore-Islamabad motorway;
electricity, water, workers and efficient roads in these zones help to
shelter foreign investments from Pakistan's infrastructural problems and
instability.
But export-oriented businesses' only concerns are the cost of production,
efficiency of transportation and political and economic stability of the
production base; Pakistan has yet to prove itself a viable option under
these criteria.
It has an average wage of around Dollars 100 a month and although in basic
manufacturing industry, workers are paid as little as Dollars 70, this is
still higher than other Asian export processing centres such as China and
Indonesia.
Industrialists argue that Pakistan's attraction must be for higher value
added production, aimed primarily at the local rather than export market
place. The country's official GDP per head is only Dollars 415, but the true
figure could be double that, once the cash generated by drugs, arms and
unregistered cottage industries has been factored in.
