FT  01 JUL 92 / Colombia clarifies foreign investors' tax
THE Colombian Congress has passed legislation clearing up uncertainty about
the tax treatment of foreign investors, although such investment will still
be treated less favourably than originally proposed by the government.
The legislation had been stuck in Congress for months; legislators made
various proposals that would have set tax levels so high that foreign
investors would have been driven away.
Although the tax burden on foreign companies will initially be fairly heavy,
the rate will drop significantly in succeeding years, particularly for those
reinvesting part of their profits in the country.
Mr Rudolf Hommes, finance minister, said: 'I like this bias in favour of
investment.' Although the government would have preferred more favourable
terms for foreign investors, 'it clears up the situation of uncertainty in
relation to economic policy, and puts public finance near equilibrium.'
The government needed to raise tax revenues, in part to replace lost income
from reduced taxes and duties on foreign trade. The 1991 fiscal deficit is
forecast at about 1.4 per cent of GDP, but 1 per cent of this is due to weak
coffee prices, which increase government transfers to growers.
Foreign companies will be liable for the basic income tax rate of 30 per
cent and a surtax charge of 7.5 per cent. The tax on profit remittance
starts at 12 per cent in 1993 and, for non-oil companies, falls to 7 per
cent by 1996.
For oil companies, the rates are higher because of a 600 peso/barrel (92 US
cent) production tax and because the profit remittance tax will stay at 12
per cent.
Although the reform allows for a withholding tax of up to 30 per cent on
incoming foreign currency, it is unlikely the rate will be anywhere near
this level.
As high tax would encourage black market dealing and evasion, the figure
will probably be nearer 10 per cent.
Plans to raise value-added tax from 12 per cent to 18 per cent had to be
scrapped and VAT was set at 14 per cent; the long list of exceptions include
agricultural machinery.
Duties on luxury items such as spirits and private vehicles range from 35 to
45 per cent.
The change in VAT and many of the other reforms apply up to 1997, when a new
package will be needed.
