FT  13 JAN 92 / GATT: Dunkel goes for final Gatt sprint - A device to
sidestep Uruguay Round collapse
DESPITE the huffing and puffing in Brussels, last month's draft package of
Uruguay Round trade accords looks set to receive conditional endorsement
when senior officials from the 108 governments taking part meet in Geneva
today.
Billed before Christmas as the decisive meeting that would determine the
success or failure of the five-year-old round, today's gathering of the
Trade Negotiations Committee (TNC) will now be rather low-key.
Mr Arthur Dunkel, director-general of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (Gatt), will ask countries merely to indicate whether they are
prepared to enter the final sprint on the basis of the draft final act. This
leaves the door open for limited changes to the 436-page text.
He expects a consensus, including the European Community, in favour of
pressing on, with the aim of completing the round by mid-April. This is
probably the latest date possible if the final agreement is to come into
effect next January as planned. However, it also means the package will be
presented to the US Congress during campaigning for the November
presidential election, increasing the risks of rejection.
The Washington lobbies are already in full cry against plans to liberalise
textiles trade and alleged inadequacies in the accord on protection of
patents, copyright and other forms of intellectual property.
By carefully avoiding a demand that governments adopt or reject the draft
accords presented to them on December 20, Mr Dunkel has staved off the
immediate threat that EC objections on agriculture could sink the round.
Other countries with reservations on the draft, including Japan and the US,
will also breathe a sigh of relief. So too will the many smaller nations
still working through the implications of the package.
While governments now have a few more weeks to settle outstanding
differences, they are keenly aware that too much meddling with the text
could upset the fine balance it strikes among the interests of all 100-plus
participants.
For this reason a number of countries have told Mr Dunkel they oppose any
renegotiation. Australia and Brazil, two key members of the Cairns Group of
14 farm exporters, have publicly endorsed the draft.
Despite its description as the Dunkel package, the vast bulk of the text -
upwards of 85 per cent - was negotiated and agreed. This left just a few,
admittedly controversial, issues to be decided by negotiating group
chairmen: notably that on anti-dumping.
Only the draft on agriculture could truly be described as a Dunkel text,
following the failure of the US and the EC to come to terms after weeks of
intensive talks.
Mr Dunkel's formal pretext for playing down today's meeting is that
governments cannot judge the results of the Uruguay Round until they know
the outcome of two sets of negotiations yet to be completed - the detailed
country-to-country bargaining over tariff cuts for goods, including farm
products, and on opening markets to foreign services.
For many countries, these negotiations will be the crucial ones when the
time comes to sell the Uruguay Round deal to legislators, lobbies and
voters.
Developing countries will be looking for concrete demonstrations of the rich
world's professed willingness to lower trade barriers to farm produce,
commodities and textiles. The US has said repeatedly that, to get the
Uruguay Round package through Congress, it must win substantial improvements
in access to foreign markets for its services companies.
Over the next three months the draft final act will be scrutinised by a
legal and drafting committee for sense and consistency. However, most
interest will centre on the channel, supervised by Mr Dunkel as TNC
chairman, by which governments may be able to secure changes to the draft
accords. The seven groups that negotiated the draft final act have been
disbanded.
Mr Dunkel said on Friday that he would accept any changes agreed by all the
participants, but that it was up to dissatisfied governments first to
discuss their problems with trading partners.
To what extent countries will decide to press amendments, given the risks of
damaging the package, remains unclear. Until today, only the Community has
said unambiguously that the draft package is unacceptable and must be
modified. Its core objection centres on the way the agricultural text
excludes from the permitted subsidies the compensation payments envisaged
under EC plans to reform its Common Agricultural Policy.
Many pitfalls remain to upset the round. The US has expressed reservations
on the agriculture text, while Japan and South Korea oppose proposals to
open their closed rice markets. Outside agriculture, there could be moves to
reopen talks on anti-dumping, intellectual property rights, textiles and
services, if countries start demanding payment for changes made elsewhere.
