FT  31 OCT 92 / How To Spend It: Why sheets should be all white on the night
 -You can't beat plain cotton and linen
WHEN IT comes to bedlinen I take the unfashionable view that it is hard to
beat white. I can see that this is not inspiring news for the designers and
manufacturers who go to such energetic lengths to ravish the eye and seduce
the purse with patterns and hues which would have been rich and diverse
enough to tempt the ancient rulers of Sarmarkand.
Furthermore, I take the even less attractive standpoint, from the view of
manufacturers, that old is much nicer than new. Finely-woven, smooth as
silk, old linen sheets cannot be beaten for imbuing the nightly ritual of
bed and oblivion with a sense of luxe and well-being.
I know, I know . . .they are murder to launder and after just one night on
the bed they look as if they had witnessed much more than a sedate night's
sleep. You may be as surprised as I to learn that at The Mandarin hotel in
Hong Kong, where staff change the linen sheets daily, if you crumple them by
enjoying an afternoon snooze the housekeeper changes them again in the
evening.
For those, like me, who enjoy fine linen, antique fairs and markets often
yield happy finds. I have picked up embroidered linen bedspreads, cotton
woven Marcella bedspreads and embroidered sheets all at prices way below
those in the smarter shops. For those who do not have the time or do not
enjoy scrummaging around antique stalls there are quite a few specialist
shops where antique textiles of all sorts can be found.
In London, Lunn Antiques, both in its original shop at 86 New King's Road,
SW6 and its brand new one at 21 Cucumber Alley, Thomas Neal's, Covent
Garden, has built up a reputation for being a sure source of marvellous old
bedlinens.
When it comes to sheets Stephen and Juliette Lunn only deal in linen. A good
indicator of quality, according to Stephen, is the thread count - the larger
the number of threads used per square inch in the weave, the finer the
thread, the better the quality.
In much modern linen the thread count has become less in order to keep the
price down (an honourable exception is the Irish Linen Board which ensures
standards - and that also means thread counts - are kept up).
'If the linen feels floppy, it's a sure sign of a worn-out piece,' says
Stephen. 'Linen should have body and some dealers pack it with starch to
give an impression of body. Each time linen is washed it loses some of its
molecular surface so careful washing is essential.'
In grand old country houses, where most of the second-hand and antique linen
sheets started out in life, one person used to be in charge of the linen
cupboard and sheets were numbered and used carefully in rotation.
So munificently stocked were these linen cupboards that many of the sheets
that come on to the market have never been used.
At Lunn Antiques a pair of plain, hem-stitched, linen double sheets with
good hand-finished hems costs about Pounds 125. Single size ones are more
plentiful and cost about Pounds 65 a pair. Lavishly embroidered ones start
at about Pounds 125 each.
At the moment there are four truly exceptional sheets - 'the best I've ever
stocked,' says Stephen Lunn, no doubt to explain the price of Pounds 500
each.
They are 9 ft by 12 ft each, of the smoothest linen, with fine handwork,
deep borders of needle and bobbin lace and embroidered with the coronet and
monogram of the Countess of Westmoreland who married in 1892. The 12 ft
length is to enable the sheet to be turned back to reveal the beautiful
handwork. To put the price into perspective it is worth knowing that at The
Irish Linen Shop, in the Burlington Arcade, a pair of plain, linen double
sheets with a two-row cord finish sells for Pounds 310, while a hemstitch
finish is Pounds 395.
If you cannot run to those prices even a pair of handworked pillowcases
gives an air of luxe to almost any bed. At Lunn Antiques a pair would set
you back anything from Pounds 38 for plain hem-stitched ones to about Pounds
95 for very lavish ones.
Most towns sport a good supplier of antique textiles. Hand in Hand, for
instance, at 3 North West Circus Place, Edinburgh has double linen sheets
that range in price from Pounds 60 to Pounds 140, standard size pillowcases
range from Pounds 35 and linen bedcovers with intricate embroidery or drawn
threadwork start at Pounds 75.
In Bath, Avon, there are two marvellous shops which seem to me to have
friendly prices - Collectable Costume at 6 Bladud Buildings had, when I was
there, beautiful plain white quilted 18th century Marcella bedspreads, fine
embroidered pillowslips and lots of embroidered and lace-trimmed bedspreads.
It is also worth looking in on Penny Philip, at 5 London Street, Bath, who
has a lot of French homespun linen, including 19th century double linen
sheets for Pounds 45, turn-of- -the-century pillowcases with cotton lace and
white embroidery at about Pounds 35 each and double Jacquard, woven, white,
cotton counterpanes for Pounds 65.
After linen, next best has to be 100 per cent cotton. The cheapest ones I
could track down come from - you've guessed - Marks &amp; Spencer. At Pounds
11.99 a time for singles and Pounds 15.99 for doubles, in pure white cotton,
they are commendably plain and simple.
If you like a more old-fashioned style Cologne &amp; Cotton is a company worth
knowing. Just three years old it has started 'to reintroduce the pleasures
of . . . two completely natural products, 100 per cent pure cotton bed and
table linen, and a range of eaux de colognes based on original 18th century
formulas.'
All the bedlinen is in pure cotton, much of it beautifully hand-embroidered
and prices are very user-friendly. For those who cannot get to the shop at
74 Regent Street, Leamington Spa or the two concessions at 3 Broad Street,
Bath or 9 Little Clarendon Street, Oxford, the complete range is available
by mail order.
There is a pure white collection - a double duvet cover with drawn-thread
work and cutwork detail is Pounds 46.95, double sheets, classically plain
but beautifully hemstitched are Pounds 39.95, Jacquard cotton bedspreads,
woven in Damascus, start at Pounds 44.95 for the single size and go on up to
Pounds 64.95 for the King size.
Photographed here (below) is a crisp blue and white check range - duvet
covers start at Pounds 19.95 for a single, standard pillowcase are Pounds
8.50. Tel: 0926- 332573 for a free catalogue.
More nostalgic charm from Damask - anything from absolutely plain white
cotton napkins with drawn threadwork edging to pukka old-fashioned
eiderdowns. For those who like the sweet simplicity of pure white there is a
whole range of white, cotton, hand-embroidered sheet sets. The Athene range,
for instance, includes a hand-embroidered sheet with fine drawn threadwork,
at Pounds 70 for a single sheet and similarly embroidered pillowcase.
There is a big range of pillowcases - every shape from traditional oblong to
continental squares and bolsters. There is a creamy woven cotton bedspread
and the enchanting reversible eiderdown in old-fashioned cabbage rose prints
(Pounds 225 for the single size, Pounds 270 double).
The Damask range is widely available from: Harrods of Knightsbridge, London,
SW1; The General Trading Company, 144 Sloane Street, London SW1; And So To
Bed, 638-640 Kings Road, London SW6; Homework, 12 Swan Street, Wilmslow,
Cheshire; The Hambledon Gallery, 42-44 Salisbury Street, Blandford, Dorset;
and Woods of Harrogate. A brochure is available for Pounds 2.50 from Damask
Furnishings &amp; Fineries, Unit 7 &amp; 10, Sulivan Enterprise Centre, Sulivan
Road, London SW6 (or tel: 071-731-3470).
At Liberty, of Regent Street, the onslaught of winter has brought a rash of
tucking-up ideas - on the third floor a beautiful collection of handforged
iron bedsteads and bases made by a blacksmith in Cumbria are perfect props
for a collection of outrageously pretty bedlinen. For purists there is
Nimble Fingers' range of crisp, white cotton and linen mixes, most of the
pieces hand-edged.
