FT  28 OCT 92 / Canadians throw out reform deal
CANADIAN business leaders and many politicians yesterday called for a pause
in the long efforts to rewrite the constitution, and said attention should
be focused on the faltering economy, following the unequivocal rejection of
a constitutional reform package in Monday's referendum.
Mr Brian Mulroney, the prime minister, responded sombrely to the snub from
the electorate: 'The accord is history. . . the problems that faced us as a
nation remain,' he said. Those problems, he warned, could not be resolved
'in the foreseeable future at least, through constitutional reform.'
The Business Council on National Issues, which represents the chief
executives of 150 of Canada's biggest companies, called for an indefinite
deferral of any further attempt at comprehensive constitutional reform.
The council urged political leaders to turn instead to more flexible forms
of negotiation. It added that Canadian business's priority was to 'get the
economy moving and growing again'.
The extent of the No victory in the referendum was far greater than opinion
polls had projected. A majority of voters in six of Canada's 10 provinces
rejected the deal, known as the Charlottetown Accord, which was hammered out
in August by Mr Mulroney and leaders of all provinces.
Quebec separatists took heart from the province's vote against reform by a
margin of 56 to 42 per cent, vowing to translate the rejection into a drive
for independence for the francophone province.
Mr Jacques Parizeau of the Parti Quebecois and Mr Lucien Bouchard of its
federal affiliate, the Bloc Quebecois, plan to push Mr Robert Bourassa, the
province's Liberal premier, to hold a general election in the province as
soon as possible. If they win they have promised another referendum
specifically on sovereignty.
Voters in Ontario, where about a third of Canada's population lives,
approved the deal by only the narrowest of margins. Only three small
Atlantic provinces, which depend heavily on the federal government for
transfer payments, recorded an unequivocal Yes.
Those in favour of the deal, which was a carefully balanced compromise
between the demands of Quebec, western Canada and aboriginal people, found a
crumb of consolation, however, in the fact that the No vote was not confined
to any single region or population group.
Political analysts had warned that the worst possible outcome for Canadian
unity would have been strong support for the agreement in English Canada and
opposition in Quebec, or vice versa.
The most vocal opponents of the deal were Quebec separatists, who claimed it
offered the province too little, and western Canadian groups, who said it
gave Quebec too much. But many Canadians appear to have used their
referendum votes to vent their anger against the political and business
establishment in general over the recession and a range of unpopular
government policies.
Observers cautioned that the decisive No victory did not necessarily
indicate support in Quebec for a breakaway from Canada. However, Mr Bob Rae,
Ontario's premier, warned that Canadians were 'quite wrong' if they thought
separatism and other tensions would disappear.
Editorial Comment, Page 20
