FT  15 JUL 92 / Government Bonds: Gilts recover modestly as pound improves
THE prospect of a tightening in German monetary policy continued to hang
heavy on European bond markets yesterday as investors dug in for the long
wait until the Bundesbank meeting tomorrow.
UK government bonds, which had slipped on Monday as sterling caught a bad
case of the jitters over Germany, recovered some of their composure, along
with the currency. Prices of longer-dated gilts moved to reflect continued
signs of weakness in the UK economy and falling inflation, despite the
trepidation caused by tough signals from the Bundesbank.
UK manufacturing output figures confirmed the recent trend, with output for
May down 0.6 per cent and a provisional April rise of 0.1 per cent revised
to a fall of 0.2 per cent. Investors preferred to take note of these figures
rather than the latest producer prices, which showed an unexpected jump.
The benchmark 9 per cent gilts due 2008 picked up nearly half a point to 101
17/32 , for a yield of 8.8 per cent, while the yield on partly-paid 9 per
cent gilts due 2012 fell to 8.77 per cent, a price of 37 3/32 .
On Liffe, the short sterling contract ended the day near its Monday close,
having slid on the fears from Germany.
IN Germany, bunds firmed on the day as conditions in the money market
remained tight ahead of the Bundesbank meeting.
In a moderately active day on Liffe, the bund futures contract advanced from
87.62 to 87.76 as traders reacted to the feeling that Monday's sell-off had
been overdone. However, the market remained generally apprehensive - despite
some suggestions that the bund market could actually advance on the back of
any monetary tightening, taking it as an encouraging reaffirmation of the
Bundesbank's determination to beat inflation.
The OECD, in its latest annual report on the German economy, added its voice
to those calling for moderation in Bundesbank policy when it said: 'A
temporary above-target monetary expansion would not seem to call for further
tightening of monetary conditions.'
DESPITE further signs of the Japanese economy weakening - this time a 0.2
per cent fall in wholesale prices in June, in line with market expectations
 -the prime minister repeated yesterday there was no need for a cut in
Japanese interest rates. The benchmark No 129 bond ended a quiet day at a
yield of 5.175 per cent.
IN THE US, the yield curve steepened further yesterday as investors
preferred the safety of short-dated maturities in the currently unsettled
domestic political environment.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government issue was down  5/32 at
103 17/32 , to yield 7.688 per cent. The two-year note, however, was firmer,
up  5/32 at 101 5/16 to carry a yield of 4.277 per cent.
The yield curve has been steepening lately as investors buy short-dated
paper over the longer-term securities, their demand spurred by faint hopes
that the Federal Reserve may ease monetary policy again and by concern that
President George Bush could lose the election in November.
At times of political uncertainty, short-term securities are always favoured
as the safe haven of choice.
