FT  23 JUN 92 / World Trade News: Lisbon summit 'crucial to Gatt'
A POLITICAL initiative by EC leaders - most prominently Germany's Chancellor
Helmut Kohl - will be needed at the Lisbon summit later this week if the
Uruguay Round of world trade talks is to avoid collapse, negotiators in
Brussels and Geneva said yesterday.
The talks are 'totally and utterly blocked', senior staff at the
Geneva-based General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt), said over the
weekend. This was due to a dispute between the EC and the US over reform of
world trade in farm products. Pessimism about a settlement has prompted
calls by some trade negotiators in Geneva for a ministerial meeting next
month formally to bury or resurrect the Uruguay Round.
After last week's failure in Geneva to reinvigorate the detailed
country-by-country negotiations on lowering tariff barriers, some countries
have apparently asked Mr Arthur Dunkel, director-general of Gatt, to call a
ministerial meeting of the trade negotiations committee to decide on the
future of the Round.
EC negotiators insist that no issues of substance now prevent a US-EC
agreement on farm trade: 'Things are no longer in the hands of negotiators,'
an EC official said. 'It has become more of a political problem, and much
will now depend on a prise de conscience from leaders of member states in
Lisbon, given that the commission is fairly divided on the issue.'
In a Lisbon agenda already thrown into disarray by concern over the
Maastricht treaty, negotiators are not confident EC leaders can muster the
will to push for settlement of the Uruguay Round. Officials look to
Chancellor Kohl because Germany takes up the EC presidency at the end of the
year, and because of Germany's pivotal influence on Europe's farm policy.
EC officials acknowledge that a common EC position on the Uruguay Round will
be formulated in Lisbon, but were unclear whether this prise de conscience -
or 'awakening' - would enable a US-EC settlement to be drafted ahead of the
summit of leaders from the Group of Seven industrial countries in Munich in
July.
