FT  15 FEB 92 / How to Spend It: Bridal gowns, one careful owner . . .
IF ANYBODY in your family is about to become a bride, you may be in for
something of a shock when the bills start rolling in. Joy Eagell and Sandra
Rishover have had what seems like an idea whose time has come - they sell
second-hand wedding dresses.
The dresses come from some of the best-known names in the business - Tatters
(beloved of the upper-crest set), Louise Hamlin-Wright, Hollywood Dream,
Beverley Summers and lots, lots more. Some have been specially-made for the
bride by a dressmaker, others are couture, yet others have originally been
bought off-the-peg. All have been beautifully dry-cleaned and are in
excellent condition.
At any given moment they probably have some 60 different dresses to choose
from and they sell at roughly half what they would have cost originally.
Prices start at Pounds 250 and go on up to Pounds 2,500. The bride gets
roughly a third of the original prices, the new buyer pays roughly half.
'Yesterday's Dress for Tomorrow's Bride' is their motto and it seems like a
very useful service.
There is a nice, relaxed showroom at 73, Fairfax Road, London NW6 4EE, where
either Joy or Sandra will see prospective brides by appointment only. Tel:
071-372-4748.
With the opening of the trout fishing season approaching a box of beautiful
artificial flies, I am reliably told, is exactly the sort of present that
fisher folk would be more than pleased to receive.
Hawkes and Black is an old-established fly tying firm and has put together
some 40 different patterns in a (re-usable) black plastic box. All are for
fishing for trout and sea trout, and all have been devised in consultation
with the relevant experts.
There are different flies for each fishing region - the Welsh Trout Fly
Collection, the Welsh Sewin Fly Collection, the North Country Spider
Collection, the Scottish Trout Collection and the Welsh Border Collection.
Each fly box comes complete with a sleeve with lots of appropriate
information on it.
Each box costs Pounds 15.99 (including postage) and can be bought direct
from Hawkes and Black (tel: 0363-83655), from Greys of Alnwick,
Northumberland, (tel: 0665-510020) or from any Greys of Alnwick stockist.
These days keeping a house filled with fresh flowers can cost up to hundreds
of pounds a week, so it is not surprising that many people have taken to
mixing fresh flowers with artificial ones. But this needs to be done
carefully - the difference between the best and the worst of the artificial
ones is huge.
Oasis, at 194-196 Walton Street, London SW3 (tel: 071-584-9519) has some of
the best artificial ones I have seen and its latest line, imitation dried
flowers, is really lovely. Made in silk, they crackle and look faded, just
like the real ones. There are small rosebuds (Pounds 1.50) and roses (Pounds
3.40) as well as flowers such as hydrangeas (Pounds 4.20) and peonies
(Pounds 3.90). The initial outlay may seem large but they wash and wash and
next year they will still look as good.
