FT  01 AUG 92 / Books: Keneally returns to his Booker format - Fiction
WOMAN OF THE INNER SEA by Thomas Keneally Hodder &amp; Stoughton Pounds 14.99,
284 pages
SAMARKAND by Amin Maalouf Quartet Books Pounds 15.95, 309 pages
THE STRANGE CASE OF MADEMOISELLE P. by Brian O'Doherty Chatto &amp; Windus
Pounds 9.99, 228 pages
MATING by Norman Rush Jonathan Cape Pounds 15.99, 477 pages
THOMAS Keneally is known best for his 1982 novel Schindler's Ark, which won
the Booker Prize that year and sold more copies than any other Booker winner
before or since. It was a heady mix of fact and fiction - so much fact that
some people claimed it was not a novel at all - based more or less directly
on a real story from Hitler's war. For his latest work, Woman of the Inner
Sea, Keneally is trying the same thing again, albeit in a vastly different
setting.
Names, dates and venues have been changed but the author says the story is
essentially true, told to him a dozen years ago and filed for future
reference. It tells of Kate, a prosperous Irish-Australian whose marriage to
an immigrant construction boss turns sour at the same time as something
terrible (it would be unfair to say what) happens to their two children.
Unable to cope, Kate abandons her husband and sets off for the Australian
bush. She works as a barmaid in the middle of nowhere and takes up with
several different men, one of whom keeps an emu and a kangaroo (Australia's
national symbols) as pets. But her husband hires a private investigator to
track her down and serve her with divorce papers. The investigator is a
thoroughly unpleasant character who punches the kangaroo so hard on the nose
that its hind feet rear up and shatter his pelvis. And that is only for
starters.
Throw in floods, dynamite, attempted murder, an Oscar-winning film director
and a defrocked priest serving five years for illicit gambling and you have
the makings of a very whimsical tale indeed. In fact, parts of it would
appear to belong in a different book, or even several different books.
Yet, if the story never quite coalesces as a whole, the main character is
done beautifully and the plot unfolds with real skill. The problem, perhaps,
is that the author has set out to tell a partially true story and truth, in
the end, often turns out stranger than fiction.
Amin Maalouf's Samarkand is based on a true story as well, the writing of
the Rubaiyaat of Omar Khayyam in 11th century Persia, now Iran. It begins
with Omar's arrival in Samarkand as a little-known poet and ends 900 years
later with the loss of the original Rubaiyaat MS in the Titanic disaster.
The first half of the book is taken up with the writing of the poems, the
second with a 19th century American scholar's hunt for the manuscript,
missing for 600 years.
It is an intriguing story presented deftly by Maalouf, although the English
translation by Russell Harris is a little stiff. You might feel that 11th
century Persia is not your cup of tea. But think again because, in Maalouf's
hands, it is a brightly-lit world of sieges, sackings, voluptuous court
poetesses and homicidal assassins (in the original sense of the word). The
narrative rambles in places and the author does not always make the best use
of a dramatic situation but he has a splendid tale to tell - one which
already has won a prize in France and deserves to succeed in the UK as well.
It is a good week for fiction based on fact. Brian O'Doherty is a doctor of
medicine and, for his first novel, has recreated a famous medical history
from 18th century Vienna. The Strange Case of Mademoiselle P. tells the
story, in several different voices, of Marie-Therese von Paradies, the
pianist for whom both Mozart and Salieri wrote concertos.
Blind from the age of three, Marie-Therese had given up hope of seeing again
until her father took her to the pioneer of psychosomatic medicine, Franz
Mesmer. Thus 'mesmerised,' she regained her sight gradually only to see her
playing suffer as a consequence. This endangered her livelihood, prompting
her father to look askance at Mesmer's cure. What happens thereafter will be
for readers to find out: suffice to say that it is a most interesting story,
reconstructed ably by O'Doherty.
Norman Rush has been a published short story writer for more than 20 years,
but Mating is his first attempt at anything longer. It is set in Botswana in
the 1980s, where the author worked for a while, and follows the career of an
American woman writing a thesis on nutritional anthropology while looking
for the perfect man to sleep with.
The book is billed as a comedy of manners, and the tone is certainly jokey
enough. But the author's use of English is clumsy, to say the least, and his
command of dialogue almost non-existent. Some writers are long-distance
performers and some are not; one suspects that Rush's natural length is the
short story, rather than almost 500 pages of often tortuous prose.
