FT  07 JUL 92 / Duran considers what to do first: Sarita Kendall outlines
the problems facing Ecuador's president-elect
A WIDE margin of victory in the second round of presidential elections on
Sunday should give Ecuador's president-elect, Mr Sixto Duran Ballen, the
leeway to embark on the campaign goals he set himself.
Mr Duran's main campaign promise was to pursue the goal of 'national
consensus'. He also pledged to introduce market-oriented policies to escape
economic stagnation and dependence on oil.
But while his 15 percentage point victory should help him pursue these aims
early in his four-year term, a more lasting consensus will come under severe
pressure from Ecuador's traditional regional, political and racial
divisions.
Mr Duran, 70, was born in Boston while his father was serving in Ecuador's
diplomatic corps. An architect and former cabinet minister, he earned a
reputation for public works as mayor of Quito. To run for the presidency he
had to leave the Social Christian party, which he had helped to create but
which fielded his opponent in the second round, Mr Jaime Nebot. Mr Duran
founded the Republican Unity party, which won only 12 of the 77 seats in
congress.
The vice president-elect, economist Mr Alberto Dahik of the Conservative
party, adds five more seats to the parliamentary alliance. He is expected to
be a stronger influence on economic policy than previous vice presidents and
shares Mr Duran's desire for market-oriented reforms.
Looking pleased and relaxed as he scanned the regional voting results which
gave him victory in 19 of the 21 provinces, Mr Duran stressed the need for
multi-party agreement. He must negotiate the support of at least two more
political parties to have a small majority in congress, and though this may
be easy at the beginning of the government it will be harder in his second
two years.
Mr Duran's immediate worry will be the economy, especially the steady but
high inflation rate of 50 per cent and the large budget deficit.
Devaluation, as well as increases in the price of petrol, transport and
other services, are some of the unpopular measures he will have to take in
the first weeks of government.
The role of the state will be reduced: 'I believe it should be a regulator,
but the state is a bad administrator - look at our railways,' said Mr Duran.
'We can do lot with private sector contracts, for example in the maintenance
of roads, in housing and in the provision of water and sewerage. This will
generate employment and reduce costs.'
The present government made little progress on rescheduling the Dollars
12.3bn foreign debt, about half of which lies with the commercial banks. Mr
Duran plans to increase debt swaps and 'use the debt as a factor for
development'.
As part of the liberalisation strategy, the new administration needs to
attract foreign investors: 'Foreign capital should be treated in the same
way as national investment with no discrimination. There must be security
for the repatriation of profits and investment recovery and, I hope, a
climate of peace and confidence.'
Foreign oil companies in particular have become frustrated with the present
government's delays and changeability.
President Rodrigo Borja has however earned praise for his energetic and
unexpected action against Ecuador's main drug-trafficking group. Mr Jorge
Reyes and other members of the Reyes clan, allegedly linked to Colombia's
Cali cartel, were arrested at the end of June. 'In the next government we
must continue, and make sure the justice system does its job,' said Mr
Duran.
