FT  07 APR 92 / Gains by far right in Germany lead main parties to
collaborate
GERMANY'S mainstream parties, shocked by far-right gains in weekend
elections, yesterday prepared to collaborate in a bid to restore their
credibility. They also want to break the deadlock over legal reforms and
efforts to revive the economy of the former East Germany.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl invited the opposition Social Democrats (SPD) to
talks after Easter to discuss federal finances and changes to political
asylum laws. Mr Bjorn Engholm, the socialist chairman, called for a
'national commonsense pact'.
Both leaders were snubbed by the electorate in Sunday's polls. The far-right
Deutsche Volksunion (DVU) won six state parliament seats in
Schleswig-Holstein, where Mr Engholm is prime minister, cutting his majority
to one.
In Baden-Wurttemberg, a Christian Democrat stronghold for 20 years, the
extremist Republicans took 15 seats, robbing Mr Kohl's party of control of
its last west German state.
Ruling out power-sharing, Mr Kohl stressed that he wanted to discuss the
issues with socialist leaders from federal, state and local parties. His
main concerns are the need to stiffen asylum laws and to persuade the mainly
socialist state governments to increase their contributions to supporting
eastern Germany.
More than 250,000 asylum seekers entered Germany last year, and 35,000
arrived last month alone. At present the federal budget bears virtually all
the costs of propping up the eastern economy. Transfers from Bonn this year
are expected to exceed DM180bn (Pounds 63.1bn).
Mr Engholm was less specific, and claimed that one party could not handle
all the problems the country faced. 'When you see the problems we have in
Germany - DM1,500bn in debt, housing shortages and long-term difficulties
building up east Germany - it is not easy to solve,' he said.
According to Mr Kohl, the federal constitution must be changed to control
the influx of asylum-seekers - a move so far firmly resisted by the SPD and
the chancellor's FDP liberal allies in the coalition.
The jubilant Republicans and DVU, which had canvassed almost exclusively on
the asylum issue, linking it with economic concerns over housing,
unemployment and crime, went to ground yesterday. The DVU, reckoned to be
the more extreme of the two, now has seats in 13 of Germany's 16 state
parliaments.
Polling analyses showed that they had attracted votes from both main
parties, particularly among young, working-class men living in large towns
and cities.
The Infas social science institute said the weekend results showed a similar
pattern to those of the recent elections in France, where the establishment
was also shaken by far-right gains.
The main common features included: anxiety over economic well-being, a
tendency to blame foreigners and readiness to consider extremists as
alternatives to traditional parties.
The right creeps in, Page 18
