FT  04 APR 92 / SIB issues defence of 'soft commission'
THE Securities and Investments Board, the City's chief investment regulator,
yesterday turned down calls for a ban on so-called 'soft commission' share
trading and issued its strongest statement in defence of the practice.
Under soft commission arrangements institutional investors promise to give
business to a particular broker. In return they receive facilities that help
them do their job, such as information services or screens carrying market
news and data.
Critics say the arrangements prevent investors from shopping round to get
the best deal for their own clients each time they trade.
The practice was criticised recently in a speech by Mr Peter Rawlins, chief
executive of the London Stock Exchange, when he called on pension fund
investment managers to drop soft commissions. He added: 'To the average man,
if people want a service, they should be prepared to pay visibly for it in a
currency everyone understands.'
Yesterday the SIB said it had noted calls to review its policy on soft
commissions, or to ban the practice, but it had decided no change was
necessary.
'Soft commission arrangements provide a legitimate means for fund managers
to obtain specialist services,' the board said. 'The payment of commission
in return for an array of services in addition to execution, which benefit
the fund manager's clients, is a traditional feature of the marketplace.'
The SIB said that to prevent abuse it had developed a framework to define
the services that could be provided, to keep customers informed and to
ensure that 'transactions are carried out on terms no different from those
involving a traditional commission arrangement'.
Those regulatory arrangements should be given a chance to settle down, the
SIB said, adding that trustees 'should be alert to the implications for fund
beneficiaries of such arrangements'.
The SIB also said yesterday it would take no action to limit the ability of
integrated investment houses to undertake soft commission business. It had
started a review of the subject, prompted by moves by some integrated houses
to cut soft commission rates to win business.
