FT  16 MAR 92 / Election 92: Lib Dems form dawn patrol for campaign raids -
How the party hopes to capture the initiativeeach day
SHORTLY after dawn each morning until April 9 the small, disciplined Liberal
Democrat high command will launch the first salvoes in the day's
campaigning.
A brisk review of events will be followed by a 7.15am press conference. The
8am news bulletins will carry the Liberal Democrats' theme for the day. The
others will have to catch up.
That, at least is the theory. Mr Des Wilson, Liberal Democrat campaign
director, has constructed a slim, but not tiny, strategy team to force the
minority party's message into voters' consciousness while others sleep. The
number of decision-makers is minimised and resources targeted.
The vanity of parliamentarians has not been pampered - Mr Paddy Ashdown,
party leader, is the only MP on the inner strategy-making circle.
It is a high-risk strategy, dependent on a few people getting on together
and working effectively through an exhausting schedule. Although experienced
and enthusiastic, the strategy team has yet to prove it is cohesive and able
to stand back from the campaign to see how effectively scarce resources are
being deployed.
The danger is of internal disputes, burn-out, or of being squeezed into
simply responding to the far larger campaigns of the Conservatives and
Labour, which will be dominated by ranks of ministers or their shadows.
Much has been invested in Mr Ashdown who, to outsiders, will appear to be
running the campaign single-handedly. He will travel from one end of the
country to the other for photo-calls and rallies.
Mr Wilson has a campaign budget of Pounds 1.5m - compared with about Pounds
7m expected to be spent by Labour and Pounds 20m by the Tories. He might be
able to spend more if fund-raising allows but is already assuming that
Pounds 500,000 will be raised during the campaign.
The biggest costs are the leader's tour, the evening rallies and the morning
press conferences. Precise figures are not being released but the
advertising budget will be small.
The focus will be on 'strategic' adverts in quality newspapers, by the TBWA
advertising agency, to grab the attention of opinion formers to the agenda
the party is trying to set. With television advertising illegal, the
financial disadvantage is not as great as it would otherwise be.
Yet with limited finances, the party's strongest card could prove to be the
campaigning prowess of its strategy team. The example to be avoided is the
1987 election campaign of the former Alliance parties.
Then, as much energy was expended on co-ordinating the SDP and Liberal
parties, and on soothing bruised egoes, as on the campaign itself.
Logistical and policy clashes were inevitable.
Veterans of 1987 recall with horror the day it was discovered, within hours
of transmission, that an already-weak party election broadcast featuring Mrs
Rosie Barnes, the SDP MP, should have been 10 minutes long, not the five
minutes prepared.
This time the strategy team will be dominated by Mr Wilson and Mr Ashdown.
It will assemble before and after the morning press conference and again
late at night, moving between the National Liberal Club in Whitehall, the
Horseguards Hotel next door and party headquarters in Cowley Street.
Gregarious and bubbly, Mr Wilson is a campaigning legend with a curriculum
vitae dating from his formation of, Shelter, the charity for the homeless,
in 1966.
In 1987 he ran the Alliance party's overnight operation. He has been
planning the present campaign for two years.
His deputy is the calmer Mr Alec McGivan, once a Labour supporter and
formerly SDP national organiser, who brings experience outside elections as
a full-time communications specialist for a campaigns consultancy. His job
will be day-to-day logistical 'crisis management'.
The 'intellectual' - and the nearest the strategy team has to an elder
statesman - is Lord Holme, the 55-year-old former president of the Liberal
party, who has written most of the party manifesto.
Responsible for Mr Ashdown's speeches will be Mr Alan Leaman, a researcher
who has also acted as press liaison officer in the four years since Mr
Ashdown became leader.
Ms Olly Grender is the chief press officer with responsibility for trying to
control the images presented on television which the party hopes both to
feed and fool.
Mr Tim Clement-Jones, former Liberal party chairman, will be responsible for
constituency associations and local candidates. Some of these are
well-organised, but others may well be founding wanting in the basic tasks
of securing the local vote.
The two other members of the strategy team are Ms Alison Holmes, assistant
to Mr Wilson, who will take charge of arranging party election broadcasts,
and Mr Chris Rennard, a veteran of Liberal Democrat by-election campaigns,
who will have particular responsibility for hard-nosed tactics in target
seats.
Of the nine members, only Mr Ashdown, Mr Wilson and Lord Holme will take a
high profile during the campaign. The main spokesmen - the party's MPs -
will be slotted into a schedule drawn up by the strategy team. Whatever the
frenzy behind the scenes, the public faces of the party must always be calm.
