FT  03 DEC 92 / Brussels agrees strategy to help revive growth
THE European Commission wants EC leaders to earmark nearly Ecu7.7bn (Pounds
6.2bn) as the kernel of a co-ordinated strategy, to be discussed at next
week's Edinburgh summit, to get Europe's economies moving again.
The strategy, approved by the Commission yesterday suggests the money would
consist mostly of soft and temporary loans for infrastructure investment
programmes, and the redirection of part of EC spending on research and
training.
Mr Henning Christophersen, economy commissioner, said yesterday the
Community needed 'a good psychological signal from the European Council (in
Edinburgh) which would give us something on which we could build a growth
initiative'.
The plan is consistent with earlier ideas for the EC to provide 'seed-money'
to revive economic growth, but falls far short of widespread reports that
Brussels was preparing an Ecu50bn-Ecu60bn reflation package.
The document it approved yesterday calls for:
A new European Investment Fund able to lend Ecu2bn over four years for
infrastructure and small to medium-size enterprises. The European Investment
Bank would pay in 40 per cent of the Ecu400m capital, with the rest split
between the EC budget and unspecified private financial institutions. The
hope is that this could 'support' investments of up to Ecu10bn.
An Ecu5bn loan facility to support trans-European networks, normally
transport, including those from western to eastern Europe where there is
clear 'mutual interest'. These loans, raised on international capital
markets, would be for 'a limited time'. There would be 10-15 per cent loan
subsidies to participating east European nations, which the Commission
suggests the London-based European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
might help finance.
New facilities for immediate retraining (at a cost of Ecu200m in 1993) for
workers made redundant, 'so as to avoid a loss of skills and motivation'.
Redirection of Ecu400m in R&amp;D spending to improve industrial
competitiveness, in areas like computer-aided design and manufacturing,
advanced telematics, and laser processing.
