FT  11 SEP 92 / Major stands by 'hounded' Mellor
MR David Mellor, the heritage secretary, was said last night to retain the
'full confidence' of the prime minister following the latest newspaper
allegations about his personal life.
Amid speculation among Tory MPs and some ministers that he is now struggling
to hold on to his seat in the cabinet, Downing Street said Mr Major had no
intention of asking him to stand down.
Senior ministers voiced concern, however, about what one characterised as an
attempt by sections of the media to 'hound' Mr Mellor from office. While
most of his colleagues believe that the heritage secretary will remain, some
acknowledge that if the press campaign continued there would be a question
mark over his future.
Sir Norman Fowler, the party chairman, telephoned Mr Mellor at lunchtime
yesterday to offer personal backing and to quash suggestions that
Conservative Central Office had discussed his future with his local
constituency party.
The prime minister's officials dismissed as 'insignificant' a report in The
Daily Mail that the heritage secretary had been provided with occasional use
of a London flat and a car by Mr Elliott Bernerd, a property developer. A
senior official said Mr Major had been informed of the friendship and was
satisfied that there had been no 'impropriety'.
Government officials said that Mr Mellor had used the car provided by Mr
Bernerd during the election campaign but had made the proper declaration to
electoral officers. There had been no direct discussion between Mr Major and
the heritage secretary.
The report followed a series of detailed allegations in other newspapers
centring on Mr Mellor's alleged affair earlier this year with Ms Antonia de
Sancha. Friends of the heritage secretary, who this week insisted that he
had no intention of standing down, said the latest allegations were part of
a tabloid circulation war. Mr Mellor has been subpoenaed to appear as a
witness in a libel action against Mirror Group Newspapers that begins in the
High Court on Monday, John Mason writes.
Ms Mona Bauwens, daughter of a Palestinian Liberation Organisation official,
is suing MGN over comments in The People of September 2 1990 that Mr Mellor
and his family should not have gone on holiday with her in the aftermath of
Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, when the PLO supported Iraq.
