FT  19 JUN 92 / Arts: Austerity with a baroque twist / Review of the art and
craft of the Hutterites and Mennonites
In summer, the colony bell wakes everyone at 6.15 am. The bell calls the
adults to the communal kitchen for a breakfast of prunes, cheese, smoked
ham, bread, jam and coffee. Quickly and in order the men file in, hang their
hats and take their assigned places on benches around a long table. All wear
black working trousers and coloured shirts; the mature men are bearded. The
women follow and sit at a second table, their hair identically arranged,
their clothes another uniform of polka-dotted head scarves, long patterned
dresses and aprons. No children are present.
A short prayer. Each person eats quickly and in silence. Another prayer. The
dishes are carried into the kitchen. Women finish clearing the tables and
begin washing up. The procedure takes seven minutes in all.
The colony is Hutterite, the date the mid 1960s. For the first time,
outsiders had been admitted to observe and photograph the life of what is
the most long lived of all Christian Utopian communities. The Hutterites,
like the other two surviving German-speaking Anabaptist sects, the
Mennonites and the Amish, chose to separate themselves from church and state
in the 16th century. Endlessly persecuted, not least for their pacifism as
well as for their separateness, they sought refuge and land to farm first in
Prussia or Russia, then the US, and latterly in Western Canada.
Unlike the Mennonites and the Amish, their life is communal, their modest
earthly goods the possession of the community rather than an individual.
Moreover, they have continued to resist integrating into a wider community.
In North American in 1965, a population of some 16,500 Hutterites was
recorded in 170 colonies.
An image of those cheerless, regimented breakfasts ought to haunt like a
spectre 'All Things Common', a beautifully presented small show of Mennonite
and Hutterite furniture, textiles, metalwork, ceramics and calligraphy at
Canada House. So seductively simple and wholesome are these workaday rustic
chests and chairs, and handsome quilts, that the harshness of the life for
which they were made is blurred in a romantic mist.
The Hutterite children who slept in the gaily painted turn-of-the-century
cradle, and played in the child's wagon of around 1930, were not allowed to
favour their own mothers above other members of the community.
Indoctrination began early: by the age of two they would be aware that the
needs and will of the colony took precedence over those of the individual.
Indeed, the individual will had to be broken, individuality suppressed.
There appears to be a contradiction between what we see in this exhibition
and what we know. Despite their austerity, the so-called 'Plain Folk' in
sombre blue clothing appear not so plain after all. Unlike the Shakers who
rationalised 18th century English furniture to create a new, streamlined,
functional style, Mennonite and Hutterite craftsmen continued to copy and
simplify old prototypes. Those prototypes happened to be in the most
immodestly exuberant and self-indulgent of decorative styles, the baroque.
The survival of Germanic forms and decorative traditions among these - and
other - widely dispersed and much travelled Germanic colonies is striking.
Theirs is a similar small repertory of essential furniture: blanket boxes,
wall cupboards, chairs, tables and sleeping benches, which serve as storage
chest, bench and bed. In the latter, in particular, we find Baroque
curlicues and scrolling arm rests, back rests and skirts. Throughout are
unexpected bright primarily colours, inlay, trompe l'oeil, and Hansel and
Gretel heart-shaped cuts outs.
In contrast to Shaker furniture and artefacts, some of these pieces seem
fussy, galumphing and poorly made. What they lack in aesthetic and technical
refinement, however, they often make up for in spirit. We can imagine the
sense of satisfaction felt by the man who carved the heart in the top of the
cabbage cutter here, or forged the heart-shaped trivets, as well as the
simple pleasure derived by those who handled them.
An instinctive feel for colour and design is evident in the traditionally
patterned Mennonite quilts on show. That sense of design is also apparent in
perhaps the most distinctive works here - the lively manuscript illumination
known as 'fraktur'. Again, the art form derives from Swiss-German
traditions, but it flowered in the New World. The motifs that once decorated
the borders of important family documents became as important as the script
itself, and even exist without it. Eight-pointed stars, hearts, birds,
flowers, animals and trees of life weave their lively, rhythmic watercolour
courses across the page.
All Things Common continues at Canada House, Trafalgar Square, until July 3.
