FT  07 MAY 92 / Tired Nigerian leadership battling to limit economic damage:
How Lagos must strive for fiscal stability while attempting to bring about a
smooth transition to civilian rule
WITH just eight months to go before he hands over power to an elected
civilian administration, Nigeria's President Ibrahim Babangida has lost his
image as the mercurial Maradona of Nigerian politics.
Instead, a tired, leaden-footed administration is battling to contain the
impact of depressed oil prices, the ravages of rampant inflation, a
generation of fiscal irresponsibility and an unsustainable debt burden,
domestic as well as foreign.
On the economic front, his government is preoccupied with damage limitation
while still determined to ensure that the transition to civilian rule goes
ahead as smoothly as possible.
The brave, if unavoidable, March 5 decision to devalue the Naira from N10.5
to the dollar to the current rate of N18.6 brought down the wrath of vested
interests on the President's head.
The timing was doubly unfortunate; coming after a period of excessive
monetary growth, the inflationary impact has been lethal.
The latest official figures show inflation running at 29 per cent in January
in the wake of 1991 credit growth of over 40 per cent.
Devaluation was seized upon by all and sundry as justification for sharp
price increases, and according to one survey, retail prices rose 12 per cent
during March alone.
Devaluation was all the more unfortunate too, since after a decade of
stagnating living standards and nearly six years of structural adjustment,
it was hailed by the administration's many critics as concrete evidence of
the decisive failure of economic reform.
Nor has a subsequent series of own goals helped matters. In a newspaper
interview, the President said he kept asking his advisers 'why the Nigerian
economy has not collapsed until now', adding: 'I have still not found an
answer'.
In a statement tying the hands of his officials who at the time were
negotiating a standby agreement with the IMF, the President ruled out any
increase in the domestic price of petrol - currently less than four US cents
a litre.
The sensitivity of the issue has been underlined over the past few days. The
riots that broke out on Sunday were over fuel shortages rather than the fuel
price but Nigeria's history shows that any increase in petrol pump prices
provokes an angry reaction.
The pricing issue, he said, was best left to the future civilian government
to resolve - confirmation, as critics were quick to point out, of his
administration's lame-duck character.
Government hypersensitivity to criticism was reflected in the two-week long
closure of Concord press, whose news magazine African Concord's critical
17-page survey of the economy has been banned.
As time runs out, crisis management is the only strategy to hand. Western
diplomats and bankers believe the best Nigeria can expect in talks with the
IMF is a year-long standby which might just enable the government to secure
a conventional debt-rescheduling agreement from the Paris Club of official
creditors before the handover in January.
Although Nigeria is now eligible for an IMF Extended Structural Adjustment
Facility, (ESAF), negotiations for such a concessional facility must await
the emergence of a new administration that can take a three-year view of the
economic situation.
In last week's negotiations in Washington with the Fund, the Nigerian team
apparently had little to offer. Naira devaluation removed the major
obstacle, but agreement on fiscal management is likely to be extraordinarily
difficult, especially given the probability that in its final months in
power the Babangida administration will seek to buy off its
increasingly-vocal opponents.
With inflation set to reach 50 per cent later in the year, according to
local economists, the government will come under intense pressure to grant
compensatory pay awards to public servants. Wage inflation is already on the
march in the private sector as employers react to the post-devaluation price
surge.
Weak though Nigeria's bargaining hand may be, the Fund negotiators are also
in a bind. If they press too hard for Nigerian concessions especially on the
entirely rational but intensely emotive issue of phasing out the petroleum
subsidy, they run the risk of being accused of contributing to civil unrest
that could derail the return to democracy.
At the same time, both the IMF and the World Bank know that throughout the
main flaw in their Nigerian game plan has been their inability to achieve
fiscal stability. It is not just a matter of the size of the budget deficit
nor the manner of its financing, but the lack of accountability and
transparency in public spending programmes.
Fiscal policy is the key to short-term stability too. Devaluation in March
did no more than bring the official - subsidised - exchange rate into line
with that ruling in the marketplace.
Although officials claim to have deregulated the foreign exchange market,
bankers say that the rate is still being closely managed.
'Its now a fixed rate system,' said one Lagos banker; 'pegged at N18.6 to
the dollar, despite strong fluctuations in the demand for foreign currency'.
The Central Bank no longer publishes the details of the weekly foreign
exchange auction, though it does announce the exchange rate and how much
currency is being sold.
Money market liquidity has tightened a great deal since March largely
because the banks now need almost twice as many Naira to buy their dollar
requirements, but also because the Central Bank issued N5 billion (Dollars
269m) of stabilisation securities to mop up excess liquidity.
This might result in brief respite for the Naira though it may soon be
overtaken by escalating inflation on one hand and increased public spending
on the other.
The familiar Nigerian syndrome of the central bank trying to contain
inflation while the government spends as if there were no tomorrow seems all
too likely to repeat itself during the administration's dying months.
Donors insist that any debt-relief package must be linked to a
closely-monitored reform programme agreed, not with a lame-duck military
administration, but with the incoming civilians. As one donor put it bluntly
last week: 'There is nothing in this administration's recent track record to
merit Trinidad-style debt-relief terms.'
With so little room for manoeuvre on either side both the IMF and the
government seems set to fudge the issues. Its clear that Nigeria cannot meet
its debt-service obligations - of more than Dollars 5bn during 1992 - from
export earnings of around Dollars 9bn.
A one-year IMF standby and a conventional Paris Club rescheduling would
avoid a new build-up in arrears, giving the incoming civilians the breathing
space - but no more than that - to try and put together a coherent economic
strategy.
But in the run-up to the national assembly elections in mid-year and the
presidential primaries in September there is little evidence to suggest that
more than one or two of the literally dozens of presidential aspirants yet
accepts that, whoever wins in December, will have to continue to implement
the military government's highly unpopular economic reforms.
