FT  31 DEC 92 / Italy fails to agree market revival plan
ITALY'S cabinet yesterday failed to agree a package of measures to boost
popular share ownership and revive the stock market after a stormy 10-hour
meeting which revealed continuing differences between ministers over the
government's ambitious privatisation programme.
Ministers formally approved the privatisation plan, passed by parliament
earlier this month. They gave the go-ahead for measures to bring Italy's
indirect taxes into line with European Community rules from January 1,
raising an estimated L1,500bn (Dollars 1.09bn) in additional revenue next
year.
The government also approved a L1,650bn spending package for the year ahead
to counter rising unemployment and help job creation. In addition, it
unfroze L10,000bn in payments overdue to construction companies for public
work contracts. Disbursing these had been delayed by corruption inquiries.
Heading the long list of assets to be sold are state holdings in banking,
foods, insurance, engineering and energy.
The sales are planned to raise L27,000bn over the next three years for the
Treasury, which will use the money to reduce Italy's vast budget deficit. A
further L24,000bn will come from disposals of companies within the IRI state
holding company. IRI will use the money to cut its own vertiginous
borrowings, now over L60,000bn.
Ministers are believed to have clashed over the extent of asset sales,
meaning that details of the proposed ministerial committee to supervise the
privatisation programme were left unresolved.
The extended debate meant that approval for widely leaked measures expected
to boost the stock market was postponed until the next cabinet meeting,
early in the new year.
Brokers had welcomed the leaked proposals to boost the bourse, which bear
traces of both the personal equity plans of the UK and the individual
retirement accounts common in the US.
The Comit equity index continued a strong week by rising 2.15 points to
451.18 yesterday, although share prices are still below their levels at the
beginning of the year.
If the proposals go through, investors would be offered substantial tax
breaks over the next four years to buy shares in companies going public. A
new type of retirement savings account would also be introduced, with tax
advantages if at least half the funds are put into equities and held for a
number of years.
Further features include tax incentives for companies to go public and for
investors buying into newly-quoted concerns. The measures would also propose
extra funding to reinforce Consob, the stock market and companies watchdog.
The steps should encourage popular share ownership and prepare for one of
Europe's most ambitious privatisation programmes. Italy's relatively
illiquid equity market is inadequate to absorb the vast amount of equity
that could be issued once privatisations start in earnest.
Critics of state disposals may be appeased by a proposed 'golden share'
formula, first used in the UK, to prevent important public sector companies
slipping entirely out of state control.
The latest proposals would replace earlier plans in August dismissed as
inadequate by bankers. The government subsequently went some way to meet
brokers' demands by suspending the unpopular capital gains tax on shares
until September next year.
Only Credito Italiano, the country's sixth-largest bank, and Nuovo Pignone,
the ENI turbines subsidiary have made substantial advances towards
privatisation.
