FT  06 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Salinas sows seeds for economic
benefits/ A look at the impact of Mexico's far-reaching agricultural reforms
MEXICO'S president, Mr Carlos Salinas de Gortari, likes to propose bold,
sweeping reforms. But many Mexican government officials reckon the president
has launched his boldest and most radical yet in opening up Mexico's
antiquated agricultural sector to market forces.
His reforms, which passed into law last week, will greatly extend private
ownership of Mexican farms and increase the attraction of agricultural
investment for both Mexican and foreign business.
They will also remove the government's powers of distributing agricultural
land and undermine the rural power base which has kept the ruling
Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) in power for the past 62 years.
At the same time they have exposed Mr Salinas's government to the criticism
that it has betrayed the spirit of Mexico's 1910-17 revolution -
encapsulated by the constitutional right every Mexican had to land.
For Mexico's president, however, the risk is worth taking. The country's
inefficient agricultural system, which has suffered from a lack of capital
and declining farm size, is standing in the way of his attempts to modernise
the country's economy.
Mexico's farm sector accounts for 30 per cent of the population but just 8
per cent of GDP. The World Bank has recently estimated that 11m of the 27m
Mexicans based in the countryside live in extreme poverty and says that
'lagging rural and agricultural development' lies at the root of the
problem.
The weakness of the rural sector is largely the result of the agricultural
laws enacted after Mexico's bloody 1910-17 revolution. These laws gave every
Mexican the right to land, and established a system of ejido or communal
farms - where farmers managed their plots of state-owned land but often
shared capital and equipment. Ejido farms now account for about half of
Mexican farms.
The ejido system, and the concomitant commitment to land reform, has
provided land for millions of Mexicans. But it discouraged private
investment in agriculture and the creation of larger, more efficient farms.
Ejido farmers, (ejidatarios) could not sell, rent or mortgage their land,
and thus faced difficulty in raising credit. Many private farmers, unsure if
their land will be taken away from them, were also unable or unwilling to
borrow money.
Under the reforms, the constitional right to land has been scrapped.
Mexico's 3m ejido farmers will for the first time become landowners (rather
than landusers) and, as ejidos, they will also be able to form joint
ventures with both Mexican and foreign agricultural businesses without legal
restrictions.
If they prefer, they can become individual private property owners. At the
same time, private sector farmers who combine to form limited companies will
be able to farm up to 2,500 hectares of irrigated land. Previously they
could only farm up to 100 hectares.
The government hopes that the reforms, and the more secure property rights
they create, will attract new investment in capital and technology. This, it
believes, will raise productivity, increase wages and reduce poverty in the
rural sector.
There are signs that the hoped-for investment will be forthcoming. Grupo
Pulsar, Mexico's largest tobacco group, is planning considerable investment
in agro-industry, according to Mario Rodriguez, director of banking affairs.
'The major factor is the credibility that the changes in the constitution
give private investors,' says Mr Rodriguez.
Other Mexican companies have planned similar joint ventures, building on the
100 or so that had overcome legal obstacles, and are already in place.
Foreign agricultural companies are also changing their attitudes towards
investing in Mexican agriculture.
'In the past, many people did not bother to make fixed capital investments'
says Mr Ken Foster of AmFin, a consultancy company specialising in
agro-industry. He says that lack of capital and legal uncertainties made it
difficult to enforce contracts and were a disincentive to foreign
businesses.
Mr Foster forecasts big demand in investments in labour-intensive crops
(vegetables) and winter crops, such as citrus fruits.
But transforming Mexico's rural sector will take time and, for certain
sectors, the adjustment will be painful. Most of Mexico's desperately poor
2.3m maize farmers will not benefit in the short term. They are unlikely to
find buyers for their poor unirrigated land, unsuitable for fruits or
vegetables.
Moreover, the conclusion of a free trade agreement with the US would spell
serious difficulties for maize farmers. Mexican maize prices are about 70
per cent higher than in international markets.
To reduce the impact, the government has promised a phased liberalisation of
the maize market and is also planning a large infrastructure programme to
raise agricultural productivity and increase irrigation.
The government hopes that an ambitious programme of public investment in
irrigation will complement private investment in value-added crops. Mexico
will gradually import more maize, paid for out of crash crops.
The government's policy of agricultural reform will also bring broader
political risks. In particular, it will reduce the ability of the ruling
party to control the rural vote.
Under the ejido system the PRI could buy support by handing out and taking
away land according to political necessity. Land disputes were settled by
the agrarian reform ministry, which in Mexico meant the PRI.
The task of overseeing the agricultural changes will therefore test
President Salinas's political skills to the full. But the betting in Mexico
is that Mr Salinas will get away with the agricultural changes - as he has
done with all his other gambles to date.
The PRI's convincing win in last year's mid-term elections showed that it
can attract the urban lower and middle class vote. The conservative
opposition party has for some time called for many of the changes now
proposed by the president.
Above all, recent privatisations and buoyant tax revenues have given the
president a war chest of billions of dollars to provide agricultural
irrigation and ease the pain of change.
