FT  29 APR 92 / Pemex shake-up may follow gas blast: A strengthened case for
restructuring at Mexico's state oil company
THE explosion that killed at least 191 people in Guadalajara, Mexico last
week may have strengthened the hand of those wishing to restructure
Petroleos Mexicanos (Pemex), the once-proud state oil concern.
On Monday, Mexico's attorney-general, Mr Ignacio Morales Lechuga, ordered
the jailing of seven government officials, including four from Pemex, for
charges including negligent homicide. The blast was caused, said the
attorney-general, by a leak of large quantities of petrol, combined with
other combustibles, into the city's sewer system, as a result of a corroded
water pipe. The Pemex officials had called off an emergency check of gas
leaks in the early morning of the explosion.
Pemex, along with local government officials who failed to evacuate the
endangered area after receiving complaints about gas leaks, has come under
fierce criticism. The outrage has been fuelled by Pemex's original denial of
all responsibility, coming just a couple of hours after the explosion, and
the public accusation it made against a small cooking-oil company (which is
still being investigated).
Rescue workers showed their disgust by interrupting a press conference given
by the governor responsible for Guadalajara, and demanding that Pemex be
held accountable for the deaths. Newspapers have run critical accounts of
Pemex's safety and environmental record, suggesting many more cities are at
risk from similar explosions. Proceso, Mexico's weekly news magazine, claims
the company had known about the gas leak for eight days without doing
anything about it.
The tarnishing of Pemex's image may, in the long run, make it easier for the
technocrats in charge of the government to push ahead with sweeping reforms
of the company, some of which are being demanded by the US in negotiations
over the North American free trade agreement.
Mr Rogelio Ramirez, an economic consultant, said: 'I would be very surprised
if the government did not take this opportunity to shake up Pemex.'
The government may for example loosen restrictions on allowing private
capital into energy, break Pemex up into holding companies, and force a much
more vigorous and public audit of its operations and finances.
Until now the president has shied away from a radical restructuring of
Pemex, probably for fear of creating a backlash in the company that would
damage productivity. Pemex's exports of Dollars 8.3bn a year account for
about 26 per cent of the country's total.
Pemex thus still remains a law unto itself, whose operations are a guarded
secret. The lack of accountability appears to have created a culture of
negligence, in which accidents are not uncommon. Last year a refinery blew
up killing at least six and injuring 329. In 1984 tanks of liquid gas
exploded killing 400.
Pemex shoulders the blame with local government officials, whose actions
before and after the explosion underline the huge gap between the apparently
articulate, clean-cut ministers in charge of Mexico's federal government,
and politics at a local level. It appears officials, apart from failing to
enforce environmental regulations, repeatedly ignored warnings that gas was
leaking from the sewerage, and failed to evacuate residents when there was
still time.
Despite the evidence, the governor, Mr Guillermo Cosio, who has long been
tainted by charges in the press over corruption and nepotism, said at first
that no government official was at fault. Then he claimed that residents had
been warned, but behaved like little children in doing exactly the opposite
to what they were told. Critics claim that, in ordering bulldozers to clear
up the rubble before all bodies were found, local authorities may have
caused more deaths.
Mexicans are concerned that similar accidents could occur elsewhere, and are
demanding even more forcefully that the government enforce and business obey
Mexico's environmental and safety laws.
An editorial in Epoca, a weekly magazine, captured some of the public mood
when it said: 'All of us in the cities live in constant risk. We live
without fire escapes; meeting halls do not have emergency exits, and when
there are, they are closed; gases, liquids, and other dangerous substances
are released as if they were nothing . . . It is not possible to manage the
lives of millions of Mexicans under a dictatorship of casualness. And that
is what we have been doing so disgracefully for a long time.'
