FT  01 FEB 92 / UK Company News - Wace: Anglo-Irish distances itself from
Clegg
ANGLO-IRISH Bank Corporation was at pains to distance itself from Mr John
Clegg, who resigned as a non-executive director of the Dublin-based banking
group yesterday following market speculation that his UK company, Wace, has
been involved in money-laundering for the IRA.
Mr Sean Fitzpatrick, Anglo-Irish's chief executive, said there had been no
pressure on Mr Clegg to resign, but that 'he took the honourable decision'
after a series of meetings earlier this week.
Both Mr Clegg and Anglo-Irish had concluded that 'while the allegations are
around, it is right and proper that he should resign'. Mr Fitzpatrick said:
'As a bank we must have directors who are above and beyond suspicion.'
Mr Fitzpatrick added: 'I can confirm that we had no banking relationship
with John, his family or with Wace. No loans were made to them, nor were
there any deposits from them, or banking transactions.' He said he was
'dumbfounded' by the allegations against Mr Clegg.
Mr Clegg's family holds 15 per cent of the shares of Anglo-Irish, which in
its 1990 annual report recorded trading assets of IPounds 759m (Pounds 704m)
and a pre-tax profit of IPounds 6.5m. The shares are believed to be held
through a family trust controlled by Mr Clegg and several nominees.
The Clegg family first took a stake in Anglo-Irish in 1986 and have
consistently followed the rights issues since, maintaining its holding at
the present level.
Mr Clegg was brought on to the board in 1988 as a non-executive director
because 'the bank needed young, bright blood to know what was going on in
the UK', said Mr Fitzpatrick. He was considered a good director, although
more recently his contribution has apparently declined as he had dedicated
more time to the development of Wace's activities in the US. Wace holds just
under 1 per cent of Anglo-Irish shares directly.
Mr Clegg has been under pressure from the board for several years to reduce
his combined family and Wace holding - something which Mr Fitzpatrick has
made no secret of, as Anglo-Irish is seeking to increase institutional
shareholdings.
However, Mr Clegg has resisted the pressure, arguing that Anglo-Irish shares
have been undervalued and are good value, according to one Dublin-based
market analyst.
