FT  05 OCT 92 / Economics Notebook: Economic policy vacuum in a floating
world
Nearly three weeks on from Black Wednesday, the UK is still without any
semblance of an economic policy.
Indeed ever since sterling was forced to quit the European exchange rate
mechanism, official comments have generated heat rather than shed light. The
past weeks' war of words between the UK Treasury and the Bundesbank has left
Britain almost as much in the dark about the future underpinnings of policy
as when the 23 month-long experiment of pegging sterling to the D-Mark
failed.
We do, it is true, know something about the government's intentions. A few
days after sterling's float, Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, told fellow
finance ministers in Washington that policy setting would give weight to a
range of financial indicators. These would include narrow money, with the
current 0 to 4 per cent growth target remaining in place, as well as broad
money, asset prices (with particular reference to house prices) and the
exchange rate.
The prime goal will be still to bear down on inflation. Some senior Treasury
officials appear to think that an 'inflation target' might be helpful in
this regard.
But there has been no attempt so far to explain how these policies would
work. Mr Lamont's address to the Conservative Party Conference this week
will be honed to help his political survival. He may give some policy
details to the Commons' Treasury and Civil Service committee next Monday.
But the Treasury's assumption after the float was that the chancellor's
October 29 Mansion House speech would be the occasion to expound on monetary
policy. Fiscal policy, or at least the public spending part of it, should be
made clearer with publication of the Autumn Statement, probably in
mid-November.
Sterling's sharp fall last week underlined the dangers in this leisurely
approach to policy making. When trading ended on Friday, the pound's value
against the D-Mark was about 12.5 per cent below its old DM2.778 ERM floor.
By any standard, this devaluation is substantial. It has already seriously
weakened the logic of the UK moving to a floating regime instead of simply
devaluing and returning to ERM disciplines. The attraction of floating was
that it would give the authorities an opportunity to cut interest rates and
so ease a monetary policy policy that had come to be judged too tight at a
time of prolonged recession.
Mr Lamont made full use of that freedom on September 22 when he cut British
bank base rates by a full percentage point to 9 per cent from 10 per cent.
On that day, the pound actually gained slightly to close at DM2.545 in
London. After a week of trading insults between London and Frankfurt, it
closed on Friday at DM2.43, for a loss of 11.5 pfennigs. As a result, the
next move in interest rates could be up rather than down.
At one time, the Treasury had a rule of thumb that equated a 10 per cent
devaluation to a 2.5 percentage point base rate cut. This is now formally
disowned in Great George Street. But the easing of monetary conditions
implicit in the latest devaluation is substantial as is the inflationary
potential of the weaker pound.
In a gloomy assessment of the inflationary potential of sterling's fall, the
National Institute of Economic and Social Research has calculated that a 10
per cent sterling devaluation will add 3.8 percentage points to retail price
inflation in 1993, 3.7 points in 1994, 2 points in 1995 and 1.1 points in
1996.
With next Friday's announcement of the retail prices index expected to show
that UK inflation in September was running at an annual 3.5 per cent, the
NIESR's calculations would suggest that Britain is again on the threshold of
rising prices.
But if the past two years have taught anything, it is to beware of
econometric models. There is a strong belief among economists that
inflationary pressures are especially subdued.
Mr Michael Saunders, UK economist of Salomon Brothers in London, argues that
the government has chosen a good time to devalue. The recession should
prevent higher import costs being passed on in full to the consumer and
there is no strong inflationary pressure from commodity prices.
Mr Douglas McWilliams, the CBI's chief economic adviser believes a 10 per
cent sterling devaluation might add 1 to 1.25 percentage points a year to
retail price inflation. In that case, RPI inflation could stabilise in the 3
to 4 per cent range for 2 years or so rather than rise.
Some optimists see similarities with the early 1980s when sterling fell
sharply, interest rates declined and inflation moved downwards - albeit
unevenly - until the middle of the decade. This parallel cannot be taken too
far, however. Sterling was less obviously overvalued before Black Wednesday
than in the early 1980s.
So if the chancellor would be unwise to let policy drift for too long, what,
credibly, can he do?
The government, having sunk all its eggs in the ERM basket, and having
failed to live up to its promise to defend successfully the pound's parity,
is left asking the nation to take its ability to manage the economy on
trust. Britain's recent history is reason enough not to do so.
It is likely that the government will seek to target at least some of the
financial indicators identified by Mr Lamont. But some senior policy makers
have already concluded that to make that move credible, there will have to
be a more open discussion of policy options so that they can be debated and
tested by government insiders and outsiders.
Such a development, for example, would mean that the UK could never again go
into the ERM at a central rate of DM2.95 without any rational discussion of
the merits or demerits of the rate.
In a nation as obsessively secretive as Britain any move that made economic
policy making more open and accountable would be a significant advance. It
would be the one good thing to emerge from what otherwise has been a
catastrophic failure of government.
