FT  08 JAN 92 / Business and the Environment: Recycling scheme takes 'soft'
option
The current heated debate about what to do with the world's waste was given
a boost yesterday as Gateway, the UK food retailer, pitched in with a study
which suggested that Britain could recover 80 per cent of household waste
for recycling in a way which would make both environmental and economic
sense.
The report argued that the UK could achieve the highest waste recovery and
recycling rates in Europe mainly by concentrating on recovering the organic
fraction of domestic waste which constitutes 60 per cent of its volume.
Most other recycling schemes have been almost exclusively devoted to
re-using the 'hard' elements of domestic rubbish such as glass, metals,
paper and plastics, and have largely ignored the potential for recovering
'soft' materials such as soiled paper and putrescibles (waste food and
garden clippings).
The report suggests these soft materials could be be used to produce a
contaminant-free compost using the WMC process - a British technology
capable of separating organic material from the rest of the domestic waste
stream.
Research at the Long Ashton Research Station, a government institute, has
shown that the compost produced by this process has very similar properties
to the best of the commercial, peat-based composts.
The report proposes that a full-scale commercial experiment should be
conducted to test the viability of the WMC process. The scheme could be
financed by the creation of a National Recycling Fund which would levy a
small recycling tax on packaging materials and newsprint. The fund could
also pay for the creation of a comprehensive national system of banks for
glass, metals, plastics, paper, textiles and batteries.
Gateway commissioned the report from Landbank Consultancy, an environmental
group headed by Bryn Jones, a former chairman of Greenpeace, as part of a
programme of environmental research in the packaging field.
Its aim was to establish an effective alternative to the German 'Dual
System' which - to the horror of large segments of the international
packaging industry - has set the benchmark for waste recovery and recycling
schemes throughout Europe. The report criticises the German system, which
has created a separate industrial system for recovering waste, as being an
expensive duplication of existing waste collection networks.
Gateway's Warm (Waste As a Raw Material) proposals will now be sent to every
local authority in the UK in an effort to shape the course of the debate.
'We would like to take recycling out of the commercial-political environment
and make it a national issue. What we really need is an integrated national
recycling scheme,' says Jones.
The Landbank Consultancy has, however, established a reputation for coming
to controversial conclusions. An earlier report it produced for Gateway
attempting to assess the 'cradle-to-grave' impact of various packaging
products was fiercely criticised by many sections of the industry - even
though it formed the basis of a drive by Gateway to reduce the energy
content of its packages by 50 per cent over the next five years.
Elements of the Warm study are also likely to draw fire, especially the
comparison of the economic benefits of door-to-door collection systems and
recycling banks.
Several recycling projects in North America and Europe, such as that being
conducted by the European Recovery and Recycling Association in Adur
District in Sussex, have attempted to establish a commercially-driven
kerbside recycling system. But Jones argues: 'It does not make commercial
sense to use more energy collecting the stuff than can be gained from
recycling it.'
Instead the Warm proposals argue for an intensive network of recycling banks
for metals, plastics and glass at a density of one bank for every 400
households combined with banks for recovering newspapers and textiles at a
density of one bank for every 2,000 households.
