FT  11 FEB 92 / Technology: Technically Speaking: A hole in one for CFCs
No one can see an 'ozone hole'. The sky looks the same whether or not ozone
is present in the upper atmosphere. But scientific evidence released last
week showed that man-made chemicals are destroying the protective ozone
layer far more quickly than even the pessimists had feared a year ago.
Natural chemicals thrown many miles high by the exceptionally violent
eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines last June have accelerated the
ozone destruction. But these cannot obscure the fact that the main culprits
are synthetic chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) which have built up in the
atmosphere after decades of use in the world's refrigerators, aerosol cans,
cleaning fluids and insulating foams.
The United Nations Environment Programme estimates that a sustained loss of
even 10 per cent of the ozone layer would cause 300,000 extra skin cancers
and 1.75m eye cataracts per year worldwide. Additional ultraviolet radiation
could also suppress the human immune system and exacerbate diseases such as
Aids.
At least a human being can escape solar radiation by going indoors. The
impact of ozone depletion on plants and animals that spend their whole lives
in the open air could be still more serious. Both wildlife and agriculture
are vulnerable.
In the face of such a threat, the governments of the world must accelerate
further the timetable for phasing out CFCs (and related chemicals called
halons) which was agreed originally as the Montreal Protocol in 1987 and
revised in 1990. The present schedule calls for CFC production to stop by
2000, but the EC has already set 1997 as the deadline and Du Pont, the
largest CFC manufacturer, says it will not sell the chemicals in developed
countries after 1996.
Although the next ministerial meeting of the Montreal Protocol is not due
until next November, Greenpeace, the environmental group, argues that the
latest evidence justifies holding an emergency session to ban CFC production
immediately. The chemicals industry responds that this would not be
practical, since substitutes are not yet available for many applications,
particularly in refrigeration.
However, a ban taking effect in 1994 might represent a reasonable compromise
between urgent action and the need to leave users enough time to make
alternative arrangements. An early halt to CFC production must be
accompanied by more active incentives for industry to extract and purify the
'bank' of CFCs trapped in existing products, so that these can be re-used
rather than discharged to the atmosphere.
At the same time it is essential for all parties in the debate - chemical
manufacturers, users, governments and environmentalists - to reach some sort
of agreement about what is an acceptable substitute for CFCs. Uncertainty
about this issue is holding up investment in alternatives and making it
likely that some users will face a serious crisis when CFC supplies run out.
Hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), technically the best substitute for many
CFC refrigerants, are not acceptable because they also contain chlorine and
could exacerbate ozone destruction.
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) are another matter. They pose no threat to the
ozone layer but environmentalists oppose them because they are powerful
'greenhouse gases'. However, used as refrigerants on a limited scale, their
contribution to global warming would be much less than that of carbon
dioxide released by burning fossil fuels. HFCs should be welcomed if their
commercialisation makes it possible to phase out CFCs more quickly and allow
nature to start repairing the ozone hole.
