FT  26 JUN 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Pressure on dollar maintained
PRESSURE ON the dollar continued as rumours swept through the foreign
exchange markets that official moves were afoot to sell it and support the
yen, writes Peter John.
The dollar was already weak in the morning as it languished under continuing
pressure from worse than expected US durable goods figures announced on
Wednesday.
There was some potential support from news announced mid-morning that
first-quarter GDP figures in the US were better than the market had
forecast. However, there was no significant response.
Then, in the afternoon, speculation grew that the Bank of Japan (BoJ) was
intervening to support its currency by selling dollars and buying yen.
This was compounded later by talk that the US Federal Reserve was checking
yen/dollar rates, a psychological move whereby the Fed rings up dealers to
ask for rates and consequently gives the impression that it is contemplating
an intervention. In most cases the checking acts as support for the dollar,
but yesterday's rumoured move was suggested to be possibly support for the
yen at the request of the BoJ.
The rumours were largely discounted but they sent the US currency tumbling
by more than a yen to Y125.40 in a highly sensitive market.
Mr Michael Feeny, a market analyst with Sumitomo Bank in London, said: 'The
dollar is more susceptible to news providing downward pressure than upward
pressure.'
The dollar was also weaker against the D-Mark, falling by a pfennig to
DM1.542; and in New York ended at DM1.5367 and Y125.17. The D-Mark has been
held up by higher than expected money supply growth figures earlier in the
week. The high M3 figure for May was not counteracted yesterday by hints
that German inflation was easing, and the Bundesbank indicated that it had
no intention of cutting interest rates in the near future.
US investment bank Merrill Lynch argues that the dollar will stay weak
against the D-Mark. The bank says its most recent global investor survey
reveals that international investors are 'actually moderately overweight in
the dollar and underweight in the yen and D-Mark'.
The pound was up sharply on the dollar at midsession and even firmed against
the D-Mark in spite of the continuing flow of funds out of the US unit.
Traders said such flows usually benefit the D-Mark at the expense of
sterling, but there had been such solid support at DM2.9120 in recent days
that the market had temporarily given up on the downside.
Meanwhile, Hungary will launch its long-awaited interbank foreign exchange
market on July 1, the Hungarian central bank announced yesterday, giving the
market more power to set the forint's value.
