FT  12 NOV 92 / Survey of Jordan (2): Silver linings gleam through Gulf
clouds - Mark Nicholson charts the recent surprise upturn in the Jordanian
economy
A STABLE Jordanian dinar, real gross domestic product (GDP) growth this year
of at least 11 per cent and a finance minister gleefully expecting to meet
the next set of International Monetary Fund adjustment strictures, having
comfortably met most of the last?
These are among the indicators which testify to one of Jordan's biggest
recent upturns - and to the kingdom's unexpected good fortune in finding
silver linings to the black clouds which hung over the economy only two
years ago. Quite by surprise, Jordan's economic policymakers find themselves
worried these days not by how to engineer growth, but how to sustain it.
By the end of the war, Jordan had lost most of its biggest export markets in
the Gulf and Iraq. It had been forced to suspend its IMF adjustment
programme - itself forced by a severe foreign exchange crisis in 1989. It
had lost almost all its traditional aid from Gulf countries and was required
somehow to absorb about 300,000 returning Jordanians and Palestinians
evicted by Kuwait - a 10 per cent rise in the country's population.
Estimates of the war's cost to Jordan's tiny economy (GDP this year was
Dollars 3.98bn) ranged from Dollars 1.7bn to Dollars 5bn.
But each setback, in the event, produced some countervailing benefit.
Jordan's exporters, for example, were forced to seek fresh markets and, with
surprising success, found them in Sudan, Yemen, Morocco, Tunisia, eastern
Europe and even in the US.
The loss of about Dollars 400m in annual aid from the Gulf countries,
withheld because of Jordan's pro-Iraqi tilt during the war, prompted Japan
and numerous EC countries to pledge assistance which totalled Dollars 800m
by the end of 1991. This in turn helped Jordan to build its foreign exchange
reserves and meet the conditions of its second IMF programme - which in its
turn helped the country successfully to reschedule Dollars 7.5bn of Paris
Club debts.
As a bonus, tourism to Jordan is already skirting pre-Gulf war levels.
Most significant of all, however, has been the potent economic effect of
Jordan's returnees. The breadwinners among them, 70,000 or so, essentially
represent the professional and technical middle-class of Kuwait; they
returned to Jordan with both skills and money. 'It is the first time in
Jordan's history we have had a huge influx of rich refugees,' remarks a
local businessman.
Repatriation of the returnees' savings poured about Dollars 1.5bn into
Jordan's banking system. As the cohort settled (Mr Michel Marto, deputy
governor of the central bank, estimates that 60 per cent have now been
absorbed into the labour market), these funds began flowing into the
economy, both through strong consumer demand and, most significantly, into
the construction sector. Mr Marto estimates that the construction sector
will account for about half of this year's real GDP growth.
Here lies the rub. Nothing indicates more clearly the one-off nature of the
returnees' fillip to the economy than the proliferation of gleaming new
limestone apartments and villas across Amman's nine hills, where 80 per cent
of the returnees have settled.
The stimulus to the economy has taken its effect before the government has
committed itself to the large infrastructural work which, it believes, the
arrival of 300,000 more people will require. According to Mr Basel Jardaneh,
the finance minister, this will demand at least Dollars 300m on
telecommunications, Dollars 600m on power networks, Dollars 300-Dollars 400m
on water supplies and additional spending on roads.
HthY@and Mr Jardaneh is ruling out syndicated commercial loans, not least
while Jordan has still to reach a rescheduling agreement with the London
Club of commercial creditors over more than Dollars 1bn of debt. The kingdom
will have to stay firmly on-side with the Paris Club - and thus firmly
within IMF performance criteria. Mr Jardaneh says Jordan will be seeking an
additional Dollars 300m from its donors in 1993.
He can point to an impressive record of meeting IMF targets. The budget
deficit, which the IMF wanted to see fall from 17.9 per cent of gdp to 13.7
per cent, is down to 7 per cent; a figure helped by the bonus in customs
duties on imports sucked in by returnees. He expects this to rise slightly
to 8.5 per cent of gdp for 1993, still below an expected IMF target of 11
per cent.
But substantial problems remain. Not the least of these is unemployment,
which the government estimates (conservatively, many believe) at just about
18.9 per cent. More seriously, poverty blights an estimated 24 per cent -
familes living on an income of less than JD101 a month are reckoned below
the poverty line. Three per cent are said to be living in 'absolute
poverty'.
Any hope of creating jobs and hauling people out of poverty will rest on
meeting the IMF's longer-term target of sustainable 4 per cent to 5 per cent
growth - a target Jordan will have to reach very much on its own resources.
Another cost of the returned workers from Kuwait will be the fall in annual
remittance income; before the Gulf war it used to average at least Dollars
400m.
Sustainable growth will depend, therefore, on Jordanians spending some of
what bankers estimate to be savings, held both at home and overseas, of up
to Dollars 7bn on productive and, preferably, manufacturing investment in
Jordan.
Only then will the kingdom succeed in tearing its economic fortunes free of
an historic dependence on the Gulf states. And even then, success will
depend crucially on the outlook for peace with Jordan's immediate
neighbours.
