FT  12 AUG 92 / Management: Madonnas in retreat - Opportunities for women
are shrinking fast in cash-strapped Japan
Three years ago, the success of the Iron Butterfly, Miss Takako Doi, the
Socialist Party leader, created a 'Madonna Boom' in Japanese politics, with
parties rushing to enlist women candidates and the country debating when the
first woman prime minister would be appointed.
Corporate Japan had its own Madonna Boom, as image-conscious companies
commissioned advertisements that portrayed strong women talking on cellular
phones or putting in overtime long after the men had left for their karaoke
bars and their water-weakened whiskies.
In the meantime, Miss Doi has resigned, the number of new women candidates
at last month's Upper House fell by half, and cash-strapped Japanese
companies have begun a back-to-basics campaign which includes trimming the
intake of new women and the opportunities for women already on the career
path.
Companies are remarkably blunt about their intentions. Toyota Motor will
reduce its intake this year of young male high school graduates by 7.4 per
cent to 1,580, while the number of women graduates is to fall by 25.6 per
cent to 570. Nomura Securities will halve its annual intake of women from
last year's 800, and the total number of women workers is likely to fall to
3,000 in 1997 from the present 5,000.
There are two career tracks for women in Japan: the 'ippanshoku', which
involves general administrative work and carries no promise of promotion;
and the 'sogoshoku', which is supposed to provide women with promotion
opportunities equal to those of the mainstream men.
Women on both tracks are having to pay the price for bad management
decisions made in the late 1980s, the easy money era, when firms rapidly
expanded their workforces. For example, securities industry personnel
increased by 41.6 per cent in the four years until the peaking of the stock
market in December 1989.
The collapse of the stock market and the economic slowdown have shown that
while Japanese women are making incremental gains in the workplace, the
impression of equal opportunity was as exaggerated as the Nikkei market
average in 1989.
At that time, the labour shortage and the need for more women managers were
urgent themes in the Japanese financial press, and it seemed women would
inevitably take places at the top corporate tables.
However, a study by Recruit Research of graduates' job opportunities has
shown that not only are opportunities for women severely limited at the top
end of management, but that there is a striking imbalance at the entry end,
even for graduates of the more prestigious universities. University
background is important, as about 45 per cent of the bureaucratic elite come
annually from Tokyo and Kyoto universities.
Recruit found that the ratio of new job offers to male graduates last year
was 2.72:1, but that for the present year, the figure fell to 2.22. For
women graduates, including those from two-year specialist courses, the job
offer ratio was a meagre 1.30 last year and had declined to 0.93, meaning
that there are more applicants than jobs for the first time in eight years.
A section manager at one of Japan's Big Four securities houses suggested
that women have suffered most because they were hired simply to sell stocks
 -and the market collapse had made them redundant. A second role in
corporate identity campaigns has also evaporated - companies were once keen
to attract publicity by hiring more women, he said, but this image-enhancing
drive has been scaled down.
For example, securities companies were particularly keen to impress foreign
clients, and made a point of dispatching women to their offices in London
and New York. A Japanese house had sent four women to its London office,
but, to save money, recently cut back to just one. one.
Personnel managers generally argue that women are unable to make the
commitment necessary to justify the expense of training them for management
positions. Without that commitment, there will be no promotion goes the
argument, though the research by Recruit suggests there are fewer
opportunities regardless of the commitment.
Companies are continuing 'experiments' with women managers, in that they are
allowed to do what male graduates of the same age would do. In one test
case, a 27-year-old woman at a Japanese commercial bank was recently sent
from Tokyo head office to a suburban branch to work as a loans officer,
enabling her to gather the experience necessary for further promotion.
The bank found that some proprietors of smaller businesses were offended
when their account was given to a woman, so she has concentrated on less
prejudiced proprietors, as well as foreign businesses and the more
liberal-minded of the larger Japanese companies.
Her work schedule is tough, with 13-hour days the norm, and she fears that
somewhere down the career track, the male-dominated system may reject her.
But she is determined to succeed: 'The personnel department is always
checking on me, ringing the branch manager to ask about my work. But I feel
that I have to stay. If I stop, it will be more difficult for other women.'
