FT  19 JUN 92 / Italy's Mr Clean steps into the breach
A NEW KIND of prime minister took on the challenge of governing Italy
yesterday and immediately set himself the task of steering the ship of state
away from the rocks.
The appointment of technocrat Professor Giuliano Amato marks a decisive
break with the past, having won the job for his ability and moral qualities
rather than in a backroom party deal.
He emerged from long talks with President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro and pledged
action to improve public finances, clean up government and introduce
institutional reforms.
The 54-year-old constitutional law professor and former Socialist finance
minister said talks on forming a government could take time.
He expected to rely on the narrow parliamentary majority of Christian
Democrats, Socialists, Social Democrats and Liberals which formed the
previous government. However, it was clear he anticipated broader cross
party support.
Prof Amato's appointment represents a break with the established practices
of party-controlled politics.
He has been chosen not in a back-room deal but from necessity: as a man
capable of obtaining a broad cross-party consensus with high moral standing
and genuine grasp of institutional reform and economic policy. Similar
considerations led to the surprise election of Mr Scalfaro as president.
He is the first post-war prime minister to be chosen more for his technical
than political abilities. An academic who gradually shifted into politics,
he only became a deputy for his native Turin in 1983, and most of his
political experience has been as adviser and right hand man to Mr Bettino
Craxi, the Socialist leader and prime minister from 1983 to 1987.
It is an equally important departure for an Italian leader to be chosen for
his moral qualities. Amid growing outrage over the Milan municipal
corruption scandal involving rigged contracts and pay-offs to political
parties, Prof Amato represents a 'Mr Clean'. He is currently investigating
his Socialist party's corrupt activities in Milan.
This said, the process of his selection was tortuous. The new Italian
president has exploited the weakness of the main parties after the election
and demanded quick agreement on their candidates for the premiership. Faced
with deadlock this week, President Scalfaro took the initiative.
He said the outgoing four-party coalition lacked legitimacy after the April
elections and needed a broader base. Ideally this meant the backing of the
former communist Party of the Democratic Left (PDS), the second largest
parliamentary grouping.
Mr Craxi objected, and insisted on his own candidature until President
Scalfaro made him realise on Wednesday that this was unrealistic. Mr Craxi
has been too heavily compromised by the Milan scandal.
In proposing Prof Amato as his substitute, Mr Craxi has salvaged some
honour: the Socialists have their deputy leader in the prime minister's
office, the Christian Democrats have the presidency and the PDS has the
speaker of the Chamber of deputies. The Christian Democrats have avoided the
embarrassment of having to chose a candidate when they cannot agree a
successor to Mr Arnaldo Forlani, who resigned after the party's poor
election showing.
The PDS and Republicans are happy to see Mr Craxi, a long-time enemy,
humiliated. His absence from government makes their support more
forthcoming. As for the populist Lombard League, the second largest party in
northern Italy, Prof Amato is a suitably neutral figure.
