FT  17 JUL 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Traders believe producers
behind zinc price rise
TRADERS SUGGESTED yesterday that a producer-inspired market support
operation was behind the steep rise in the London Metal Exchange price of
zinc, which yesterday touched Dollars 1,365 a tonne at one stage - the
highest level for 21 months.
Since the latest attempt by the LME executive to keep the market orderly
ended on Wednesday this week, zinc has risen by nearly 4 per cent. The
three-month price closed at Dollars 1,359.50 a tonne last night, up Dollars
23 following a Dollars 27.5 a tonne rise on Wednesday.
The LME's zinc market has been in the grip of technical tightness almost
continuously since April last year. The exchange's executive issued two
warnings and managed to nip a squeeze in the bud in January.
But the LME had to take action on June 15 in order to maintain an orderly
market after the premium being paid for cash zinc over three-month metal
reached nearly Dollars 200 a tonne. The LME placed a limit on the daily
backwardation (premium for cash metal over future dates). This limitation
ended on Wednesday.
Consumers maintain that during the first six months of this year the zinc
market fundamentally deteriorated and that physical metal is in plentiful
supply - as indicated by the record LME stock levels.
Mr Robin Bhar, consultant to Carr Kitcat &amp; Aitken, part of the Banque
Indosuez Group, said in his latest Metals Markets Insight: 'Producers have
become increasingly prominent in the options market, accounting at times for
up to 40 per cent of turnover. Because of this activity some believe that
concerted producer support operations are behind the technical squeeze and,
therefore, the price rise.'
Traders said the latest concern was about October delivery dates and that
the backwardation for October was now Dollars 65 a tonne.
After its most-recent meeting the LME board said it had noted concern about
tightness appearing once again on further forward dates, particularly
October and November and said it would 'closely monitor' the market.
Mr Angus MacMillan, research manager at Billiton-Enthoven Metals, part of
the Royal Dutch/Shell group, pointed out yesterday that zinc supply outpaced
demand last year and probably would do so again in 1992. Fundamentally, the
price for three-month zinc should be about Dollars 1,100 a tonne. However,
consumers still needed metal and they were buying whenever the price dipped
to Dollars 1,200. He added: 'It is difficult to see what the LME can do
about the squeeze. But we are in for an interesting summer for zinc.'
