FT  20 FEB 92 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (13): Driving motivation
 -German policy
GERMANS love their cars, and executives and managers are no exception.
Big corporations and banks have fleets of vehicles to ferry their top
employees in a country where extensive driving is vital to doing business.
The same is true of government and public authorities, which also have
garages full of cars.
Metallgesellschaft, the Frankfurt-based metals, mining, engineering, and
chemicals group, has a fleet of 304 cars, which includes all the main German
car marques except Porsche, whose luxury sports cars hardly fit the role of
the sober executive.
The Metallgesellschaft cars are allotted to managers on a hierarchical basis
(accounting for a third of its fleet) and according to who drives the most.
Having weighed up the relative costs and benefits of leasing against
purchase, it favours purchase. Thus the company owns all its cars.
The cars in the Metallgesellschaft fleet do not include those of its
subsidiaries such as Lurgi, the big engineering company, and Kolbenschmidt,
which makes motor components. But the rules for executive and company cars
are roughly the same throughout the concern.
At Metallgesellschaft, the nine main board management directors all receive
a Mercedes-Benz 400 SEL, costing just over DM100,000. Although BMW has made
considerable inroads into the Mercedes domain with its sleek, attractive
7-series, it is still the Mercedes which is the German executive car par
excellence, especially with its new S-class, which came out last May and is
bigger and more expensive than its predecessor.
Below the management board, there are three hierarchical levels. The first
rank of managers is entitled to a Mercedes 300SE or BMW 730i. The next two
are allowed to have progressively less expensive cars from the ranges of
Mercedes, BMW, or Audi (the up-market Volkswagen subsidiary).
For employees who drive more than 25,000km (15,500 miles) a year, there are
four categories. Within these, the entitlement is to various models of BMW,
Ford, Opel (the German subsidiary of General Motors of the US) and Audi. All
Metallgesellschaft employees who receive a car can add their own money, if
they wish, to move up into the next level; they may not, however, edge into
the main directors' group. Since they would be contributing towards the
payment of a car that was not their own, and would thus get nothing back
when the car was sold, very few do trade up in this way.
The company will also pay a further 12 per cent over the list price of the
car an employee receives to cover any extra equipment desired such as
air-conditioning - highly desirable during the recent hot summers - or a
sun-roof.
Companies such as Metallgesellschaft do not just hand out company cars to
make their employees feel appreciated, although this is obviously a factor.
'It is a sort of motivation,' says Mr Horst Bogateck, the group's head of
administration. The main reason is to save time and ensure that top managers
can move quickly from place to place when necessary.
In Germany, there is no single dominating business centre. Because of its
highly decentralised economic structure, now extended with the addition of
eastern Germany through unification, a tremendous amount of time is spent on
the road. For some journeys, say between Frankfurt and Munich, it is quicker
to fly. Rail is also the better option for some routes, such as between
Frankfurt and Cologne or Frankfurt and Stuttgart.
Moreover, many companies are not in the main cities or towns at all.
Bertelsmann, one of the world's biggest media companies, is based in the
small northern town of Gutersloh, though it has important divisions in
Hamburg, Munich, and elsewhere. Germany's thousands of Mittelstand (small-
and medium-sized) companies, which are such a vital part of the economy, are
spread all over the country.
Metallgesellschaft changes its cars every four years or after 120,000km.
Last year, it bought 70 new cars at a cost of just over DM2m. Those cars
which are provided according to an employee's rank tend to do the full four
years, with the others reaching their kilometre level in less than three.
The cars driving the farthest distances are mostly accounted for by
Chemetall, a materials consultancy subsidiary of the group.
A company car does not mean a free ride for German employees, who are taxed
on 1 per cent of the car's list price (including extras) per month and also
on mileage covered for travelling to and from work. However, maintenance,
insurance, petrol, and other costs are taken care of, giving the user of
such a car considerable benefits. Each main board director has a driver,
with two others available when needed. The company also has 13 cars in a
general pool, consisting of vehicles whose users have retired, left, or
moved up the scale.
For Mercedes-Benz especially, the company fleet market is of vital
importance, although it is coy about saying just how much. The new S-class,
an increasingly common site as it purrs down German motorways, dwarfing most
other cars, has put the company back at the top of the executive class
market. In Germany, new S-class registrations went up by more than 40 per
cent in the first 11 months of last year, while those of the BMW 7-series
eased by just under 4 per cent. Some of these big limousines are bought by
independent businessmen or lawyers, dentists, and other wealthy people, but
company fleets account for a big chunk of their sales.
