FT  21 FEB 92 / Taiwan's central bank under fire
THE European Chamber of Commerce in Taiwan yesterday wrote to the island's
central bank expressing concern about a freeze on the inflow of foreign
funds for investment in equities.
The Central Bank of China has been the target of increasing criticism since
it became known this week it had imposed the freeze for an indefinite
period, apparently to reduce upward pressure on the Taiwan dollar. Bank
officials said it was a temporary measure.
The Taiwanese Finance Ministry has expressed concern at the potential
setback to its programme of financial liberalisation, and is to hold a
number of meetings with the central bank to discuss the apparent conflict of
interest.
Critics say the move, which has not been announced officially, could
seriously damage the island's reputation among international investors.
Local share prices have fallen and securities analysts say the risk of
investing in Taiwan has been heightened.
The central bank has come under strong pressure from exporters hurt by the
rapid appreciation in recent months of the Taiwan dollar. The currency
reached a record high of TDollars 24.9705 to the US dollar last week,
despite five consecutive interest rate cuts in as many months.
Some securities analysts say the bank's move is a gesture to exporters, and
not a serious measure against currency appreciation.
The impact of foreign investment funds on the foreign exchange markets is
likely to have been small. Only Dollars 500m has been remitted into Taiwan
since the bourse was opened to foreign investors in January 1991, compared
with a total stock market capitalisation of over Dollars 100bn.
Mr Peter Kurz, chief representative of Baring Securities in Taipei, said a
more mature foreign exchange market would cushion the Taiwan dollar against
the effects of capital inflow.
Large trade surpluses and the central bank's reluctance to cut interest
rates still further have been mainly responsible for the upward pressure on
the Taiwan dollar.
A difficulty which the central bank has pointed to has been the way in which
remittance applications for foreign funds have tended to be crowded together
just before the deadline for remittance, making them much harder to handle.
The European chamber of commerce, in its letter yesterday, suggested it
could co-operate in trying to alleviate the remittance problem.
Central bank officials say foreign exchange markets will have to stabilise
before any more applications to remit funds into the country can be
accepted.
