FT  26 NOV 92 / EC plan links coal aid to output costs
EUROPE'S coalmines will have to bring production costs in line with the EC
average or lose their right to state aid, according to a plan agreed by the
Commission yesterday.
But the Commission - under strong political pressure from German and Spanish
governments, and the coal industry itself - has amended its original
proposals to allow more flexibility in deciding whether inefficient pits can
continue to receive state aid.
The amendments to the plan, which would replace the existing state aid
regime for coal in January 1994, should slightly reduce the risk that
high-cost German and Spanish mines will be forced to close.
The Commission's original plan would have penalised pits which produced at
more than the 1992 average cost. The amended plan merely aims for
'convergence' between the high-cost Spanish and German pits and the more
competitive British mines. State aid for high-cost pits will be approved
only if the plans include restructuring proposals which will help the mines
lower their costs towards the EC average.
The proposals will still tighten the screw on inefficient mines in the eight
years before the abolition of the European coal and steel treaty in 2002,
and could face severe opposition when they are put to EC ministers. Member
states must approve the replacement plan unanimously.
Some EC pits produce coal at a cost of more than Ecu200 (Pounds 162) a
tonne, compared with an EC average of Ecu110 and a world price of Ecu40.
As if to underline the dependence of some national industries on state aid,
the Commission also approved yesterday subsidies of up to DM11.8bn (Pounds
4.8bn) for the German industry. However, Brussels also acknowledged the
parallel efforts being made in Germany to restructure the industry and make
the aid system more transparent.
The Commission is also calling for coal producers to detail state aid
received in their balance sheets after 1994.
Some commissioners had argued that it would not benefit the EC industry if
high-cost producers were driven out of business because there is little
competition between Community producers. Critics of the original plan said
that EC users would choose to buy much cheaper non-EC coal rather than
drawing on remaining EC supplies, however efficiently produced.
West European coal producers - like their counterparts in the EC steel
industry - have lobbied hard for the Commission to recognise the grave
situation in the industry. They want the EC to recognise 'the essential role
of coal, and notably of Community coal, in meeting the Community's energy
supply.
The Commission's statement says that Brussels will take decisions on coal
aid 'within the limits of its overall policy which takes into consideration
security of supply'.
