FT  30 MAY 92 / Fragile frontline of the forest: People in the Amazon need
sustainable development
The Amazon rainforest has had a powerful allure ever since reports of its
existence reached Europe in 1500. Numerous adventurers have risked their
lives to penetrate its depths in search of riches such as El Dorado - the
kingdom of a man so rich that he anointed himself daily in gold dust - or,
in the past decade, Serra Pelada, the world's largest open goldmine.
A few years ago, it became clear that a less tangible, but more essential,
treasure was at risk. Foreign attention was seized by television pictures of
burnings in the Brazilian Amazon, wiping out the luxuriant forest to create
pasture.
The Amazon, the world's largest rainforest, 60 per cent of which is in
Brazil, was described as 'the lungs of the world' by experts, who warned
that the burnings were reducing the planet's oxygen and contributing to
global warming. Species were being wiped out before they had been
discovered, any of which might contain substances or genetic material that
could be used for important cures. Contact from the white man was
eliminating Indian tribes, who had no resistance to his diseases, while
cattle-ranchers were pushing out the traditional forest people in the cause
of producing hamburgers for the First World.
The outcry was immediate. Quick calculations showed that, in less than 30
years, an area of forest 10 times the size of Switzerland had been lost.
Under international pressure, the Brazilian government ended the financial
incentives it was offering for forest clearance, and halved burnings to
11,000 sq km last year compared with an average 22,000 sq km a year in
1978-88. But Mr Jose Goldemberg, the environment minister, admits: 'That was
the easy part.'
Little has been done for the 16m people for whom the forest is both home and
workplace, or about the poverty in which a total 40m Brazilians live, which
drives some of them to seek wealth - or merely survival - in the jungle. Mr
Alfredo Homma, from the Agricultural Research Institute in the Amazonian
port of Belem, complains: 'There has been too much focus on preserving the
forest and not enough on providing alternatives for people living within
it.'
This issue is at the heart of the debate at next week's Earth Summit.
Industrial nations see tropical rainforests as a kind of global asset. The
Brazilian Amazon makes up 48 per cent of the world's remaining tropical
forest; has the greatest biodiversity, with between 15 and 20 per cent of
the world's species; has a fifth of the planet's fresh water; and provides a
third of its oxygen.
To most Brazilians the Amazon is full of resources to be exploited. Its
mineral reserves include gold, copper, bauxite, nickel, manganese and the
world's largest iron ore mine with reserves of 18bn tonnes; and its
hydroelectric potential is a total 100,000MW. Yet the 5m sq km region
provides only 6 per cent of gross domestic product, and average income for
the region is just Dollars 1,270 a year. General Leonides Goncalves, a
former commander of the Amazon region, argues: 'Not to exploit and populate
this area is a luxury Brazil cannot afford. What is more important, man or a
tree?'
Brazil insists that if the north wants it to keep the forest intact and gain
access to the genetic material, it should contribute both funds and
technology transfers. Mr Jorge Ito, a farmer in the remote Amazonian town of
Tome Acu, says: 'If you pay me, I'll happily keep the forest standing.
Otherwise I'll cut it down to make a living.'
This difference appears so hard to bridge that there will be no legally
binding forest convention signed at the Earth Summit, simply a declaration
of principles.
The difficulty lies in finding a way for people to earn a living from the
forest without destroying it - sustainable development or 'living off its
interest rather than its assets', as Mr Joseph Connor, president of the
International Chamber of Commerce, describes it. The current main activities
such as ranching, logging and goldmining are not sustainable in their
present form; but they show no signs of abating.
The most destructive, ranching, is not as unprofitable as ecologists claimed
 -and land remains a safe investment with inflation topping 20 per cent a
month.
The network of roads built by the army in the 1960s and 1970s and the
increasing value of tropical wood have led to an explosion in logging. Mr
Chris Uhl, a biologist from Pennsylvania University, says: 'Logging is
likely to be the key economic activity in the Amazon for much of the next
century.' He argues that, if done selectively, it can be sustainable. But
currently there are neither the management skills nor the incentive to be
selective; Mr Uhl identifies 40 species of tree at risk.
The most frequently cited form of sustainable development for the Amazon is
'extractive reserves', where traditional populations can carry out
activities such as rubber-tapping and fruit and nut-gathering. Ms Diana
Propper from Cultural Survival International of the US, which sponsors a
reserve, explains: 'We want to give people an alternative to destruction by
providing them with greater income from the products they traditionally
harvest, by helping with processing facilities and creating markets
overseas.'
She says people are prepared to pay more for such products, but admits that,
if a market is created, there is a risk that other people would produce them
on large-scale plantations outside the Amazon (as happened with rubber). Mr
Homma of the Agricultural Research Institute says: 'At best reserves are a
short-term way to gain time while other alternatives emerge.'
Ms Propper agrees but adds: 'The people living in the forest are our
frontline of defence against destruction and that's what we must concentrate
on.'
