FT  20 FEB 92 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (3): Something in it for
everybody - The pros and cons of fleet management companies
ONE OF the main pre-occupations of fleet operators is the pros and cons of
hiring a fleet management company to run their vehicles. But how many fleet
operators make use of such companies?
According to a survey* of company car schemes, an external fleet management
company is most commonly used by fleets of more than 100 vehicles (one third
of fleets of that size band responding to the survey said they do so).
However, a significant (although lower) percentage of companies running
fewer vehicles also declared they use the services of an outside fleet
management company.
The reason there is something in it for everybody is because fleet
management is by its very nature a bespoke service; ranging from a one-off
fleet 'health check' to full-time, hands-on vehicle management by outside
experts. There is no doubt that managing a fleet today has become a highly
sophisticated operation, with even greater cost penalties than ever before
to be paid for errors and oversights. But can a fleet operator's own staff,
however competent they are, be expected to perform this task unaided?
There are many specialist companies offering increasingly sophisticated
support systems to fleet managers. As well as the external fleet management
companies, handling as many areas of operation as the client requires, there
are software houses offering packages for the fleet operator's personnel to
run in-house, which are often tailored to meet individual needs.
According to Mike Newing, general manager of Kalamazoo Logistics, when fleet
operators are evaluating computerised vehicle management systems, they must
be aware that software comes in different forms, to run on a variety of
hardware and perform a whole panoply of tasks.
'Fleet operators need to examine their requirements and determine exactly
how much they want to spend on a computer system,' he advises. 'However,
they must recognise that running a fleet is a high cost activity.'
Just as an example, Kalamazoo's Profleet system costs from Pounds 3,000,
with the end user simply supplying some form of PC to run it on. From there
prices rise according to the sophistication of the system and the way it is
run, up to packages for mainframe users with networks linking operational
centres round the country, as in the case of some of Kalamazoo's larger
customers.
But, says Mr Newing, today's software is user friendly and adaptable to
individual customers' needs: 'Most of the software that's available these
days is designed for people who are not necessarily computer experts, nor
necessarily fleet managers.
'In addition, with customised software, you can break your company down by
your organisation so you can look at costs incurred by your fleet with your
in-house system based on the organisation of your company - and not just a
reflection of overall vehicle costs. It is almost impossible for a third
party company servicing a large number of other customers to provide
information based on all their organisations. You can imagine the logistical
nightmare that would involve for the supplier.'
Naturally enough, Derek Cant, Avis Fleet Management's director, believes
that a professional fleet management company can offer a number of vital
services, some of which cannot be achieved by an in-house operation.
'Clients can choose to have a vehicle acquisition programme, maintenance of
vehicles while they are in service - plus any number of ancillary services,
such as an accident management programme, advice on the best funding method,
fuel cost management, or access to daily rental vehicles - right through to
the point at which the customer's vehicle becomes an asset to be disposed
of,' explains Mr Cant.
'And we are consistently able to obtain a better net return on used vehicles
than the end users are themselves. Many fleet operators can perform
administrative disposal quite adequately, but that is a long way from
ensuring the vehicle is sold at the right time and in the right way, to
realise its optimum re-sale value.'
According to Mr Cant, end users benefit also from professional advice on
vehicle acquisition: 'It is remarkable how many fleets continue to include
vehicles in their car policies, based on a very simplistic and dangerous
comparison of capital costs. Arguably, it is more critical to look at what a
vehicle's re-sale prospects are, as well as fuel and maintenance costs.'
And costs of all sorts, as well as how to control them, are indeed the key
considerations when a fleet operator is deciding how the vehicles are to be
managed.
Even though a fleet operator's in-house staff are doubtless perfectly
capable of identifying any cost areas producing problems, does sophisticated
software alone equip them to deal with problems such as work poorly done, or
unnecessary maintenance work? And do they have the same clout with suppliers
of products and services as a fleet management company which buys these in
great volume all the time on behalf of its clients?
The chances are the answer is no - if only because these suppliers are
careful not to upset such a leading customer.
Furthermore, a fleet management company will have maintenance records for
countless examples of any make and model. It will know that model X needs a
new clutch normally after so many thousand miles, while at a certain mileage
the front discs are prone to go on model Y, and it will be on the look-out
for gross exceptions to any such norms when its customers' cars are
serviced.
But if so many tasks are to be assumed by an outside fleet management
company, suddenly there is less administration to be taken care of in-house.
This is a further benefit to the fleet operator because staffing costs can
also be reduced, or personnel can be re-assigned to more important tasks
connected with their employer's core business.
It is perhaps best summed up by one Bedfordshire fleet manager who makes
extensive use of a fleet management company: 'We aren't into cost and
maintenance control as our main line of business, so we think it's more
sensible to delegate those responsibilities to a company which is.'
* Company Secretary's Review Survey of Company Car Schemes 1991, Tolley
Publishing, Croydon, Surrey. Pounds 39.50
