FT  11 NOV 92 / Survey of Sweden 2: The state comes first - Profile of
Ingvar Carlsson
INGVAR CARLSSON may only be the leader of Sweden's main opposition Social
Democratic party but he acts and thinks nowadays very much as if he was
still prime minister, writes Robert Taylor.
His decision to suspend partisan politics in September and lead his party
into the negotiation of two separate crisis agreements with the government
to save the krona and improve corporate competitiveness was unprecedented,
as the Social Democrats put the national interest before their own party
advantage.
In opposition since his party lost the September 1991 general election, Mr
Carlsson does not believe in opposing the government for its own sake.
Moreover, he has no wish to draw up shopping lists of alluring promises to
win votes. 'We need to promise less and deliver more,' he explains. 'We must
not be populist.'
Resisting the temptation of instant opposition can be a difficult strategy
to follow. Most of the party's active members would like nothing better than
to fight an unrestrained campaign to wreck Mr Bildt's shaky coalition
government. But Mr Carlsson insists the Social Democrats must be
responsible. 'I could not have looked other Swedes in the face on the bus if
I had refused to co-operate with the government in September,' he says.
Whatever private grumbling there might have been in the party's ranks over
this, nobody of substance has publicly attacked his decision.
Indeed, the unity of the Social Democrats is astonishing, with no signs of
left- wing dissent with the leadership's strategy. Only some trade union
leaders have voiced criticism about the loss of two days' statutory paid
holiday, an issue Mr Carlsson plays down in view of the crisis.
In taking such a high-minded position and making deals with his party's
enemies, he can point to a long tradition of Social Democratic government
from September 1932. The burdens of continuous office (except from September
1976 to September 1982) have shaped the ethos of Swedish social democracy
for a long time.
A similar refusal by the party to seek short-term popularity at the
government's expense can be seen in the Social Democratic attitude to the
issue of Sweden's European Community membership negotiations. Mr Carlsson's
policy on the European Community differs from the views of most of his
party's supporters, who are now very hostile to EC entry.
As the prime minister who formally presented Sweden's EC membership
application on July 1 last year, he is not going to abandon his pro-EC
position to exploit the national mood of disillusionment.
But Mr Carlsson emphasises the Social Democrats will organise their own Yes
to the EC campaign when Sweden's referendum on entry is held which he hopes
will be in the spring or early summer of 1994, a few months before Sweden's
next general election in September that year.
'My argument for joining the EC is very different from that of Carl
Bildt's,' he says. Mr Carlsson wants to strengthen the forces of the
democratic left in the Community so that it will give a much higher policy
priority to dealing with the curse of mass unemployment.
However, he has no ideological difficulties in accepting the need for
economic and monetary union. The old shibboleths of neutrality no longer
appear to concern the Social Democrats either. Mr Carlsson and his party may
dislike the 'neo-liberal' tone of much of the EC but this has not led them
to question its present evolution. What they hope to see with Swedish entry
is a strengthening of the social dimension of the Community.
Mr Carlsson may lack charisma, but he never sought high office. A modest and
decent man, he took over the premiership after the murder of Olof Palme in
February 1986, mainly out of a keen sense of duty. During the last 18 months
of his minority government between February 1990 and September 1991 he
directed Sweden onto a new course as he accepted the need to speed up the
country's transformation into a social market economy despite increasing
economic troubles.
The Social Democrats suffered disastrously in the public opinion polls,
dropping to an approval rating of under 30 per cent in early 1991. The party
recovered some ground by the general election in the autumn though it polled
only 37.6 per cent, its poorest result since 1928.
However, the Social Democrats appear once more to be riding high. The latest
opinion surveys suggest the party has about 47.5 per cent support, an
extraordinary revival in its political fortunes.
This would probably be enough for the party to form its own majority
government if repeated in the 1994 general election. But Mr Carlsson is
realist enough to accept his party may have to find a partner at least in
parliament if not in a coalition if it hopes to govern again in two years'
time.
The former Communists - now called the Left party - look set to fall below
the 4 per cent voting hurdle needed in the general election and lose their
parliamentary seats but Mr Carlsson has not seen them as a junior partner
for some time. Instead, he hankers after an alliance with the Liberals or
the Centre.
The ideology of Social Democracy may be going through an intellectual
reappraisal in Europe and the crisis of identity has even affected Sweden.
Its party's links with the trade unions have weakened with the abandonment
of their collective affiliation to local branches and many institutions of
the Swedish labour movement, such as its publishing house and its insurance
business, have known better days. But with 400,000 individual members (more
than belong to the British Labour party), the Swedish Social Democrats are
far from being a spent force.
Indeed, this autumn's financial troubles underlined what many observers have
often suspected: that in or out of office it is impossible to govern Sweden
without the full-hearted consent of its Social Democratic party.
