FT  27 NOV 92 / Go-ahead for Dollars 2.6bn Sao Paulo river clean-up
THE Brazilian state of Sao Paulo has received the go-ahead to begin a
Dollars 2.6bn (Pounds 1.7bn) clean-up of the state's Tiete River, following
agreement by the InterAmerican Development Bank to provide finance for the
project.
The board of the IADB this week approved a loan of Dollars 450m to the
state, Brazil's largest. It is the first part of a planned Dollars 1.2bn
IADB financing, which would be the largest granted by the bank.
The initial loan will finance half the Dollars 900m needed for the first
stage of the scheme, designed to resuscitate the river, which has been
devoid of aquatic life since the 1950s. The goal of the first phase is to
reduce industrial and human waste by 50 per cent by 1994.
An estimated 1,100 tonnes of waste a day are dumped into the Tiete, 800
tonnes of domestic waste and 300 tonnes of industrial effluent.
The reduction will be achieved partly through basic sanitation projects for
domestic sewage. The sewerage system will be expanded to increase coverage
of the Sao Paulo metropolitan region from the current 63 per cent to 70 per
cent. Two new treatment plants and expansion of an existing one should
increase the proportion of waste treated from 19 per cent to 45 per cent by
1995.
Mr Luis Antonio Fleury, the state governor, said in London yesterday that
five European companies had voiced interest in participating in the project,
which was open to international tender. They included Thames and North-West
Water in the UK and Generale des Eaux and Lyonnaise des Eaux of France.
IADB financing will also help boost pollution control agencies. Some 1,200
companies, responsible for 80 per cent of the Tiete's industrial pollution,
have been identified and companies are expected to develop individual or
joint schemes to reduce the flow of toxic waste into the waterway. About
Dollars 500m is expected to be spent on pollution control equipment.
Brazil's National Development Bank (BNDES) has made Dollars 250m available
for this.
The river runs through Brazil's most populous and industrialised region.
About 16m people live in the metropolitan region of Sao Paulo city. The
state, with 33m inhabitants, accounts for 32 per cent of the country's gross
domestic product.
Brazilian officials compare the recovery effort to that used for the Thames
in the UK, although the Brazilian project is more ambitious. The Tiete is
1,100km long, 300km of which are severely polluted, against 338km for the
Thames.
