FT  21 NOV 92 / Books: A great civic builder - The work of the Victorian
architect Alfred Waterhouse
ALFRED WATERHOUSE 1830-1905: Biography of a Practice by Colin Cunningham and
PrudenceWaterhouse Oxford Pounds 80.00 + illustrations
ACCORDING to a recent poll, Alfred Waterhouse enjoys a greater reputation
than any of his fellow goths and the emergence of the Natural History
Museum, one of his finest works, from decades of grime has reinforced his
popularity with the public.
Yet there exists no biography. 'A major gap in the history of Victorian
architecture' as Mark Girouard has rightly lamented, though the booklet
accompanying an exhibition of Waterhouse's drawings at the RIBA Heinz
Gallery a decade ago whetted the appetite.
Dr. Colin Cunningham, one of the authors of that booklet, and Prudence
Waterhouse, an architect great grand-daughter of the architect, have now
remedied that deficiency in a scholarly work sub-titled 'Biography of a
Practice'. The fruit of many years of research, it provides a list, in
chronological order, of 647 works attributed to Waterhouse, appendices of
the competitions he judged, the paintings he exhibited at the Royal Academy
(he was elected RA in 1877) and of draughtsmen and assistants in his office.
The approach to Waterhouse's life and works is eminently sensible and
broadly chronological with a chapter for each of his major commissions and
groups of buildings, such as his work at Oxford and Cambridge in the 1860s
and 1870s. There are also brief essays on themes running throughout
Waterhouse's career, such as the business of building and his relationship
with the architectural profession (he was President of the RIBA).
Waterhouse was born in Liverpool in 1830 into a Quaker family, a fact to
which one critic attributes his preservation from 'the faults of decorative
and gothic excess'. After training with a minor classicist in Manchester he
travelled on the continent, seeing everything through Ruskin's eyes. France
and northern Gothic were to follow. He set up on his own in Manchester at
the age of 24, scraping by on minor commissions from friends and relations
until his victory in the competition for the Assizes Court there shot him
into the first rank in his profession at a tender age.
He moved to London and never looked back, acquiring a broader practice than
any of his peers. He built country houses, churches, university colleges and
a whole host of great civic buildings. His three most famous commissions
followed hotfoot, one on the other, and pay testimony to the efficiency with
which his office was organised. Curiously, and in strict contrast to Scott
or GE Street, no talented architects emerged from his office to pursue their
own careers.
Of his three greatest buildings Eaton Hall, Cheshire, built for the Marquis
of Westminster, has been pulled down after years of service as an infantry
officers' training school and the Natural History Museum suffers from the
most insensitive extension conceivable and threats of philistine
'improvements'; but Manchester's Town Hall soldiers on more or less as
Waterhouse eventually designed it. In each case Waterhouse solved complex
planning problems and produced buildings that were functional and, despite
their gothic or Romanesque dress, intensely Victorian.
Waterhouse was the most artistically gifted of his contemporaries - his
watercolour of the main door of the Museum - 'a high cathedral portal
recessed like a cave into the cliff of the front' - is quite ravishing and
the terracotta details of birds, animals and fishes throughout the building
are a constant delight. But he was also thoroughly practical as well. His
espousal of terracotta for the outside of many city centre buildings,
thereby creating a strong corporate livery for the 27 rather disparate
buildings he designed for the Pru, preserved them from 19th century soot and
pollution. They still look pristine if also a little unyielding in their
harshness.
All this, and more, is conveyed succinctly by Dr. Cunningham's book without
generating the excitement and sense of discovery the first man on the
biographical scene ought to. Partly this is because Waterhouse was indeed a
supremely professional architect but perhaps lacking the hint of genius that
Pugin, Burges or Butterfield embodied. Partly this may reflect a certain
tentativeness about the authors' own convictions about Waterhouse's oeuvre
and position in the architectural pantheon.
The treatment of his country houses is brief to the point of being
perfunctory and the survey of his furniture designs, particularly those for
Blackmoor is frankly inadequate. However, the main blame must be laid at the
publishers' door. A book at this price deserves better than 200 black and
white illustrations, many of them amateur snaps, crammed onto less than 50
pages. They are supplemented by a sparse four pages of colour when
Waterhouse's buildings, his perspectives and his drawings cry out to be
shown in their considerable multi-coloured glory.
He deserves better.
