FT  22 JUN 92 / The Lex Column: Coal sale
In privatising British Coal, the government must reach a delicate balance.
It naturally wants to maximise proceeds for taxpayers. But if it tries to
enhance the worth of BC by pricing its output too aggressively, it will
impair the value of its remaining 40 per cent investment in the two
electricity generating companies, which it intends to sell in the medium
term.
Hence the importance of the negotiations over the generators' future coal
contracts. There may be up to 25m tonnes sustainable UK annual coal
production which can easily compete with imported coal. A BC sold on that
basis might not be hugely profitable, but its earnings stream would be of
high quality and worth a premium in the market. Had the generators to accept
higher-priced coal contracts, more UK coal would be economic, but BC's
earnings quality would fall.
Equally, after a point, higher contract prices would reduce the generators'
profits. New competitors would not face the same constraint and would
probably use gas anyway. PowerGen and National Power might try to pass on
costs to the distribution companies, but it is hard to see the regulator
accepting that.
The government's first need is to strike the level above world coal prices
that the generators can bear without adverse effect on their earnings. That
is probably no more than 10 per cent, which would allow British Coal annual
output of nearer 30m tonnes. The end to uncertainty once a deal is signed
should increase the value of the generators. The remaining task then becomes
that of extracting value for the taxpayer.
The logical route would be to seize the opportunity, albeit belatedly, to
break the generators up into smaller, competing units. There would be no
significant loss of value. The new companies would have relatively stable
earnings thanks to their coal contracts. The government could sell its
stakes once the market had stabilised. The process would take longer than a
straight secondary sale, but taxpayers would benefit from a more competitive
industry.
