FT  16 NOV 92 / Heathrow rail link plans near collapse
PLANS for the public and private sectors to set up a Pounds 300m rail link
between Heathrow airport and London are near collapse amid a bitter dispute
over who is responsible for undermining them.
The row could deliver an embarrassing blow to plans announced by the
government last week to bring public and private sectors together to build
badly needed roads and railways.
The Heathrow Express project, intended to speed passengers between Heathrow
airport and central London's Paddington station in 16 minutes, is being
developed jointly by BAA, the private sector airports group, and state-owned
British Rail.
The plan is for BR to carry the trains on its existing tracks for
three-quarters of the 16-mile journey. The private sector would build and
operate the spur needed to take the trains off the main line to Heathrow
airport.
Last week BAA accused British Rail of undermining the viability of the
project by asking too high a price for the use of the mainline tracks. But
BR is furious over the allegation, claiming that BAA's refusal to put more
money into the project is to blame.
A senior BR manager said the Heathrow Express trains would take 43 per cent
of the capacity of the fast tracks into Paddington, and the track charges it
was proposing were 'right at the bottom end of what anybody would regard as
reasonable'.
British Rail says the real reason why the project is in jeopardy is because
it yields a return on capital of only 7.8 per cent - too low to attract the
private sector backers needed to fund it. BR argues that BAA should be
prepared to put its own money into the project because the line will bring a
big increase in passenger numbers at Heathrow, BAA's most profitable
airport.
An annual subsidy equivalent to 2 per cent of BAA's annual pre-tax profits
would make the project viable, according to BR. Based on BAA's last reported
profit of Pounds 192m in the year to March, that would be about Pounds 4m.
British Rail and BAA are due to meet transport minsters this month in an
attempt to save the scheme. Sir John Egan, BAA's chief executive, is
believed to be hoping ministers will press BR to bring its track charges
down.
BR says it is 'naive' to think the government will do this when
privatisation is about to introduce a track-charging regime likely to be
even less favourable to the Heathrow Express.
However, BAA said yesterday that the project should be treated differently
because it held out the possibility of getting Pounds 300m worth of private
sector investment in a vital rail link which would not otherwise be built.
