FT  25 MAR 92 / Management: Getting the chemistry wrong - Dow Corning's
response to the breast implant scare
No company is immune from crisis. Even the most solid companies, selling the
best established products, can get into trouble and all the fail-safe
management systems in the world may not be enough to get them out of it.
Silicone gel breast implants had been on the market for decades and Dow
Corning had sold them for almost 30 years. The company's reputation was
unsullied: it prided itself on having one of the best corporate ethics
programmes around.
Yet last winter, a San Francisco woman was awarded Dollars 7.3m (Pounds
4.2m) in damages and Dow Corning charged with knowingly selling a defective
product. Within months, Dow Corning's handling of the implant crisis was
being compared with Exxon and the Valdez oil spill or AH Robins and the
Dalkon Shield debacle as the furore over the devices grew.
In the face of mounting lawsuits, political controversy and congressional
investigations, the Michigan-based company last week said it would withdraw
from the silicone breast implant business altogether.
The combative way in which Dow Corning initially responded to the
controversy was a classic case of crisis mismanagement, and succeeded in
sabotaging the company's reputation. It failed to adhere to the the golden
rule: when things go wrong, accept responsibility and maintain good
relations with the public. That way, Johnson &amp; Johnson managed to limit the
damage from its tainted Tylenol pain killers.
Handled properly, the implant scare need not have attracted so much adverse
publicity to Dow Corning. Implants account for less than 1 per cent of the
company's Dollars 2bn annual sales. And the safety issue is far from
resolved - they have not been proven safe, but they have not been proven
unsafe either.
Before the controversy, Dow Corning was generally seen as whiter than white.
'If you had asked me six months ago, I would have used Dow Corning as an
example of how a company can put into place a process that prevents
something like this from happening,' said Kenneth Goodpaster, a former
Harvard business school professor now at the University of St Thomas in St
Paul, Minnesota.
On paper, the ethics system - started in 1976 - is thorough. The company
established a business conduct committee with six managers serving
three-year terms and devoting up to six weeks each year to committee work.
Each Dow Corning business operation is audited by the committee every three
years. Results of the audits are reported to a three-member audit and social
responsibility committee of the board of directors. Employees are also
encouraged to raise ethical issues.
Dow Corning says it is still trying to find out how, with all these
safeguards in place, serious questions of safety did not arise earlier,
although the silicone implant business had been audited four times in nine
years. Executives believe the process itself may be flawed, since safety was
seen as more of an operational than an ethical issue.
Corporate image and complacency may also have played a role. Dow Corning, a
50-50 venture between Dow Chemical and Corning Inc, is primarily an
industrial supplier and does not have the sense of corporate accountability
of most healthcare companies. Furthermore, the implants were regarded as
more of a cosmetic than a healthcare product. Silicone had been used for
many years with so few side-effects that its safety was never seriously
questioned.
Although there had been scattered reports of health problems for years, they
only recently started to gather momentum. 'It was a case of being too close
to the forest, so they missed the trend,' says Viren Mehta, an analyst at
Mehta &amp; Isaly a pharmaceutical investment researcher in New York.
He argues that 'it was the classic tale of management who had been in place
for a long time and were not sensitive enough to changing perceptions. They
did not see that the newer reports of side-effects carried more weight.'
The lack of corporate concern about safety was not for lack of information.
Memos and internal documents dating from 1976 outline safety concerns from
doctors, sales agents and Dow Corning employees.
Yet, when the San Francisco court awarded damages last winter and charged
Dow Corning with concealing evidence that linked ruptures in the implants
with autoimmune disorders, the company responded with cries of outrage. And
when the Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) launched its own investigation,
the company resisted turning over its internal documents for several months.
By the time Dow Corning finally agreed to release those documents, and the
public learned that the company had known about safety problems for more
than a decade, Dow Corning was in deep trouble.
The company has belatedly adopted a more conciliatory stance. In January, it
hired Griffen Bell, Attorney-General under President Carter, to investigate.
Bell, with a panel of scientists and medical experts, will look at how the
implants were developed and marketed. Dow Corning says it is premature to
say what went wrong until Bell's findings are publicised.
Meanwhile, Lawrence Reed has been replaced as chief executive by Keith
McKennon, a former Dow Chemical executive with a reputation for diplomacy
who helped to steer Dow Chemical through the Agent Orange scandal in
Vietnam.
Although the company has denied all charges of wrongdoing, and is appealing
against the San Francisco judgment, it has offered to pay Dollars 1,200
towards implant removal for women who could not otherwise afford the
surgery. An estimated 750,000 women around the world have had Dow Corning
implants, bringing the theoretical cost to more than Dollars 900m.
Dow Corning has taken a Dollars 25m fourth quarter charge to cover legal and
other costs related to the controversy. It also has Dollars 250m of
insurance to cover potential legal costs and plans to invest Dollars 10m in
further research.
The very worst that could happen is that the weight of pending litigation
could force the Dow Corning into a Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing. But even if
the company's finances escape unscathed, it has a long way to go to restore
its credibility.
