FT  14 MAR 92 / Travel: An island haven for noisy wildlife - Michael Woods
visits a part of Australia where the sea-lions have priority over people
THE LARGE buff-maned bull sea-lion reared up and surveyed the beach around
him. A second bull, silvery grey and sleekly wet, fresh from the sea, was
suddenly faced with his noisy aggression.
Backing off quickly, he skirted the first animal,which was nearly 8 ft long
and built like a tank, and found a more peaceful spot to sleep. Fortunately
my presence only four yards away was disdainfully ignored for, on Seal
Beach, the sea-lions have become accustomed to having priority over the
70,000 visitors who come each year to see them.
Probably 10 per cent of the total Australian sea-lion population lives and
breeds on this beach on Kangaroo Island, and to watch them swimming, resting
and suckling their young is a privilege: there are few places in the world
where such animals are so tolerant.
Almost 30 per cent of Kangaroo Island, Australia's third largest, has been
set aside for conservation, and it is a wonderful place to see many of the
country's indigenous species. When, earlier this century, South Australia
realised that modification of much of the state's natural habitat was wiping
out its wildlife, it introduced a number of animals, such as koala and
platypus to Kangaroo Island in order to conserve them.
For my part, a visit to this temperate wildlife haven was pure indulgence.
On Seal Beach, for instance, we did not just watch sea-lions but saw the
complete skeleton of a whale washed up about five years ago, and glimpsed a
pair of white-breasted sea eagles.
The biggest national park on the island, Flinders Chase, occupies the
western end and covers an area of 185,000 acres. Koalas sit wedged in the
crotches of gum branches, sleeping soundly in the leafy shade. The more
wakeful scratch lazily or extend a paw for the occasional leaf.
Unlike the mainland population, these animals are disease-free. Without
predators, their numbers are booming. At the information centre, Kangaroo
Island's own kangaroos gather to be fed by visitors. They take pellets with
salivary muzzles and demonstrate how, when moving slowly, they support their
bodies on their tails and front limbs in order to move their hind legs
forward.
Here, near the rangers' offices at Rocky River, our guide, Craig Wickham,
grilled steaks on a barbecue in one of several special covered areas
provided by the park authorities. These are spacious, clean, open-sided
buildings with tables and benches, running water and a sizeable gas grill.
It is a testament to the general atmosphere of trust and honesty on the
island that the original gas lighter, provided when the barbecue was
installed some years ago, is still there.
We drove south through dense forest to the tall stone lighthouse at Cape du
Couedic, first to see Admiral's Arch, which drips with long black knobbly
stalactites. The Southern ocean beats against the cliffs here and against
the small off-shore islands where sea-lions and New Zealand fur seals bask
on the rocks.
Nearby, in a sudden geological switch from limestone to granite, is a dome
topped with a collection of naturally sculpted and scalloped boulders. Their
forms and the play of light and shade present great opportunities for
photographers but how, in this hard rock, some of the boulders achieved
their massive, spectacularly delicate shapes, puzzles me still.
In comparison with the huge bulk of Australia, Kangaroo Island looks tiny, a
day-trip's worth of island a stone's throw from the South Australia coast.
In fact, at 90 miles long and 35 wide it is almost 12 times the size of the
Isle of Wight and a single day is adequate only for skimming its surface.
Even with Craig, who was born on the island and knows it intimately, I did
not see all I wanted in two days and could easily have spent twice that time
there.
Kangaroo Island's mainly dirt roads, although often badly corrugated, are
pleasant to travel on: a broad strip of trees and shrubs flanks each
roadside between fields and carriageway and gives a wilder, wooded feel. At
the same time the climate is cool and comfortable even in high summer.
While large waves frequently batter the south coast, the sun-facing north is
much more sheltered with the Australian mainland only a short distance away
across Investigator strait. Here we visited Stokes Bay, a delightful hidden
treasure reached through a natural tunnel in the rocks where fairy penguins
nest. The brilliant white sands of the beach are protected by a reef of
rocks which provides safe swimming.
Not all the interesting parts of Kangaroo Island are found around its coast.
For example, a number of inland lagoons support a wealth of water birds.
Some are little known, and Craig drove me across fields to reach them -
irregular shady pools with gums standing in their midst up to their knees in
water. One lagoon was good for spoonbills, another was used by chestnut teal
and wood duck as well as more familiar birds like little grebes and
moorhens.
It is always a pleasure to be guided by someone who has a good knowledge of
an area and its wildlife and so, when I asked to be shown kookaburras, Craig
offered koalas, too, and took me to a small wood on the way to the airport.
We spotted the birds at once but the koalas were more elusive. Craig was
determined, though, and - just as it began to look as if I would have to
dash to catch my aircraft - we caught sight of one almost concealed in a
thicket of gum leaves.
Michael Woods toured Kangaroo island with Craig Wickham's Adventure Charters
(tel: 0848-33282) which is based at the Wanderer's Rest in American River
(tel: 0848-33140), a pleasant motel with striking views over Eastern cove,
where he stayed. He flew to Kangaroo Island from Adelaide with Air Kangaroo
Island (tel: 08-2344177).
Visitors to Kangaroo Island will probably want to stay overnight in Adelaide
at the start and end of their visit. Adelaide's Bed and Breakfast at 239
Franklin Street (tel: 08-2313124) is cool, comfortable and friendly and the
proprietors, Tony and Deirdre DiFalco, serve good food with style.
