FT  27 FEB 92 / Denmark asks EC to look at Glaxo pricing
GLAXO, the UK pharmaceuticals group, is being challenged over its European
drug pricing strategy. The Danish office of fair trading has asked the
European Commission to investigate whether the company is abusing a dominant
market position by charging excessively high prices for its drugs.
Glaxo's strategy of commanding premium prices for innovative products could
be severely undermined if the Danish move is successful. The group needs to
generate substantial revenues from new pharmaceutical products over the next
few years if it is to compensate for an expected fall in sales of Zantac,
its best-selling ulcer drug.
The Danish authorities have complained about the price of three recently
introduced products: Imigran, a migraine drug; Serevent, an asthma product;
and Zofran, an anti-cancer pharmaceutical. All three drugs have been
described by analysts as possible 'blockbusters' with potential sales of
more than Dollars 1bn (Pounds 500m) a year. Analysts forecast Imigran will
generate revenues of more than Dollars 2bn a year by 1997.
In order to prove that Glaxo is abusing a dominant position, the Commission
will have to show that it charges excessive prices by conducting an analysis
of the cost of producing the drug.
The European Court of Justice has ruled in the past that prices are
excessive when they have no reasonable relation to 'the economic value' of
the product.
Glaxo said last night it was studying the Danish complaint. The company said
its drug prices reflected the benefit of each product to society and the
patient, as well as the cost of research and development. It expects to
spend Pounds 600m on R&amp;D this year.
Mr Robin Gilbert, an analyst at James Capel, said the Danish move was
unprecedented. He said the complaint was unlikely to have much effect on
sales in the short term, but that it could be significant in the long term
if it made other governments question Glaxo's pricing policy. 'Pricing is
becoming a hot subject. This is an unpleasant straw in the wind,' he added.
The Danish announcement, just before the London stock market closed, led to
a 10p fall in Glaxo's price. The stock closed up 1p on the day at 794p.
