FT  14 JAN 92 / Disposal of MGN 'may take years'
THE disposal of Mirror Group Newspapers could take 'months if not years',
according to a financial consultant with a close knowledge of the process.
Accountants Arthur Andersen, which are acting as administrators to the
Maxwell private companies under UK insolvency legislation, are still 'at the
development stage in formulating a sales strategy', he added.
Mr John Talbot, a partner of Andersen in charge of the administration, is
understood to believe that there is no pressing need for an early sale.
'MGN is a much more robust business than other assets of the private
companies', said the consultant, 'so the priority is to sell these other
assets first.'
The sale is also being delayed by the difficulty of drafting a reliable
balance sheet for MGN, following the withdrawal of assets from its accounts
and from its pension funds' accounts by the late Mr Robert Maxwell.
The Maxwell private companies own 51 per cent of MGN, but these are
controlled by a handful of banks, which were given the shares as collateral
against loans they made to the private companies. Andersen will need to get
the banks' approval for a sale timetable.
National Westminster Bank controls 131.4m MGN shares while Midland and
Lloyds speak for 40m and 7m respectively. Goldman Sachs, the US investment
bank, controls a further 40m.
'We were hoping for a quick sale,' said a banker. Any delay in the sale is
costly for the banks, for two reasons:
Their capital is tied up in loans to the private companies which are not
paying interest.
The banks are forced by regulators to make big provisions to cover the risk
of loss on the loans.
The delay will come as a serious blow to the management team trying to buy
out Mirror Group Newspapers. Mr John Sharkey, special adviser to the buy-out
team led by Mr Richard Stott, the editor of the Daily Mirror, said last
night he planned to appeal to the administrators to speed the process up.
Mr Sharkey said he feared that MGN would be damaged by delay and
uncertainty. He did not believe, however, that the decision by Pearson,
owner of the Financial Times, to pull out of the running would make any
difference.
'There is just one fewer contender. We are still pressing ahead and there is
no shortage of applicants prepared to help with the financing,' said Mr
Sharkey. The management buy-out is backed by Electra, the venture capital
group.
It became clear yesterday that Pearson became interested in MGN earlier than
previously realised. In early December, when Mr Ian and Mr Kevin Maxwell had
only a few days to raise several hundred million to keep the banks at bay,
Mr Frank Barlow, Pearson managing director, suggested an offer of Pounds
175m for 51 per cent of MGN.
The administrators were called in before anything could be done.
The immediate financial pressure on MGN receded yesterday as the newspaper
group's banks said they were sympathetic to providing a Pounds 20m package
to fund MGN until the end of May, in addition to Pounds 35m already lent.
Meanwhile the MGN pension trustees yesterday issued a preliminary report
warning that the pension scheme does not have adequate security for all its
benefits.
'If none of the missing funds is recovered, the scheme is unlikely to have
enough money to guarantee in full the benefits of existing pensioners,' the
trustees say.
The trustees emphasise that existing pensioners will continue to be paid in
full while new pensioners will still be able to take part of their pension
in the form of a lump sum.
Lex, Page 16
