FT  14 MAY 92 / Leading Article: The EC and Yugoslavia
YESTERDAY'S decision by the United Nations to withdraw from Sarajevo, the
capital of Bosnia-Hercegovina, casts an ominous new shadow over the war in
what used to be Yugoslavia. Not only is it a disappointment for the UN and
for the European Community, which has also withdrawn its monitors from the
republic, it signals, for the moment, a victory for Serbia and the
Serbian-dominated Yugoslav army in their quest to create a greater Serbia.
That army, which still controls a third of Croatia, is now attempting to
block the deployment of UN peace-keeping troops in Croatia. If it succeeds,
it is reasonable to conclude that the Croatian army, which has also been
fighting in Bosnia, will launch an offensive to regain control over its
borders.
When the EC started trying to mediate between the warring factions last
July, it was entering terra incognita. This was the Community's first
attempt to mediate in a war, and the first test of European security after
the Cold War. The affair has demonstrated how the collapse of communism has
created a security vacuum in Europe, as well as exposing the Community's own
vulnerability and divisions on foreign policy and security issues.
For several months, the EC, under the umbrella of its peace conference
chaired by Lord Carrington, adopted a two-pronged strategy: while attempting
to negotiate the break-up of the Yugoslav federation, it held out the
prospect of recognition for Croatia until it could broker a lasting
ceasefire in that republic. But under pressure from Germany, the Community
recognised Croatia last January. The decision did nothing to stop the war
from spreading to other parts of Yugoslavia. Serbia and the federal army
consolidated their positions in Croatia, and then attacked
Bosnia-Hercegovina. More than 1m people have been displaced, and thousands
killed, in the struggle.
Precipitate action
Throughout the 11 months of fighting, the EC has been accused of indecision
and weakness vis-a-vis the aggressors, principally the Yugoslav army. The
Community also stands accused of acting precipitately in its recognition of
Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina, on the grounds that this provoked the army,
and Serbia, into grabbing more land, and undermined the efforts of the EC
peace conference. There is some justice in these charges: the EC has itself
been divided on how to proceed and most member governments now admit that
premature recognition was a mistake.
Futile debate
Nevertheless, this debate is futile; there has never been the political will
within Croatia or Serbia to stop the fighting. Ceasefire agreements by both
sides were repeatedly broken and the grab for land by both republics took
precedence over EC and UN peace efforts. The EC must now ask what else it
can do - to stop the killing, and prevent a heavily-armed Serbia from
becoming the new strong man of the Balkans.
In practical terms, the EC must immediately enforce the arms embargo imposed
on all the former republics of Yugoslavia by the UN Security Council. This
will not be easy. But at least the Community should spell out to Austria,
Russia, Slovenia and the countries of eastern Europe that it will take a dim
view of support, sales, or transfers of weapons to any parts of the Balkans.
For its part, the US, which has remained on the sidelines, must signal to
Russia (if it has not already done so) that its conciliatory attitude
towards Serbia, is not consistent with improving relations between Moscow
and Washington.
The EC must also keep up the pressure on Serbia. Recalling its ambassadors
from Belgrade earlier this week was a necessary, if belated gesture. It
should now make clear to Serbs that President Slobodan Milosevic's regime
will find no place in Europe unless it gives up its territorial ambitions;
that it will do everything in its power to ensure that a greater Serbia can
not be economically sustained. Eventually, Serbia will need good relations
with the EC.
In the meantime, despite yesterday's developments, the EC and the UN have
said they will persevere with their peace efforts. Stopping now is precisely
what the Yugoslav army and Mr Milosevic want the outside world to do. They
should not be appeased.
