FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (3): Sympathy with caution
 -Sweden has some past embarrassments to live down
SWEDEN TODAY likes to see itself as the strategic linchpin of a potential
Baltic region. But it must live down past embarrassments. Neutral Sweden was
one of only three countries in 1940 which recognised Stalin's brutal
annexation of Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia. The other two were Hitler's
Germany and Franco's Spain.
The Swedish government also lost no time in handing over to Stalin the
Baltic gold stored in the country by the fleeing Baltic authorities. In
1945-1946 it went on to deport, forcibly and in public, escaping Baltic
soldiers to the tender mercies of the Soviet authorities.
After that, for 45 years, Sweden's foreign policy of neutrality looked south
to the developing world and a lesser extent western Europe. As Bo Kragh,
adviser to the Estonian and Latvian governments, explains, Swedes knew all
about Chile, South Africa and Vietnam but nothing about the Baltic states
who had vanished into the maw of the Soviet Empire.
Then suddenly, in 1988, Sweden's 'forgotten neighbours' could be seen on
Swedish television waving their national flags and calling for independence
from Kremlin rule. In Sweden there was an astonishingly emotional outpouring
of sympathy for the Baltic states.
Every Monday lunchtime for weeks in 1990-1991, hundreds of Swedes would
gather in a central Stockholm square to demonstrate their solidarity with
the Baltic cause. At first the main attenders were old emigres from Latvia
and Estonia who had settled in Sweden after the second world war: by the end
in August 1991 the country's entire political establishment were present.
The Baltic states began to look to Sweden for more than verbal commitments.
Contingency plans were prepared to establish and recognise their governments
in exile in Sweden if the August 1991 hardline coup in Moscow had succeeded.
Swedish politicians of all parties across the left-right spectrum spoke up
loudly for the cause of Baltic independence.
As long as the Russian military presence in the Baltic states remains,
however, Stockholm is bound to take a cautionary view. It is possible Sweden
may be ready in future to try and exert pressure on Russia to withdraw its
troops. This would indicate how far Sweden is willing to go to help its
Baltic neighbours and risk antagonising Russia.
Until now recession-hit Sweden has not been particularly generous in its
trade and assistance programme for the Baltic states. Public financial
support has been described as pitiful. In the current financial year the
government has allocated SKr1.2bn (Dollars 206m) for the whole of eastern
Europe of which SKr700m (Dollars 120m) will go to Estonia, Lithuania and
Latvia. This is part of a SKr1bn (Dollars 172m) a year programme of aid over
three years.
A severe problem for Swedish companies is the lack of long-term export
credit guarantees for any projects they propose in areas of the former
Soviet Union.
Until now the country's export credit guarantee board has taken up a highly
restrictive attitude - much to industry's dismay.
Under intense lobbying from employers, however, the Swedish government is
expected to modify its attitude in next month's budget. Credit guarantees
will be available after July 1, 1993, although industry does not believe the
sum of money will be enough to attract larger companies.
Swedecorp as a government agency is promoting and taking part in industrial
development activities on the eastern side of the Baltic.
This year it has invested in three joint venture projects - two in Poland
and one in Latvia. It has also helped administer promotions in the area.
Assistance is also coming from BITS, the technical aid organisation.
Despite official Swedish caution, a growing number of companies have decided
to take the risk and start up activities on the other side of the Baltic.
Asea Brown-Boveri, the engineering giant, has revealed a long-term strategy
plan for the region and it has been particularly active in establishing
joint ventures in Poland and eastern Germany. ABB opened up offices recently
in Riga and Tallinn.
'In the Baltic states there is a great need to upgrade and modernise their
entire infrastructure - everything from power generation and transmission to
transportation,' argues Mr Bert-Olof Svanholm, ABB's president in Sweden.
But he also insists 'export credits and investment guarantees are a
necessity.'
Last month Molnlycke, the Swedish paper company, announced it had acquired a
majority shareholding in Viscan, the Polish diaper manufacturer in Wroclaw
in Silesia.
Televerket, the Swedish telecommunications company, has been particularly
active through the creation of joint ventures in the Baltic states for the
development of mobile telephone networks.
The country's main electricity supply company, Vattenfall, is one third
partner with its rival Sydkraft and the German company Preussen Elektra in
the construction of the Baltic Cable linking up the electricity grids of
Scandinavia and northern Germany.
Vattenfall is also developing environmentally-adapted and inexpensive power
production plants in Poland and it is collaborating with the Finnish power
company Ivo in modernising Estonia's power system.
Other companies active in the Baltic area include Ikea, the furniture group;
Tetrapak, the packaging company; the insurance group Trygg-Hansa, and
Svenska Handelsbanken.
The low cost of production in the east and its proximity to Nordic markets
should encourage more companies to take a chance.
But, battered by Sweden's current recession, employers are in no mood for
Baltic expansion unless the government becomes much more generous in its
credit guarantee policy - which looks unlikely.
