FT  02 JUN 92 / Hanson and P&amp;O would make Canary Wharf offers under Pounds
600m
TWO POTENTIAL corporate purchasers of Canary Wharf have separately concluded
that the insolvent office project in London's Docklands is worth no more
than Pounds 600m.
Hanson, the Anglo-US conglomerate, and P&amp;O, the UK shipping and property
group, would be likely to offer considerably less than that figure if either
decided to bid for the development. The project cost Pounds 1.3bn to build.
Canary Wharf was put into administration last week by Olympia &amp; York.
Hanson's and P&amp;O's conclusions about the value of Canary Wharf emerged
yesterday as the government's proposals to move civil servants to Docklands
came under fire from Westminster Council, central London landowners and
Civil Service unions.
They stepped up their lobbying of senior ministers including Lord Wakeham,
lord privy seal, who is co-ordinating government negotiations on Canary
Wharf.
Lord Wakeham also met Lord White, chairman of Hanson Industries in the US.
According to one of Hanson's financial advisers, Lord Wakeham was told
Hanson would be interested in bidding only if banks wrote off most of Canary
Wharf's Pounds 1.2bn debts and the government proved flexible on O&amp;Y's
promised Pounds 400m contribution to extend the Underground Jubilee line.
Lord Sterling, chairman of P&amp;O, which has been closely involved in Canary
Wharf's development as owner of Bovis, the construction company, would not
consider putting in more than a few hundred million pounds of new money if
it decided to make a bid, according to a financier close to P&amp;O.
The Labour party is set to press Mr Michael Howard, environment secretary,
today to explain what criteria will govern any decision to move Whitehall
departments or agencies and on the future of the Jubilee line.
At a meeting of senior ministers chaired by Lord Wakeham, Mr Michael
Portillo, chief secretary to the Treasury, made clear any move could only be
approved on grounds of value for money.
Mr David Weeks, leader of Westminster council, warned that an exodus of
4,000 civil servants could have a 'very severe' impact on the economic
health of Victoria, where many government offices are located. The run-down
could prompt other organisations to leave, probably for mainland Europe, he
said.
Central London property owners including Land Securities and Chesterfield
Properties urged the government - in letters to Lord Wakeham - to put the
health of central London and its transport systems before Docklands. Mr
Peter Hunt, chairman of Land Securities, said: 'It should not take a
decision for political expediency to the detriment of central London and the
taxpayer.'
Ms Elizabeth Symons, general secretary of the First Division Association,
which represents top civil servants, wrote to Sir Terence Heiser, permanent
secretary at the Environment Department, warning of fears that the move was
less about the department's efficient functioning and more with the
political need to sustain the Docklands scheme. She called for the
publication of a cost benefit analysis before a decision.
Mr Leslie Christie, general secretary of the National Union of Civil and
Public Servants, said he was not against relocation in principle but would
strongly oppose any move intended to solve political problems.
If Hanson acquired Canary Wharf, Lord White said the conglomerate would have
an enormous property arm.
'We are heading into this as fast as we can. Our team is moving right away
to see the administrator,' he said. 'This could be one of the most exciting
projects. If we did acquire the development it would make a good fit with
our property redevelopment plans in the US.'
Minister challenges private sector, Page 11
