FT  22 SEP 92 / Arts: Decorative follower of cubism - William Packer on Juan
Gris at the Whitechapel
The Spanish painter, Juan Gris, died in 1927 at the age of 40, was mourned
by, among others, his compatriot and friend of nearly 20 years, Picasso, and
his dealer, Henry Kahnweiler. The young artist had arrived in Paris at the
age of 20, to be introduced almost at once to the inner circle of the
Parisian avant-garde, at the centre of which sat Picasso, himself barely 26
and already a hero, the blue and rose periods long past, the proto-cubism of
'Les Demoiselles d'Avignon' behind him and the great cubist experiment about
to begin.
Gris was clearly no such prodigy as Picasso, but he showed from the start a
certain technical self-assurance and a precocious sophistication in his
work. Close as he was to Picasso, however, who for a while occupied the
studio next door in the Bateau Lavoir, he took some time to assimilate the
currency of what was going on in Paris in general, and in particular to come
to terms with the high-cubist example being proffered just under his nose.
His first tentative essays in cubist principles, with the object but
modestly refracted and fragmented, date only from 1910 and 1911, following a
series of wonderfully dramatic and monumental still-life drawings in the
old, grand, traditional manner. Thereafter, through 1911 and 1912, his
development into cubism was as rapid as it was assured, and his contract
with Kahnweiler soon followed. Yet certain questions remain, for we find
little sign in the work of Gris' personal resolution of the formal and
imaginative problems posed so profoundly by Braque and Picasso, even before
1910. The sense is of the conscious adoption of a style, and a decorative
style at that.
It would be unfair to suggest that Gris was unique in this respect, for
Paris was full of young cubist acolytes, some good, rather more of them not
so good. Gris was certainly among the best of them and was, for the next 10
years or so, as true a cubist as any. His active participation at such a
level allows him some real significance in the history of modern art, even a
moment or two of actual influence. Yet the evidence of the work itself is
that, good as he was, Gris remained as he began, an artist essentially of
the second rank, never a leader but always a follower.
The temptation with such a figure, given the circumstances of a manifest
talent, famous friends, early success and a premature death, is to search
too assiduously for significance and originality, to fall for the myth. To
do so here, however, is to be as unfair to Gris. For to be a follower at
such a level is no mean thing and, for this work to be remembered, a real
achievement.
This fine exhibition, beautifully chosen and arranged, gives us the perfect
opportunity for just such a fair reappraisal. What it shows us of Gris, in
its gentle way, is that his qualities were a function of his limitations.
Decorative has become the most delicate of perjoratives, loaded with
condescension and damnable faint praise, yet it need not be so. If Gris was
indeed a decorative artist, he was so in the most positive way. The thought
occurs that at that early moment when he saw cubism in terms of style, and
exploited so energetically the opportunity it presented, he may even have
been a little ahead of the game. Did he offer a lead to Braque and Picasso
in modifying the rigours of analytical cubism into the more open, playful
disciplines of synthetic cubism, from which all the devices of collage,
dada, constructivism and surrealism were so soon to follow?
The strong, monumental composition; the clearly stated image; the flat
surface and the flattened picture-plane; the clean colour  - all are virtues
of the essentially decorative and graphic artist, by which is meant no
slight but only a necessary distinction. What we do not get is the
hesitation and rethinking on the canvas itself, the active engagement in the
handling of the paint and its resolution into image that is the mark of the
artist absorbed and unself-conscious. Gris, the stylist, looks ever about
him, and in his work throughout. In Gris the eclectic, we pick up hints of
his more public preoccupations. Now it is Picasso, most obviously, and
Braque; now Chagall and Metzinger; and yet we look on the surface to find
his paint always less particular than theirs, the effect brighter, simpler,
the apparent complexity of the image often flattering to deceive. The image,
the appearance, is everything, though to say as much seems too harsh.
The 1920s, however, do indeed see a profound falling off, marked not so much
by a change in approach as by a clear loss of confidence. Where, at his best
in the mid 1910s, his reworkings of the cubist formulae of fruit and
bottles, cups and glasses, cigars, guitars and all the rest of it, were
reworked with a real confidence and panache, now it seems he had declined
into nothing more than pale imitation and pastiche  - at first of the clowns
and pierrots of Picasso, last of all of Braque's mid 1920s table-tops and
buffets. The last years are very sad.
Juan Gris: Whitechapel Art Gallery until November 29, then on to the
Staatsgalerie Stuttgart, and the Kroller-Muller, Otterlo; organised by the
Whitechapel in association with the European Arts Festival, with support
from the Baring Foundation.' Juan Gris', Pounds 35, has been published by
Yale University Press to coincide with the exhibition
