FT  01 SEP 92 / International Company News: Canon fall adds to gloom in
Japan
CANON, the Japanese camera and office equipment maker, yesterday reported a
14 per cent fall to Y56.4bn (Dollars 448.4m) in pre-tax profits for the
first half, while Chinon Industries, another camera maker, announced that it
would withdraw from the domestic market.
The announcements came as other companies cut profit estimates for the first
half to the end of September, including Kyocera, the electronics company,
which revised down its pre-tax forecast by 8.8 per cent to Y17.7bn, compared
to Y21.9bn for the same period last year.
Japanese news agencies reported that the leading department store operators
Takashimaya and Sogo announced downward pre-tax profit revisions of 50 per
cent and 37 per cent respectively for their first half to the end of August.
Each of the companies blamed worse than expected performances on the
continued slowing of the domestic economy, but said they were confident of
increasing domestic sales in the second half, given the assistance of the
government's stimulatory package.
The package came too late for Chinon, which is to halt domestic sales of its
camera brand later this year. The company also makes information equipment
but executives admitted yesterday that it is now dependent on camera exports
for earnings and overseas sales have been weak.
Chinon reported a pre-tax loss of Y2.2bn last year and had forecast the same
for the current year.
Canon said that its consolidated sales rose 0.7 per cent to Y928.8bn in the
first half to the end of June, with camera sales down 7.4 per cent and sales
of business machines 2.2 per cent higher.
Sales of optical and other products were 0.5 per cent lower.
For the full year, Canon is expecting a 3.2 per cent increase in
consolidated sales to Y1,930bn, but a 15 per cent fall in pre-tax profit to
Y124bn, and a 12 per cent fall in after-tax profit to Y46bn.
Kyocera, which is the leading maker of ceramic packages for integrated
circuits, said sales for the September half are likely to fall 6 per cent to
Y148bn. For the full year, the company forecast sales of Y318bn, about the
same as last year, reflecting its confidence in a second-half economic
recovery.
Japanese department stores have been bruised by the unexpected weakness in
consumer spending in recent months, and Sogo said that demand for most lines
had fallen, leading to an expected 9 per cent decline in its first half
sales. For the full year, it forecast a 34 per cent fall in pre-tax profit
to Y4.8bn on sales of Y292bn, down from Y310bn.
Takashimaya expected a 4 per cent fall in its first-half sales to Y393bn.
Its full-year pre-tax profit forecast was revised downwards from Y12.8bn to
Y9bn.
