FT  14 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Recession leaves Evode halved at Pounds
7.3m
EVODE GROUP, the adhesives, coatings and plastics concern, continued to
suffer from a harsh trading environment which resulted in halved pre-tax
profits of Pounds 7.3m for the year to September 28, against Pounds 15.2m.
Turnover was higher at Pounds 279m (Pounds 271.4m), although the figure fell
by 6 per cent if divestments and acquisitions last year are taken into
account.
After dividend payments, the group incurred a retained loss of Pounds 1.8m,
against profits of Pounds 3.2m, for the year.
The group, which derived 47 per cent of sales last year in the UK, said that
the UK economy was in a worse state than that of the US or Australasia.
Overseas trading had improved in the second half of last year, but a
recovery in the UK could not be expected unless confidence improved, Mr
David Winterbottom, group chief executive, said.
The group is recommending a lower final dividend of 1.8p making a total of
3.58p (6.42p). Fully diluted earnings per share were 3.8p (11.4p) or 0.5p
(10.6p) basic.
The industrial coatings division was affected by the 17 per cent fall in the
UK powder coatings market. Last year was the first time in 10 years that
there has been anything but steady growth, Mr Winterbottom said.
The footwear division suffered not only from recession in the UK but from
the disappearance of the Iraqi market which it supplies, due to the Gulf
war.
In addition, Evode was still suffering the effects of its acquisition of
Chamberlain Phipps, the shoe components group, in 1989 for nearly Pounds
89m. Partly as a result gearing has risen to 78 per cent with net debt of
Pounds 46.1m (Pounds 41.8m).
COMMENT
The outlook for companies heavily dependent on UK markets remains very
uncertain and Evode is rightly cautious about prospects for the current
year. It is unfortunate that it has had to spend so much time and expense
sorting out problems at Chamberlain Phipps just as business was hit by the
recession. That exercise left Evode with an uncomfortably high level of
gearing, which would be even higher at about 200 per cent if the preference
shares are considered as debt.
Evode has managed to avoid passing its dividend this year, and looking ahead
to when that UK recovery comes, it has all the catchings of a strong
recovery play. But until there is some evidence of possible disposals to cut
borrowings and prospects of an uplift in the UK, there is little in the
short term to move the shares above current levels.
With forecast pre-tax profits of Pounds 9m, and earnings per share of 3.8p
the shares, at 56p, give a multiple of nearly 15 which is high enough.
