FT  14 FEB 92 / Parliament and Politics: Scotch mist clouds regional policy
 -The devolution dilemma facing Labour frontbenchers
THE intriguing if somewhat arcane question of the rights and powers of Scots
MPs in Westminster once a legislating, tax-raising Scottish parliament is up
and running is hardly likely to dominate the general election.
But neither is it merely a sideshow for the Caledonian fringe. To several
cynical Labour MPs - though party officials would fiercely dispute the claim
 -it is the issue upon which Labour's complex, and still largely unmapped,
regional policy is built.
This week the so-called 'West Lothian question' elbowed its way back into
the newspaper columns after Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish secretary, highlighted
Mr Robin Cook's recent assertion that he could not serve as health secretary
for England once Labour's Scottish parliament was set up.
Yesterday the point was taken up by the prime minister in reply to a
question from his back benches. Provocatively, Mr John Major suggested that
Mr Cook's self-denying ordinance should apply to other Labour frontbenchers
like Mr John Smith, shadow chancellor and Mr Gordon Brown, shadow trade and
industry secretary - and even to Mr Neil Kinnock as a Welsh MP.
Labour's answer to the taunt is that Mr Cook was speaking out of turn. Party
officials say Mr Kinnock does not share his views and that this
constitutional wrangle will be best examined when it is reached.
Mr Bryan Gould, Labour's environment spokesman responsible for regional
policy, bravely tried to explain the issue to Mr Brian Walden on television
on Sunday.
He said 'a very substantial answer' to the question lay in Labour's plan to
create elected assemblies for the English regions. As these assemblies would
also receive devolved powers, Mr Gould implied they would to some extent
'balance' the new political entities in Scotland and later, Wales.
If this sounds somewhat vague, then that is the overriding characteristic of
Labour's regional policy - and for good reason.
Mr Gould's task has been to satisfy the pressure for assemblies from
northern MPs, long fearful of the ability of a Scottish parliament to
attract investment across the border. At the same time, he has had to calm
the anxieties of Labour councillors that their powers will be eroded, while
winning round the sceptics about devolution - not least Mr Kinnock.
In consequence, the delicately-worded pledges in Labour's latest policy
document need to be read with care. They commit the party to setting up a
Scottish parliament with tax-raising powers within a year of taking office.
However, on the English regions and, it appears, a Welsh assembly, Labour
promises only to set up regional 'administrations' within a first term.
Elected bodies, empowered and charged with a strategic role in such areas as
planning and transport, would come only in a second parliament.
The repeated emphasis on the slimline nature of the bodies is evidence of
Labour's sensitivity to Tory charges that the assemblies represent more
unnecessary, unwanted and costly bureaucracy. Labour replies that regional
sentiment is growing and that the proposal meets a general desire to see
power devolved from Whitehall. The assemblies will also provide a forum for
planning decisions and the administration needed to link in with Brussels'
soon-to-be-formed committee for the regions.
Yet large questions on the exact nature and powers of the assemblies, how
regional boundaries will be drawn up and how representatives will be elected
remain unanswered. Some keen regionalists like Mr Richard Caborn, the MP for
Sheffield Central, want the regions ready for election within the lifetime
of a Labour government.
Others, more dubious, hope the lack of a fully-defined blueprint means lead
times can be indefinitely extended. As several delegates to Labour's local
government conference in Blackpool last weekend discreetly suggested, the
proposals look alarmingly like a classic example of the leadership's
fondness for institutional solutions to political problems.
Mr Gould insists: 'The regional assemblies will happen.' But for the moment,
many Labour campaigners hope that beyond being 'a very substantial answer'
to the West Lothian question, prior to the election this particular sleeping
dog will be left to lie.
Nervousness north of the border, Page 13
