FT  19 SEP 92 / Money Markets: Rate cut discounted
AFTER Thursday's concern about the liquidity shortage in the sterling cash
market, rates eased sharply yesterday, as expectations rose about an early
cut in UK borrowing costs.
The Bank of England provided a temporary facility of between Pounds 3bn and
Pounds 5bn to a group of banks, gilt-edged market makers and the five
biggest building societies to help remove the massive shortage that was
created by the Bank of England's intervention in the foreign exchange
markets on Wednesday.
Despite the facility, a shortage of Pounds 3bn was forecast by the Bank of
England yesterday . Most of this was removed by the buying of repurchase
agreements and short dated bills at rates compatible with 10 per cent base
rate.
In the interbank market, 3 month money closed at 9 5/8 per cent and the 1
year rate at 9 per cent. 1 month money still closed as high as 10 1/4 per
cent on the offered side, but the nearer maturities cannot move far because
tight credit conditions will probably continue.
Trading in the cash market was thin because few dealers want to take
positions in a climate where rates could be cut sharply at any moment. 'Now
that the UK is out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism, it will be far easier to
cut rates,' said a trader at a UK clearing bank. 'But the government may cut
rates by less than people want, to keep inflation down.' However, many
traders now believe that the Maastricht referendum will have no impact on
rates next week.
Trading in sterling futures reflected the expectation of a cut in base rates
next week. At one stage the December contract was 67 basis points up from
its previous close at 91.95, but later subsided to close at 91.60. On a
strict interpretation, this assumes that 3 month money at the end of the
year will be at 9.4 per cent, a full percentage point lower than it was at
the start of the week. Trading in the December contract was very high at
over 70,000 lots.
The Bank of England cancelled the regular weekly tender yesterday because it
would have compounded unprecedented pressures washing back from the
authorities' recent massive purchases of sterling in the currency markets.
