FT  17 JAN 92 / US drug regulator criticises Fisons product
FISONS' most promising product has been criticised by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), casting a shadow over the prospects for profits growth
at the UK drug company.
The FDA controls products which go on sale in the Dollars 60bn (Pounds
33.50bn) a year US drugs market.
Documents released under the Freedom of Information Act show that UK
production of Tilade, an asthma drug for which sales were once forecast by
analysts to reach Pounds 500m a year by 1992, has been breaking US
regulations.
The FDA said Tilade's production methods 'do not conform to NDAs (new drug
application regulations)'.
It criticised the manufacturing process of Tilade dispensers and said that
testing of the drug during production was not accurate enough. The report
also listed inadequacies in quality control of another asthma drug, Intal,
as well as Opticrom, an eye treatment, and Imferon, an blood-iron treatment.
Fisons said yesterday: 'Tilade production issues raised by the FDA have been
answered satisfactorily. There are no further undisclosed issues.' It hopes
to get US approval within months.
Tilade is intended to replace Intal, which has been the mainstay of Fisons
profits growth since the 1970s. However, Tilade has failed to secure US
approval in spite of statements from Fisons on several occasions over the
past 18 months that approval was imminent. The drug is available in several
countries, including the UK, but revenues in 1992 will probably be less than
Pounds 50m.
The FDA has told Fisons that it might be committing a felony under US law if
the drug were shipped to the US without changing the production process.
The criticisms of Tilade production have come to light two days after the
resignation of Mr John Kerridge, Fisons' chairman and chief executive, on
grounds of ill-health.
His sickness had probably been exacerbated by controversy surrounding the
company over the last four months, according to Mr Patrick Egan, his
temporary replacement at Fisons.
The shares have lost one third of their value since the summer and the
company issued a profits warning in December.
FDA sets record on approvals, Page 14
