FT  22 MAY 92 / Observer: A rush for black gold in the world's far frontiers
 -Oil companies are abandoning their traditional fields to explore higher
risk and higher return deposits
Enterprise Oil is charting a passage through the dense jungles of Laos to
take seismic readings in an arduous search for oil. As the trail moves north
towards the border with Vietnam, engineers from the British company run the
risk of detonating unexploded mines with the monitors they carry to survey
the local geology.
In South America, British Petroleum faces possible disruption to its Dollars
200m oil-drilling programme in the foothills of Colombia from attacks by
left-wing guerrillas.
Across the globe, Chevron finally signed an agreement this week with the
government of Kazakhstan, a member of the Commonwealth of Independent
States, to develop a potentially huge oilfield in the Caspian Sea. The
company has been negotiating the deal for four years amid the shifting
allegiances of politics in the former Soviet Union.
In spite of such obstacles, the world's oil industry is increasingly keen to
develop what it describes as a 'frontier strategy' as it moves away from
fields which are running dry.
The drive for expansion has been matched by the opening of traditionally
closed markets by new governments which are more accommodating towards
western oil companies than their predecessors.
These governments - from Vietnam to Russia - are seeking to exploit mineral
resources to expand hard currency earnings as they reform their economies.
But faced with global credit shortages they realise that they will not find
the capital they need to develop their resources from the international
banking community alone.
The cash demands are huge. Dr Subroto, secretary-general of the Organisation
of Petroleum Exporting Countries (Opec), estimates that its 13 members alone
need some Dollars 25bn in capital over the next decade to complete their
capacity expansion plans to meet rising world demand.
Western oil companies can provide investment funds and sophisticated
technology in return for access to oil reserves. In exchange for exploration
licences, companies usually fund the costs of searching for oil and, if they
find it, pay the host government in oil and royalties.
Mr Dan Yergin, who heads Cambridge Energy Research Associates, an oil
consulting group, and the author of The Prize, a best-selling history of the
oil industry, calls this a 'new bargain' between countries and companies.
'It is the antithesis of what we saw in the 1970s when a wave of nationalism
across the world led to many of these companies being thrown out of
countries they were operating in,' he says. 'The great question then was -
what is the future of the traditional oil company outside of a few areas
such as the North Sea and North America?'
that their frontier strategy provides an answer to that question.
These companies are unlikely to see large production growth in the North
Sea, which has been so well explored that there is little chance of further
big discoveries. Similarly, they are leaving North America where the
environmental lobby has prevented them drilling in large parts of the
country.
Mr Allen Murray, chairman of Mobil, the second-largest US oil company, says
the most attractive areas for drilling in the US - offshore California and
parts of Alaska - have been closed to the industry following concerns over
pollution and environmental damage after the Exxon Valdez oil spill disaster
in March 1989. 'We're sitting on two tracts we've purchased, but are not
being allowed to drill because of pressure from local environmental
lobbies,' he said.
The search for new fields is given urgency by the failure of the large oil
companies to maintain reserves. 'So many companies have done a poor job of
replacing their reserves,' says Mr Robin West who advises companies on their
frontier strategies at Petroleum Finance Company, the Washington-based
consulting group. 'They are now being forced to turn from quick pay-out,
low-risk investment in the North Sea and North America to riskier
prospects.'
British Petroleum, for instance, failed to replenish its oil reserves during
much of the 1980s - the level of its proven oil reserves dropped by 4 per
cent last year - largely as a result of its concentration in the mature
oilfields of the North Sea and Alaska.
For British Petroleum, as for the other big companies, the elephant' - a
discovery estimated to contain 1bn barrels of oil or more. A find of this
size would secure long-term reserves and should ensure earnings growth for
at least a decade.
Mr Kenneth Derr, chairman of Chevron, says this is why his company was so
patient in its attempts to exploit Kazakhstan's Tengiz field. 'It is unique
in terms of size, and could have a meaningful impact on a company of our
size for a very long time.'
The Tengiz field is estimated to contain recoverable reserves of between six
and nine billion barrels - approximately twice the remaining recoverable
reserves in the UK. Once Chevron's joint venture project goes ahead its
share in Tengiz could raise the company's worldwide production of 1.2m
barrels per day by an estimated 10 per cent over three years and as much as
another 500,000 barrels per day by the turn of the century.
The lure of such large discoveries is a powerful incentive for companies to
focus on frontier drilling, but the risks are huge. Oil exploration is a
notoriously hit and miss affair in the best-researched locations and
frontier strategies increase the risk that companies will be investing in
dry holes.
'At the end of the day, you have some very high-tech data on the geology,
but you are making subjective judgments and half of the wells you drill are
dry,' said Mr Brian Lee, general manager of exploration at Lasmo.
Clyde Petroleum, a British exploration company, was disappointed when its
Dollars 8m investment in offshore drilling in Vietnam turned sour last year.
The company found a gas reservoir, but it turned out to be carbon dioxide.
British Petroleum hopes to minimise the risks of its frontier strategy by
targeting areas where its sophisticated technology can make a significant
contribution to extracting oil from known reserves. In many developing
countries, known oil deposits have not been exploited because of inadequate
technology and equipment.
The use of sophisticated technology, however, does not remove the political
risk in some countries, where governments can be unstable and liable to turn
hostile to western companies.
In spite of such risks and the costs, frontier strategy is a trend that will
continue. 'We are seeing virtually the full departure of the 15 largest
companies from drilling onshore in North America,' said Mr Tom Petrie,
industry analyst at Petrie Parkman, a US consulting group.
Their departure for new frontiers marks a return to the high-stakes
competition of the early years of oil exploration and may herald a shake up
in the ranks of the leading oil companies. For the 1990s, the industry's
winners and losers will probably depend on who takes the risks, who strikes
a deal in the republics of the former Soviet Union or who gets lucky in the
jungles of Laos.
