FT  15 JAN 92 / Leading Article: Who runs against Bush
IT MAKES little difference these days whether President George Bush speaks
in Tokyo or Kansas City, or whether his targets are Japanese industrialists
or European farmers, because the message is increasingly the same. He is
running for re-election and he has calculated that he will win with the
great four letter word - jobs. If stealing the clothes of the Democratic
party is a crime, which it is not, the president rivals Fagin.
Given that his popularity continues to fall, if not yet catastrophically,
and that his trip to the Far East was ill conceived and received, this is
hardly surprising. He sets off today on the campaign proper to New
Hampshire, an iconoclastic state featuring an iconoclastic Republican
challenger, Mr Pat Buchanan, with some reason to be nervous. But Mr Buchanan
is not going to be the Republican presidential nominee, nor is the odious
right-winger David Duke, under whatever political guise he finally runs.
Assuming his health holds up, a reasonable post-Tokyo caveat, the president
will be the man to beat. The question is who, and armed with what policies,
will the Democrats run against him.
Although very early days, the increasing presumption is that this could be
Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas. He seems to be the principal beneficiary
of the non-running of Governor Cuomo of New York and the withdrawal of
Governor Wilder of Virginia; he is better organised, financed and prepared
than anyone else; he is a border southerner, which helps where the Democrats
have become weak, and a Rhodes scholar, which gives him legitimate
intellectual and foreign pretensions, if not actual experience. He is not an
outright protectionist, he knows a bit about education, he is apparently
pragmatic and he speaks well.
Stronger armour
There seem, in sum, fewer holes in his armour than in that of his main
rivals. Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska has charisma, but has shown less
substance; Tom Harkin from Iowa, the home state favourite in the first
caucuses next month, has the substance, but it is of the prairie liberal
variety so roundly rejected under the Mondale banner in 1984; Paul Tsongas
could create problems in his own New England in early primaries but is too
much of a muchness with the hapless Michael Dukakis to travel well. A
protracted campaign for the nomination cannot be ruled out, nor therefore
the emergence of a powerful late entrant. But if not Mr Clinton, the current
probability is that the Democrats will field someone like him; bland
perhaps, untested certainly, but not instantly divisive.
Domestic issues
The Democrats start with the advantage that the domestic issues consuming
Americans are, with the important exception of tax levels, their issues,
which is why Mr Bush is trying to steal their protectionist clothes. The
Democrats' weakness, to the extent that the public is exercised, is in
foreign policy, though here again this once overwhelming Bush strength now
looks more fragile than it did last summer. Saddam Hussein still rules Iraq,
Mikhail Gorbachev is gone, the new world order is unmade and the purpose of
overwhelming military might, as the administration itself has conceded, is
now less than imperative. Mr Clinton has been sharp enough to devise one
good counter slogan, neatly embracing all foreign policy concerns without
providing a solution for any of them, that 'national security is largely
economic'.
The battle ground, however, is not only for ideas, but also for people. The
US is a vast and not necessarily homogenous country. Its regions respond to
different political stimuli and so do its whites, blacks, Hispanics and
Asians. The Democrats once understood this complex matrix better than the
Republicans, but the last three presidential elections have been won by
appealing to the mostly white and suburban middle classes. In the US, as in
Britain, after a decade of prosperity this group is in a fractious mood and,
increasingly, not voting. Whoever finds out what they want will be the next
president of the United States.
