FT  12 MAY 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Dollar fails to sustain gains
THE DOLLAR was unable to sustain the gains that it made last Friday on the
foreign exchange markets, in spite of underlying uncertainty about the
German economy and thin trading in Japanese yen, writes James Blitz.
In London, the US unit drifted to the bottom of a half-pfennig range in late
trade, after spending a day in a market devoid of energy or direction. The
dollar ended at DM1.6405, after a previous close of DM1.6475. By midday in
New York, it was dropping back towards DM1.6350; it ended there at DM1.6383.
The US currency declined narrowly against the yen in London to finish at
Y133.15, from Y133.35. It eased further in New York to a closing Y133.
Much of the market's uncertainty is still due to the 6-point differential
between US interest rates and German short-term rates. Fears that the
Federal Reserve will cut its Fed Funds rate could be allayed when real
economy numbers for inflation, retail sales and money supply appear later
this week. Mr Paul Chertkow, chief currency strategist at Citibank in
London, commented: 'If the numbers for retail sales are good, that could be
a catalyst to buy dollars.'
In spite of its dollar gain, the D-Mark did less well against its
fellow-European currencies, amid persistent worries about Germany's
troublesome wage negotiations. A particular concern is that the powerful IG
Metall union, which represents 4m metal and engineering workers, said at the
weekend that it is looking for a 1992 pay rise of at least 6 per cent.
The markets also appear to have been unsettled by comments at the weekend
from Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the Bundesbank president, who said that the 5.4
per cent wage increase agreed by the main unions and the government last
week would lead to price rises and complicate the conduct of monetary
policy.
One winner against the D-Mark was the French franc, which closed at an
18-month high of FFr3.3626, compared with last Friday's FFr3.3630.
According to Mr Mark Austin, chief economist at HongKong and Shanghai
Banking in London, the market remains impressed at how the French
authorities engineered last week's reduction in bank base rates by
increasing bank liquidity. 'There is a realisation that the French have done
a clever thing to get base rates down without lowering the intervention
rate,' he said, 'so that there is no cost to franc investors.'
Two currencies lost ground to the D-Mark, however. One was sterling, which
closed  1/4 pfennig down at DM2.9425. The other was the Swiss franc, which
traded above 93 centimes to the D-Mark for the first time since 1980.
Traders believe that the Swiss currency is weighed down by a wide interest
rate differential in favour of the D-Mark.
