FT  05 DEC 92 / Hawks &amp; Handsaws: An easy mistake to make
IT IS astonishing how many people mistake me for Goran Ivanisevic. For
anyone who lives on Mars, Ivanisevic - lanky, imperious, a bit of a loose
cannon - is the fast-serving Croatian meteor who occupies the No 4 slot in
the men's tennis rankings on planet Earth.
'Hold on,' I say, whenever people mix us up. 'Hold on. Ivanisevic is 6ft
4in; I am 6ft 2 5/16 in. Ivanisevic is 160lb; I am 167lb. He is 21; I am . .
. more mature.
Sure, there are superficial similarities: slim legs and slim bodies
supporting not much weight - the perfect physique for modern tennis. We are
both known to be temperamental. And both can swear like boys. But we have
very different fans, and probably different philosophies. Goran is rich; I
am not especially. Goran flashes his eyes; I avoid cheap tricks.
'However, the key distinction between us,' I continue, 'is our serves.
Ivanisevic's low-toss hatchet-swing serve is the biggest anyone has seen. It
is cosmic. McEnroe says so, and nobody argues with him. At Wimbledon this
year, Ivanisevic boomed down 206 aces. His serve is so fast that opponents
sometimes cannot tell whether it has passed them on the forehand or the
backhand side.
'My serve is not like that. Coaches who have looked at it say it suffers
from mis-directed venom and is technically impure. Be that as it may, the
difference between our serves is the reason why Goran is No 4 in the world
and I am struggling to hold my position, in the middle -to-high-30's, in the
yuppie singles league at Paddington Sports Club.'
The more I protest, the more I am mistaken for Goran. It is pointed out that
both of us charmingly mispronounce many words. We are not diplomatic. And
each of us tends to exaggerate things, to explore the outer limits of
hyperbole. Sports Illustrated recently gave an example of Goran in full
flight. He had just been bounced out of the US Open in New York by an
unseeded rival.
'Here,' said Goran, 'food is not good. If you eat those McDonald
cheeseburgers, hamburgers, you go to the hospital forever . . . I don't hate
 -I like America, but I don't know. Last year I didn't felt like this.'
Of his racket-breaking habit he has said: 'It's nice feeling to break
rackets when upset. So I break many. I am professor in the school of how to
break the racket.'
Funnily enough, my own speech patterns are starting to resemble Goran's. The
more people mistake me for the lanky superstar, the more fractured and
aggressive becomes my speech, the wilder my flights of fancy. I am starting
to flash my eyes. This week, anxious to stiffen national morale and put a
few things right, I telephoned various people.
I called Queen Elizabeth II. 'Is bad news you paying taxes like all the rest
of us,' I said. 'Maybe you sell a few horses? The thing about taxes is you
have to watch your code. Always the code they lower it. Never is it raised.
Soon you pay them everything. Is one big stink and scandal.'
I called Michael Heseltine, president for life. I said: 'Seldom did people
of this country felt so demoralised and cackhanded. Is utterly lamontable.
What you going to do?' I called John Gummer, agriculture minister. 'Why you
not like women?' I demanded.
'What's wrong with women priests? You tell papers, radio, anyone who
listens, is not you leave Church of England, is Church of England leave you.
You say church splitting in sects. Then you bring in orthodoxy, saying it's
under siege. But orthodoxy change. These not the Middle Ages. Women are fine
by me, John. Many of them send me letters, want to fix up meeting. For me,
they not big problem.'
I called John Smith, leader of the Labour party. I said: 'Time to raise
game, John. Your serving all gone soggy and you not bending to your volleys.
'Politics just like tennis, John, you got to bend the knee. How many times I
tell you? Is many people cross. You suppose to be opposition, yet you agree
with governing Tories. You pass things on the nod, which is one big hell
mistake.'
I rang the French farmers. 'You pipe down,' I said. 'Nobody wants your rape.
Plates of Europe are shifting, just like in major earthquake. Everyone's got
problems, yours no bigger than our.'
Notice than none of these people attempted to get a word in edgeways. I do
not believe they dared.
