FT  28 SEP 92 / Economics Notebook: High-speed train to EMU begins to gather
steam
HIGH-speed European Monetary Union is the talk of the town in Brussels.
First came a mischievous speech by Mr Jacques Delors, European Commission
president; then some impromptu comments by Mr Alfons Verplaetse, governor of
the central bank in Belgium, who said on Friday that it was possible for
France, Germany and the Benelux countries to move immediately to a common
currency.
When Mr Norman Lamont, UK chancellor of the exchequer, meets his fellow
European finance ministers in Brussels today, he may well wonder how much
this talk of a 'fast-track' to economic and monetary union (EMU) is bluff, a
Franco-German ruse to calm the markets and pressure Britain into rejoining
the ERM. But how much it is a serious statement of intent?
Rumours of a secret Franco-German pact gathered steam after a private
meeting between Chancellor Helmut Kohl and President Francois Mitterand, two
days after the lukewarm endorsement of the Maastricht treaty in the French
referendum. They grew in intensity as the Bundesbank and the Banque de
France joined forces to prop up the franc, and they reached a crescendo with
Mr Delors' remarks at a conference on the future of the European Community
Thursday night.
In a thinly disguised reference to growing British opposition to Maastricht,
Mr Delors said: 'If some countries are looking for alibis for delaying the
treaty, it may well be that others take the lead.'
Mr Delors' comments can be read several ways. At face value, he shares the
view of President Mitterand and Chancellor Kohl that political uncertainty
about the fate of the Maastricht treaty is driving speculation in the money
markets. Having put too much faith in EMU, the markets are now overreacting
to the impact of Denmark's rejection of the treaty. The aim, therefore, must
be to restore market confidence in EMU - without necessarily shrinking the
timetable for a common currency by the end of the century.
A second interpretation is that Mr Delors knows that Maastricht's goal of
monetary union for the Twelve by the end of the century - never likely - now
looks impossible. Sterling's withdrawal from the ERM accentuates the
division of Europe into two tiers, a northern club and a less prosperous
southern tier, including Italy, Greece, Portugal - and Britain. Now this
reality has sunk into the consciousness of markets, it makes a leap to
monetary union more likely.
In Brussels, there is plenty of high-powered thinking about how to proceed,
fast-forward, to EMU.
Mr Peter Ludlow, director of the Centre for European Policy Studies,
describes a package deal, whereby 'hard core' members of the EMS (Germany,
France, Benelux, and possibly Denmark) agree to reduce or even eliminate the
margins of fluctuation within the ERM. Decision-making on monetary policy
could be more collective, with the door held open to other EC members.
Lastly, the German authorities would agree to tighten fiscal policy to
relieve pressure on the Bundesbank, thus paving way for lower interest rates
and economic recovery in Europe.
One flaw in this analysis is that EC ministers ruled out narrower
fluctuation bands in the EMS in the run-up to the Maastricht treaty. The
tidal wave of speculation in the money markets in recent weeks makes the
room for currency manoeuvre more - not less - necessary when defending
existing parities. One informed EC official notes that speculation is likely
to increase - not decrease - in the second stage of EMU, before countries
lock into fixed exchange rates. 'The testing will never stop,' he says.
These make for strong technical arguments for accelerating moves toward EMU.
The trick is to make the package politically saleable - not just to
important southern states such as Italy who fear being left out, but also to
Germany, where popular fears of abandoning the D-Mark appear to be
increasing.
One suggestion is to create a European Central Bank on the lines of the
Federal Reserve in the US. To guard against political interference, the
'regional' heads of the central banks in France, Germany and Benelux would
agree that all decisions on monetary policy would require unanimity. The
Bundesbank could argue its independence was being protected, while offering
a notional voice to the French. Majority voting might come later.
A further argument in favour of such arrangements is related to the question
of enlargement of the EC. There is little secret that the Bundesbank views
Austria's and possibly Sweden's, accession to the community with pleasure
because it would most likely strengthen the hand of monetary discipline. By
contrast, Italian, Portuguese and Spanish accession to EMU is viewed as a
recipe for creating 'esperanto' money.
Yet EMU cannot be sold simply as a privileged club for the rich countries of
the north and east. The prospect of EMU membership has, after all, provided
invaluable 'political cover' for the poorer countries to take painful
measures to cut their budget deficits and restructure their economies. Thus
any moves to 'fast-track' EMU must explicitly hold open the door for the
admission of new members, EC officials say.
Where does this leave Britain? Assuming that Franco-German co-operation
succeeds in defending the parity of the franc against the D-Mark, the ERM
will have survived its baptism of fire. This makes it less likely that EC
states will listen to British complaints about 'fault-lines' in the ERM
which must be corrected. Moreover, a radical reform of the ERM does not make
sense for those Germans and French who see it only as a half-way house to
the real goal of EMU. Mr Karl Otto Pohl made this link during remarks at the
annual IMF-World Bank meeting in Washington last week. The former Bundesbank
president said only a multi-speed approach to economic and monetary union
now seems feasible. Dr Pohl's old joke that Germany and the Benelux
countries could form a monetary union 'tomorrow', should not be taken
lightly in London.
