FT  26 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Reading between party battle-lines from left
to right - The likely social breakdown of the MPs in the next parliament
THE candidates that the parties are fielding in the constituencies they
think they will win reveals much about each party, its values and the
interests it represents.
Mr Neil Kinnock, troubled in the early 1980s by leftwing activists choosing
candidates in their own image, was strong enough by 1987 to change Labour's
selection rules. He introduced one member, one vote, mobilising the local
membership to neutralise activists.
The effect has been to reduce significantly the number of leftwingers
getting through the net; no rightwing MPs have been deselected, whereas of
14 MPs dropped between 1981 and 1985 most were from the party's moderate
wing.
The new process has, however, greatly localised candidate selection,
favouring aspirants known to the widened local electorate. Hence the
selection of prominent local-government leaders: in the 28 seats where
Labour MPs announced their retirement between 1987 and 1992, at least 10
selected local worthies of this sort.
Retention in the selection process of 40 per cent of the votes for unions
has added to this localising trend, with the unions securing seats for their
own, often local, officials.
Long gone are the days when Labour could parachute into its safe seats
London-based dons, barristers and journalists. The party's heartland is
increasingly occupied by non-metropolitan party and union apparatchiks.
The pattern in Conservative seats is similar in one respect and different in
another. A number of potential Tory MPs are also likely to be drawn from the
ranks of full-time politicians and party insiders, but the vast majority of
the 60 candidates chosen to replace retiring MPs are London-based
professionals. If local Conservative associations have a reputation for
autonomy, they still show signs of favouring metropolitan professionals over
locals.
There are also contrasts between the political characteristics of the new
candidates, with Labour moving away from the left but the Conservatives
remaining on the right.
The great majority of new Labour MPs will be soft-left Kinnockites. In a
likely new intake of about 100 MPs (assuming a Commons in which both parties
have about 300 seats), fewer than a dozen will have hard-left histories,
from which most of them appear to have mellowed.
A Kinnockite parliamentary Labour party (PLP) will, however, face a
Conservative party reduced in size but not in fervour. In place of MPs
defeated in marginal seats - many of whom are staunch Thatcherites - the
party will have a significant infusion of new Thatcherite blood in safe
seats where MPs have retired.
In occupational terms, superficially the parties have long been on
convergent paths, to the extent of Labour becoming more 'white-collar'.
Conservative MPs have traditionally been drawn from business and
professional backgrounds in equal proportions. Labour, on the other hand,
had a large minority of manual workers, comprising in 1951 almost two-fifths
of the PLP. After the election the proportion is likely to be reduced to
about 20 per cent.
The proportion of Labour MPs with business backgrounds has always been very
low and is set to fall below 5 per cent. In place of these categories is
Labour's expanded 'middle-class' base but it is drawn almost exclusively
from the public sector, notably teaching and local administration. In
contrast the Conservative middle-class MP is a private-sector professional -
most typically a lawyer. Additionally, a significantly expanding proportion
of Labour's white-collar MPs are party and union officials.
In educational terms, while Labour has an increased number of graduate MPs
and candidates, the Conservatives have fewer MPs with a
public-school-and-Oxbridge pedigree.
In 1974 50 per cent of all Conservative MPs were of such an educational  -
and, by implication, social - background. After the election, in a
Conservative party reduced to 300 seats, the proportion will have fallen to
nearer one third.
It was said that as Mrs Thatcher rose, so the social status of the party
declined. The total of Conservative Etonians is set to fall to an all-time
low of 30 MPs (10 per cent of the total compared with 25 per cent in 1951).
Some advance has been made in the representation of women. The Conservatives
have - surprisingly, given the party's reputation for female activists who
will not choose women as candidates - picked women for six safe seats. But
with defeats expected for MPs of the last parliament such as Mrs Lynda
Chalker, the overseas development minister, the party is unlikely to end up
with many more women MPs.
Labour has, with the help of mandatory shortlisting of women, put women into
a quarter of the 100 key marginals and is likely see its number of women MPs
rise from 24 to 40 in a 300-strong PLP.
Neither party has done much for aspirants who are black or of Asian origin,
even if the Conservatives have selected two for the Tory-held seats of
Cheltenham and Brentford and Isleworth. Given the level of prejudice about
black candidates, the difficulty for the Conservatives is the lack of
Tory-held seats with a significant proportion of black and Asian voters.
Labour has far more seats with ethnic-minority electorates, and four of them
elected black candidates in 1987. The problem for aspiring black Labour
candidates is that most of the remaining seats with high proportions of
ethnic-minority voters are already occupied by high-profile white incumbents
such as Mr Roy Hattersley, Ms Clare Short and Ms Joan Ruddock.
In a party where the women's lobby is well-organised, deselection of one of
the few women MPs is unthinkable. Thus one minority serves to hold back
another.
Labour's teachers and lecturers, local administrators and union officials
confirm it as the party of public-sector defence. The growing number of
party and union organisers, however, also implies a party of power-seeking
professionals and arguably one of pragmatists.
The Tories, while retaining a mix of business and the professions, will also
include more power-focused party functionaries. Ideologically, with an
influx of rightwingers, they would be well-prepared for a populist assault
on a weak Labour government facing considerable political and economic
challenges.
The writer is senior lecturer in politics at Aberdeen University.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                  OCCUPATIONAL BACKGROUND of MPS
             Assuming 300 Conservative and 300 Labour MPs
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                               Conservative            Labour
                          New intake    All     New intake    All
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Professions                 42%         40%        34%        40%
(including the law,
teaching)
Business                    28%         38%         2%         4%
Other white-collar          30%         21%        47%        35%
(including journalists,
local government
administrators,
party and union officials)
Manual                       0           1%        16%        20%
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
