FT  02 NOV 92 / Angolan forces accept UN ceasefire
ANGOLAN government forces and troops of the rebel Unita movement accepted a
ceasefire agreement late last night, raising hopes that the country would
halt its slide into renewed civil war.
The ceasefire, due to come into effect at midnight, was arranged by the
United Nations between President Jose Eduardo dos Santos and Mr Jonas
Savimbi, leader of Unita which disputes the results of elections in
September.
A statement from the office of Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN
secretary-general, said the truce would cover the entire country and
provided for the release of foreigners by the combatants.
The agreement followed three days of fighting in the capital Luanda, where
government forces appeared yesterday to be gaining the upper hand, and
across the country.
The battles were the most bloody since the elections. They threatened the
UN-led efforts to bring Angola through a 17-month transition to peace and
democracy which started when a ceasefire was signed in May 1991, ending a
civil war that began at independence in 1975.
According to the Portuguese news agency Lusa, at least 300 people, including
two UN peacekeeping staff, had been killed in clashes in Luanda since
Thursday night, and corpses and abandoned weapons littered the city's
deserted streets.
Shortly before the ceasefire, Lusa reported that Unita's top military leader
in Luanda, Elias Salupeto Pena, and other high-ranking officials gave
themselves up to the Defence Ministry.
A Portuguese radio station said their surrender followed a government attack
on a Unita stronghold in Luanda's Maianga suburb during which three
Portuguese were killed.
Russian Mi-8 helicopter gunships circled the city yesterday and the
government put into force an all-day curfew and threw up road blocks around
the city. Foreign residents took shelter from the fighting in hotels and
private residences.
Fighting also raged for control of the key cities of Benguela, Lobito,
Huambo and Cuito in the Unita tribal strongholds of the central provinces.
Unita also seized several diamond-producing areas in the north and south of
the country.
Luanda airport was closed yesterday and commercial flights into the capital
have been cancelled. Britain, the US, Portugal, South Africa and Brazil were
attempting to evacuate their nationals.
Omens bad for Angola's future, Page 6
