FT  05 OCT 92 / Regions in search of aid: South joins clamour once dominated
by the north - High unemployment reported in Ilfracombe and Isle of Wight /
The redrawing of the funding map
THE GOVERNMENT is redrawing its map of assisted areas, the regions classed
as 'development' or 'intermediate' that qualify for financial support.
Businesses and councils affected by the recession have been lobbying
eloquently for bigger slices of the overall assistance cake.
But the signs are that the scope and size of assistance will be cut just
when many regions feel justified in demanding more of it. The period for
applications has just ended, and a new map, first promised in 1988, might be
published by the end of the year after consultations with the European
Commission.
Councils and businesses fear the areas might be reduced and the methods of
payment made more restrictive.
'It is unlikely that the coverage of the new map will be greater than now,
and it could be somewhat less,' the government said in a consultation paper
in June.
The government may also take the opportunity to alter the methods of
funding.
Mr Tim Sainsbury, the industry minister, indicated in Birmingham last week
that changes might go beyond the redrawing of the map.
In the past regional aid has been directed mainly at towns caught up in
industrial decline or industrial restructuring. But the recession has
changed the geographical pattern of unemployment, providing some southern
regions with a strong case for inclusion on the map.
Unemployment percentages on the Isle of Wight, for example, are as high as
those in the Newcastle upon Tyne travel-to-work area, which includes parts
of Tyneside, Northumberland and County Durham. And the decline of
unemployment since 1984, according to analysis by Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the
accountants, has been much faster in the old blackspots of south Wales than
it has been in Southampton or Portsmouth.
Because state subsidies are involved and because the subsidies impinge on
the EC's competition rules, the government needs approval of its new map
from Brussels.
The availability of EC funding, added to the plethora of UK regeneration
instruments introduced since 1979 - enterprise zones, urban development
corporations, derelict land grants and so on - has diminished the immediate
financial importance of domestic regional aid, which is paid through two
main channels:
Regional selective assistance, designed to improve employment opportunities
and aimed at projects that would not go ahead without some subsidy. It is
frequently used as a carrot to attract inward investment.
Regional enterprise grants, designed to help small companies with product
and plant development.
Total government spending on such schemes has fallen from Pounds 518.2m in
1984-85 to Pounds 264.6m in 1991-92. That is not simply because the
government has tightened its purse strings. It is also the result of a
policy switch in the mid 1980s: the system of automatic entitlement to funds
for projects in the assisted areas through the regional development grant
was abandoned in favour of discretionary funding, where projects are
examined case by case before a commitment is made to support them.
Regional aid from UK funds is spread over areas designated in 1984, most of
which are north of a line drawn from The Wash to the Severn estuary, which
accounts for 35 per cent of the working population of Britain.
The officials working on the new map, just as with the existing map, will
use unemployment as their main yardstick in deciding whether an area should
be on the map. But they have no precise formula. It is not known how much
weight they attach to actual unemployment figures relative to long-term
unemployment figures, or, indeed, to potential unemployment figures.
Against that background, the regions have been marshalling some widely
differing cases. Northern Development Company, for north-east England and
Cumbria, emphasises that it has the highest regional rate of unemployment in
Britain, that only inward investment can strengthen a weak economic base and
such investment will not be attracted without assisted-area status.
The Isle of Wight emphasises its persistent unemployment and a fragile
economic base.
Telford in Shropshire wants to retain assisted-area status because its
workforce is growing so quickly that it cannot be absorbed by expansion of
local companies, so it needs assistance to draw inward investment.
There is no evidence that, in working its way through the competing claims
of disadvantage, the government is examining the fundamental purpose of
regional policy.
There has been no debate on the extent to which the existing instruments of
regional policy work towards what the government defines as its broad
objective: 'to reduce regional imbalances in employment opportunities'.
The fact that, for example, northern England complains of 'structural
unemployment for 60 years' and over the past 20 years a rate of unemployment
'50 per cent above the average for Great Britain', raises the obvious point
of whether there is value in the existing instruments of regional policy.
Is the flaw in the instruments or does fault lie elsewhere? Should regional
policy be redefined?
Absence of such debate suggests that the new map will be changed by
tinkering, perhaps taking out parts of Wales and Cheshire, perhaps inserting
parts of the East Midlands, southern coastal areas, north Kent, and the
Essex and Lincolnshire coasts.
There is also the political map to be considered. Broadly, if the government
stays with the existing map, it will benefit Labour areas - while if it
spreads the map into the south, it will benefit Tory areas.
