FT  02 JUL 92 / UK Company News: Gresham House share price tumbles on loss
GRESHAM HOUSE, an investment trust specialising in the two areas recently
most prone to pitfalls - property and unlisted investments - yesterday saw
its share price collapse from 18p to 8p after it announced a second year of
losses. Fifteen months ago the shares traded at 300p.
The company said late on Tuesday night that a collapse in dividend and
interest income led to pre-tax losses of Pounds 8.87m in the year to
December 31. This followed a loss of Pounds 16.7m 12 months earlier.
Mr Alfred Stirling, chairman and chief executive, said yesterday that a
proposed re-financing under discussion with its banks was crucial to the
company's future. 'I think the worst will be over if we can sign up the
re-financing deal. If we can't, I will be struggling again,' he said.
Gresham is seeking the replacement of a short-term debt through the issue by
Gresham House Finance of up to Pounds 8.5m of 2.5 per cent secured loan
stock.
Gresham also said group net asset value, including property and other
subsidiaries, had turned negative to minus 18p from 129p a year earlier. Net
asset value of the actual investment trust, excluding subsidiaries, remained
positive although its net asset value fell from 91p to 62p.
Gresham, which is unrelated to Gresham Trust, the venture capital company,
is the second high-profile investment trust to hit trouble. Drayton
Consolidated Trust, managed by Invesco MIM, wrote off over half the value of
its unlisted assets in May.
Mr Stirling said dividend and interest income fell from Pounds 2.05m to
Pounds 471,000 after Gresham was forced to liquidate 'the majority' of its
non-property portfolio to pay off debts. He said details on Gresham's net
borrowings and gearing levels were not available. Interest costs fell only
slightly to Pounds 2.64m (Pounds 2.91m).
He confirmed that Gresham was being sued for Pounds 1m in relation to the
placing into receivership of a subsidiary. Court rulings have so far gone
against Gresham, which intends to appeal to the House of Lords.
Gresham intends to continue disposing of investments and properties to
reduce borrowings.
