FT  30 SEP 92 / US hopes to resume Sarajevo airlift soon
THE US is considering a swift resumption of relief flights into Sarajevo,
the capital of Bosnia-Hercegovina, where up to 400,000 people could die of
starvation and exposure this winter, according to United Nations aid
officials.
Six thousand tonnes of urgently needed food and other supplies had failed to
reach Sarajevo since the flights were suspended four weeks ago, Mrs Sylvana
Foa, spokeswoman for the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, said yesterday.
'We are not anywhere near prepared for winter,' she said. 'It seems we will
lose a lot of people. It really is too late probably for thousands and
thousands of people.'
An extra 6,000 UN troops needed to open new land routes into Bosnia had
still not arrived, she said, and the agency was short of cash and trucks.
Mrs Sadako Ogata, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, has meanwhile
called for urgent despatch of peacekeeping troops to Bosnia, arguing that
their presence could stop a new wave of 'ethnic cleansing'.
Only fast action by the international community could prevent 'further
deterioration of an already terrible situation', she declared.
Mr Alija Izetbegovic, the Bosnian president, said in Geneva after talks with
Mr Cyrus Vance, the UN mediator, that all sides in the conflict had agreed
to demilitarisation of Sarajevo in principle.
He added that Mr Vance had expressed the hope that US flights could resume
in 24 hours. However, a UN official denied that the flights would be resumed
immediately but said the US administration was considering a resumption
'within days'.
'The airlift, unfortunately, is interrupted today but it looks as if by the
end of the week we may be able to resume,' Mr Thomas Niles, assistant
secretary of state, said in Washington.
The airlift was suspended after the shooting down of an Italian aid aircraft
nearly four weeks ago.
Mr Vance and Lord Owen, the EC mediator, have made clear their dismay at the
failure of governments to resume the flights.
Mr Vance and Lord Owen are due to have talks in Geneva today with Mr Douglas
Hurd, the British foreign secretary, on proposals to establish a 'no-fly'
zone in Bosnia aimed at halting Serbian air attacks on the Moslem
population.
Mr Hurd is also due to meet Mr Franco Tudjman, the Croatian president, and
Mr Dobrica Cosic, the Yugoslav federal president, while in Geneva.
Though most members of the UN Security Council, including the US, Britain
and France, have serious reservations about using military aircraft to
enforce a 'no-fly' zone in Bosnia, Mr Hurd believes that the idea is worth
pursuing by other means.
Britain favours a solution under which UN monitors would be stationed on
Serbian airfields to control military aircraft sorties.
Mr Hurd will also discuss with Mr Vance and Lord Owen what means can be
employed to get humanitarian aid flights restarted.
Meanwhile, the Croatian defence ministry said a soldier was being questioned
about firing without authorisation on two UN helicopters on Monday. Croatian
radio said the ministry had apologised for the incident in which, it said,
the soldier had fired seven rounds from an anti-aircraft gun.
In eastern Croatia, UN peacekeepers tightened security and warned they would
use force if necessary to prevent thousands of Croat refugees from marching
on their former homes in Serb-held territory.
The march, scheduled to take place today, could reignite the Serbo-Croat
war, a UN commander said. The war left about 10,000 people dead and hundreds
of thousands homeless.
'Croatian plans to send back the refugees is a violation of the UN
peacekeeping plan and could provoke a return to war,' said Colonel Aleksandr
Khromtshenkov, UN commander of the eastern sector.
Editorial Comment, Page 20
