FT  14 MAY 92 / Survey of Argentina (12): A city that comes alive at night -
What to do in Buenos Aires
BUENOS AIRES is probably the least stressful of Latin America's major
cities. Its relatively uncongested streets, and clear air make it a welcome
relief from Mexico City, Rio de Janeiro or Caracas. Although crime is
rising, murder, robbery and drug use - and other features of many modern
cities - are still rare enough to make the news.
Buenos Aires does take some getting used to. Argentine lifestyles are
demanding, with evening meals beginning at 10 and night life only really
starting after midnight and ending at dawn on weekends. Fortunately,
Portenos as the inhabitants of this port city call themselves, are not early
risers - the morning rush hour normally reaches its peak around 10 am
It is easy to get about, since government offices and corporate headquarters
are packed within walking distance of each other into a small part of the
city centre known as the microcentro. The city is swarming with taxis:
unlike many other Latin capitals, drivers know the city's streets well and
are often honest.
Buenos Aires has good restaurants, theatres, cinemas and several beautiful
parks. Many of the best bars, cafes and restaurants line the Recoleta park
in one of the city's most exclusive residential neighbourhoods. But be
prepared: going out is not cheap. Buenos Aires is among the most expensive
cities in the world. A meal for two with a local wine in Recoleta will cost
Dollars 100 for two. A tip of 5-10 per cent is expected.
As might be expected, beef is the staple food of Argentina. Vegetarians will
find it difficult to cope, all the more so as lettuce, onion and tomato
salads or potatoes are the only concessions to a balanced diet. Health
freaks will also have to put up with inhaling cigarette smoke. No smoking
signs are almost universally ignored.
Leading international credit cards are widely accepted, as are US dollar
bills. However, travellers should be warned to only use and accept dollar
bills that are in good condition: Argentines reject torn, crumpled or
defaced money.
Argentina changed its currency in January, replacing the austral with the
peso. One peso is worth 10,000 australs or just over one US dollar. Be
careful, because austral notes and coins are still in circulation and taxi
drivers and waiters occasionally try to fleece the unwary by 'accidentally'
confusing austral and peso values.
The San Telmo antiques market on Sundays is a favourite with foreigners and
locals. Also popular are visits to La Boca, a working class district with
brightly painted houses which was first settled by Italian immigrants in the
19th century. However, it should be avoided during carnival, when people
attack each other with buckets of water and hosepipes.
Browsing through the late night bookshops on Avenida Corrientes is a
well-established local habit. A visit to the Boca or River Plate football
stadiums is an unforgettable experience with fireworks, tickertape and
ecstatic chanting to greet the teams as they enter the pitch. British
visitors may also want to visit the exclusive Hurlingham Club, founded by
the Anglo-Argentine community, where cricket and bowls are still played.
Watching polo, even for the uninitiated, is fun. Buenos Aires has several
polo pitches and there are matches on most weekends during the season.
Visitors may also want to watch or even dance the tango. Most dance halls
are tourist traps, but a few venues can still be found which preserve the
traditions of tango with loving dedication.
Buenos Aires has several glitzy and expensive discos that open their doors
around 1 am Suits and ties for men and short, tight dresses for women are de
rigueur. Argentines are careful, if conservative dressers. Unpolished shoes,
crumpled clothes or unconventional fashions are viewed with disdain.
These days, Buenos Aires is brimming with business visitors from abroad,
filling its five luxury hotels to capacity. Finding a good hotel room can
often be a frustrating experience. However, English is widely spoken in the
city centre and by most business people.
Shop opening hours are strictly observed, particularly on Saturdays, when
many shops close promptly at 1pm. Central Buenos Aires is packed with
leather goods shops of varying quality and prices - shoppers are advised to
look around before buying. Silverware and handicrafts can also make good
presents. Argentine wines can be worth trying, and a hit with visitors is
Bodega Menem - the wines produced by President Carlos Menem's family
business.
Buenos Aires can be uncomfortably hot and humid in the summer, although most
buildings in the city centre are air conditioned. The city empties from
December to the beginning of March as Portenos decamp to the seaside for
summer holidays. Arranging meetings can be a problem at this time of year.
Winters are chilly, with temperatures falling to freezing in July and
August.
Although nearly all major businesses are headquartered in Buenos Aires,
where over a third of the population lives, the cities of Cordoba and
Rosario are also important business centres. There are frequent daily
flights to both cities. However, flights are far from punctual and are
expensive: the one hour flight to Cordoba costs Dollars 242 return.
Buenos Aires has two airports. The international airport at Ezeiza is a 40
minute drive from the city centre, with cabs costing Dollars 50-60. The US
government warns that security arrangements at Ezeiza are inadequate. The
Jorge Newbery metropolitan airport handles domestic departures and some
flights to neighbouring countries.
As for the mountainous south, hiking and fishing is recommended during the
summer in the spectacularly beautiful area around the resort town of
Bariloche. Its ski slopes are packed during the winter. However, the pistes
and prices compare unfavourably with neighbouring Chile.
