FT  03 FEB 92 / Bonn to raise concern over debt with Kravchuk
GROWING concern in Germany over developments in the newly and determinedly
independent republic of Ukraine will dominate talks this week when Mr Leonid
Kravchuk, the Ukrainian president, pays his first official visit to Bonn.
The refusal of the republic to sign the western-inspired memorandum of
understanding on the servicing of the debt of the former Soviet Union is a
serious bone of contention in Germany, which is owed by far the largest
portion of outstanding debt.
At the same time, Chancellor Helmut Kohl, on whose invitation Mr Kravchuk is
coming, has expressed concern at the establishment of new armed forces in
the former Soviet republics on a scale which could upset the balance of
forces in Europe. On that score, Ukraine is also the most obvious offender.
Mr Kravchuk will meet Mr Theo Waigel, the German finance minister, as well
as Mr Kohl, and Mr Richard von Weizsacker, the German president.
Finance Ministry officials have made it clear Germany will oppose the
admission of Ukraine to the International Monetary Fund, until an
internationally acceptable agreement is reached on shared repayment of the
former Soviet debt. The German government will also refuse to support any
new export credit guarantees for contracts with Ukraine until the problem of
old debts is resolved, according to the Economics Ministry.
Ukraine has said that it will pay its share of Soviet foreign debt -
accepted as 16.37 per cent - independently, but not as part of the joint
'memorandum of understanding' signed by eight of the former Soviet
republics. Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan and Georgia have also failed to sign.
In an interview with the magazine Der Spiegel, he said Ukraine was ready to
resettle several hundred thousand Volga Germans - deported to the east by
Stalin during the war - in the south of the republic, and in the Crimea.
With 500,000 Volga Germans having submitted applications to emigrate to
Germany, and five times that number having the right to do so, any attempt
to persuade them to remain in the former Soviet republics will be warmly
welcomed in Bonn.
The only problem with Mr Kravchuk's offer is that the Crimea itself is
disputed territory with the neighbouring Russian republic.
He also stressed in the interview that Ukraine was determined to get rid of
all nuclear warheads on its territory. So far, one-third of all tactical
nuclear weapons had been removed from the republic and by July 'they will
all have disappeared,' he said.
As Mr Kravchuk arrives in Bonn, Mr Jurgen Mollemann, the economics minister,
is leaving on a four-day visit to Russia, Kazakhstan and Ukraine, aimed at
reviving Germany's collapsed trade with the region.
