FT  07 MAY 92 / The Queen's Speech: Crackdown on vote-rigging - Industrial
relations
THE GOVERNMENT will, as expected, go ahead with its sixth significant piece
of industrial relations legislation since 1979, persevering with the core
proposals in last July's industrial relations green paper. Only the plan to
make collective agreements legally enforceable has been dropped.
In 1990, the government announced it had completed its programme of
industrial relations reform but then decided to have one more go.
Nevertheless, the new Conservative government is expected to be less hostile
to the unions than its three predecessors and further legislation of this
kind is not expected in this parliament.
One of the four areas for legislation that the government spelt out
yesterday follows allegations of ballot-rigging in the TGWU general union in
1990 and misuse of National Union of Mineworkers funds during the 1984-1985
strike. The government will 'strengthen the rights of trade union members
against fraud and vote-rigging in union elections and mismanagement of their
union's finances'. Proposals include independent scrutineers for election
and enhanced powers for the Certification Officer over union finances.
The second area states that the government will 'give workers greater
freedom to join the union of their choice and protect them against the
unauthorised deduction of subscriptions from salaries'.
The first part involves making the Trades Union Congress rules for
controlling inter-union disputes - the Bridlington rules  - inoperable. Some
union officials fear that the proposal could release a wave of inter-union
disputes, further discrediting trade unionism, and undermine the movement
towards single-union deals.
The second part will hurt union income, 65 per cent of which currently comes
from union subscriptions 'checked-off' at source by employers. Instead of
giving permission only when they join the system, as at present, union
members are likely to have to give written permission for 'check-off' every
three years and must be informed by employers every time the subscription is
raised. Some observers think unions could lose 1m members as a result.
Less controversial proposals include: giving users of public services the
right to take action against unlawful strikes even when the employers do
not; requiring seven days' notice of strike action; and extending the
requirement for postal ballots to strike ballots.
