FT  23 SEP 92 / Money Markets: Rates cut to 9%
SHORT sterling futures rallied sharply yesterday after the Bank of England
signalled a base rate cut to 9 per cent, with futures dealers pricing in
another percentage point reduction before the end of the year.
Rates in the sterling cash market also softened, with three-month money
ending at 9 1/8 per cent on the offered side from a previous close of 9 1/2
per cent. Period rates traced a sharp, downward-sloping yield curve, with
one-year money finishing at 8 5/8 per cent on the offered side.
A cut in UK base rates had been expected after the UK's departure from the
ERM last week, and the cash market had priced in  1/2 percentage point
reduction on Monday night.
However, traders were divided over whether yesterday's cut would soon be
followed by more. Some paid heed to the comment from Mr Norman Lamont, the
UK chancellor, that being outside the ERM was 'not a free lunch', and that
there was still a battle against inflation to be fought. Others believed
that another cut could come before the Conservative party conference.
The rally in futures was partly driven by pressures on the French franc
inside the ERM for the fourth trading day. Some traders believe that if the
franc comes under further pressure, the Bundesbank may be forced to lower
rates at its council meeting on Thursday week. However, there was an
unsettling note from Germany, where the Bundesbank announced that M3 money
supply growth in August, its guiding light on interest policy, had risen
sharply to 9 per cent.
The December short sterling contract reflected these various trends, opening
at 91.57 but dropping to 91.45 on the back of the M3 figure. It later
rallied to close at 91.86 which, strictly speaking, assumes that 3-month
money by the year's end will be at 8.14 per cent.
The Bank announced that there would be an Pounds 800m shortage and that
discount houses wishing to use their borrowing facilities were invited to do
so at a 9 per cent interest rate.
The Bank bought Pounds 540m of Band 1 bank bills at 8 7/8 per cent, and
Pounds 2m of Band 2 bank bills at 8 7/8 per cent. In the afternoon, it lent
Pounds 270m at an interest rate of 9 per cent for seven days.
