FT  26 SEP 92 / Gardening: More bark, same bite
THE LATEST development in the seed and potting compost controversy is that
Fisons, connected closely with the development of peat composts for 25
years, is about to market a non-peat product in direct competition with its
own well-known Levington Multipurpose.
Some months ago, Fisons gave virtually all its peat bogs to English Nature,
a government-sponsored conservation agency. It now decides which bogs should
remain undisturbed to preserve the natural flora and fauna, and which can
continue to be used for peat extraction.
Putting these events together, you might suppose Fisons was pulling out of
the peat industry altogether, but this would be wrong. The company's faith
in peat as an ideal compost material is as strong as ever.
But it recognises that the kind of peat required for top-grade plant
composts is becoming fairly scarce in the British Isles and needs to be
conserved, although there is plenty of it in other parts of the world.
Fisons started seed and potting compost research in 1956 when it moved to
Levington, near Ipswich, Suffolk, but the research was aimed at finding a
substitute for soil-based composts (such as the John Innes' mixes, which
were running into difficulties even then because of the shortage of loam of
the required type and quality).
The company investigated many materials before settling on sphagnum peat,
but it was not until 1966 that the peat-based Levington range was marketed.
Testing and further research continued and, in 1976, a wetting agent was
added; this made it easy to moisten the composts even after they had become
very dry.
At first, there were several composts (differing mainly in their chemical
content): one for potting, one for seed germination and the cultivation of
small seedlings, and a third for growing-on mature plants. Eventually, a
single mixture known as Multipurpose was deemed satisfactory for all these
purposes in the home garden, and also for rooting cuttings. It has remained
so.
While there seems little evidence that gardeners are moving away from peat
composts on any scale, some obviously are uneasy about their ecological
effects. So, Fisons has chosen softwood bark as the best alternative and has
based its new peat-free compost on this.
Softwood bark is available freely as a waste product from the timber
industry. It has no toxic elements or anything else that might prove harmful
in the garden, and the new compost is intended to be just as effective as
its peat-based predecessor for seed germination, seedlings, growing and
full-grown plants, and cuttings.
The peat-free product is pleasant to handle, moist and crumbly, and easy to
fill into pots or use for picking out seedlings or inserting cuttings. It
seems in every way a useful addition to garden composts.
