FT  19 MAY 92 / International Company News: Taiwan proposes new Douglas deal
TAIWAN Aerospace has proposed a new deal with McDonnell Douglas, the US
aircraft manufacturer, which would initially rule out any large equity
investment by Taiwanese investors.
However, McDonnell Douglas, which needs cash from an equity sale to fund the
development of its new MD-12 jumbo jet, indicated yesterday the plan would
not be acceptable.
The Taiwanese proposal would involve setting up a third company to act as a
financing arm to buy aircraft from the US group.
Last year the US company unveiled a plan to hive off its Douglas commercial
aircraft operations and sell up to 49 per cent of the business to Asian
partners. The plan was designed to help it launch the MD-12 programme.
McDonnell Douglas in November signed a memorandum of understanding with
Taiwan Aerospace in which the 29 per cent government-owned company would pay
Dollars 2bn for a stake of up to 40 per cent in the Douglas commercial
aircraft business.
However, the venture has been criticised by Taiwan legislators concerned by
the US company's financial position and declining share of the commercial
airliner market. A recent study by Taiwan said the deal was 'high risk", but
offered a 'great opportunity'.
The new proposal appears to be a compromise aimed at managing the risks
while attempting to reassure potential investors and critics. Under the
scheme, Taiwan proposes to acquire a large number of MD-12 aircraft, with
the option of investing in an equity stake later.
However, McDonnell said yesterday: 'What both parties have understood from
the beginning of our talks are the basic requirements for an equity
partnership. McDonnell Douglas will insist that partners take an equity
position to insure the long-term success of the new company.'
It said there were different ways a final deal could be structured, and this
could include the purchase of a number of the aircraft Taiwan Aerospace
would be involved in producing.
Mr Denny Ko, Taiwan Aerospace president, outlined the new proposals at a
meeting held to attract private investors to the deal. He said the deal
would set up a separate finance company with government and private backing,
which would place an order for up to Dollars 2bn worth of MD-12 aircraft. It
would provide McDonnell Douglas with a standby letter of credit for the full
cost of the aircraft, but conditional on the US company booking orders for
up to 30 new aircraft with airline customers.
Mr Ko said another option under consideration would involve granting
McDonnell Douglas government-backed loans convertible to equity at a later
date if the company performed on target.
Taiwan might initially also make a token equity investment as a gesture of
good faith. Taiwan Aerospace is still hoping to attract to Taiwan the
production of the wings and fuselage of the MD-12.
McDonnell Douglas has been anxious to reorganise its commercial aircraft
business and find equity partners to help support development of the MD-12.
This month it unveiled the proposed design for its new aircraft, a
four-engine double-deck jumbo which challenges Boeing's 747.
