FT  27 MAR 92 / Japan's electronics companies face price-fixing inquiry
JAPAN'S Fair Trade Commission has struck at the heart of the country's
distribution system, launching an investigation into alleged domestic price
fixing by subsidiaries of four leading electronics companies, Matsushita
Electric Industrial, Toshiba, Sony and Hitachi.
In the past, the FTC has been condemned by Washington for failing to
investigate leading manufacturers' alleged maintenance of high retail prices
on the domestic market, allegedly to provide them with profits needed to
expand their international market share.
FTC investigators raided distribution subsidiaries of the four companies
over the past two days, following claims that they had drawn up price
schedules for product discounts. The companies allegedly controlled
retailers' advertised discounts to try to lift prices in the face of slowing
domestic demand and product oversupply.
It is also alleged that some retailers, who did not abide by the discount
schedules, were told that the supply of consumer audio-visual equipment
would cease unless they obeyed the distributors' demands.
All four companies confirmed that subsidiaries were raided and said they
were co-operating with the FTC, but none would comment on the substance of
the allegations. The FTC said an investigation was under way and could take
several months.
The investigation comes at a difficult time for Japanese electronics
companies, which are expecting sharply lower profits this year because of a
downturn in domestic and international demand. The move also highlights the
growing role of the FTC, Japan's anti-monopoly body, whose number of formal
cease-and-desist orders rose from only five in 1988 to 24 last year.
A rush of new electronics releases on an already weak market has forced
heavy discounting within Japan in order to clear old stock, though
manufacturers are known to be concerned that excessive discounting could
damage their products' image and change consumer perceptions about
'acceptable' retail prices.
Prices of video cameras, video-cassette recorders and televisions have
fallen by as much as 35 per cent over the past year, creating friction
between specialist discount shops, which offer the largest cuts, and shops
tied to manufacturers, which are under pressure to support prices in return
for privileged access to products.
Eight sales companies run by Matsushita were investigated, and a company
spokesman said that 'we are taking the investigation very seriously'. Two
Toshiba subsidiaries, Toshiba East Japan Home Electronics and Toshiba
Central Home Electronics, are also under investigation, as is Hitachi Home
Electronics and a Sony subsidiary.
The companies are part of the manufacturing keiretsu groups targeted by US
trade negotiators as a structural barrier to imports. US officials say the
parent company's control over product distributors leads to agreements,
either explicit or implicit, that restrict imported goods' market access.
Hitachi Home Electronics said it abided by anti-monopoly laws and was 'not
aware' of price restrictions.
If the FTC finds the companies did try to fix prices, it will issue a
cease-and-desist order, but will not impose a fine. If that order is
ignored, the FTC can prosecute.
