FT  24 JAN 92 / Management: Adopting the Lotus position - Gay rights / Why
US companies are copying a revolutionary initiative
Has the age of the 'spousal equivalent' dawned ? Perhaps in Massachusetts,
where Lotus Development Corporation - the large US software company - has
taken the bold step of extending healthcare and other benefits to partners
of its gay employees.
Even in the huge and diverse US market, this is radical thinking.
Initiatives recognising employment rights for homosexual workers have
usually been confined to a handful of public sector employers, such as
Manhattan's Montefiore Hospital, or small 'ideologically-sound' companies
like Ben &amp; Jerry's, the Vermont-based ice cream manufacturer, and the
Village Voice, a left-leaning New York publisher.
Lotus, on the other hand, has more than 3,000 US employees and worldwide
name recognition. As such, it is by far the largest, and most high-profile,
corporation to extend employee benefits to 'non-traditional family units'.
No one pretends that this mould-breaking package was achieved easily - the
initiative came from a handful of determined employees and was hammered out
over many months  - but repercussions from the move have been immediate and
widespread.
On the one hand, says Lotus, some 75 companies have been in contact,
requesting details or asking about the plan's implementation. These, it
adds, have ranged from large multinationals to small domestic businesses. On
the other, the US media has picked up on the subject, and gay rights in the
workplace have become a hot topic of debate.
As with the furore over sexual harassment last year, it is questionable
whether this heightened awareness, in itself, will bring practical change.
But most activists are convinced that discussion alone is useful in
dismantling barriers. 'Even if a corporation decides against a change in
their benefits plan,' comments Ruth Harlow at the American Civil Liberties
Union, 'the simple fact of airing the issue helps'.
Under current US law - and in contrast to popular perception abroad - gay
employees have relatively little protection when it comes to working
conditions. Although a 'gay rights' bill is pending in Congress, few
activists expect this to find its way on to the statute book in the
short-term. In the meantime, federal protection is virtually non-existent.
At the state level, matters are only slightly more advanced. Four states -
Wisconsin, Hawaii, Massachusetts and Connecticut - plus the District of
Columbia, have enacted measures banning discrimination on grounds of sexual
orientation. A smattering of cities and municipalities - including New York
 -have similar laws. Some companies, meanwhile, have taken the initiative
into their own hands, and spelt out individual anti-discrimination policies.
This position may eventually improve, but progress has been noticeably
patchy in recent times. Legislation supportive of gay rights has just been
passed in New Jersey, for example, and was signed only days ago by Governor
Jim Florio.
But homosexual employees in California, the most heavily-populated state,
suffered an important setback when Governor Pete Wilson vetoed a similar
measure last autumn.
Given a widespread reluctance to state sexual preference, it is difficult to
assess the number of employees who may be directly interested in the matter.
However, the conventional assumption is that some 10 per cent of the US
labour force is either gay or lesbian. If correct, this translates to 13m
people, the equivalent of almost half Britain's working population.
So, in an area which has arguably been neglected for far too long, what has
the Lotus deal achieved ? The package itself is relatively straightforward.
All US Lotus employment policies will simply add the term 'spousal
equivalent', whenever the word 'spouse' is used. This applies across the
board - in relocation matters, questions of bereavement leave, expatriate
assignments, as well as for healthcare and medical benefits.
To qualify as a spousal equivalent, the person must be the sole partner of
the employee. He or she must also be the same sex as the employee; live in
the same residence 'with the intent to reside together permanently' and 'be
jointly responsible for the common welfare and financial obligations of both
individuals'. Plainly, this does not extend the notion of 'spousal
equivalents' to unmarried partners in heterosexual relationships. Lotus
justifies this stance by pointing out that state law does not permit gay and
lesbian couples the option of marrying.
Superficially, the Lotus initiative seems to come at an inauspicious time.
After all, are all US employers not acutely aware of mounting healthcare
costs and will the Aids risk not drive up expenses in this particular case?
That, says Lotus firmly, is a misconception. It is true that the software
company is largely 'self-insured', which means that it meets most healthcare
costs out of its own pocket instead of paying hefty insurance premiums to a
commercial carrier. As a result, the task of implementing the new scheme was
made a good deal easier.
Nevertheless, the company itself is clearly at risk, and did its homework
accordingly. Where precedents have been set, Lotus claims, experience has
not been particularly adverse. 'Data indicates that coverage of same-sex
employees and their partners has not significantly increased per capita
healthcare costs,' it told employees in an internal memo.
In fact, perhaps the bleakest element in the Lotus story is that only a
dozen employees have taken advantage of the scheme to date. This, in turn,
seems to mirror the experience of some progressive public sector employers
operating similar benefit packages. All of which points to a rather gloomy
conclusion: improved benefits, one suspects, can go so far, but making
everyone comfortable about taking them up is another matter altogether.
