FT  01 JUN 92 / Survey of Spain (2): Ten years, and still running - Prime
Minister Felipe Gonzalez resets his sights
FELIPE GONZALEZ can seem so careless sometimes. 'It makes you want to shake
him,' says a long time admirer. When he rose to the speaker's podium in
Parliament in March to deliver his state of the nation address he seemed
tired and distant.
Such Gonzalez appearances are rare and eagerly anticipated as much by his
opponents as by his friends. But the speech was delivered in a monotone -
most of it was read in a hurry - and he only stopped once to chuckle. No one
else caught the joke. Was he laughing at his own performance or at what he
was reading?
It was astonishing, really. The Spanish Prime Minister was proposing a
radical effort to reform or crush the stubborn rigidities in Spanish life -
from the easy frauds that encourage people to become officially unemployed
to the comfortable guilds that protect and preserve the high costs of
professional services. These go to the very core of the way Spaniards live.
It was only a few days later, when the Finance Minister had put some meat on
the bones Mr Gonzalez had thrown to parliament, that the true import of the
changes dawned on the trades unions. They quickly began to threaten all
manner of revenge, (as discussed in a separate article).
The importance of Mr Gonzalez's off-hand treatment of the unions was a
measure of his state of mind.
Opponents have been suggesting for years that the Prime Minister, who has
been in office since October 1982, is tired. Wild rumours swirl about. One
day he is said to be after the presidency of the European Commission (this
is probably not the case) and the next day his eye is said to be on the
Socialist International (again, no).
A week later, he will be depressed at the strained relations between his
Government and the socialist party, of which he is also leader. Or maybe his
health will be troubling him. Spain lives by rumour and innuendo and all of
this is perfectly normal.
But it is probably reasonable to assume that he is tired. Bored may be a
better word. Mr Gonzalez never wanted to change Spain, just calm it down
after so many years of nervous dictatorship and tumultuous transition. It is
his stated aim to raise Spain to be an average country, with average
European Community incomes, average lifestyles and average output.
This struggle may have been captivating while Spain was a long way from
converging with the rest of its European neighbours. But as Spain gets
closer Mr Gonzalez naturally comes under pressure to reset his sights beyond
nominal convergence and this is hard, even for a politician as successful as
he has been. It means changing gear and taking a constantly bickering party
with him.
The March speech suggested Mr Gonzalez was either not going to bother much
taking his party - still dominated at an administrative level by the Left -
with him or that he had somehow already persuaded the bulk of the
organisation's leadership they had no option to follow him. Given the
subsequent expressions of support for the convergence plan he was outlining,
the latter may well be the case. What is crucial now is how that support
holds up in the face of union attack.
The Left has an interest in not rocking the boat too soon. If the unions
succeed in changing economic policy and the jobless benefit cuts in the
Plan, then Finance Minister Carlos Solchaga's position in the Government
will be greatly weakened. Mr Solchaga is deeply despised in party
headquarters but his strength in Government is, for the moment,
unquestionable.
Just two weeks after making that speech the guts of the convergence plan -
steep cuts in unemployment benefits - had become law.
Although he will allow the party to tinker with the the benefits decree, he
seems to have abandoned his customary caution and, following his instincts,
finally turned both ears to Mr Solchaga, who has told him that unless Spain
dramatically streamlines its top heavy bureaucracy, forces workers to seek
jobs and fiercely attacks high prices - be they lawyers or plumbers' fees -
the country could drift well past the turn of the century trapped by a ring
of inefficient traditions that almost guarantee its mediocrity.
Union pressures may still panic the party but electoral arithmetic makes it
relatively easy for him to be this cavalier. Even if the implementation of
this plan damages socialist party support, there is simply no-one in the
party capable of winning more votes for it in the next general election
(which must be held by October 1993) other than himself. Whatever he does,
the party, which now has exactly half the seats in parliament, will not get
rid of him.
Even assuming a loss of support, from Mr Gonzalez's increasingly
conservative point of view the prospects of a coalition are almost
attractive. This would almost certainly be with the ruling party in
Catalonia, Convergencia i Union (CiU) or, more remotely, with the biggest
Basque party, the PNV.
Both are conservative, and the presence of either in a Gonzalez government
would allow him (and Mr Solchaga) to ignore the more strident left wing of
the socialist party because of the demands of coalition.
A Catalan or Basque partner would add pressure on Madrid to devolve more
power but there is little chance that such a scenario would split the
socialists, who would still be able to enjoy the fruits of power, in the
short term. It is, anyway quite possible that the socialists, under Mr
Gonzalez, might improve their share of the vote in the next election. That
would depend on how well the unions manage their challenge to the
convergence plan.
But the next term of office could take the socialists right up to
convergence and the scheduled creation of Economic and Monetary Union in the
European Community by the end of 1996 and it would be courageous to bet on
the Prime Minister fighting a fifth election then.
His going does not depend on another job being found for him. It depends on
the socialist party being able to find someone who can win elections for it.
Spanish politics concentrate on leaders, not programmes, and without him,
the face of politics here changes completely.
For a start, it means that his current opponent - Mr Jose Maria Aznar, the
leader of the conservative Partido Popular - would become vulnerable to
challenges from an attractive right wing crusader unsullied by years of
opposition politics. Mr Gonzalez's going will be exactly the right time for
such a person to bid for office.
That person may be Mr Mario Conde, a young banker, chairman of Banesto, one
of the country's biggest banks, and an articulate - though still not quite
engaging enough - spokesman for an even freer economy than the pragmatic
socialists have been able to erect. Large parts of the opposition press
already champion him but now is not the moment. No-one will beat Felipe
Gonzalez in the next election but the moment he goes, the search for a new
face, a new voice, begins and it really does not matter which party - within
reason - he or she belongs to.
Nevertheless, assuming that Mr Gonzalez will make his next election his last
is not without risks. There is no grander position in Spain for him to
occupy and the parliament and the senate in Spain are not places anyone with
his talents would want to spend much time as a former leader.
And he is not a rich man. He would probably find it quite hard to buy a good
apartment in Madrid if he had to.
So there is an inertia that keeps him in office. It will not last forever,
though.
