FT  11 AUG 92 / Management: Down and out all round the world - Bankruptcy is
on the increase almost everywhere. But Graham Bannock takes a sanguine view
The number of companies going bankrupt or into liquidation always increases
in a recession.
According to the Department of Trade and Industry, almost 500 companies a
week went into liquidation in the fourth quarter of 1991, and that number
rises to almost 1000 if individual bankruptcies are included.
Although the absolute number of company liquidations is rising, the rate of
increase is falling. In 1991 the year-on-year increase reached a peak of 67
per cent in the second quarter.
It fell to 42 per cent for the third quarter and 20 per cent for the fourth,
and in the first quarter of this year it was down to 17 per cent.
Throughout the 1980s and into 1990 the business population, as measured by
the number of companies and unincorporated businesses registered for VAT,
rose every year.
However, the overall number of company closures rose sharply last year and
there were fewer new incorporations.
The number of live companies registered in the UK fell by 27,000 in 1991.
This was about the same as the last large fall in 1985 and was the largest
drop since 1968.
According to the latest Labour Force Survey, the number of self-employed in
1991 was down by 150,000 on the previous year.
Even after compensating for the steep increase in the turnover threshold
introduced in the 1991 Finance Act, it seems probable that the VAT register
will also show a fall in 1991.
Is this a cataclysm? Does it herald the end of the enterprise revolution?
(No doubt some commentators would claim both.) Is the UK business
population, having grown faster than that of other countries, now set to go
on shrinking faster in this recession?
The short answer to all these questions is 'no', although it is most
unlikely that the rapid rise in the business population in the 1980s will be
repeated in the 1990s.
There are considerable difficulties in comparing failure rates
internationally because of differences in statistical coverage.
Differences in bankruptcy law and commercial culture also affect the
proportion of business closures that results in legal insolvency.
Businesses close for a variety of reasons, including takeover and
retirement. In fact, Michael Daly of the Department of Employment calculates
that of all VAT deregistrations (and there were 185,000 of these in 1990),
only about half were closures. It seems likely that compulsory liquidations
and business-related individual bankruptcies accounted for much less than 20
per cent of all deregistrations.
The average rate of business closures (as distinct from insolvencies) in the
UK appears to be not very different from that in Germany and possibly less
than the United States, but it is difficult to make comparisons with other
countries.
It seems safer to compare trends in insolvencies. Trends should be less
subject to differences in coverage, though even here there are statistical
problems, and trends also need to be interpreted in the light of differences
in the timing of the economic cycle.
The chart shows that since 1988, the UK has indeed suffered relatively badly
compared with Germany and Japan, though it did a little better than Germany
in the last recession.
The UK figures probably understate the deterioration somewhat, because they
exclude business-related individual bankruptcies, which are partly included
in other countries.
The proportion of business-related bankruptcies to total individual
insolvencies seems, however, to have been declining sharply in the UK in the
face of a steep rise in debt-related personal bankruptcies.
The UK trend is much lower than that in the US, where bankruptcy is less of
a stigma, but mirrors it closely.
The 1991 increase has brought the UK trend just above that of France,
which is the only country to have seen an uninterrupted rise in the number
of business insolvencies throughout the period (ignoring a small dip in
1982).
The contrast between the UK, the US and France on one hand, and Japan and
Germany on the other, is marked.
However, even in Japan, insolvencies are now rising, and in Germany, with
its tighter monetary conditions, a reversal in the downward trend seems
probable.
The US and UK positions would have looked somewhat better on a chart using
percentages of the business population, or failure rates, rather than actual
numbers of insolvencies.
The UK in particular saw a spectacular increase in the size of its business
population in the 1980s: up by over two-thirds between 1979 and 1989.
As it is, even in 1991, company liquidations in England and Wales were only
2.2 per cent of the number of live companies on the register, though this
compares with 1.8 per cent at the previous peak in the 1980s.
This is why, as the bad news continues to emerge, it is important to keep
things in perspective.
If the structure of the UK economy is to continue to adapt, large numbers of
business closures are inevitable and will resume their normal level only
some time after economic growth is resumed.
Even in good times, businesses need to close to allow new firms to take up
resources released by closures, as technology, competition and consumer
demand shift and grow.
Economic cycles intensify this process, and if swings in these cycles are
too large or banks get into trouble and have to restrict credit, then good
businesses will be lost.
In some cases this is probably happening now, but it is in the social
interest that even in bad times businessmen should take risks in introducing
new products and services: the more risks are taken, the more failures there
will be.
It is easy for economists to write coldly in this way about the social
interest, and it has to be said that many, if not most business insolvencies
result in personal tragedy for the business owners involved and often for
their employees.
The vast majority of insolvencies, like the vast majority of all businesses,
are small firms.
There are, moreover, differences between the effects of failure in large and
small firms. Most large firms survive insolvency in some sense, through
takeover or restructuring.
In most cases, the worst thing that can happen to a director of an
insolvent, very large company, delinquency apart, is the loss of his or her
job, usually cushioned by a golden handshake.
In a small firm limited liability is no protection against recourse to
personal guarantees by banks and leaseholders, and the owner often loses
all.
At this stage in the economic cycle there is not much that governments can
or should do, while rhetoric will not help the sufferers. The last thing
Britain's battered small business people need is panic action to reflate
demand, and another ride up and down the inflation roller-coaster that would
end again in more insolvencies.
What would help, in addition to sticking to the ERM discipline, is more
action to cut business costs and, in Britain, more esteem for those who,
with good intentions, fail in the interests of economic advance.
The author is an economic consultant.
