FT  16 DEC 92 / Business and the Environment: Chilean dam to win funding
Environmentalists in the US and Chile are mounting a rearguard action
against a proposed Dollars 3bn (Pounds 1.9bn) hydroelectric project which
they say will spoil the rugged beauty of Chile's Bo-Bo river and threaten
the culture of the Pehuenche Indians.
In the centre of the controversy is the International Finance Corporation,
the private-sector arm of the World Bank, which tomorrow is expected to
approve funding for the Dollars 500m Pangue Project. This is the first dam
in a proposed series of six, and the largest, most controversial
hydroelectric project to receive IFC financing.
Because other privatised energy companies will be seeking funds, IFC's
handling of Pangue is likely to set environmental standards for projects to
follow. Strongly aware of public concern, the IFC took seriously the need to
work with the opposition.
Chile's environmental record is enough to give any investor pause. While
pushing ahead with economic growth under the Pinochet government, Chile also
despoiled its resources.
Santiago is second only to Mexico City in air pollution according to the
Natural Resources Defence Council, co-ordinating opposition to the project
in Washington. 'Copper smelting operations in northern Chile have produced
dangerous blood levels of arsenic among local populations.
'Commercial logging of Southern Chile's native forests is rapidly
eliminating some of the world's oldest temperate rain forest ecosystems.
Overfishing has left all of Chile's important commercial fisheries in
critical condition,' says the NRDC.
Now a democracy, Chile has a fledging environmental movement which looks
with suspicion at plans to develop the river. Three suits have been filed in
Chilean courts to stop the project.
ENDESA, the privatised electric company, planned the Bo-Bo development with
no analysis of energy alternatives, and little public discussion or
consultation with the Pehuenche. However, it needs foreign capital to
complete even the first dam.
After complaints from the NRDC and Grupo de Accion por el Bo-Bo, the IFC
required a comprehensive environment assessment and an independent study of
energy alternatives. It hired an independent consultant to evaluate the
environmental assessment and overcame ENDESA resistance to making the
results public.
Pangue, due to be completed in 1997, is not a large dam by World Bank
standards. It will create a reservoir 14km long, flooding an area of 400
hectares. Only 53 people will have to be relocated. The most immediate
impact will be on white water rafters and kayakers.
Environmentalists say the forests around the dam could become susceptible to
logging, threatening an ecosystem which supports many rare and endangered
species. These include the Araucaria trees, which produce pine nuts gathered
by the Pehuenche; the Andean condors, pumas, and the tiny pudu deer.
Operation of the dam will change the river's chemistry, endangering
fisheries.
ENDESA has promised numerous measures to mitigate the impact of the Pangue
construction. It has also agreed to the Pangue Foundation, funded through an
annual grant of Dollars 140,000 or 0.3 per cent of the project's net income,
to help the Pehuenche communities.
None of this has satisfied the Pangue opposition, which criticises the
dearth of public debate in Chile over the project. Glen Prickett of the NRDC
believes an energy conservation programme could satisfy the short to
medium-term demand for new electricity in Chile, giving time for new
developments in solar and biomass technologies.
However, Monenco, the Canadian consulting company hired to assess energy
alternatives, concluded that the Pangue project represented the best option
for supplying near-term energy needs.
The dam will be almost impossible to stop; construction is already under
way. However, the IFC has made no commitment on the next five dams. It has
also got ENDESA to agree to study the cumulative impact of the other dams on
the Bo-Bo and its people before further development.
