FT  14 DEC 92 / Survey of Pulp and Paper (9): Cheaper land, faster trees -
Regional report: Latin America
THIS YEAR has been a milestone for Latin America's pulp and paper industry.
With Aracruz, the world's largest eucalyptus pulp company, completing a huge
expansion project in Brazil, and the start-up of three new mills in Chile,
the region is poised to become the world's leading low-cost supplier of
cellulose.
The growth of Latin America's pulp industry confirms a world trend to move
to low wood-cost areas. Land is cheap in both Brazil and Chile, generous
government subsidies encourage reforestation, and trees grow faster there
than almost anywhere else in the world. Brazil has some 1.5m hectares of
eucalyptus plantations, which can be felled after five years, compared with
10 years in temperate climates. Most of Chile's 1.4mha of man-made forests
are planted to Radiata pine, which matures after 15 years compared with 30
years in New Zealand, 40 in Sweden and 60 in Canada.
As a result, Finnish consultants Jaakko Poyry Oy expect Latin American mills
to squeeze out high-cost producers in the northern hemisphere and contribute
just under half of the world's increased production of cellulose - estimated
at 9m tonnes - towards the end of the century. With world demand for pulp
growing at an annual rate of 1.4 per cent, Jaakko Poyry expects Latin
America to command 30 per cent of international trade by the year 2005. At
present, it supplies about 15 per cent of the world trade in pulp.
Chile is well-placed to supply the fast-growing markets of Japan and
south-east Asia, while Brazil's strongest markets are in Europe. In Brazil,
the pulp-and-paper sector appears to have escaped the general malaise and
economic chaos afflicting other industries. Exports are growing so
vigorously that neighbouring Argentina was forced to introduce import quotas
earlier this year to protect its domestic producers.
Brazil's papermakers export about a quarter of their annual production of 5m
tonnes. Pulp producers sell almost 40 per cent of their 4m tonnes abroad.
Both exports are up by 20 per cent this year and are expected to earn
Dollars 1.5bn.
Aracruz became the world's largest eucalyptus pulp company in 1992, after
completing a Dollars 1.2bn expansion programme at its mill in the state of
Espirito Santo, north of Rio de Janeiro. With capacity at 1.2m tonnes a
year, Aracruz can now supply half of Brazil's short-fibre pulp, which is
used for quality paper and tissues, and 24 per cent of the world's total.
The company, owned by BAT's Brazilian affiliate Souza Cruz, Lorentzen and
Banco Safra, is also investing Dollars 100m to convert from chlorine to the
more environment-friendly oxygen bleaching.
Companhia Vale do Rio Doce (CVRD), Brazil's largest mining conglomerate, is
also investing heavily in the pulp-and-paper sector. Bahia Sul, a
joint-venture with Brazil's top paper manufacturer Suzano, started up this
year with a capacity of 500,000 tonnes. CVRD is also planning to double
capacity at Cenibra, its 350,000 tonnes-a-year pulp mill in Minas Gerais.
Its partners here are a consortium of Japanese papermakers. Mr Marcos
Montagna Carramota, CVRD's forestry industry chief, says the company plans
to start a new pulp mill every two years, to reach a capacity of 2.5m tonnes
by the year 2000.
Brazil's economic instability, however, is a serious setback for some
Dollars 5bn of pulp and forestry projects. Pulp manufacturers complain that
the government lacks a clear industrial policy, while inflation and
exchange-rate uncertainties are forcing them to postpone projects until the
end of the decade. 'If Brazil solved its economic problems, it could wipe
out all other short-fibre pulp producers in the world,' says Mr Eladio
Susaeta, an international consultant based in Santiago.
Chile's pulp industry also took a leap forward this year, with the start up
of three new mills which have more than doubled the country's productive
capacity to 1.5m tonnes a year. As a result, exports are expected to earn
more than Dollars 900m in 1993. Although Chile is now experimenting with
eucalyptus, its comparative strength lies in the production of the more
resistant long-fibre cellulose from Radiata pine.
Of the three new mills, the largest is Arauco II, a Dollars 600m
joint-venture between Brierley Investments of New Zealand and the Angelini
group of Chile, which will produce 350,000 tonnes a year. Compania
Manufacturera de Papeles y Cartones (CMPC), Chile's largest paper
manufacturer, inaugurated a kraft mill in partnership with Simpson Paper of
the US, which will produce 315,000 tonnes of bleached cellulose a year.
Santa Fe, owned by Scott Paper of the US, Citibank and Royal Dutch/Shell, is
the only eucalyptus mill in Chile. It started production last year, but has
been plagued by a shortage of raw material. Forestry experts say Santa Fe is
having to venture up to 400km away from its site in southern Chile to obtain
supplies of eucalyptus.
The three new mills are putting pressure on Chile's forestry resources, as
two-thirds of the 1.4m ha of planted pine are less than 15 years old. Mr
Susaeta believes the supply crunch will last another two to three years.
Other forestry experts believe Chile will have to double the acreage under
man-made forests to meet expected demand.
The dramatic growth in Chile's forestry industry has also exposed some
serious infrastructure bottlenecks. Roads in rural areas are poor, and
delays at congested ports are adding to export costs.
Compared with Brazil and Chile, Argentina's pulp and paper industry is
backward and inefficient. Almost half of the country's installed capacity
lies idle. Pulp and paper production, which totalled 900,000 tonnes last
year, is mainly for domestic consumption. Exports earned only Dollars 60m in
1991.
