FT  17 AUG 92 / Pakistan PM cools towards Hekmatyar: Islamabad impatient
with Afghan rebel it backed
MR Nawaz Sharif, Pakistan's prime minister, yesterday strongly criticised Mr
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, the Mujahideen leader Pakistan supported during the
13-year Afghan civil war.
Pakistan's growing impatience with Mr Hekmatyar is the result of heavy
fighting in the past week around Kabul, in which hundreds of civilians are
reported killed. The Red Cross hospital alone said it admitted 604 people in
five days, of whom 85 had died.
Mr Hekmatyar's forces have encircled the city and closed the airport and Mr
Hekmatyar yesterday vowed to continue his attacks on the Afghan capital
until his demands are met.
Mr Sharif said in an interview with the Financial Times: 'I think Mr
Hekmatyar should abide by the commitment that he has given. He should not
fight the government. Why should he fight? Afghanistan stands liberated. Who
is he fighting against?'
The recent violence, Mr Sharif said, was a violation of the April Peshawar
accord, which followed the downfall of the Soviet-backed President
Najibullah. Under the agreement, designed to end the civil war, Mr Hekmatyar
agreed with other rebel leaders, including Mr Ahmad Shah Masoud, on sharing
power in an interim government and holding elections within six months.
It emerged yesterday that Afghan President Burhanuddin Rabbani had dismissed
Mr Ustad Farid, the prime minister who was Mr Hekmatyar's most senior
representative in the interim government.
Pakistani government officials said that Islamabad had taken steps to cut
off supplies of food and other essential goods going over the border into
Afghanistan, since these supplies were mainly going to Mr Hekmatyar.
One Pakistani official said: 'Hekmatyar is the man responsible. He needs to
be brought back to his senses.'
However, Islamabad is also discussing with Mr Rabbani how supplies can be
sent into Afghanistan without aiding Mr Hekmatyar, and has offered to assist
in bringing the rival factions together for discussions.
Officials fear that a worsening of the conflict could lead to a break-up of
Afghanistan. Pakistan wants to prevent this, partly because stability there
is crucial for Islamabad's policy of developing political and trade links
with the new central Asian republics.
Pakistan's frustration with Mr Hekmatyar is significant because during the
Afghan war it provided him with large amounts of arms and other support. It
also helped Mr Masoud, but he largely relied on weapons captured from Soviet
and Afghan troops. Most guerrilla groups maintained offices in Pakistan as
their main links to the outside world.
Despite the government's attempt to dissociate itself from Mr Hekmatyar,
however, there remain elements within Pakistan sympathetic to the guerrilla
leader who feel the other parties to the Peshawar accord have not honoured
their commitments to him.
They remain suspicious of the role being played by General Rashid Dostam,
the militia leader who was previously allied with Mr Najibullah. His switch
to Mr Masoud contributed significantly to Najibullah's fall, but his militia
has since aroused resentment among Mujahideen.
Mr Hekmatyar is thought to be attempting to press his case by force because
time is running out. The winter snows, due in October, would temporarily
weaken his position because his forces are mainly camped in the hills.
Most UN staff withdrew from the Afghan capital as more rockets pounded
residential areas over the weekend, Reuter adds.
Only seven staff remained in the city after three carloads headed towards
the northern town of Mazar-i-Sharif, UN officials said.
Tens of thousands of Afghans were fleeing north. Several thousand who tried
to head east have taken shelter instead in the Pul-i-Charkhi prison on the
city outskirts.
Diplomats were reported to have met Mr Rabbani to discuss evacuating
foreigners from Kabul but said they were waiting for guarantees of safety
before evacuating. About 200 embassy personnel want to leave the city after
two Russian embassy staff were killed last week when five rockets hit the
embassy in the south of the city. Embassy spokesman Zmair Kaboulov said the
compound had been targeted deliberately.
Mr Rabbani warned diplomats they could become a target for rockets and some
embassies said they were considering closing.
