FT  29 JUN 92 / The European Market: Insurers still face problems in pursuit
of a real single market - Big concessions by Germany and France have helped
companies, but are of little use to consumers
IN June 1990, Sir Leon Brittan, the EC commissioner responsible for
financial services, addressed the German Insurance Association in Cologne.
Even by Sir Leon's own exacting standards, it was a detailed and closely
argued speech, in which he sought to explain the Commission's insurance
policy, down to the last line of small print.
The speech - to some of Europe's most meticulous, most powerful and most
conservative insurers - was an illustration of how difficult Sir Leon then
thought the battle to open the European insurance market would be.
As one of Sir Leon's advisers puts it: 'When we arrived (in Brussels) in
1988, we thought that German opposition would be irreducible.'
But just over two years after Sir Leon Brittan's Cologne speech, EC finance
ministers should today formally sign up to the Third Life Assurance
Directive, which will complete the single insurance market. The Third
Non-Life Insurance Directive was formally adopted 10 days ago. The Insurance
Accounts Directive was adopted at the end of last year.
The raft of directives will be implemented from 1994 onwards. The main
effect will be to scrap the tight regulation of policy wordings and prices
favoured by many member states and allow insurers to trade throughout the
community on the basis of a single passport, a licence obtained from
regulators in their home state.
Advocates of greater deregulation argue that the single licence should
benefit insurers from countries with more liberal rules and lead to the
evolution of a more liberal framework Europe-wide.
Mr Neil Hamilton, UK corporate affairs minister, said recently that controls
such as prior approval and minimum pricing common in Germany, Italy and
Belgium 'acted as a real barrier to trade in insurance.'
Germany has made a number of major concessions. For example, starting with
their 1995 accounts German insurers will have to reveal the current value of
their substantial assets for the first time.
All this represents a substantial advance on the more modest reforms
envisaged in the second life and non-life directives introduced in 1990,
which extended deregulation mainly in the commercial lines area.
Indeed the extent of liberalisation is more comprehensive than many would
have been believed possible in 1985, when the single market programme was
laid out.
Liberals led by Sir Leon Brittan, the EC commissioner responsible, and
initially backed by the British, the Netherlands and Ireland, have won round
first France and then Germany to a programme of far-reaching change.
The first breakthrough came in December 1986 when the European Court of
Justice ruled that German, French, Irish and Danish attempts to restrict the
sale of 'foreign' insurance policies on their territory were illegal,
backing the line taken by the Commission, Britain and the Netherlands.
According to officials in Brussels the key breakthrough appears to have come
in the second half of 1990 when France - a protectionist on insurance, as
the court case demonstrated - started changing its legislation to allow its
ambitious part-state-owned insurers to compete head-to-head with their
European competitors.
It was at that point, according to Commission officials, that Germany
decided it could no longer be obstructive.
Yet there are some snags ahead. Mr John Young, partner with London
solicitors Lovell White Durrant in London, predicts that the lack of a
single contract law system will hinder a genuine single market.
In addition differences in the tax regimes between member states will also
affect the extent to which genuine competition can take place.
And despite the new freedoms, penetration of some markets - especially those
where retail networks are dominated by extensive networks of tied agents,
which sell the products of just one company, rather than independent brokers
 -will be tough.
Consumer groups are concerned that although the new legislation will help
the mobility of large insurance companies, it will be of little use to the
consumer.
The Bureau Europeen des Unions de Consommateurs (Beuc) - the main European
consumers' organisation - cites linguistic difficulties, lack of information
and inconsistent consumer protection rules as the main obstacles to a real
single market.
Ms Monique Goyens, Beuc's legal adviser, believes a fourth generation of
insurance legislation may be necessary to lay down harmonised contract
safeguards.
