FT  16 DEC 92 / Brussels urged to block gaps in single market
MEPs yesterday called on the European Commission to adopt legislation to
close loopholes in the single market, which is due to open on January 1.
But Commission and member states are likely to resist pressure to unleash a
new wave of law-making, which they believe would further alienate EC
citizens, as the first tide of legislation begins to ebb. Governments will
concentrate on implementing and enforcing existing laws.
With just over two weeks until the single market deadline, member states
have adopted all but 5 per cent of 282 measures in the June 1985 single
market white paper, which seeks to encourage the free movement of people,
goods, services and capital.
Internal market ministers of the 12 hope to agree on some of the outstanding
legislation when they meet tomorrow. They will try to agree temporary
measures allowing frontier controls on goods to be lifted, even though
systems for regulating movement of items such as explosives and art works
will not be in place by January 1.
In a report to the Parliament, Mr Ben Patterson, a British Conservative MEP,
yesterday proposed a new white paper setting new goals and 'correcting the
negative environmental and social impacts of the internal market'. His
report, prepared for the Parliament's committee on economic and monetary
affairs and industrial policy, says gaps exist in the single market,
including:
* a definitive system for collecting and monitoring value added tax, which
will not be in place until 1997 at the earliest;
* freedom for airlines to operate anywhere in the Community, which will not
be granted until April 1997;
* proposals for liberalisation of the EC energy market, which are opposed by
a majority of member states.
'We don't want to be too downbeat about the single market, because 95 per
cent of the legislation is there,' said Mr Patterson. 'But there is a strong
undercurrent that the job has not been completed.' Mr Martin Bangemann,
internal market commissioner, tried to reassure MEPs, saying EC citizens
would have a right to sue governments which had not properly implemented
single market legislation.
Reuter adds from Madrid: Nine EC countries yesterday approved a passport
sticker letting them abolish border controls for their own nationals and
other visitors, Mr Carlos Westendorp, Spain's state secretary for the EC,
said. The move meant travellers from most countries with a visa to visit any
one of the nine so-called Schengen group states would be able to enter the
others without checks.
Nationals from the nine would be able to move through each other's territory
with the hologrammed label. The nine comprise all EC states except Britain,
Denmark and Ireland, and plan to abolish internal frontiers before the EC as
a whole. Britain, Denmark and Ireland want to keep border checks for non-EC
nationals but the Schengen group will scrap controls on visitors from 120
countries who will be entitled to use the new sticker.
