FT  16 MAY 92 / London Stock Exchange: Equity market closes on cautious note
NEWS that Olympia &amp; York (O &amp;Y), one of the world's biggest property
developers, had filed for protective bankruptcy in Canada added to the mood
of uncertainty that has emerged in the equity market this week and caused a
further bout of selling pressure, notably in the property and banking
arenas.
The O &amp; Y news upset most of the world's big stock markets. Cautious
statements from Unilever and Pearson also kept share prices under pressure
for most of the day and extended the equity market's fall on the week.
However, the bearish mood was tempered by better than expected news on the
inflation front.
The FT-SE 100 share index ended a difficult session a net 12.1 lower at
2,682.6. Over the week the Footsie fell 43.1.
Worries that the O &amp; Y situation could prompt a wave of selling in the banks
and property sector prompted dealers to mark share prices sharply lower
across the board at the outset of trading. The Footsie opened more than 20
points lower at 2,674.1 and looked to be in danger of falling further
shortly after the opening.
No really heavy selling emerged, however, and the market quickly stabilised
and managed to regain some of the ground lost as the day wore on.
There had been real concern among senior marketmakers at the beginning of
the day, that O &amp; Y would induce a sharp sell off on Wall Street when that
market began trading. In the event, the US market opened lower but showed
few signs of a wholesale retreat.
Official statistics on inflation, showing the April year on year increase at
4.3 per cent helped to stabilise the market and triggered a steady
performance by sterling. Gilts, encouraged by the economic news, gained
ground, with longer dated issues up around  3/8 at the close while rises in
the index-linked stocks were on a slightly smaller scale.
Property stocks were given a severe mauling during early trading but closed
well above the day's lowest levels. Bank shares, similarly, suffered early
on, but rallied quickly.
Despite the question mark over the property scene, dealers in London were
not unhappy to see the market dip. 'The worries are not so much property,
but the downside on Wall Street and the chances of big rights issues here,'
said one trader.
Turnover yesterday - 509.5m shares - was one of the lowest since the general
election and suggested that institutional selling had been small.
Overseas buying interest, plus more big share placings and programme trade
activity, kept customer, or retail business, at high levels this week.
