FT  10 DEC 92 / The Edinburgh Summit: Swallow hard: here's the menu
THE DANISH QUESTION: The toughest issue on the Edinburgh agenda. Denmark's
rejection of the Maastricht treaty last June triggered the political crisis
in the Community. EC leaders must find a way to bring the mutineers back on
board, or face a messy divorce. But if they give up too much, they risk
creating a Community a la carte. The UK has put forward a solution based on
a summit declaration, but it remains unclear whether this will meet Danish
demands for a 'legally binding' agreement on a UK-style opt-out on a common
currency, defence force and EC citizenship.
ENLARGEMENT: Expect progress here. EC leaders at the summit in Lisbon last
June agreed to make enlargement talks conditional on a budget deal and
ratification of Maastricht by all member states. Under German pressure,
France has now softened its insistence on linkage, accepting that
negotiations can begin early next year with Austria, Finland, Sweden - and
possibly Norway - even though Britain and Denmark will not have ratified by
then. Spain's demand for a larger slice of the budget pie remains the main
obstacle.
BUDGET: Nothing moves in the Community without money. Recession has made
richer member states such as Germany much warier about supporting Jacques
Delors' original plan to raise EC spending by one-third over the next seven
years. Britain has led opposition to a fatter EC budget, but its own
proposals enraged less wealthy member states led by Spain. Along with
Ireland, Portugal and Greece, Spain is demanding the 'cohesion' fund
promised under the Maastricht treaty which is the 'bribe' for pressing their
economies into line with their northern partners in the drive to monetary
union.
SUBSIDIARITY, TRANSPARENCY: Once viewed as a silver bullet to deal with
fears about an overpowerful Brussels bureaucracy. But even Jacques Delors
now points out that subsidiarity can only be applied rigorously in a federal
system - which the EC is not. Look to EC leaders to use subsidiarity and
openness as a way to convince sceptical citizens that the Community is
mending its ways, with ritual scrapping of proposed and existing EC laws.
Political declaration at Edinburgh may also help sway votes in Denmark and
in the House of Commons on Maastricht ratification.
GATT: Time-bomb now defused. Two big risks were that the UK would lead a
free-trade bloc to isolate France, which opposes the EC-US agreement on farm
export subsidies, or that France would link a solution to the EC budget
wrangle to renegotiation of the EC-US deal. Most likely outcome is that
leaders will avoid polemics and 'contain' the Gatt question.
GROWTH PACKAGE: Lots of talk, but little prospect of immediate action. A
Commission paper suggests more spending on public works, particularly
linking eastern and western Europe in telecoms and roads, as well as closer
co-ordination of economic policies. The UK frets that Jacques Delors wants
to 'hijack' the summit with a superficially attractive growth package.
Brussels wants to talk about growth to show that the Community speaks for
ordinary people's needs, and to prod a sleepy European Investment Bank to
support more capital projects, probably through a new European Investment
Fund offering loan guarantees. Summit likely to agree guidelines for action
only, and to call for closer co-operation with US on economic policy.
SITES: Everything up for grabs, from the site for the European Central Bank,
to the Trademark Office, to the Medicines Agency. Britain blocked a deal at
Lisbon by pressing London's cause as a site for the operational arm of the
Central Bank. Now the case for Bonn seems irresistible, particularly given
growing fears about German attitudes to a monetary union which would mean
giving up the D-Mark. If EC leaders fail to agree on a site for the Central
Bank, it would send a negative signal to financial markets already sceptical
about the Emu timetable.
MIGRATION: EC ministers have agreed to toughen policy toward illegal
immigrants and bogus asylum-seekers in response to the refugee crisis in
Europe. Most attention is focused on economic refugees from eastern Europe,
particularly Yugoslavia, but Mediterranean countries are pressing for the EC
to prepare for the next migratory wave from the Maghreb. Watch Chancellor
Kohl make a diplomatically phrased pitch for other EC members to share some
of the burden of east European refugees, expected to reach more than 500,000
in 1992. Germany is likely to take 440,000 of these.
YUGOSLAVIA: Much hand-wringing expected, particularly from Germany, which is
bearing the brunt of the refugee exodus. EC leaders are unlikely to shift
toward a more aggressive policy toward Serbia, but they may press for a
stricter policing of the UN arms embargo along the Danube. They are likely,
too, to point to the planned international conference on Bosnia to take
place in Geneva on December 16. On Macedonia, EC leaders are being pressed
by Greece to stick to the Lisbon agreement to recognise the former Yugoslav
republic as an independent state provided it does not use the name
'Macedonia.' The best outcome may be a decision by most member states to
recognise it - while not forcing Greece to do likewise.
PARLIAMENT: Germany wants more MEPs - 18 more, to be exact - to reflect the
addition of the new Lander. A straight increase in German deputies is
resisted by France, which thinks it could herald a round of German
power-grabbing in other EC institutions. The most likely solution seems to
be extra MEPs all round, with the final numbers for each of the 12 decided
on the basis of population and political horse-trading.
OPENING OF THE SINGLE MARKET: The only issue which the UK has always
intended to proclaim as a triumphant success for its presidency. Main
interest will be generated by British attempts to finesse the question of
border controls on people: not only will such controls not be lifted on
January 1, they may still be in place a year hence. Other member states are
dragging their feet, but Britain is still the most stubborn opponent of
abolishing passport checks. Expect a diplomatic fudge: a declaration
welcoming the single market, but with caveats about frontier controls, and
emphasis on 'making the single market work' for business and the consumer.
Words by Lionel Barber and Andrew Hill Cartoons by Roger Beale
