FT  26 JUN 92 / Survey of Norway (6): Two main arguments of the anti-EC camp
 -Agriculture and Fish
AGRICULTURE and fishing arouse deep passion in Norway. Fears about losing
autonomy in these industries are among the main reasons why Norway narrowly
rejected membership of the European Community in a bitterly divisive
referendum two decades ago.
Farming and fishing remain the two main arguments of the anti-EC movement in
Norway. It argues that the country should remain outside the Community in
spite of the fact that Nordic cousins Sweden and Finland have applied for
membership.
Both industries are used as policy instruments to maintain a settlement
distribution in remote areas of the country and both are the most subsidised
Norwegian industry.
Mrs Gro Harlem Brundtland, Norway's prime minister making a pro-market
speech warned: 'The Labour party has important principles to defend in the
new agricultural policy that will be devised. Agricultural activites shall
be spread throughout the country; and those engaged in agriculture shall not
have a lower standard of living than the rest of the population.
'We realise that others take a different view of this. Many advocate
concentrating our efforts on achieving the most efficient agricultural
sector possible, and letting the more vulnerable districts fend for
themselves. This is unacceptable to us.'
Few outsiders realise the great expanse of Norway. One way to gain a
perspective is to turn a map of Norway around - reverse north and south on a
pivot - and you will find, surprisingly, that the north would stretch far
down into the Mediterranean reaches of Italy.
Norway's area is 324 sq kms, and the western coastline is over 2,000 kms
long. On one hand, fishing is Norway's most international industry - outside
petroleum - with 90 per cent of the catch exported - 60 per cent to Europe.
Fishing off the coast and in distant icey waters has always been important
to Norway which, until recent times, was one of the world's leading fishing
nations.
Fishing accounts for about 7 per cent of gross domestic product. Farming, on
the other hand, employs less than 7 per cent of the country's workforce and
is meant to make Norway as self-sufficient as possible in food production,
provide outlying rural areas with employment while matching farm incomes to
those of the average blue-collar worker.
Lavish subsidies, in the range of NKr12bn of annual state transfers, have
supported this policy in recent years.
Only 3 per cent to 4 per cent of Norway's land mass is cultivable, about
9,000 sq kms, and most grain is imported. Farming meets the demand for milk,
cheese and meat and some of this produce is exported, but generally at an
economic loss.
In 1990, total turnover of the 16 agriculture co-operatives was NKr34bn, a
2.5 per cent growth over the previous year. About one-half of Norway's
farmers are dairy farmers and are situated in extreme outlying rural areas.
About 20 per cent of Norway's municipalities have more than 25 per cent of
the working force employed as farmers. But there has been on average, a
reduction in the number of farms of about 3,000 a year since the 1950s.
About 60 per cent of Norway's farmers have the main part of their annual
income from farming but all have second jobs.
The odd side of Norway's farming picture is that the country still imports
about one-half of consumption and it is the one area in which there has been
no Nordic co-ordination of policy nor co-operation in production.
However, Norway's agriculture policy is about to undergo reform. Last year a
white paper suggesting the direction of the reform and pinpointing measures
was meant to be presented in parliament but was postponed by the delay in
the Gatt and Uruguay Round negotiations. It will be further postponed until
agreement on these two international issues is achieved.
However, the minority Labour government is hell bent on presenting some sort
of white paper on policy this autumn, although it is disappointed that it
will not be as far-reaching as it had intended.
Earlier this year, Ms Gunhild Oeyangen, Norway's tough, no-nonsense
agriculture minister, told OECD delegates that bringing Norway's agriculture
reform process to its natural conclusion was necessary.
Ms Oeyangen conceeds that to achieve success in the reform process, policy
will have to be broad. 'We must not focus simply and entirely upon the
economic gains to be achieved through reducing subsidies and liberalising
trade, even if this is of substantial importance,' she warned.
Agriculture's role is likely to always remain a priority as it upholds
traditions and cultural heritage while supporting rural communities.
She told OECD delegates that agriculture was strongly decentralised, and
thereby provided an important and independent element in the development of
more diversified economic basis in rural areas.
In a far-reaching report, the OECD urged Norway to revamp is agriculture
policy to become more market oriented and less insulated. It said that the
total price and subsidy assistance to Norway's agriculture sector, in
relation to the value of production, was the highest of all OECD countries.
The OECD argued that Norway's agriculture policy's multiple objectives -
security of food supplies, equitable farm incomes, regional development,
environmental preservation and economic efficiency - were hard to reconcile.
The OECD calculated that subsidies measured as the net total producer
subsidy equivalent (PSE) more than doubled from NKr8.1bn to NKr17.2bn
between 1979 and 1988.
About half of total subsidies - those supported by high producer prices
which are sustained by strict import barriers for most commodities - came
from direct payments, including deficiency payments to shelter domestic
production from world markets.
The burden falls on consumers, whose support to the sector rose four-fold to
nearly NKr9bn, as the tax they paid on farm production more than doubled to
63 per cent by 1988.
A government-appointed committee urged a two-thirds reduction in support to
farms and a realignment of agricuture policy to become market-oriented. In
the last couple of years more than 100,000 farmers received more than 100
price support measures.
However, the report warned that in remote areas of Norway a necessary level
of government support should be maintained and that measures should continue
to restrict imports of agriculture products to a level that would secure the
furture of Norway's farming industry to ensure adequate food supplies.
The government admitted that the report initiated an important debate over
its excessive agriculture support and helped identify structural problems of
the sector.
Nevertheless, Norway believes that it has special problems relating to its
agriculture sector - which it calls arctic farming - and should it join the
EC, would benefit from negotiating terms and conditions for this sector
together with Finland which it says has a similar uniqueness.
Norway's potential as an agriculture producer is far from being utilised and
farm operations could easily be stepped up. Norway has no shortage of
produce but over-production remains a concern of future farm policy.
