FT  05 OCT 92 / Tories air differences on economy
DISAGREEMENTS among senior Conservatives about the harsh medicine needed to
survive the present economic turmoil surfaced yesterday. Lord Parkinson, who
as Mr Cecil Parkinson served in the Thatcher cabinet, said the priority
should be to restrain interest rates rather than taxes in order to protect
capital spending programmes.
'The last thing our economy needs at the moment is higher interest rates,'
he said on BBC radio. 'If another price has to be paid as part of the price
of getting them down I would be prepared to pay that.
'As part of getting interest rates down, giving the economy a boost and
maintaining the capital programmes in the public expenditure programme, I
would be prepared to see a levy of some kind that would put up taxes.'
He spoke as senior ministers strove to dispel fears that tax increases might
be used as an escape route from the present economic difficulties. They
emphasised that, outside the ERM, control of public spending was even more
important than before in ensuring that the government's anti-inflationary
strategy carried credibility.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, home secretary, said the government would not leave
sterling in free fall, and emphasised the need to bring stability back to
the pound's exchange rates as soon as possible.
Mr Clarke signalled that Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, would be prepared
to raise interest rates if the pound continued its fall. He was joined in
his efforts to calm nervousness in the money markets about the direction of
economic policy by Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, who
said that raising taxes was the 'least attractive course' open to the
government.
Worry in the markets at the prospect that details of the new basis for
economic policy might not be disclosed until the chancellor's Mansion House
speech at the end of this month has contributed to the decision that Mr
Lamont should use his speech on Thursday to the Tory party conference and
his appearance in front of the all-party Treasury committee of MPs a week
today to chart the way forward.
Mr Clarke said on BBC television that the government's duty was to have a
monetary and fiscal policy that gave traders stability. He also indicated,
however, that he did not believe it was yet possible to know what exchange
rate would be sustainable.
Brushing aside the Anglo-German row about the circumstances of sterling's
suspension from the ERM, he insisted that the relationship between the two
countries was still good.
