FT  29 DEC 92 / Mystery of missing mass: This year's models of the universe
As a momentous year for astronomical observations draws to a close,
scientists remain in a ferment of uncertainty about the origins, structure
and future of the universe.
The first pictures of the emerging universe transmitted by the US Cosmic
Background Explorer (Cobe) satellite, together with observations from the
Hubble Space Telescope, have inspired new cosmological theories without
dismissing the old front-runners.
The only clear landmark is still the Big Bang itself. Mainstream astronomers
have accepted for several years that we live in the expanding debris of a
cosmic fireball that created everything 12bn to 18bn years ago. But there is
no consensus on the way the universe has grown, its composition today, and
whether it will expand forever into an infinite coldness or come back
together in a Big Crunch.
The Cobe pictures show gigantic 'ripples' of microwave radiation which
emerged from the universe when it was 300,000 years old - 0.002 per cent of
its present age. These faint echoes of the Big Bang are the earliest
detectable signs of the unevenness which gravity later pulled into clusters
of galaxies and stars. It may never be possible directly to see any further
back in time; when the universe was less than 300,000 years old, it was too
dense to allow any radiation to escape.
Cosmologists are using the Cobe patterns both to extrapolate further into
the past - to within a fraction of a second of the Big Bang - and to look
forward to the present universe and its fate.
They are particularly keen to solve the mystery of the missing mass. All the
visible objects observed by astronomers - galaxies, stars, dust clouds and
so on - contain less matter than they know must actually exist. They
calculate that the mass of 'dark matter' is 10 to 100 times greater than the
visible matter, in order to provide enough gravity to account for the
movements of the stars and explain the development of the universe from the
primeval ripples observed by Cobe to what we see today.
Theories to explain the missing mass include:
It is ordinary matter composed of the particles that make up the sun and
earth - protons, neutrons and electrons - but is not visible by any
astronomical instrument. For example, galaxies may be surrounded by a myriad
of planet-sized bodies, known whimsically as Massive Compact Halo Objects;
'machos' would be too small to kindle the nuclear fires that produce light
from visible stars.
It is 'cold dark matter' consisting of slow-moving subatomic particles left
over from the Big Bang. These Weakly Interacting Massive Particles may
pervade the whole universe. Theoreticians calculate that about 1,000,000bn
'wimps' pass through each one of us every second. But they make little
impression on ordinary matter and have therefore not been detected.
It is 'hot dark matter' consisting of subatomic particles, each with a tiny
mass but moving almost as fast as light. Neutrinos are the most likely
candidate for hot dark matter, if it exists.
Charles Alcock, an astrophysicist at the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory in
California, believes that, before invoking exotic particles to explain the
missing mass, it is worth searching more thoroughly for ordinary matter that
has remained hidden. A US-Australian project is beginning to track millions
of stars every night and look for the tiny changes in brightness that should
occur as they pass behind planet-sized objects.
However, most cosmological theories put a limit on the amount of ordinary
matter that could have been created in the immediate aftermath of the Big
Bang. If they are correct, the universe must be still dominated by exotic
particles. Earlier this year, cold dark matter was the leading main
contender but the latest thinking is that a mixture of hot and cold matter
fits the Cobe observations most closely.
The 'inflationary' model of the universe, presently in vogue, postulates a
super-expansionary burst immediately after the Big Bang. The effect would
have been analogous to an explosion triggering an atomic bomb, releasing an
unimaginable amount of energy on a scale of less than a millionth of a
millimetre. Random fluctuations during this inflationary period sowed the
seeds of our universe.
Perhaps the most important prediction of inflationary cosmology is that we
are balanced between a 'closed' universe containing enough matter eventually
to reverse the expansion and an 'open' universe flying apart for ever.
Growth will stop after an infinite period but there will be no Big Crunch.
This idea, which appeals to astronomers' aesthetic sense, is supported but
not proved by Cobe.
On a more speculative level, some inflation theorists suggest that ours may
be one of an infinite number of universes. Each would have different laws of
physics because these would have been determined by random fluctuations in a
single primeval force, immediately after its Big Bang. The one we live in
happens to be conducive to the differentiation of matter into stars, planets
 -and life.
Astronomers are now waiting for other observations of the emerging universe
to confirm and supplement Cobe's. 'Everyone who works in this field believes
the Cobe results but we will feel more comfortable when an independent
experiment detects fluctuations in the microwave background,' says Peter
Coles, an astronomer at Queen Mary and Westfield College, London.
Several ground-based instruments are searching and Professor Martin Rees,
director of Cambridge University's Institute of Astronomy, expects positive
results to be announced by June. They should help to sort out competing
theories by distinguishing variations on a finer angular resolution than
Cobe is able to produce.
At the same time the Dollars 2bn Hubble telescope, in orbit around the
earth, is proving to be more useful than the pessimists predicted when a
flaw was discovered in the main mirror after its launch in 1990. 'You can
get out something approaching the telescope's original design specification,
but at the price of spending longer pointing it at the object you want to
look at,' says Ian Smail, an astrophysicist at Durham University.
He is part of a group using Hubble to explore 'gravitational lenses' -
clusters of galaxies billions of light years away whose gravitational pull
acts as a natural magnifying glass, bending and refocusing the light from
even more distant galaxies. Studies of gravitational lenses will reveal more
information about the way dark matter is distributed through the universe.
Recently, Hubble has also given a more precise estimate of the age of the
universe, based on its rate of expansion. And it has sent back pictures of
the most distant-known galaxy, forming 1bn to 2bn years after the Big Bang
around a massive black hole.
Astronomers expect another crop of new observations from space and earth
next year. By Christmas 1993 scientists will not be able to predict
confidently the ultimate fate of the universe but they should have a better
idea of whether it is filled with machos, wimps or hot neutrinos.
