FT  13 JUL 92 / The Lex Column: Gold
To say gold has staged something of a rally in the last few weeks is
probably stretching the point. In dollar terms, admittedly, the metal is now
roughly 5 per cent higher than its 1992 intra day low in mid May. But in
just about any other major currency recent performance has at best been
flat.
Even so, relative stability is almost cause for gold bug celebration after
the disappointments of the last decade: in sterling terms gold is now
trading at almost exactly the same price as 10 years ago. Last week's
spectacular sale of 20m ounces of silver by the National Commercial Bank of
Jeddah provoked perverse glee among gold enthusiasts on the grounds that
they had been spared, and that perhaps there is no gold left to dump in the
Arab bank's vaults. More significantly, though, the bulls have been drawing
comfort from the market's ability to absorb pressure from persistent
producer forward selling and from operations like the 200 tonne sale by the
Belgian central bank earlier this year. Previous forecasts of Dollars 400
per ounce by the year-end have been trimmed back - but predictions of around
Dollars 380 per ounce (against Friday night's close of Dollars 348.45) now
appear to carry greater conviction.
Encouragement can obviously be derived from the dollar's weakness and the
negative turn in short-term US real interest rates after last week's
discount rate cut, though positive rates elsewhere and the absence of retail
investment demand in Europe somewhat spoil that particular story. It is also
possible that the bears under-estimate buying demand from south-east Asia,
India and the Middle East where gold has not yet lost its glitter.
That said, the arguments against the metal pushing decisively up through its
recent trading range seem more persuasive. There may have been a good
technical explanation for the Belgians lightening their load, but the market
has become twitchy that central bankers' hoards - equivalent to 17 years'
mine production - could have an increasingly unsettling effect. It may only
be a matter of time, the pessimists say, before the growing practice of
selling call options turns into physical sales. If that proves to be so, it
will take more than the closure of a few marginal mines to rekindle
confidence.
