FT  03 JUN 92 / International Company News: S&amp;P downgrades debt rating on
four US airlines
STANDARD &amp; Poor's, the US credit rating agency, has downgraded debt
securities at four of the largest US airlines - a decision which, it said,
reflected the weak economic recovery and the domestic fares wars.
S&amp;P had placed the ratings of the seven leading non-bankrupt US carriers on
credit watch, with a view to a possible downgrading, in late-April.
The airlines affected by the downgradings are American, Delta, Northwest and
USAir. S&amp;P said it was still talking to management at United Airlines, and
that ratings of UAL, United's parent company, remained on credit watch 'with
negative implications'.
Of the four downgraded carriers, S&amp;P said it believed only one - American -
had 'a chance to earn a profit in 1992'. It added that all should report
'greatly improved earnings over the next several year,' but suggested 'the
improvement in credit measures will be restrained by a heavy fixed charge
burden'.
At present, S&amp;P said, the rating outlooks on all four carriers remained
negative - suggesting that ratings could fall again if 'economic weakness
and/or fare competition prevents a return to levels of profitability'.
American attempted to overhaul the domestic fare structure earlier this
spring, but its initiative has since been hit by undercutting. Commenting,
S&amp;P said that 'the new fare structure initiated by American in April has
improved the mix of tickets sold but stimulation of business traffic and
shifts in market share have been modest.
'While airline managements disagree about the profit impact of the new
structure, most believe it will cause a net loss of revenue. More recent
leisure fare cuts will further dilute revenues in the coming months, despite
a flood of bookings,' S&amp;P said.
In the downgradings, the senior debt at AMR, American's parent, and American
Airlines was cut from BBB+ to BBB, for example; senior debt at Delta fared
similarly; at Northwest, it was cut from B+ to B; and at USAir the senior
secured debt was reduced from BB to BB-, and the unsecured senior debt from
BB to B+.
TWA, the bankrupt US carrier owned by Mr Carl Icahn, is laying off 300
employees at its maintenance base in Kansas City.
The airline, which made operating losses of over Dollars 100m in the first
three months of 1992, employs 4,000 workers at the base.
TWA said the 'furloughs' - temporary layoffs which can be reversed -
reflected a reduction in contract work from other carriers.
