FT  21 OCT 92 / UK Company News: Honeymoon over at SmithKline - The merged
group must now increase sales
THE MERGER is complete, says Mr Bob Bauman, chief executive of SmithKline
Beecham, the Anglo-American group formed by the fusion in 1989 of the US
group SmithKline Beckman and the UK's Beecham Group. The combined group can
no longer drive up earnings through cost savings. Now, says Mr Bauman, the
company must show it can generate growth through volume.
As long as recession continues, SmithKline Beecham's growth must come from
pharmaceuticals. For the first nine months this year, profits at animal
health fell 14 per cent to Pounds 39m, while consumer brands rose only 2 per
cent to Pounds 168m. In contrast, operating profits in pharmaceuticals grew
9 per cent to Pounds 567m.
However, the group's biggest-selling drug, the blockbuster ulcer treatment
Tagamet, is under pressure. In Europe it is suffering from competition from
a new generation drug, Losec, marketed by Astra, the Swedish group. Last
April its price was cut in Japan by 15 per cent and in the US its patents
expire in 1994.
Mr Bauman says the pharmaceuticals business' success will be determined by
the group's ability to defend existing products like Tagamet; its capacity
to bring new products aggressively to market; and finally whether the
company picks the right drugs from small pharmaceuticals and biotechnology
groups which it can then market.
So far, the group is defending Tagamet highly successfully. The drug's US
sales actually increased 2.5 per cent by value during the first nine months,
according to Mr Hugh Collum, finance director.
Once Tagamet's US patents expire in 1994, generic versions will reduce its
sales by between 30 and 50 per within two years, according to Mr Bauman.
However, Mr Bauman hopes to have approval from the Food and Drug
Administration to sell the drug over the counter (OTC) with a doctor's
prescription. The company has just set up an OTC partnership with Marion
Merrell Dow of the US. He warns, however, that earnings are unlikely to be
enhanced even if Tagamet receives approval in 1994, because of the high
marketing costs associated with an OTC launch.
In the longer term, the challenge for Mr Bauman is to ensure SmithKline
Beecham's development pipeline is strong enough to replace Tagamet and still
drive earnings growth.
The company is investing heavily in research and development, spending
Pounds 430m last year. It has recently announced a reorganisation of its R&amp;D
activities.
Mr Bauman explains: 'We were undertaking too much in the past. We were
developing over 70 different compounds for 100 different indications. We
have now reduced the number to 30 molecules.'
The company aims to bring products to market two to three years earlier than
before. Mr Bauman explains: 'If there is one area where you can get a
competitive advantage, it is the speed that you take a product through to
market. Sales and profits arrive earlier and the life of the product before
its patent expires is extended.'
The group is also on the look-out for innovative drugs from other companies
that it can co-develop and market. The most successful drug acquired in this
way looks likely to be Seroxat, an anti-depressant known in the US as Paxil.
Brokers County NatWest believe the drug, licensed from Ferrosan, a
subsidiary of Novo Nordisk of Denmark, could generate sales of Dollars 450m
(Pounds 262m) by 1995.
The other new drugs on which SmithKline Beecham's future is based include
Relafen, an anti-arthritis drug with 10 per cent of the US market by value
since its launch in February; Kytril, the anti-nausea treatment; and Engerix
B, a hepatitis B vaccine.
Mr Bauman stresses the strength of SmithKline Beecham's marketing skills.
There were more than 110,000 visits to general practitioners in May for the
US launch of Relafen.
The jury is still out on the transition to an organically driven growth
business. Some operations, such as animal health, continue to perform
poorly. Mr Collum explains there are six companies in animal health with
about 15 per cent each. He expects to see rationalisation. It is a core
business, but its nature is likely to change.
Meanwhile, some of SmithKline Beecham's drugs are set to come under
pressure. Relafen will face renewed competition from Voltaren, a product
marketed by Ciba-Geigy, the Swiss group. Engerix B will come under
increasing pressure from Recombivax, marketed by Merck of the US. It has
been in short supply because of manufacturing problems.
Finally, Augmentin, SmithKline Beecham's antibiotic which could break the
Dollars 1bn sales barrier for the first time this year, is being targeted by
Eli Lilley's Lorabid.
The much-famed marketing skills of Mr Bauman and his company will be fully
needed if the group is to replace Tagamet fully after its US patents expire
in 1994, incidently driving SmithKline Beecham into the drugs industry's
first division.
