FT  02 JUL 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: British Gas in huge Kazakhstan
deal
BRITISH GAS, the UK gas group, and Agip, the oil subsidiary of Italy's
state-owned ENI energy group, have won exclusive negotiating rights with the
former Soviet republic of Kazakhstan to develop the huge Karachaganak oil
and gas field.
The field is among the biggest in the world, containing 20 trillion (million
million) cubic feet of gas - four times the size of the UK's largest gas
field.
Recoverable reserves of oil and condensate are estimated at 2bn barrels,
equal in size to the Forties field in the North Sea. The deal would double
British Gas's worldwide reserves, and is also a big step in Agip's attempt
to break into an international energy industry still dominated by major UK
and US companies.
The two companies have been bidding for 18 months to develop the field,
which is expected to produce into the second half of the next century.
They beat a consortium of BP, the UK oil and gas producer, and Statoil, the
Norwegian state oil company, as well as initial competition from two big US
companies, and hope to sign a final agreement by summer next year. According
to the letter of intent signed in the Kazakh capital of Alma Ata yesterday,
the two companies in a 50/50 joint venture will invest more than Dollars 6bn
in the project over the next decade. British Gas refused to release precise
details of the deal, but said that the share of profits going to the Kazakh
government would gradually increase over the life of the field, eventually
tipping the balance in favour of the Kazakhs.
The contract is initially for 40 years, extendable by another 20 years, and
is expected to make a substantial contribution to Europe's gas requirements.
Infrastructure already exists which could transport the gas into western
Europe, via the Soyuz pipeline, but British Gas said it had not ruled out
the possibility of further pipeline construction.
Karachaganak, discovered in 1979, is already producing at a low level, but
investment from the two western companies is expected to bring daily
production up to 2bn cu ft of gas, and 200,000 barrels of oil.
This is the second significant deal involving Kazakhstan in less than two
months. Chevron, the US oil company, recently reached agreement to develop
the giant Tengiz oilfield.
