FT  09 JAN 92 / Hospital efficiency changes highlighted
THE HOSPITAL bed is declining in importance as the central component of
patient care, the Audit Commission says today.
Until recently, says a report from the local government watchdog, the status
of most hospital consultants was judged by the number of beds they
controlled. But improvements in primary and community services and
technological advances were reducing the bed to just one of several
resources used to provide integrated healthcare.
'It follows that the number of hospital beds is no longer a useful measure
of the quality or quantity of the healthcare delivered,' says the
commission, which is responsible for audit and value-for-money exercises in
the National Health Service.
The declining number of hospital beds is frequently quoted in political
exchanges over the NHS. The government - which prefers a productivity-type
measurement based on patients treated per available bed - welcomed the
report.
Mr William Waldegrave, health secretary, said: 'I was particularly pleased
to see that the Audit Commission firmly endorsed our view that bed numbers
should not be regarded as a key element of strategic planning, but rather as
just one of many resources required to care for patients.'
The commission says that if all health authorities used their beds as
efficiently as the best-performing 25 per cent, 27,000 of the 123,000 beds
currently available would no longer be needed.
It emphasises that many of the resources freed by such a reduction would
have to be reinvested in community-based services.
There was a 22 per cent reduction in the number of medical beds in the NHS
between 1974 and 1989, while the number of in-patients treated rose by a
similar percentage. This increased the average annual throughput of patients
per bed from 26 to 41. The increased throughput was achieved by shorter
lengths of stay and reducing the time beds remained empty between patients.
The commission says that further improvements are possible. Its auditors
will this year examine bed use in every English and Welsh health district.
Lying in Wait: the Use of Medical Beds in Acute Hospitals. Audit Commission,
HMSO. Pounds 9.50.
