FT  19 MAR 92 / Arts: Sweet-and-sour gangster epic - Cinema
BUGSY (18) Odeon Leicester Sq LA BELLE NOISEUSE (15) Metro, Renoir, Chelsea
Cinema SHINING THROUGH (15) Odeon West End
It is the late afternoon of a gangster's life. A gilded haze drifts around
his home; the sun slants into his soul through the holes in his conscience.
Bugsy Siegel is about to meet his maker. But who did make Bugsy Siegel?
According to Bugsy the movie, it was a combination of God, Meyer Lansky and
the West Coast gambling and showbiz industries. This brilliant
sweet-and-sour gangster epic directed by Barry Levinson (Rain Man) and
written by James Toback (The Gambler, Fingers) first does the unspeakable  -
glamorising its hero-villain by casting Warren Beatty as the Brooklyn-born
mobster who stole, killed and created that perdition zone called Las Vegas
 -and then transcends it with the irresistible.
Bugsy Siegel was evil. But he did not rise to evil's heights without charm
and self-promotional flair; nor without wearing the best suits and seducing
the best women. Ergo: Toback and Levinson see the successful gangster as a
not-too-distant cousin to the successful movie star. More, they discovered
that Bugsy himself made a screen test soon after being posted to Los Angeles
by his New York crime-partners Lansky and 'Lucky' Luciano. In the event,
Bugsy's experience of stardust was confined to romancing aspiring actress
Virginia Hill (Annette Bening) and to persuading the Hollywood famous to buy
shares in his Flamingo Hotel.
The building costs of this 'folly' in the Nevada desert rose from Dollars 1m
to Dollars 6m, causing Lansky and Luciano to fume and Siegel to seal his own
death warrant. He was gunned down on June 20 1947. The hotel went on to
become Las Vegas and Las Vegas went on to become the El Dorado of the New
West.
The film has a mythical acoustic so potent that we never believe we are
watching merely a Siegel bio-pic nor merely a Beatty ego-trip. (The star
also co-produced.) It is about both men and all men, and it is about human
contradictions. Though Bugsy Siegel is the insect in each of us  - that part
of ourselves tempted by dark scuttling pathways to self-fulfilment  - he was
finally undone by building his dreams in broad daylight in a broad desert.
Toback and Levinson confer on the man a bizarre innocence. He is a
narcissist who checks his hair in a glass while beating up a fellow
gangster; he frets over his screen test while re-running it on a home
projector; and he woos his girlfriend with cornball-wistful lines  - 'I wish
the two of us could be alone on Coney Island eating a couple of hot dogs
together'  - that in another film would be derisory rather than derided.
Photographed in a seductive haze by Allan Daviau, the film is the dream of a
man with an etherised conscience. Morally as well as geographically this
Bugsy is in Lotusland, where the outward vistas are as unreal as the inner
perceptions; from the idyllic painted matte-shot that introduces Hollywood
to Siegel and Virginia's first meeting on a soundstage 'hilltop'.
As in his other nostalgia dramas  - The Natural, Avalon  - director Levinson
sees the past as a kind of human aquarium, where the drama of survival is so
slow-motion that it can be mistaken for lyricism. But Bugsy never loses
sight of the hidden cruelties. Beatty, whose looks, age and a receding brow
have now Nixonised, makes Siegel a charmer who can turn in an instant to
brawler or black magician. And Bening is a marvel. Her acid malevolence of
voice and odd, tense prettiness  - Ida Lupino in a good light, Gloria
Grahame in a bad  - are both a tinder to Bugsy's evil and a precis of this
movie's world. It is a world where that familiar duo the Bad and the
Beautiful have progressed from being just good friends to being fast,
inextricable lovers.
Jacques Rivette's La Belle Noiseuse is a 4-hour French film about an ageing
painter (Michel Piccoli). It is directed by a man whose work hitherto has
been noted for a few shipshape vessels  - L'Amour Fou, Celine And Julie Go
Boating  - floating in a Sargasso Sea of interesting wrecks (Out One,
Duelle, Noirot).
Do we tempt you? I thought not. But La Belle Noiseuse  - roughly 'the
beautiful nuisance'  - is a masterpiece. It takes all the exasperating
Rivette traits and makes them riveting. The source is a Balzac story (as in
Out One). The people do a lot of talking. Art, sex and death are favourite
subjects. And a well-tried quartet of Euro-stars, led by Piccoli and Jane
Birkin, take up acting space in a weatherbeaten country home that Rivette
might be time-sharing with Eric Rohmer.
Piccoli is the artist trying to end a ten-year creative block by painting a
new and nubile model (Emmanuelle Beart). The two enact their corrida of
creativity in a cavernous studio, she forcing his emotions to the surface,
he coaxing her body into positions known previously only to the Kama Sutra.
Meanwhile, artist's wife Birkin and model's husband David Bursztein pace the
Piccoli estate, like anxious spouses waiting for the birth of what they hope
(but doubt) is an artistic offspring related to them. The film spends loving
minutes  - nay, tens of minutes  - watching the artist's hand deflower blank
sheets and canvases. (In close-up painter Bernard Dufour's hand substitutes
for Piccoli's). Often the only sound is a steel pen scratching lines on
white paper, interspersed with picador remarks from Piccoli like 'When I was
young I enjoyed pulling my toys to pieces.'
Sado-masochism is clearly part of this artist's game plan. But comical
serendipity is just as important. He finally 'finds' his subject when Beart
makes a stray spontaneous gesture and Piccoli, half drunk with red wine,
falls off his stool. As the painting sessions crawl on through their strange
eternity  - though to us it never feels like one - the girl takes increasing
command and the artist becomes her blustering tool, raving about creative
'maelstroms' and 'hurricanes.'
An entire sex war is depicted here, further enriched by Mlle Birkin's
outrage that the canvas she once modelled for ('La Belle Noiseuse') is now
being effaced and painted over by her faithless spouse. 'You've put buttocks
in place of my face]' she cries. Was ever marital despair so plainly,
pithily imaged forth?
This is a dazzling study in the birth-pains of art and the growing-pains of
art's relationship with life and love. The film presents creativity not as
some ponderous, uncomprehended sacrament a la Hollywood  - Beethoven out in
the storm, Van Gogh mystically eyeballing his sunflowers  - but as a direct,
chaotic extension of daily life, daily need and daily passion.
It would do Melanie Griffith's heroine in Shining Through a power of good to
sit for M. Piccoli. He would have her clothes off in an instant and she
would be writhing on the floor. As it is, the only exercise the overdressed
Miss G gets in this daft wartime thriller is to run from Potsdam to Berlin
one night in high heels and an opera gown.
Have you ever tried this? It is, I assure you, impossible. But then so is
everything else in writer-director David Seltzer's adaptation of a Susan
Isaacs best-seller. Griffith plays a humble secretary working for Allied
Intelligence (Michael Douglas) in pre-Blitz London. When she offers to
smuggle herself into Berlin and pose as a cook for a top Nazi in order to
grab vital doodlebug-bomb secrets, how could Douglas refuse? She speaks
perfect German and her Apple Strudel, she claims, is a knockout. So off she
goes to meet Sir John Gielgud as 'Sunflower', our man in back-projected
Berlin.
The rest is history; or rather thank goodness it is not and never was. There
are hairsbreadth 'scapes, hair-raising scrapes, and herrings and skates.
(The heroine hides her messages in a fish shop.) There is also Miss
Griffith's voice, that high piping gurgle resembling a cat trapped in a
water deposit. With this she delivers the film's voice-over narration which
reaches its finest hour when explaining the plot's time scheme. 'I knew it
was Friday, because the next day was Saturday.' By final reel she is
staggering past German bullets to the finishing post. But the audience has
already left for the bar, totting up its losses.
