FT  14 APR 92 / UK Company News: Banks persuaded not to drop Aitch -
Stitching together a clothing company's rescue
THE LADIES at Aitch Holding's shirt factory in Lurgen, Northern Ireland,
hardly ever seem to pause for breath.
Fleet of finger at the best of times - they are paid on a piece work basis -
they are also acutely aware that Coats Viyella, a much larger competitor,
has cut 900 jobs in Northern Ireland in the year, 566 of them last week.
Lurgen's ladies would not, however, be working today were it not for the
many hundreds of hours put in by Aitch's bankers and its new management,
dedicated to putting together a rescue plan, as well as the intervention of
a government department and the Bank of England.
The Aitch rescue, which its shareholders were yesterday asked to approve
along with a name change to Dunkeld Group, may not rank in size alongside
the refinancings of Brent Walker or News International. But it is an example
of banks, faced with huge losses, taking the responsible route of allowing
management to work out a bad loan, thereby saving jobs, rather than putting
the company in the hands of receivers.
But it was a close decision. Hill Samuel, Aitch's bankers had begun to put
in the receivers last September, ending a sad and expensive episode for Mr
Harry Rogers, its founder. Following the reversal of Mr Rogers' private
clothes company into the quoted Munton group in 1988, Aitch was producing in
Northern Ireland and London, it had sales offices in Belgium and a buying
office in the Far East.
It was also losing unknown amounts of money in Northern Ireland, and from a
raft of smaller companies in a wide range of garment related businesses.
The concentration by the Northern Ireland operation on short production runs
of branded shirts, including the Ben Sherman, Pierre Balmain, Tern and
Panache labels, meant costs were excessively high by comparison with
manufacturers in the Far East. Combined with operational problems at the
contract shirts operations in Northern Ireland, the company was heading for
the rocks.
By early last year, it was clear that losses in these areas were not going
to be offset by and Gottfried &amp; Paul ladies leisurewear businesses and that
ordinary trading would not reduce debts. Hill Samuel, owed Pounds 9.5m, and
FennoScandia, owed Pounds 2.5m, were getting nervous.
Just how badly the company had fallen was demonstrated in February when it
reported losses after tax and extraordinary items of Pounds 18.73m in the
year to November 1991, taking the company far into negative shareholders'
funds territory . At its peak in 1989, Aitch had commanded a market
capitalisation of only Pounds 13m.
With this track record, it took escapology worthy of Harry Houdini for Aitch
to unwind Hill Samuel's decision to send in the receivers.
Over one stress-filled night, Mr Michael Green, a corporate doctor and
entrepreneur appointed by the board to sort out the problems in Northern
Ireland, and Mr Jon Sachs, a director of the Bank of Ireland, managed to
amass enough of an argument to convince Hill Samuel to hold off the
receivers for two weeks until the new management team had put together a
recovery plan.
Mr Sachs says the subsequent efforts to get the restructuring to stand up
was something of an 'Indian rope trick'. It rested partly on the argument
that the banks simply should not be walking away from 700 group jobs without
fully investigating whether there was an alternative.
This was one of a number of less than conventional interventions in the
ensuing months, not the least of which was the role the Bank of England
played in acting as a mediator between Hill Samuel and FennoScandia.
Equally important was the role of the Industrial Development Board of
Northern Ireland. Mr Green's proposed restructuring, the Province's
development bank argued, would not only secure jobs but would lead to a
group that could be viable.
The IDB, which has recently become much more hard nosed about backing viable
concerns and not just large employers, took the important step of backing
the restructuring with Pounds 500,000 of new capital.
But Aitch's stay of execution had as much to do with the fact that it was
entering a trading period during which it would be pulling in more cash than
it would spend, making the banks no worse off for not pulling the plug
immediately.
This breathing space allowed Mr Green to pull together the business plan.
From the beginning he argued that Aitch was never going to trade its way out
of trouble and would need to build a few of its better businesses for sale.
In addition the banks would have to grant management three years grace to do
this.
Mr Green convinced the banks this was the right way forward. Following many
more hours of 'last minute hitches', Hill Samuel and FennoScandia have taken
a 9.9 per cent stake, while the new management has nearly 17 per cent.
As the group emerges from the restructuring, Mr Green says profitability of
all four of Aitch's labels will rise and that unprofitable businesses have
been sold.
Northern Ireland now fulfils almost nothing but contract orders of shirts,
the branded business is almost solely supplied from imports.
There remains, however, the matter of a Pounds 8.2m deficit on shareholders'
funds as of last November, after taking into account sales of businesses and
the conversion of bank debt in to equity.
To climb out from under this weight and return to the dividend list, Aitch
will almost certainly have to build one of its remaining businesses and then
sell it. Only then can its employees in Lurgen be certain they will not go
the way of the employees at Coats Viyella.
