FT  06 JUN 92 / Finance and The Family: Maxwell - the heat grows / As
pension victims prepare to march, Norma Cohen reports on the drive for
justice
ON MONDAY, thousands of pensioners will march on the House of Commons to try
to force a political solution to a commercial disaster that has effectively
deprived many of them of their life savings. They are members of various
schemes controlled by the late Robert Maxwell, and are the victims of an
apparent fraud which occurred almost unnoticed by the myriad professional
advisers and trustees whose job it was to protect scheme assets.
'Citizens have the right to expect their savings to be safeguarded by
government,' says Kenneth Trench, chairman of the Maxwell Pensioners' Action
Group. Trench, who describes many members of his organisation as being 'on
the precipice of poverty,' claims the government has an obligation to
provide compensation to pensioners because regulators failed to spot and
halt Maxwell's activities.
At least Pounds 400m is missing from the pension funds, leaving some Pounds
295m left to pay the pensions of 32,700 scheme members, around 14,000 of
whom have retired already. Beginning next month, about half the 10,000
members of one of the schemes, the Maxwell Communications works scheme, will
have their monthly cheques cut by 70 per cent. Former workers at CJ Arnold,
a Leeds printing company, have already had their entire pensions stopped.
More than 100 employees who have retired from Maxwell Communications
Corporation since February cannot get any pension and that number is
increasing monthly. The most fortunate scheme members are those at Mirror
Group Newspapers, which has said it will try to make up the shortfall with
annual contributions.
But more than 500 employees of British International Helicopters, acquired
by Maxwell from the then government-owned British Airways, will lose their
payments. He had transferred them to the MGN scheme, but MGN says it will
not pay pensions to another company's employees. Since March, one former
captain has retired and others are due soon to follow suit.
Those acting for the pensioners estimate it would cost Whitehall between
Pounds 400,000 and Pounds 500,000 a month to make up payments. MPs with
Maxwell pensioners in their constituencies are urging a government financial
'drip-feed' to those affected while efforts are made to track down and
secure assets taken from the schemes.
Since the pension funds' missing assets were discovered in December,
solicitors, professional trustees, accountants and actuaries have jumped
into the fray with an energy not visible before Maxwell drowned off the
Canary Islands. But the pensioners have just discovered one of the home
truths about hiring professionals: the cost.
Trench says the bill between December 5 1991 and March 3 1992 - all from the
funds' scarce assets - was around Pounds 3.5m. This money can no longer be
used to pay pensions as, legally, advisers' bills must be settled before any
benefits are distributed.
'These bills include 17 1/2 per cent VAT,' Trench notes, 'so the government
is taking a cut of our pensions, too.'
Lawyers for the pensioners concede privately that the legal arguments for
government compensation are weak. Because no government department has
statutory obligations to oversee pensions, it is difficult to point to any
one division and argue that it failed in its duties to protect citizens.
which might have had some responsiblity is Imro, the self-regulatory body
for the fund management industry which authorised the Maxwell-owned fund
manager - Bishopsgate Investment Management - to invest the pension assets
of sister companies. But Imro's charter prevents it from being sued for
negligence.
The whole situation has exercised the minds of a cross-party select
parliamentary committee on social security. In March it issued a report
calling for pension law reforms. These include giving more muscle to the
Occupational Pensions Board.
It also called for changes to the law which gives great discretion to
pension fund boards of trustees, and asked the government to establish a
top-ranking committee to review pension law generally - a proposal to be
adopted by the government when it announces the setting-up of a commission
on Monday.
But if the legal case for aid is weak, lawyers argue that the moral case is
very strong. 'The role of government is to protect the defenceless,' says
Richard Thomas, independent trustee for the MCC pension scheme and a
director of Law Debenture Corporation.
Unlike the investors entitled to compensation under the Investors'
Compensation Scheme, Maxwell's pensioners never made any decision to invest
funds. Indeed, up until 1988, they were required by law to contribute a
portion of their salary every year to an occupational pension scheme if
their employer sponsored one. Until 1986, they were not entitled to ask how
those funds were being invested and present law, which requires schemes to
provide information to members, has no mechanism to force compliance.
Thus, in attempting to learn lessons for scheme members from the tragedy of
Maxwell's pensioners, it is difficult to point to steps which could have
been taken by individuals to protect themselves. Those who try to avoid
being defrauded by opting out into personal schemes risk losing benefits
provided by many employers - and are likely to pay heavy administrative
costs which could reduce final payments.
The only lesson, it seems, is for pension scheme members to urge MPs to
adopt a new, safer pensions act.
