FT  29 FEB 92 / A little local difficulty: The royal row caused by
Australia's Paul Keating
'The narrow ways of English folk are not for such as we; They bear the
long-accustomed yoke of staid conservancy: But all our roads are new and
strange And through our blood there runs The vagabonding love of change that
drove us westward of the range and westward of the suns'
 - A B 'Banjo' Patterson, 1890
Mr Paul Keating, Australia's Labor prime minister, struck a raw nerve among
Britain's remaining imperialists this week by asserting Australian
independence and criticising Britain's conduct of the second world war.
His outspoken comments came at the end of a fortnight in which British blood
had already been heated to boiling point by a number of 'insults' allegedly
delivered to the Queen by Mr Keating and his wife Annita in the course of a
royal tour. Mrs Keating's failure to curtsy to the Queen was an ideal story
for the 'rat pack' of tabloid journalists which follows the monarch on
overseas trips, as was a supposedly pro-republican speech made by Mr Keating
at a reception in Canberra.
But seen from the south Pacific, the jingoism of much of the reaction seems
to throw more light on some Britons' addiction to the dregs of empire than
on the development of Australian nationalism.
The tone was best captured by the Daily Star, which told its readers that
'Australia's loathsome Labour leaders have found a new sport. It's called
Mocking Her Majesty.'
The paper seemed most upset that Mr Keating had touched the Queen during the
Canberra reception. The prime minister 'slapped his arm around the Queen's
waist as if she was a Sheila by the sheep-dip,' it reported.
The comment reflects a historical view of Australia (and its neighbour New
Zealand) as Britain's south Pacific farm, a role it fulfilled from the
mid-19th century until the mid-1970s. But it is a long time since
Australians have been 'British to their bootstraps,' as Sir Robert Menzies,
conservative prime minister from 1946 to 1965, once said.
Even a casual visitor cannot fail to notice that Australia is fast becoming
a multi-racial society, in which traditional ties to the so-called Mother
Country are fading rapidly. Post-war immigration from southern Europe, Asia
and the Middle East has cut the proportion of Australians with direct
British links to less than 60 per cent from more than 90 per cent 40 years
ago. And while many Australians still head for London when they go overseas,
perhaps clutching a British passport inherited from an immigrant father or
grandfather, many others head for Greece, Italy or Hong Kong.
Trade links with the UK are also declining in importance - about 65 per cent
of Australian exports now go to Asia, compared with less than 15 per cent to
the whole of the European Community.
The change of national direction has been difficult for many of the current
generation of political and business leaders, few of whom speak an Asian
language or have close personal links with Asian leaders. But it has
contributed to a growing feeling that the time has come for Australia to
consider completing the long drift away from Britain, a drift which has been
going on since the continent's six colonies formed a federation in 1901.
Federation made Australia an independent dominion within the British Empire,
as Canada and South Africa were at that time. This status gave Australia a
single national government, while the Queen remained head of state. It was
encouraged by London and supported by most Australians.
However, federation also had the effect of neutralising the nationalist
movement, which had achieved some prominence in the 1890s as a result of
socialist activism and the stories and poems of writers such as 'Banjo'
Patterson.
Nationalists made some headway during the first world war. Many Australians
blamed the British, and in particular Winston Churchill, for the disaster at
Gallipoli, where 7,600 Australians were killed fighting the Turks - about a
quarter of the British and French casualties.
Resentment of Britain's allegedly callous treatment of Australian troops led
voters to reject a referendum on changing the constitution to allow
conscription and hence enable increased support for Britain's war effort.
The most important change in the relationship took place in December 1941,
when John Curtin, the wartime prime minister, turned to the US for help
against a threatened Japanese invasion. There was some unease in Australia
about Curtin's statement that the country turned to the US 'free of any
pangs as to our traditional links or kinship with the less, his declaration
ended Australia's military dependence on Britain and began the process of
coming to terms with its Pacific geography.
Since then, Australian governments have also ended judicial appeals to
London, replaced God Save the Queen with Advance Australia Fair, and
formally separated the British and Australian thrones, although the British
monarch is still automatically Queen of Australia.
Against this background, it would be impossible for a modern Australian
prime minister to greet the Queen, as Sir Robert once did, with the couplet
which Sir Walter Raleigh is believed to have penned in praise of Queen
Elizabeth I: 'I did but see her passing by/And yet I love her till I die.'
Yet it is worth looking at what Mr Keating actually said in his speech last
week, which reportedly upset the Queen. The most important passage referred
to the difference between 1954, when thousands of Australians lined the
streets to see the Queen's first visit, and 1992, when the crowds were far
fewer.
'This is an altogether different generation, reflecting a profound change in
our two countries and the relationship between them. As our constitutional
relationship has evolved, so have the circumstances of our economic and
political lives,' he said.
'These days we must both face the necessities of a global economy and global
change of often staggering speed and magnitude. We must also face regional
realities. Just as Britain some time ago sought to make her future secure in
the European Community, so Australia now vigorously seeks partnerships with
countries in our own region. Our outlook is necessarily independent.'
In itself, the speech did no more than set out the realities of the
relationship. In speaking of the Queen as a foreigner, Mr Keating clearly
intended to make a small gesture towards Australian nationalism. Mrs
Keating's failure to curtsy, within the bounds of royal protocol, will have
the same effect.
But what is odd about the incident is that anyone should have been
surprised. Labor has been committed to a republic for a decade, and last
year formally pledged to aim for the abolition of the monarchy by 2001, the
centenary of federation.
Nor is Mr Keating Australia's first republican prime minister. Both Mr Bob
Hawke, his predecessor, and Mr Gough Whitlam, Labor premier from 1972 to
1975, made no secret of their view that Australia should become a republic.
Far from embarrassing Mr Keating, criticism from Britain may help to rescue
Labor's fading chances of winning the 1993 federal election by allowing it
to present itself as the party of Australian patriotism. Mr Keating appeared
to be taking this line when he was questioned about the issue in parliament.
The prime minister responded by accusing Britain of abandoning Australia to
the imperial Japanese army in 1942 by failing to defend the Malaysian
peninsula properly, allowing the garrison in Singapore to fall, and
attempting to prevent the return of the Australian Seventh Division, which
was wanted for home defence.
These allegations are uncontroversial in Australia, although some historians
take the more generous view that Britain did what it could in the Pacific in
the light of more pressing strategic priorities elsewhere.
Early opinion polling indicated that about two-thirds of Australians thought
the criticism justified.
The rumpus leaves the republican movement rubbing its hands over the
publicity its cause has received. 'It is ironic that the Queen's visit has
given the biggest impetus to the campaign that we have had for years,' says
Labor senator Mr Chris Schacht, a veteran republican campaigner.
'The British tabloids can say what they like about us, they are totally
irrelevant to Australia's future, as Britain itself is. It is quite clear
now that a republic is inevitable.'
