FT  18 JAN 92 / Appointments: Reshuffle at Salomon
SALOMON BROTHERS, the US investment house suffering from a wave of
defections among staff unhappy about their bonuses, yesterday announced two
promotions.
Gary Wolens becomes head of equity sales for Europe, replacing Peter Clarke
who resigned on Thursday. Wolens is currently a managing director
responsible for fixed income and equity derivatives distribution in Europe
and the Middle East.
Salomon says his appointment underscores its intentions of staying in and
developing the European equities business. After making another senior
member of staff on the equity side redundant, the firm was anxious to fill
Clarke's position speedily - to deflect doubts about its commitment to that
area.
Meanwhile Kermit Schoenholtz returns from Tokyo, where he is currently a
director and international economist, to become manager of the economic and
market analysis group in London, stepping into John Lipsky's shoes. Lipsky
has moved to New York to replace Henry Kaufman, who stepped down as chief
economist in 1988.
He will also be Salomon's senior German analyst, bringing the team up to
strength since the departure of Thomas Mayer who left shortly after the US
treasury bond-rigging scandal broke.
As a result of that crisis last summer, Salomon was forced to reorganise
senior management, leaving some lingering unhappiness, but other colleagues
have left over compensation. Last year's bonuses were lower than in 1990,
and the framework for 1992 compensations is currently being set - for the
first time at the beginning rather than the end of the year.
Peter Kelsey is to succeed Brian Gladwin as managing director of ROYAL LIFE
ESTATES, the largest UK estate agency network. He was previously director
and general manager of Dart Oil company, Esso Petroleum's direct retailing
subsidiary.
His mission at Royal Life Estates is to try to push the group back into the
black after several years of loss-making. Last year Royal Life Estates lost
Pounds 8m.
Some of his team are already in place. Last October Ron Way was brought in
as finance director for the agency network.
Tough new financial controls are already being put in place and new
marketing activities are planned to enable the group to take advantage of
any market upturn.
*****
The UK Machine Tool Technologies Association has appointed Simon Brown
director general with immediate effect, filling a gap left since the
resignation last July of John Nosworthy.
Brown, 41, is currently the association's administration manager and company
secretary, and had been co-ordinating the trade association's day-to-day
activities since July.
The appointment underlines the association's desire for continuity at a
difficult time for the UK machine tool industry by appointing someone who
'knows the ropes' rather than a high-profile outsider. Brown joined the MTTA
as company secretary two years ago, and has spent 20 years in accountancy,
exhibition and trade association activities.
