FT  03 NOV 92 / Survey of Portugal (9): Quality, not quantity - A shift in
strategy in the tourism sector
HOLIDAYS spent amid the dust and noise of building sites cause the biggest
number of complaints from British tourists who visit Portugal's southern
Algarve coast, according to a recent survey for the Department of Tourism.
These visitors are victims of constructors who have been trying to keep pace
with a boom in tourism that has transformed the country's main holiday
region in the past decade. Tourism has been growing at a rate of 11.5 per
cent a year since 1980 and high-rise hotels and apartment blocks have
mushroomed at a similar speed. European tourism as whole has grown at a rate
of only 3.5 per cent a year over that period.
Recent statistics reflect the dramatic expansion of tourism. This year
Portugal expects to welcome 20m visitors, double the population, and almost
10m tourists (visitors who stay one night or more). This compares with 7m
visitors and 2.7m tourists in 1980.
As a result, the importance of tourism to the Portuguese economy has greatly
increased. Today, it accounts for 6 to 8 per cent of the gross domestic
product, a contribution to national wealth that equals that of textiles,
civil construction or the financial sector.
Foreign currency receipts have grown from Es57.5bn (Pounds 263m) in 1980 to
Es530bn in 1991. These earnings cover half of Portugal's trade deficit,
making an important contribution to the current account balance.
To ease the strain of this boom on the Algarve, where some areas are
becoming overcrowded, disorganised and ugly, the government has devised a
new strategy for the tourism sector. It switches the emphasis from new
building to diversification and expanding the use of existing facilities.
According to Mr Alexandre Relvas, secretary of state for tourism, 'our
resources have their limits and sooner or later we will reach saturation
point'.
Instead, tourism policy will switch from a heavy dependence on sun and sea
holidays and an over-strong reliance on the UK and Spain, to more emphasis
on investing to improve facilities rather than build new ones.
To this end, the Department of Tourism has drawn up a 19-point plan with the
overall aim of improving the competitiveness of Portuguese tourism. The
strategy will be backed up with an Es50bn (Pounds 230m) two-year financial
programme to support investment.
'To be competitive in the 1990s, tourism has to invest heavily in quality
rather than quantity,' says Mr Relvas. 'This financial programme will help
us create a competitive tourism industry in the future.'
A total of Es20bn from the new fund will be provided as grants for
investment, 60 per cent financed by European Community structural funds.
Grants will cover up to 25 per cent of the total cost of investment. But
unlike the past, very little will be made available for building new hotels.
Instead, the money will go to modernise and re-equip existing units, for the
construction of additional facilities such as golf courses and congress
centres and to diversify from beach holidays into sports and cultural
tourism.
A further Es30bn will be made available by the Tourism Fund, a special
credit institution, and banks at low interest rates.
Portugal's new tourism strategy is also aimed at combating a worrying trend.
While the number of tourists has increased spectacularly, the amount they
spend is falling. In 1980 average spending per tourist was 35 per cent above
the European average in dollar terms. Today, it is 15 per cent below.
Tourists currently spend a mere Es9,000 a day on hotels and restaurants.
Tourism authorities have mapped out two main strategies for changing this.
Beach holidays have become a mature market, where growth is falling off
rapidly. Tough competition between major operators and the globalisation of
the market through airline liberalisation is forcing down prices.
Portugal is trying to diversify away from this sector into congresses,
cultural tourism and golf and other sporting holidays. 'This development
will offer the twin advantages of attracting higher-spending tourists and
being able to use existing Algarve facilities in the off-season,' says Mr
Relvas.
Officials also want to attract tourists away from the Algarve, which
accounts for 40 per cent of total bed nights, to other areas, such as the
Lisbon coastline and the unspoiled Alentejo region north of the Algarve.
Though Portugal will maintain promotional efforts in Britain and Spain,
which together account for half its bed nights, efforts will also be made to
boost the Italian, French and German markets and to break into the US and
Japan. Regular flights from Japan, scheduled to begin in 1994, should help
increase the number of its tourists from the current level of 30,000 a year.
