FT  23 DEC 92 / International Equities: Equity growth held in check by
Europe and US - Some international investors were discouraged by the
currency turmoil in 1992
DIFFICULT stock market conditions in Europe and the US held the growth in
international equity offerings in check this year. The total volume of
international equity issues increased only 7 per cent to Dollars 21.72bn in
1992, against Dollars 20.28bn the previous year, according to figures
compiled by Euromoney.
The US and Europe still account for the lion's share of international equity
business, and 1992 saw two large offerings - from Wellcome of the UK and
General Motors.
Wellcome's Pounds 2.1bn global share offering in July was the biggest
non-privatisation issue in the world. Wellcome Trust, the medical charity,
sold 288m shares in Wellcome, the pharmaceuticals group, raising Pounds
2.1bn and cutting its stake in the company from 73.5 per cent to 40 per
cent.
The deal, which was lead-managed by Robert Fleming, was achieved using the
book-building method more commonly employed in the US than in Europe. Robert
Fleming won considerable praise for successfully arranging such a large deal
at a time when world stock market conditions were difficult.
The second big issue of the year was General Motors' Dollars 2.14bn share
offering, the largest by a US company. The deal was oversubscribed and the
size of the offering increased due to strong demand.
International equity issues from North America increased to Dollars 7.34bn
from Dollars 6.04bn in 1991, with a total of 188 issues, according to
figures supplied by Euromoney.
However, while equity offerings from the US and Canada rose, those in
western Europe declined in volume, to Dollars 6.51bn from Dollars 7.07bn, as
turmoil in the foreign exchange markets unsettled the European stock markets
and discouraged some international investors.
The currency turmoil had two effects. First, investment bankers point out
that it probably deterred international investors from buying European
equities because of the greater foreign exchange risk, especially with the
pound and lira floating outside the ERM.
Secondly, several governments which had planned to push ahead with
privatisations in an effort to reduce large budget deficits found that the
stock market conditions were unsuitable. 'A lot of finance ministers found
they were tied up with Maastricht instead of thinking of ways of raising
money,' says one UK investment banker.
At the start of 1992, investment bankers had set their sights on seeing some
big privatisation issues from Italy, France, Sweden and Finland. Only a few
of those deals went ahead. Italy, which generated only Dollars 755m in
international equity offerings this year, is expected to push ahead with the
privatisation of its state-owned banks.
Sweden's centre-right government had hoped to raise about SKr18bn from
selling a further stake in Procordia, the state-controlled food and
pharmaceutical group. The sale was due to take place in the autumn, but was
postponed because of currency worries and the unfavourable stock market
conditions.
The bulk of the European equity offerings came from the UK (where volume
dropped to Dollars 2.95bn from Dollars 3.35bn) and France, where volume rose
to Dollars 1.61bn from Dollars 1.27bn.
In June, the French government raised FFr9.5bn from its sale of shares in
the Total oil group, the biggest offering in France's partial privatisation
programme.
Given the pressures to raise money from the sale of state assets, investment
bankers are confident that the privatisations which were shelved or delayed
this year (Procordia of Sweden, Rhone-Poulenc of France, Repsol of Spain)
will be dusted down and re-scheduled for 1993.
Among the emerging markets, Mexican issues dominated those from Latin
America, but the steady flow floundered in the summer as the Mexican stock
market tumbled and international investors found they had had their fill of
Mexican paper, especially when they started to see share prices fall. Some
investors, who had participated in a Dollars 600m equity offering by Cemex,
the Mexican cement company, were annoyed when the money was used only a few
months later to invest in Spain rather than in the domestic market.
Mexican companies raised a total of Dollars 3.02bn against Dollars 3.53bn in
1991.
