FT  19 NOV 92 / Arts: Stages - Theatre
The old firm of David Storey the writer, Alan Bates the actor and Lindsay
Anderson the director is back with Storey's new play, Stages at the
Cottesloe in the National Theatre. The firm has not matured with age. Indeed
if you want a throwback to the 1960s, here it is. Outside of parody, it is
hard to imagine such a mixture of the worst of Harold Pinter, more than a
touch of John Osborne, a nod to John Braine's Room at the Top and an
acknowledgement of Philip Larkin for writing verse about the north of
England. The victim is Bates, who remains a powerful actor but has to speak
most of the lines and can hardly be expected to carry a text like this.
The point about Storey - it is always said, not least by himself - is that
he was born north-country poor, preferred art and literature to a more
humdrum life, and played professional rugby league in order to support his
studies. Thus the hearties regarded him as an aesthete, and the aesthetes
regarded him as a hearty: not, one may add, an entirely uncommon phenomenon.
Stages is the story retold, plus women. There are a lot of them about.
Fenchurch, the central character, has a daughter called Karen, an ex-wife
called Bea, a psychiatric adviser called Marion, and a glamorous-looking
woman called Rebecca who appears to be his neighbour but is treated as a
surrogate for all his longings. The main woman in the Fenchurch saga,
however, does not appear. She is Bea's mother, for whom he fell before he
married the daughter and with whom he continued an affair long after. I hope
that's clear.
The play contains one interesting line about why it is that some of us go
mad and others don't. No answer is given; nor is there much of an attempt to
find one. Fenchurch's dilemma seems to be whether he should go back to the
north, from which he and much of the 1960s drama came, or stay in the south
which he first welcomed for its anonymity. It is pointed out in passing that
the north has changed over the years; ie, has become more like the south.
Fenchurch stays put.
Bates copes manfully, looking as ever the blend of ex-rugby forward and
sensitive soul. The part is in many ways reminiscent of the middle-aged
Jimmy Porter in Osborne's Deja Vu, though without the drink and without the
foil of Osborne's Cliff. It is also without the jokes.
Pinterish pauses abound, never more so than in the first scene with the
daughter who reminds Fenchurch that nowadays the north is only a few hours
away from King's Cross. None of the women's parts add up to much. They
scarcely ever answer back, which is strange when, with the possible
exception of the neighbour, all are supposed to be well-educated
intellectuals. Joanna David's Marion must be the most inarticulate professor
of psychiatry one has ever come across. Rosemary Martin as the neighbour is
more a figment of the imagination than a character.
The set, designed by Jocelyn Herbert, looks as if it has been taken from
recent productions of Pinter: pretty well bare, but with the occasional use
of see-through gauze doors. It is Pinter without the menace.
In repertory. Cottesloe Theatre. (071) 928 2252
