FT  02 JUN 92 / EC hits at US Earth Summit stance
THE EUROPEAN Community accused the US yesterday of threatening the outcome
of the Earth Summit because of its refusal to sign a treaty central to the
success of the environmental gathering.
The summit, due to start in Rio de Janeiro tomorrow, has already been
plagued by acrimony between developed and developing nations.
Expectations about what the 10-day summit could achieve were further lowered
by Mr John Major, the prime minister, who said some people were expecting
too much from it.
'I am very keen for us to make progress generally at the Rio summit,' Mr
Major said during a visit to south-west Scotland. 'But I have been warning
for some time that some of the expectations for the summit are higher than
those that can be realistically achieved.'
Mr Laurens Jan Brinkhorst, who is leading the EC's delegation, said in Rio
that the US was in danger of creating a rift within the industrialised world
at the summit by refusing to sign a convention on species conservation, or
biological diversity.
'We're very disappointed with the US decision. It will be very sad if it
results in a cleavage not just between developed and developing countries
but also between developed countries.'
The developing world had bent over backwards to please the US and 'they are
not seeing an appropriate response', he added.
In Washington, President George Bush proposed a doubling in world spending
on forest conservation to Dollars 2.7bn (Pounds 1.5bn) and offered Dollars
150m of US funds as a 'downpayment' for his initiative. The announcement
appeared to be an attempt to deflect criticism of the US over its
announcement on the biodiversity treaty.
US officials also say they do not believe the Rio summit will be able to
agree on a once hoped for forestry convention. They acknowledged that the
extra funding might well not be available before 1994, and would be offset
by other spending cuts.
A senior US official said Mr Bush had written to leaders of the Group of
Seven leading industrialised nations and the EC about his proposal. A US
official said: 'This (the US initiative) is quite an effective approach to
dealing with bio-diversity. This is not rhetoric, this is reality.'
Members of developing countries said they were angry at what they saw as an
attempt by the US to deflect criticism with its forests initiative.
Both the EC and the developing world had accepted a weaker convention on
climate change to accommodate the US, Mr Brinkhorst said. 'We in the EC
believe it is very important to make ourselves credible to developing
countries by showing that the developed world is not only offering words but
taking steps to put our own houses in order.'
'It is not a beauty contest but while we in the EC have increased
development aid to 0.5 per cent of GNP the US has cut its from 0.3 to 0.2
per cent.'
Key is not to produce less - but differently, Page 19
Earth Summit: eight-page survey, Section III
