FT  19 DEC 92 / ITC pulls plug on Thames' bid for Channel 5: Why a
consortium's proposals for a new national TV service were rejected
MR Kenneth Blythe, secretary of the Independent Television Commission,
yesterday went to the London office of Mr Richard Dunn, Thames chief
executive, to deliver in person the commission's verdict on Channel 5.
The ITC executive said it did not want Mr Dunn to receive the news on his
franchise bid by fax, as happened last year when Thames found out it had
been outbid and would no longer be an ITV company.
This time, the news was bad all the same. Channel Five Holdings, the
Thames-led consortium which had submitted the only bid to run a new channel
capable of reaching 70 per cent of the population, had been rejected.
The ITC had accepted the consortium's proposals for retuning millions of
video recorders to get rid of interference likely to be caused by the
Channel 5 signal. This had been seen as the main barrier to the project
going ahead.
The commission also accepted the consortium's programme plans, in spite of
concern that they might be too London-oriented, at least in the early years,
to qualify as a national channel.
Channel Five Holdings was judged to have failed the quality threshold on two
counts:
The ITC was not satisfied with the business plan, particularly projected
costs, audience share and revenue projections.
It was also dissatisfied with the level of investor commitment.
As it is impossible to forecast advertising revenues accurately for 10
years, Channel Five was convinced it had made adequate provisions for what
was always going to be a minority channel starting out with a 5 per cent
audience share rising to 10 per cent or more over a number of years.
The consortium is even more angered about the decision on 'the level of
shareholder commitment'.
Thames Television was to take a 35 per cent stake in the venture, a stake
authorised by the board of Thames and its majority shareholder, Thorn EMI.
Time Warner International committed itself to 10 per cent because it has a
divisional investment limit of Dollars 25m (Pounds 16.4m). A recommendation
from TWI senior executives for a further 25 per cent stake has been
submitted to the main board of Time Warner, the world's largest media
company. It was due to be considered in the new year.
The US company sent a five-page letter to the ITC backing the project and
explaining the delay had been caused by a false start with another Channel 5
consortium. Three other large companies wrote expressing enthusiasm for the
venture.
Pearson, owner of the Financial Times, said it was interested, but first had
to get acceptance from its partners in British Sky Broadcasting because of
an understanding that shareholders would not invest in competing media
ventures.
Cox, the US media group with a turnover of more than Dollars 2bn, said it
was interested but was in the process of completing due diligence.
Capital Cities/ABC, the US network company, said it was interested in
investing but had to carry out due diligence on the business plan.
Associated Newspapers had also written to the ITC saying the company was
interested.
The ITC also received a letter from SG Warburg, the merchant bank, saying it
had no doubt the project could be 100 per cent funded.
The commission appears to have disregarded the interest from Pearson, Cox,
Capital Cities/ABC and Associated and the 25 per cent of possible Time
Warner investment which had not got main board approval.
Mr Peter Rogers, deputy chief executive of the ITC, said yesterday he had
wanted to see the 'great majority' of financing in place before the decision
was taken. Thames executives have been told 'great majority' meant 70 per
cent, although there was no such term in the applications to apply.
There is a 12-week gap between awarding the licence and granting it. Even if
the licence had been awarded yesterday it would have been subject to raising
the additional money needed, shareholder approval and licence terms.
