FT  09 JUL 92 / Ministers put prevention on par with cure: A look at the
proposals laid out in the white paper
NO DOCTOR has saved as many lives as a clean water supply. There are many
ways health standards can be improved by non-medical means, and yesterday's
Health of the Nation white paper seeks to give disease prevention the same
status as health care.
The government's wish to turn health promotion into a more central issue -
both politically and for individuals - will be widely supported. It is
consistent with a drive by the World Health Organisation to encourage all
governments to improve health standards by the turn of the century.
Ministers propose a strategy to increase life expectancy and to help ensure
that people enjoy their extra years free from illness and disability. The
strategy will aim to bring about measureable improvements in the five areas
identified by the government.
Questioning and criticism of the government's proposals will come over the
detail, and over the degree of commitment and resources ministers are
prepared to devote to making universally shared objectives a reality.
Research links the health of individuals not only with lifestyle but also
with social and economic status. The government's political opponents were
not alone in complaining yesterday that the white paper lacked proposals to
include an attack on poverty in the health campaign.
The influential King's Fund Institute health policy think tank said it was a
'striking omission' that the white paper 'ignores the rising toll of
premature mortality and sickness associated with poverty'.
There is concern among health promotion specialists that if the government
fails to address the links between poverty and health, its health promotion
strategy might have the paradoxical effect of widening health inequalities
within Britain.
Such concerns will be reinforced by a study of Liverpool published by the
British Thoracic Society today which, it says, shows a 'significant
relationship' between an increasing incidence of tuberculosis and poverty.
The white paper says the government aims to help people understand that
lifestyle can have profound effects on health, and enable them to make
informed choices. Targets will be set in the five key areas to clarify 'what
might otherwise be no more than general good intentions'. They will include:
Reducing death rates from coronary heart disease and stroke by at least 40
per cent by the year 2000.
Reducing the death rate from breast cancer by at least 25 per cent by 2000,
and the death rate from lung cancer by 30 per cent in men and 15 per cent in
women by 2010.
Reducing the overall suicide rate by at least 15 per cent and the rate among
severely mentally ill people by 33 per cent or more by 2000.
Halving the rate of conception among the under-16s by 2000.
Reducing the incidence of gonorrhoea by at least 20 per cent by 1995 - the
rate is seen as an indicator of HIV/Aids trends.
Reducing accidental deaths among children by 33 per cent, and among those
aged 15 to 25 by 25 per cent by 2005.
Encouraging changes in lifestyle will play a big part in trying to achieve
most of those objectives. At the centre of the strategy to reduce lung
cancer deaths, for example, is a linked set of targets to cut cigarette
smoking - at least 80 per cent of deaths from lung cancer are associated
with smoking.
Yet although the government will support efforts to discourage smoking, it
says at this stage only that it will 'review the effects of tobacco
advertising, particularly on children, and consider what further steps are
necessary'. There have been many calls from health campaigners for the
government to support a total ban on tobacco advertising except at points of
sale.
Although the National Health Service will have a central role in the
government's strategy, its success will depend on the enthusiasm with which
other government departments and organisations embrace the principles.
A ministerial cabinet committee covering 11 government departments will be
established to oversee the implementation and monitoring of the strategy.
Local authorities, voluntary organisations, the media and employers will all
be expected to play a part. The health department will publish details of
information needed to monitor progress, and a survey will examine the
lifestyles of 15,000 adults.
The Health of the Nation, Command 1986. HMSO. Pounds 13.60.
