FT  25 JUL 92 / Gardening: New varieties are still the spice of life - Three
trial sweet peas from Unwins Seeds
A VISIT to the sweet pea trials of Unwins Seeds, in Cambridgeshire,
Britain's biggest producer of new sweet peas, revealed much about this
little-publicised side of the flower seed industry. The trials comprised
nearly 400 seedlings, but only three were selected as new varieties for next
year's market.
There are two types of sweet pea which are popular with the public and
produced for sale on a large scale. They are the Spencer type, which has
four blooms per stem, and the Multiflora, or Galaxy, type which has more.
Since it is almost impossible to get more than four flowers fully open and
fresh at the same time - and faded flowers, or unopened buds, are
unacceptable to those who exhibit sweet peas - the Spencer type is favoured
for show purposes. By contrast, Multiflora is popular with those who grow
sweet peas in the garden, or as cut flowers for the home. It makes a fine
show, unopened buds look attractive and faded flowers can be cut off.
Breeders are always looking for changes, such as in flower character or
colour, as happened nearly 90 years ago when the first Spencer sweet peas,
with their attractively-frilled petals, appeared among the old unruffled
Grandiflora type, which is still grown but not on a large scale.
Such large mutations are rare and, for the most part, only minor differences
in flower size, shape and colour are being obtained. For example, I saw
sweet peas with slightly hooded petals which gave the flowers a deeper look
and would certainly be worth following up. But this form is not yet ready.
The three newcomers which have been chosen for next year, and will be on
sale in a few weeks, are Her Majesty and Daphne, both Spencer-type sweet
peas, and Columbus, a Multiflora.
Her Majesty is ruby-rose, a striking colour which I like very much and
imagine will be immediately popular. Daphne is officially described as
lavender, although that suggests to me a cooler tone than that of this very
beautiful flower. Columbus is a very light blue with cream undertone,
certainly unusual and highly regarded by the Unwin specialists but not a
colour greatly to my liking. All three are sweetly scented - anyone who
doubts the perfume of the modern sweet pea should have been with me that
mild, rather humid morning when the air was full of sweetness.
A peculiarity of the sweet pea flower is that it is normally
self-fertilising. If one wants to make a cross between two different
varieties, one must do it by hand, first removing the anthers before they
have ripe pollen from the flowers that are to produce the seed, then
transferring ripe pollen from the other chosen parent to the ripe stigmas of
the emasculated flowers.
In their first generation, these hybrids may appear even in character, as
many F1 hybrids do, but in subsequent generations the characters of the two
parents will segregate, giving much wider variation from which to select.
The difficulty then is to re-create two breeding varieties of any particular
seedlings which may seem desirable. Sometimes, the professionals pass this
kind of work on to amateurs, who can have fun for a few years before selling
them back to the professionals.
For trial purposes, Unwins sow their sweet peas about October 10, ten seeds
in each five-inch pot, in John Innes No 2 soil-based compost. The seedlings
are over-wintered in frames and are planted outdoors at the end of March
where they are to flower. The seedlings are allowed to grow naturally
without removal of side-shoots and are widely spaced against wire-netting
supports. They are at their peak flowering by late June and are setting seed
by July.
Unwins has an arrangement with a relative living in New Zealand which makes
it possible to get a first seed crop by early the following year and so
hasten the process of getting the new varieties to market.
It is also possible to grow sweet peas from seed sown in February or March
in a temperature of from 10`C to 20`C, the higher temperature to be
preferred. These seedlings can be planted out in April or early May for
summer flowering. Seed can also be sown in the open ground in April but with
rather more risk of losses in germination.
Some varieties, especially among the blue and maroon colours, produce a
proportion of seeds with extra hard coats which absorb water with difficulty
and so may be slow to germinate. The traditional remedy for this is to chip
hard seeds with a penknife, taking care to do this on the side of the seed
away from the eye or germ. A quicker and safer way is to rub the seed (again
on the smooth side) on sandpaper to scarify the hard coat.
In contrast to this problem, some seeds, especially among the orange and
cream shades, are soft-coated. Sometimes the seed coats actually split,
making them unattractive in appearance. These soft seeds are more sensitive
than normal seeds to cold or wet and need a little extra care, such as
choosing a porous seed compost and maintaining a genial temperature.
