FT  27 MAR 92 / UN vote on sanctions expected early next week
A RESOLUTION calling for sanctions against Libya could go to the United
Nations Security Council for formal consideration today, with a vote likely
to be taken early next week.
Diplomats at the UN indicated this last night as the US, Britain and France
resumed their drive for UN-mandated measures against Libya for failing to
hand over the two alleged Lockerbie bombers for trial.
The diplomats stressed that the current hearing of Libya's plea to the
International Court in The Hague would not be allowed to delay Security
Council action on the sanctions resolution.
After Security Council members discussed the situation at a private meeting
last night, Mr Thomas Pickering, the US delegate, told reporters: 'The court
is moving on its own time schedule and independently of the Security Council
 -and vice versa.'
He said the draft resolution sponsored by the US, Britain and France could
be submitted for formal consideration by the Security Council as early as
today.
But he and other delegates added that voting probably would not take place
until early next week.
Mr Pickering dismissed Libyan moves to deflect the sanctions drive by again
offering to turn over the two Lockerbie suspects to the UN.
The council would insist on compliance with its earlier resolution calling
for the surrender of the Lockerbie suspects to the US or Britain. The wanted
men are accused of masterminding the explosion of the Pan Am jet over
Lockerbie in Scotland in December 1988 with the loss of 270 lives.
The discussion by Security Council members last night was apparently about
relatively minor details of the proposed resolution, including the effect of
restrictions on Libyan diplomats accredited to international organisations
as well as national capitals.
The issue of possible economic damage to Libya's neighbours through the
proposed air embargo has already been addressed in a revision of the
original draft which would give 'special attention' to such cases.
Diplomats' patience with Colonel Muammer Gadaffi, the Libyan leader, now
seems just about exhausted and western delegates said that punitive measures
were the only recourse.
Delegates on all sides seemed more than confident yesterday that a sanctions
resolution drafted by the western permanent members of the Security Council
would pass by a sizeable majority.
The resolution would apply a mandatory ban under the enforcement provisions
of the UN Charter on civil aviation links with Libya, prohibit sales of
aircraft, parts and arms and direct governments to end Libyan diplomatic
representation in their capitals.
