FT  06 NOV 92 / Asean condemns timber labelling
THE Association of South East Asian Nations (Asean) has attacked Austria's
labelling scheme for tropical timber as 'unilateral and discriminatory' and
called for the scheme to be rescinded.
In an attempt to gain international backing and forestall other countries
following Austria's lead, the Asean countries (Indonesia, Malaysia,
Philippines, Singapore and Thailand) raised the issue at this week's meeting
of the governing council of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(Gatt). Canada and a number of developing country timber exporters spoke in
Asean's support.
Asean claims that the Austrian action is contrary to Gatt rules, because it
discriminates against tropical timber and will have the effect of inhibiting
trade.
Austria is the first country to introduce a mandatory tropical timber
labelling scheme, which came into force in September. The labels indicate
whether a product contains tropical timber. The law also envisages a quality
mark for timber and timber products from sustainably managed forests.
The case is the latest in a growing number of disputes over the legitimacy
of trade measures to promote environmental objectives. Gatt rules in this
area are ambiguous, though a Gatt dispute panel judgment last year (against
a US ban on tuna imports from countries whose fishing fleets killed too many
dolphins) said countries could not unilaterally impose environmental
standards on others.
Noting that Austria is itself an important timber producer and exporter,
Asean argues the labelling scheme helps domestic producers by encouraging
consumers to switch from products made of tropical woods to those using
temperate timber.
Austria's Gatt representative yesterday denied that the new regulations were
protectionist, and said they arose solely out of concern to promote the
sustainable management of tropical forests. Asean claims that, by depressing
demand for tropical timber and thus its value, labelling will tend to
increase rather than reduce the pace of forest destruction.
Other countries, including the Netherlands, are considering mandatory
labelling schemes for tropical timber.
