FT  21 JAN 92 / Survey of Egypt (11): Attractions of peace - Tourists are
returning
EGYPT'S tourist industry is celebrating its own victory just 12 months after
it was plunged in gloom by the Gulf crisis.
In the wake of a publicity drive, Dr Fouad Sultan, the tourism minister, is
ebullient. 'Trends are extremely positive. We are worried about
overbooking,' he says, adding that he hopes this season will be the best on
record.
Last year began on a less happy note. In the fiscal year July-June 1990-91
the industry recorded 16.5m tourist nights compared with the record of 22.1m
the previous year. The drop in tourist income was even more dramatic - by 60
per cent from Dollars 2.5bn to Dollars 1bn.
But the first quarter for this fiscal year (July, August, September) showed
a strong rebound. In August 1991 the number of tourists from Arab countries
rose by 5.6 per cent. The average increase in arrivals in August 1991 stood
at 2.5 per cent. The recession in the west continued to affect non-Arab
arrivals which fell by 9 per cent.
The activity at some of Egypt's famous tourists sites only partly reflects
the improvement shown by the statistics. In Luxor, site of the Karnak Temple
on the east bank of the Nile and the Theban necropolis on the west bank,
tour guides confirm an increase in tourists compared with a year ago, but
say numbers are still well down on 1989.
'We used to have 4,000 tourists a day visiting the tombs in the Valley of
the Kings before the Gulf crisis. Last year there were days when no-one
came. Now we have 1,000 a day.'
Ferries used by tourists to cross from the east to the west bank at Luxor
are running well below capacity although local tour operators reported
capacity bookings in Luxor's 33 hotels for January.
Dr Sultan feels confident that occupancy rates at Cairo hotels for this
holiday season would reach 98 per cent, 75 per cent in South Sinai (Sharm el
Sheikh), 60 per cent in Hurghada on the Red Sea coast, and 65-70 per cent in
upper Egypt - Luxor and Aswan.
He attributes some of the success to Egypt's marketing campaign after the
end of the Gulf war when the government and private sector launched a
campaign to sell Egypt as a secure destination.
Another factor may have been that many tourists had delayed their travel
until after the Gulf crisis, contributing to a surge in arrivals in the
early months of the new fiscal year.
Mr Sultan anticipates that tourist nights for 1991-1992 will reach something
like 25m (compared with 22.1m in 1989/90). Income will exceed the Dollars
3bn achieved in 1989/90.
He says that another positive trend has been the fact that many hotels in
Egypt are reporting tourists returning for a second, third or even fourth
time. Mr Sultan says the average stay in Luxor, which used to be about one
night, is now three.
The main change, he claims, is that people now know Egypt 'not only for
culture, but also for other activities such as leisure and conferences'.
Egypt has encouraged the development of more and better facilities for
tourists over the last 10 years. As a result an important factor in the
growing number of arrivals has been the large increase in the number of
hotel beds.
In June 1991, there were 53,000 rooms compared with fewer than 25,000 rooms
in 1985. Another 14,000 rooms are under construction and will be completed
in the next couple of years.
Dr Sultan says the authorities have been successful at stimulating private
sector investment in the tourism sector which is by far Egypt's fastest
growing industry.
There is also evidence that Egyptian nationals with large off-shore dollar
deposits are beginning to invest in the sector.
New projects including extensions to the Meridien Hotel in Cairo and
ambitious schemes on the Red Sea coast south of Hurghada are attracting
investment from foreigners as well as Egyptians.
The industry has its tensions, however. For some involved in preserving
Egypt's ancient monuments, the government is pursuing development at the
cost of preserving historical sites.
'We take our monuments for granted. The government exploits their earning
potential, but does nothing to protect or develop them. Not enough is being
done to curb pollution and ensure we have historical attractions for decades
to come,' says a tour guide in Cairo.
