FT  25 SEP 92 / Business Travel Management (1): Controlling costs - While
business travel shows some signs of increasing in spite of the recession,
companies are still under increasing pressure to control travel costs. David
Churchill reports on how the lifestyle of the travelling executive is
changing
THE DILEMMA for hotels, airlines and other suppliers of the business travel
market at present is that while there are signs of a greater volume of
executive travel, there is consistent and steady pressure by companies to
reduce their travel costs.
After a decade when travel has grown to become one of the major, but least
controlled, costs of doing business - British companies are estimated to
spend more than Pounds 18bn a year on corporate travel and associated costs
 -the impact of recession is forcing virtually all companies to impose a far
stricter form of travel management than ever before.
The impact of tighter travel management at a time when more executives are
actually having to travel to win new business means, for example, that
hoteliers are seeing their achieved room rates significantly below published
rack rates and airlines face a declining yield on seats filled.
'There is no doubt that the demand for business travel has increased
significantly this year in spite of the recession,' says Mr David Whittaker,
chairman of the Guild of Business Travel Agents.
'But, equally, companies are looking hard at ways of getting the best buy
and so some executives may not be travelling in the comfort they are used
to.'
Mr Eric Brannan, American Express's general manager for travel in the UK,
reports a general trend by companies to drive down costs while recognising
in some cases that this can lead to tired and disgruntled executives. 'One
major company has told all its managers that while they can now only travel
economy class anywhere in the world, they can allow for an extra two nights'
hotel accommodation to take account of jet lag and tiredness,' he says.
This drive to reduce corporate travel costs is echoed by Wagons-Lits
Business Travel, part of one of the major travel groups in western Europe.
Its analysis of business travel spending by companies shows that since May,
there has been a fall of between 2 and 4 per cent in such expenditure.
'Many large companies are radically cutting the amount of money spent on
travel,' says Mr Richard LoveIl, managing director of Wagons-Lits Business
Travel. 'This does not mean they are travelling less; rather, it shows the
impact of downgrading from business class seats to economy on aeroplanes,
staying in cheaper hotels for less time, and hiring smaller and cheaper
cars.'
Wagons-Lits says there has been a continuous decline in the average
corporate spend on all areas of business travel since the middle of 1991 -
with the exception of rail travel in the UK. 'This could be due to
executives switching from domestic air travel to rail,' adds Mr LoveIl.
For the hotel industry, hoteliers have been encouraged this year by a rise
in occupancy levels but at a cost of reduced room rates. This is the reverse
of last year's experience, when occupancies fell but rates remained firm.
'The industry reports better occupancy figures but margins are under
pressure from companies trying to secure the best deals,' says Mr Geoff
Parkinson, managing director of Horwath Consulting, a leading hotel
consultancy and a division of Stoy Hayward.
Hyatt International, one of the main worldwide hotel chains aiming at the
business market, reports a marked change in the attitude of the
international business traveller. 'No longer are they just picking up the
phone and booking their favourite hotel,' says Mr Allan Edgar, Hyatt's
marketing director for Europe, Africa and the Middle East. 'Instead, they
are doing a great deal of research, looking for tactical offers and
promotions which may be available.'
But trading down by executives is not all gloom for the travel industry. Mr
Bryan Langton, chief executive of Holiday Inn Worldwide, the world's largest
hotel group owned by British brewers Bass, says that Holiday Inn's
mid-market appeal has helped boost occupancy levels and margins this year.
'As major companies worldwide look to cut their travel costs, their
executives are moving from the luxury market to mid-priced properties which
offer everything they want at a price they can afford.'
International airlines have also been badly affected by the corporate moves
to curtail travel costs by trading down. While international passenger
numbers so far this year are some 8 per cent higher than last year's Gulf
War-affected market, there is still excess capacity forcing airlines on
competitive routes such as the North Atlantic to discount prices to fill
seats, reducing the yield from the flight at the same time.
Even though economy seats may not be the most convenient for business
travellers, because of the restrictions on their use, the airlines are
worried about their uptake by executives under cost restrictions. Hence the
continued strenuous attempts to woo business class passengers (many airlines
are virtually giving up trying in first class, where it is said that less
than one in five of the seats is filled by a full-fare paying passenger).
Cathay Pacific, for example, has just increased the size of its business
class seats and is one of many airlines now offering a free limousine
service to, as well as sometimes from, the airport.
Mr Richard Branson's Virgin Atlantic has tried another approach: it now
provides full-fare paying economy passengers - typically business travellers
who need the flexibility of a full-fare ticket - a special Mid Class seating
section. These seats are as spacious as most other airlines' business class
seats, but the food is economy standard.
But trading down from luxury to budget hotels or business to economy class
on airlines is only a short-term solution to the pressure on travel costs.
In a crisis many executives have no option but to toe the company line: yet
most companies know it does not take managers long to find loopholes in the
system.
Hence moves by companies to develop a more structured approach to travel
management, thus controlling costs in the long term, rather than by
short-term blanket restrictions. But according to a recent survey by
American Express of over 400 leading British companies, nearly half still do
not have a formal travel policy which tells staff the type and cost of
business travel they can undertake. In contrast, most US companies have some
sort of formal travel policy.
Not surprisingly, effective travel management is a niche which the large
business travel agency chains are keen to promote. They increasingly offer
even more sophisticated management information systems to help companies
monitor and control travel costs.
While most of these systems have been aimed at large-scale corporate
purchasers of travel, Thomas Cook has recently specially targeted medium to
smaller sized companies - which spend Pounds 600,000 or less a year on
business travel.
Yet the trend in the 1990s in travel management is towards globalisation of
the business. 'Major multinational companies increasingly demand from their
travel agencies a global network so that they can arrange, monitor and
control their travel costs worldwide,' points out Mr Whittaker from the
GBTA. Hence the moves by the leading travel groups - such as the world's top
five, Amex, Carlson, Wagons-Lits, Thomas Cook and the Japan Travel Bureau -
to establish international networks through acquisition.
New technology may be the key to such globalisation of business travel
management - in particular, the development by airlines and hotels of
sophisticated computer reservation systems. Mr Roy Burnham,. managing
director for the Worldspan CRS operation, one of a number of competing
systems, points out that 'the average time it takes at present to organise
one business travel arrangement is 20 minutes and that usually means at
least four telephone calls'.
But, he adds, a computer reservation system can cut that time and cost down
significantly and give more information. 'When corporate travel buyers are
linked to it electronically via a travel agent or through their own
computers, they can check information about flights, hotels and car hire and
can make bookings quickly and easily.'
Yet while more effective travel management has been given a boost by the
recession, there remains the danger that in the corporate enthusiasm to
control costs, the purpose of travel may be forgotten. Travel, even at
executive level, is tiring and stressful; company accountants and travel
managers would do well to remember that at the end of the day it is on its
business travellers that the fortunes of the company often depend.
