FT  27 JUN 92 / How to Spend It: A snappy Dresser - A look at the work of an
influential designer who has returned to cult status
IF YOU glance at Oggetti in Fulham Road, south London, you will see a couple
of teapots in the window display. Most things in Oggetti are expensive, but
these teapots are really expensive - Pounds 5,800 each.
They are part of a limited edition of products designed by Christopher
Dresser - and reproduced in sterling silver by Alessi, the Italian company
best known for its work with contemporary designers such as Philippe Starck
and Frank Gehry - which will be on sale at Oggetti until September.
One teapot is in the shape of a triangle, another is hemispherical, the
third is a square squatting on four spindly 'crow's feet' legs that are a
hallmark of Dresser's style. They look, as Oggetti's Paul Marquess says, as
if they were designed yesterday but they date back to the 1880s.
Christopher Dresser was a 19th century British botanist who abandoned his
studies of plants for product design. He was a socialist idealist who, fired
by the belief that industrialisation was changing the world for the better,
became the first designer to embrace the machine age.
Dresser lived at a time when mainstream taste was dominated by the grandeur
of Victorian baroque and when the avant garde were wedded to William Morris
and the Arts and Craft Movement. Dresser's designs were completely
different. His style was functional, simple and his aim was to ensure that
all his designs could be made by machine.
During his career Dresser enjoyed a cult following, not only in Britain but
as far away as Japan. He worked with more than 60 manufacturers on
wallpapers, fabrics, furniture, glassware and ceramics.
But he was always seen as an oddball. His modernist theories, now standard
stuff, were regarded as eccentric and his designs dismissed as novelties. By
the end of his life he had slipped into obscurity.
Dresser has now returned to cult status in design circles where he is hailed
as the forerunner of the modern industrial designer. Dresser originals are
much sought after by collectors.
This revival of interest persuaded Alessi to consider reproducing some of
Dresser's designs. Alessi tends to be associated with the post-modernist
styling of the 1980s when its products, such as Starck's lobster-like lemon
squeezer and the bird-spouted kettle designed by Michael Graves, the
American architect, became the archetypal designer objects of the decade.
But the core of its collection has always been meticulously-made,
contemporary classic designs, many dating back to the 1940s and 1950s.
In the mid-1980s it introduced a small range of archive designs, by Marianne
Brandt, a German artist who studied at the Bauhaus in the 1920s, and Josef
Hoffmann, the fin de siecle Viennese designer who was a leading exponent of
Art Nouveau.
Alberto Alessi, who now runs the company his grandfather founded in the
1920s, is keen to expand the archive range. The days when a Starck lemon
squeezer was the essential accessory are over.
If Alessi is to avoid being relegated to the ranks of the relics of the
1980s, it has to address the new sensibility of the 1990s.
Christopher Dresser, with his restrained designs and whiff of 19th century
authenticity, is a perfect addition to its range. The only problem for
Alessi was that it was very difficult to track down his original designs.
Most of Dresser's original products have disappeared, as have many of his
notebooks. Alessi had to reconstruct his blueprints from the few records it
could find using computer-aided design techniques, and then check the
results against original objects borrowed from collectors.
Although Dresser was obsessed by the machine age, most of his products were
made by hand as the silversmiths and metal workers of his era had very
little machinery. Alessi has been able to adapt two of his products - a tray
and a toast rack - to be mass-produced in stainless steel at its modern
factories.
These are now on sale at its usual London outlets, the Conran Shop and
Authentics as well as Oggetti, for around Pounds 70 and Pounds 60
respectively. The other Dresser designs, the sterling silver limited edition
now on show at Oggetti, have been made by hand.
Paul Marquess is still convinced that, recession or not, at least some of
Oggetti's customers will be willing to spend a few thousand pounds for a
Christopher Dresser sugar bowl. Perhaps he hopes they will be thinking of
the original 1880s Dresser teapot that sold for Pounds 60,000 at a London
auction last year, which makes Pounds 5,800 for a 1990s reproduction seem
(almost) cheap.
