FT  11 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Recipe for tragedy in Bolivia -
Co-operative mining ventures like the one devastated at Llipi
PRESSURE for the Bolivian government and independent mining organisations to
improve working conditions and safety records is intensifying after the
disaster which earlier this week engulfed the Llipi gold camp in the
Bolivian Andes.
The death toll may never be known. About 100 bodies have been found. But
perhaps as many as 300 miners, their wives and children remain buried under
17 metres of mud and rubble.
The Regional Federation of Gold Mining Co-operatives believes most must be
presumed dead or seriously injured. With access to the site hampered by
treacherous roads made worse by torrential rains, many of the bodies may
never be recovered.
The life of a Bolivian Co-operative miner is a precarious one but depressed
world mineral and hydrocarbon prices mean that the resources necessary to
improve his conditions are simply not available.
Llipi is the latest in a long history of fatal incidents. And one day after
the tragedy, four miners on their way to help the Llipi victims themselves
died when their lorry tipped over on a local road.
Llipi was a new gold ore camp, production having starting relatively
recently. Between 200 and 300 families had established themselve there.
The western Tipuani region, where Llipi is situated, contains the largest
concentration of co-operative miners in Bolivia: some 60 collective
enterprises worked by 6,000 miners with 30,000 dependents.
Tipuani straddles the Andes, at an altitude stretching from 4,000m above sea
level to some 600m in the river valleys. Most of its co-operative operations
mine gold, of producing the greater part of Bolivia's output of the precious
metal.
Declared output by them in 1991 was 1.9 tonnes, compared to a total of 3.5
tonnes. Inti Raymi, a subsidiary of Battle Mountain Gold, was responsible
for most of the rest coming from Bolivia's largest silver-gold open pit
operation.
Official production figures are misleading, however. Dr Fernando Urquidi
Barrau, an expert on the Bolivian mining scene, estimates that the
co-operatives' true annual gold production figure is around 6 to 7 tonnes.
He compares their conditions to those of turn-of-the century gold rushes in
the US and Canada - but worse because of the tropical environment.
Co-operative miners and their families in Bolivia are prone to tuberculosis,
anaemia, and yellow fever. Children commonly die from chronic diarrhoea.
There are no health facilities and no potable water sources.
Diets are poor and housing usually means makeshift adobe or wooden huts with
tin roofs. The average earnings of a Bolivian co-operative miner are
estimated at Dollars 1,200 a year by the Regional Federation of Gold Mining
Co-operatives.
Bolivian co-operatives have a long history. But the tin market crash caused
by the 1985 collapse of the International Tin Council's buffer stock
operation, which resulted in the laying-off of 28,000 state employed miners,
has greatly added to their numbers.
There is no government control or investment in co-operatives, though
Comibol, the state mining corporation, leases some of its operations to
individual groups.
Extraction methods are extremely primitive. Dr Urqidi estimates some 60 to
70 per cent of gold is lost by co-operative prospectors. Shafts are often
built under river beds, leading to frequent collapses and accidents.
Some of the larger co-operative operations have earthmoving equipment,
front-loaders and trucks but most have to make do with rather more primitive
tools.
Local miners attempting to rescue their colleagues at Llipi, for instance,
had the use of just one tractor, picks and shovels for the initial 36 hours
following the landslide. Road access to Llipi, as to many other co-operative
works, is either non-existent or extremely hazardous, particularly in the
rainy season. In totality all these factors amounted to a recipe for
disaster.
