FT  16 NOV 92 / International Company News: From bad guys to good guys - As
South Africa embraces Ansbacher
MR BARRY Swart, managing director of the First National Bank of South Africa
said: 'We are being targetted as the big bad guys back home'.
Mr Swart, who is in London to oversee the group's takeover of the UK
merchant bank Ansbacher, is frequently asked by people back home why he
bought a UK bank when there are not enough branches in the South African
townships.
The brutal answer, replies Mr Swart, is that without a London base, he would
not have been able to service his domestic multi-national clients, such as
the Anglo-American Corporation, which are expanding overseas.
Ever since 1986, when its British parent Barclays disinvested from South
Africa, Mr Swart has wanted to open a UK branch.
He explained that since South Africa was having problems making its debt
repayments the Bank of England refused to let First National open a branch
in the UK.
Then last year the Bank of England informed Mr Swart that there would be no
objection if First National formed a UK subsidiary. Unlike a branch a
subsidiary has its own resources and capital which to a large extent would
be ring-fenced from the parent.
With the green light from the Bank of England, First National immediately
started to look at potential UK acquisitions.
Ansbacher became an obvious choice because its biggest shareholder Pargesa
Holdings, the Swiss investment group, was keen to sell its 62 per cent
shareholding.
The South Africans also noticed that Ansbacher's management did not want to
sell out to their rival, Singer &amp; Friedlander, whom they suspected wanted to
buy Ansbacher in order to get their hands on the bank's strong balance
sheet.
Last week First National's offer, which values Ansbacher at Pounds 57.8m,
was declared unconditional with 92.3 per cent of shareholders' acceptances.
Mr Swart, who has replaced Mr Richard Fenhalls as Ansbacher's chairman, is
adamant that he does not want to turn the UK merchant bank into a South
African satellite. 'We are not trying to put a Johannesburg bank in London'
he says.
Although the non-executive directors appointed to Ansbacher's board by the
majority shareholders have all resigned, First National does not intend to
make any changes to the day to day management of Ansbacher.
Mr Fenhalls, who will be replaced as chief executive at the end of June 1993
by Mr Peter Scaife, First National's general manager, will continue his
connection with Ansbacher as a non-executive director.
There will, however, be two significant operational changes.
First, corporate finance operations, which have recently earned record
levels of fee income, and foreign exchange dealing, will be expanded to
service First National's South African clients.
'We expect Ansbacher to generate much more business from South Africa' said
Mr Swart.
Second, there will be far less lending to small businesses. Mr Swart said:
'There are few advantages in competing with the big UK high street banks to
lend money.'
Ansbacher incurred a pre-tax loss of Pounds 8.23m in the year to December 31
1991, after making heavy provisions to offset losses on loans to small
businesses.
Those loans have already been reduced. The net loan book was Pounds 80.8m at
the end of September compared with Pounds 99.1m at the end of June.
Strong performances from offshore operations and asset trading resulted in a
pre-tax profit of Pounds 3.13m for the nine months to the end of September.
The group's capital resources were Pounds 89.5m.
Mr Swart says his immediate ambition is limited to expanding and in
increasing Ansbacher's profitability and thereby becoming known as the good
guys in the UK.
