FT  28 JUL 92 / Personal View: Speaking up for Emu
If the peoples and parliaments of Europe say no to monetary union, the
architects of Emu will have themselves to blame. Caught up in seeking to
understand how monetary union could be made to work, they ceased to ask why
one should want it to work.
The mistake was made early on, when the Hanover Summit asked the Delors
Committee to propose 'concrete stages' that could lead to Emu rather than
provide a rationale. It was compounded by the Commission, which produced a
cost-benefit analysis of Emu, titled One Market, One Money, but declined to
claim that the benefits would exceed the costs. The title was as close as
the study came to making a case for Emu.
The Commission's argument for Emu - that one market requires one money  - is
sound, but the missing steps have to be added. Forming one market and
managing one money are utterly different. One market meant deregulation. It
did not worry those opposed to strengthening EC institutions and creating
new ones. One money goes in the opposite direction. New institutions are
needed.
Nevertheless, the single market requires one money, because it requires
fixed exchange rates. Floating exchange rates do not prevent free trade or
free movements of capital and labour. But they would interfere with the EC's
more ambitious forms of integration, including the gradual harmonisation of
fiscal systems. When exchange rates are firmly fixed, moreover, and capital
is highly mobile, monetary autonomy vanishes. Europe must, therefore, decide
who should make monetary policy - the Bundesbank under the EMS, or the
European Central Bank under Emu.
That question is often misunderstood. It does not ask whether Europe's
policy objectives should differ from those of the Bundesbank, and the ECB
Statute is clear on that point. The ECB will pursue price stability, just
like the Bundesbank. But it will pursue price stability in Europe, which is
different from pursuing price stability in Germany.
This distinction is illustrated by the events of the past three years. The
European economy would be healthier if the D-Mark had been allowed to
appreciate in real terms after reunification. But France resisted the
realignment of nominal exchange rates, and the Bundesbank resisted the
realignment of national price levels - the two ways to make the D-Mark
appreciate in real terms.
The Bundesbank had no choice. It is obliged to resist any increase in German
prices. In the process, however, it has punished the European economy for
the deficiencies of German fiscal policy and the ambitions of German trades
unions.
If the ECB had been up and running, it would have been required to maintain
price stability in Europe as a whole but not in each individual country.
Hence, it would have been more tolerant of higher German prices and allowed
the realignment of price levels to occur automatically.
The president of the Bundesbank, worried about Germany, might have urged the
governing council of the ECB to adopt a tighter policy but would have been
out-voted.
Is this fantasy? Far from it. The Bundesbank does not aim at price stability
in Bavaria or the Federal Reserve at price stability in Texas. A European
monetary policy would not differ in nature from German monetary policy but
would differ in domain and thus allow relative prices to contribute to
macroeconomic adjustment.
Economists are fond of warning that Europe is not an 'optimum currency
area'. There is not enough labour mobility, and the EC does not have a
fiscal system required to make income-stabilising transfers. But that is why
price flexibility matters. The EMS resists it; Emu would accommodate it.
Seeking agreement at Maastricht, however, the architects of Emu made
mistakes that must be corrected.
For Emu to function more effectively than the EMS, the ECB must be able to
make monetary policy for the entire Community, not for the small number of
countries that can meet absurdly stringent convergence criteria by 1999.
Otherwise, Emu will replicate the asymmetry and rigidity of the EMS, with
the ECB pursuing price stability in northern Europe, and central banks in
southern Europe having to follow it, just as they must mimic the Bundesbank
now.
The compromise struck at Maastricht - between the French demand for
automaticity and the German demand for limited eligibility - is inconsistent
with the rationale for Emu.
A strong case can be made for reducing inflation rates and cutting budget
deficits before moving on to Emu. Concerns about the impact on the world
economy are greatly exaggerated. Those who have them, moreover, should ask
themselves what they would recommend to Italy or Greece, with or without
Emu.
Nevertheless, countries having high debt levels, such as Belgium, Ireland,
and Italy, cannot be expected to reduce them sharply in the few years
remaining before the EC must decide which countries can participate in Emu;
it may indeed be difficult for them to show that their debt levels are
falling 'sufficiently' and approaching the arbitrary target level at a
'satisfactory' pace without depriving these terms of any meaning.
Europe also needs a coherent fiscal policy. The rules adopted at Maastricht
are aimed exclusively at protecting the ECB from the political and market
pressures resulting from large national deficits and debts. They cannot be
expected to produce an appropriate fiscal stance for Europe - an objective
that was emphasised by the Delors report but ignored at Maastricht.
Other matters give rise to concern - the narrow scope for ECB involvement in
prudential supervision, the ambiguous division of responsibility for
exchange-rate policy, and the operational inefficiencies likely to arise
from the requirement that the national central banks should be used whenever
'possible and appropriate' to conduct the open-market and credit operations
of the ECB. These were concessions to jurisdictional jealousies - to
national governments in the first two cases and to national central banks in
the third. But that explains them. It does not justify them.
These defects can be corrected, however, after the treaty is ratified.
Little time is left for the architects of Emu to explain that Europe can
live more comfortably with Emu than with the EMS.
The author is professor of economics and international finance at Princeton
University.
