FT  08 JAN 92 / Survey of Kenya: A lapsed African role model - A new era
dawns in Kenya with the re-introduction of multi-party politics, writes
Michael Holman. Whoever wins the forthcoming general election will have to
take tough economic measures under the watchful eye of donors who have
linked aid to good government
THESE ARE momentous times for Kenya as it embarks on the difficult path to
democracy.
Moving from one-party rule to multi-party government is difficult enough in
Africa, where tribal allegiances still run deep; but making this change
while committed to painful economic reforms is a challenge indeed, as
leaders in Nigeria, Ghana, Zambia and elsewhere will testify.
With marked reluctance, President Daniel arap Moi last month joined this
group, ushering in what Kenyans hope will be a new era for a country whose
reputation has been damaged in recent years.
Bowing to pressure at home, and responding to a blunt demand by external aid
donors for speedier social and economic reform, Mr Moi lifted the ban on
opposition parties to the palpable relief and delight of most Kenyans.
In the next few months the country goes to the polls. It will be a
watershed: for the first time since Kenya became a de facto one-party state
in 1966, the ruling Kenya African National Union (Kanu) will face
competition.
The opposition line-up is still taking shape, but it is clear that the Kanu
government, already weakened by resignations and scandal, has a battle on
its hands. The Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (Ford), a broad-based
coalition is led by Mr Oginga Odinga, the former vice-president. With senior
officials coming from all three main tribes  - Kikuyu, Luo and Luhya - it
poses the main challenge.
Mr Mwai Kibaki, a former vice-president, a prominent Kikuyu, and one of five
ministers and deputy ministers to resign in the past month, leads the other
newly-formed Democratic Party, but may have difficulties disassociating
himself from a Kanu legacy of mixed achievements.
The run-up to the poll could prove a demanding period should feelings run
high. Continuing defections from Kanu would further undermine the authority
of a government evidently unpopular in Nairobi, whatever the support it may
enjoy elsewhere. At the same time, multi-party politics could exacerbate the
tribal and regional tensions that lie not far below the surface.
However, the safety valve should be the general election ahead. 'It is',
says a member of the post-independence generation, savouring the prospect of
political choice for the first time, 'a fresh start, a chance to make up for
mistakes made since independence.'
Few Kenyans want to jeopardise this opportunity to restore their country's
status as a rare African success story. Kenya can boast that for nearly 25
years real growth in gross domestic product outpaced an annual population
increase of nearly 4 per cent.
However, during the 1980s doubts began to set in about Kenya's economic
management, coupled with concern about a human rights record which, while
better than much of Africa, was falling short of what donors expected from a
leading recipient of their aid.
Although western assistance to Kenya was growing - the ratio of grants to
GDP rose from 1 per cent in 1986 to more than 3 per cent in 1990 - the gap
between government's policy promises and implementation widened. An economic
adjustment plan introduced in 1986 with the backing of the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) frequently failed to meet performance
targets in important areas.
Tariff reforms, restructuring of the financial sector, export incentives,
and a competitive rate of exchange have won approval. But a growing fiscal
deficit, over-expansion of money supply and poor progress with the reform of
inefficient parastatals and a bloated government bureaucracy, overshadowed
these achievements.
Corruption, a problem since independence in 1963, became endemic, with
kickbacks and inflated contracts undermining aid programmes and deterring
foreign investors. Kanu became increasingly intolerant of outside criticism,
while losing credibility with many of its own supporters through blatant
rigging of party and parliamentary elections.
As power and wealth accumulated in the hands of a presidential clique, human
rights abuses multiplied. They ranged from spurious charges of sedition as a
way of crushing legitimate dissent, and restrictions on press freedom, to
torture, and detention of leading critics. The nadir was reached in early
1990 with the murder of Mr Robert Ouko, the popular former foreign minister.
The public inquiry that followed implicated senior government officials,
apparently determined to conceal a corruption scandal. Leading suspects
remain at large, gravely undermining the government's reputation.
Frustrated and angry, and armed with the comparatively recent development
strategy which links aid to political and economic reform in recipient
countries, Kenya's donors last November suspended new assistance, giving
government six months to put its house in order.
Barely days later, against a background of growing domestic dissent, Mr Moi
took the important first step. It may prove to be the easiest in what is
likely to be a difficult road ahead.
Whatever party emerges triumphant at the forthcoming general election has to
confront unpleasant economic realities and implement tough measures if it is
to win back the confidence of donors.
These require severe cuts in state spending, pruning of a bloated civil
service, new revenue raising measures including university and outpatient
fees, and faster privatisation of parastatals. All this and more has to take
place against a background of rising unemployment and growing land hunger.
Two-thirds of Kenya is arid or semi-arid. Sub-division of smallholdings is
approaching its limit, and more and more school leavers look to the towns
for work.
Though government has made headway in efforts to reduce the population
growth rate, the economy needs to create 400,000 jobs a year for a
population that will double in 17 years.
How much the electorate will blame Mr Moi for the state of the economy -
still in better shape than almost any other in Africa - remains to be seen.
Government officials argue that the origins of some of Kenya's economic
problems predate Mr Moi, who succeeded the late Jomo Kenyatta in 1978. But
the fact that many of those long-identified problems have yet to be tackled
suggests that the 1980's was a decade of lost opportunities.
As pertinent today as when written are the conclusions of a government
inquiry into government expenditure, appointed 10 years ago.
The government's 'serious financial crisis' had two roots, concluded the
committee, chaired by Mr Philip Ndegwa, a former governor of the central
bank. It acknowledged the adverse impact of external events. But, the report
went on, a 'stronger but less well perceived root (is) the proliferation of
commercial activities by government, which has diverted scarce management
talent away from the central functions of government.'
This, said the committee, together with heavily subsidised social and other
services, had led to an 'unmanageable growth' in government expenditure.
Ten years on, and the parastatal sector is costing the government Ksh2.9bn,
or almost 1 per cent of GDP. It is the largest single cause of governments
failure to meet spending targets. 'The new Kenya needs better management, a
crackdown on corruption, constitutional checks on the executive, and the
support of donors,' concluded a leading Kenyan businessman who has served in
government.
If the post-election administration accepts this advice, there is every
chance that Kenya, lapsed role model, could emerge as successful African
test case for democracy, donors and development.
