FT  16 MAY 92 / The rush to beatify an impatient saint: The controversy over
a campaign by the secretive Roman Catholic group Opus Dei to make its
founder a saint
THE arcane process of beatification has become the subject of an unseemly
controversy.
Tomorrow, before an expected crowd of 200,000 pilgrims, who have travelled
from all over the world to St Peter's in Rome, Pope John Paul II will
beatify Msgr Jose Maria Escriva de Balaguer, the founder of the Roman
Catholic movement, Opus Dei.
In so doing the Pope will place his seal of approval on the life and example
of this Spanish priest from Aragon who died in 1975. He will also confirm
the secretive Opus Dei movement as one of the most powerful forces in the
contemporary Catholic Church.
Beatification makes a person a saint and is the final step before
canonisation which guarantees a place in paradise. Canonisation can proceed
quickly or take centuries. But beatification automatically draws a cult of
sanctity.
The cult of sanctity around Escriva has aroused both extreme devotion and
deep suspicion. The crowds of devotees who have come to Rome to venerate his
corpse attest to his popularity. But his beatification has upset many
Catholics, not least among the Jesuit community who mistrust Opus Dei's
conservative bent.
Critics say he is being beatified with undue, even offensive, haste. Corners
have been cut and hostile witnesses ignored by a powerful lobby which fears
Escriva may be viewed differently by another Pope.
Part of the controversy concerns the saint-making process, streamlined by
Pope John Paul II in 1983. This produced the biggest shake-up in the 400
year existence of the Congregation for the Cause of Saints which judges each
case or 'cause'. This Polish Pope believes the modern Church needs fresh
saints to provide new role models for the faithful; and he has done more
than any other pope to create saints from different backgrounds and
different countries.
By 1989 after ten years in office, he had beatified 123 people against a
total of 79 by the previous seven popes this century. At a time of
increasing ecumenicism, this continued belief in the value of beatification
remains one of the greatest divides with the Protestant churches. The
effects of Martin Luther's denunciation of the abuses of the cult of saints
and their relics, which led to the Protestant break with Rome, have not
disappeared.
Equally controversial is the figure of Escriva. Critics say he was too
ambitious, too irascible and too involved with Franco's regime to attain the
'heroic virtues' of a saint. This scarcely squares with the image projected
by his promoters: a combination of spirituality, charity and temperance with
a deep understanding of the problems of coping with a materialistic society.
And in Opus Dei, Pope John Paul II sees an ideal instrument to combat the
decay of religion in industrial societies. It is well organised, discreet,
conservative and rich. It has the funds to help in the re-evangelisation of
eastern Europe. The movement was accorded the unusual privilege of a
personal prelature in 1982, the Pope giving Opus the right to appoint its
own bishops.
Escriva founded Opus Dei in 1928, conceiving it as a group of lay people and
clergy to spread the Catholic word through their daily working lives. He
expected devotees to win converts by example. His philosophy was enshrined
in a book, El Camino (The Way) published in 1939. It is a curious mix of
unoriginal homely aphorisms, common sense advice alongside puritan zeal and
exhortations to success. The novelty of his message lay in the emphasis on
members continuing in their chosen jobs - indeed this was seen as how they
could best serve Opus Dei.
Devotees are expected to contribute from their salaries and to hand over
inherited money, this has created the wealthiest modern Catholic movement
and led to complaints that Opus Dei retains a sect-like hold on its members
alienating them from their families.
Opus benefitted from close links with the Franco regime. This spread its
influence and popularised the view that its members were an influential
free-masonry. Although education was strictly state controlled, Opus was
allowed to open a private university in Pamplona and establish Spain's
first, and still most prestigious, business school in Barcelona. Escriva was
astute in encouraging Opus to 'fish' for future elites in the universities -
a policy it also followed in Latin America.
Opus technocrats were willing to enter government under Franco, and in a
field restricted by the exclusion of liberals and anyone to the left, they
were the best talent available. At least four Opus members were ministers
under Franco and they were instrumental in beginning the liberalisation of
Spanish economy in the late 1950s.
But Opus' financial history has been chequered. The 1962 liberalisation of
banking laws pushed by Opus member Mariano Navarro Rubio was seen as an
attempt to break the monoply of the big banks to allow Opus financiers a
share of the action. The most spectacular financial collapse during the
Franco era involved Opus connections with the textile group Matesa, which
fraudulently obtained export credits. And though denied, it is suspected
that Opus backed the earlier career of Jose Maria Ruiz-Mateos, the founder
of the Rumasa banking empire which was forcibly taken over with massive
debts in 1982.
Escriva's sponsors glossed over both the political connections of Opus and
the financial dealings of its members. Of more concern to his detractors are
his personality and ideas. Msgr Luigi de Magistris, one of two members of
the eight-man panel of theological consultors in the Congregation for the
Cause of Saints who voted to suspend the Escriva cause, raised serious
doubts about his humility. He referred to Escriva boasting about depriving
himself of water and his vain-glorious mortification.
Escriva claimed a vacant noble title to become the Marquis of Peralta.
Although this was reportedly done to please his mother, it was a curious
move for a future saint. Maria del Carmen Tapia, an Opus 'numerary' from
1948-66, has just written a book given much publicity in Spain. She claims
he insulted her, had no respect for women and when at table always insisted
on being served first.
He was a man obsessed with what others thought of him, she says. Opus,
insists Tapia, is a sect which even in Escriva's life-time practiced a
fanatical cult of its leader. Tapia, who lives in the US, claims she was
used by Opus to smuggle money from Spain to Italy. She was not able to put
these allegations before the beatification process as she was considered a
hostile witness.
Another unheard hostile witness, Father Vladimir Feltzman, who resigned from
Opus in 1985 after 22 years, says Escriva was ambiguous in his attitude
towards Hitler. He also says the founder of Opus was so upset by the
liberalising trend of Vatican Council II that he flirted with the idea of
allying himself with the Greek Orthodox Church in 1967. Opus spokesmen have
denied this.
Escriva also had antagonistic relations with the Jesuits, the most liberal
arm of the Church. He sacked his Jesuit confessor, Father Valentino Sanchez,
in an argument over Opus.
These criticisms might seem the natural response to a movement which has the
Pope's ear and powerful friends in the Vatican. They also stem from a sense
of unease that Opus represents a return to conservatism in the Church,
overturning the liberalising influence of Vatican Council II.
Mons de Magistris summed up the concerns of many saying: 'It seems to me
totally ill-advised to assume the responsibility of assessing his heroic
virtue at a distance of only 14 years.' He said 'several decades' should
pass to let passions cool.
The 18 volumes of the Bibliotheca Sanctorum list more than 10,000 saints.
Many are early martyrs or were created before the process of saint-making
was formalised. In the eighth century when the rules were imprecise, the
vulgarisation of saints was stimulated by an order that every Church altar
to be a tomb containing a saint's relics. Not until the 16th century, after
the Protestant break with Rome, did the Vatican establish full control with
clear rules.
Over the past 1,000 years, two thirds of all persons beatified have been in
orders, and almost the same percentage have been male. A study in the early
1980s of causes pending, showed that 156 of the 268 adult candidates came
from religious orders and that 65 per cent came from Europe's largest
Catholic countries: Italy and Spain. Candidates from the large European
countries stood a better chance because the religious hierarchies there
understood the saint-making process and have the time to pursue a cause.
Only three popes in the past 900 years have become saints: Celestine V (who
renounced the papacy in 1294), Pius V (1566-1572) and Pius X (1903-1914). As
one Vatican observer said: 'We need good popes, not saints, and popes often
create many enemies.'
A 'cause' must begin with sponsors ready to demonstrate their candidate has
a specific or universal message - or that their lives lives represented a
relevant example to the faithful. Over 6,000 letters backed Escriva's
candidature, including recommendations from 69 cardinals and 241
archbishops.
The 1983 beatification reforms cut the time sponsors had to wait before
submitting a cause from 50 to five years. The next step is to obtain the
Pope's nihil obstat, or formal approval to proceed. This is perhaps the most
'political' phase, reflecting the prevailing climate for the type of saint
preferred.
The present Pope has been cool towards proceeding with the beatification of
Archbishop Oscar Romero of San Salvador who was murdered by right-wing
gunmen at the altar in 1980 because of the latter's identification with
Liberation Theology. On the other hand, he encouraged the cause of
Maximilian Kolbe, a Polish Franciscan monk, who died in the Auschwitz gas
chambers to save a companion. (Martyrs are meant to die for the faith but
the Pope created a new category of martyr for charity).
The nihil obstat for Escriva was given in 1981, six years after his death.
Once passed this hurdle, sponsors must have the funds to prepare a positio -
a sort of theologian's brief comprising a justification for sainthood,
biography and exposition of virtues.
The sponsors can 'angle' their material, the staffing of the tribunals and
the selection of witnesses who give evidence about the 'servant of God'. For
Escriva the main testimony of over 450 pages came from his personal
confessor and heir, Bishop Alvaro del Portillo. Mons de Magistris in his
judgment of the cause said this testimony should be excluded as too partial.
The Escriva Rome tribunal documents weighed 86 kilos. His complete positio,
one of the largest ever, was delivered to the Congregation for the Cause of
Saints in Rome: within seven years of the nihil obstat.
One innovation under Pope John Paul II has been the elimination of the
Devil's Advocate who probed the weakness of a saint's cause in a
courtroom-style confrontation. The Pope's supporters say this removed a
time-consuming ritualistic process. However, the positio is now less likely
to be opposed.
The candidate's tomb is opened for verification and future veneration of the
corpse. (It does not matter if it has decomposed). A group of medical
experts is called in to verify a miracle performed by, or in the name of,
the candidate. The miracle is seen as a 'divine sign' of the candidate's
choice by God. Martyrs do not require miracles before beatification but they
are essential for canonisation.
Almost all miracles relate to unexplained cures of physical infirmities.
(Escriva is credited with the miraculous cure of a tumour on a Carmelite
nun). Advances in medicine and science make miracles more suspect and
difficult to prove; and the Pope has reduced from two to one the number
necessary. The absence of a miracle can delay causes indefinitely.
The sophistication of science and the greater access to archive material
combined with a scepticism about miracles makes the beatification process
more vulnerable.
In this sense, Escriva could become a test case if details emerges that
reveal his life was less than saintly. Kenneth Woodward, an American
religious journalist and author of a study of beatification Making Saints,
warns that there is 'a very real possibility that archive material will turn
up reflecting negatively on the candidate.' He adds: 'The potential
embarrassment to Escriva, to Opus Dei, to the Congregation, to the Pope and
to the Church is obvious.'
