FT  16 JUL 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Pasta and
promotional sources - Nestle is abandoning conventional ads for a subtler
approach
In every recent recession, jeremiahs have warned that advertising spending
would never regain the levels of the good old days - only to be proved wrong
once economic recovery arrived.
But listening to Peter Brabeck, Nestle's chief marketing strategist and head
of its food products business - source of more than half the Swiss company's
SFr50.5bn (Pounds 19.3bn) sales last year - you begin to wonder whether this
time, the jeremiahs could be right.
Nestle is one of the world's biggest advertising spenders, with a SFr2bn
annual budget. Unlike many US competitors, it has refused to bow to
recession by sacrificing long-term brand support in favour of 'below the
line' activities such as retail price promotions, intended to boost
short-term sales.
Yet Brabeck is deeply sceptical about relying on mass-media advertising as
the main method of influencing consumer behaviour. 'For me it is very clear.
Advertising is out, credible communication with the consumer is in. And
these are two different things,' he says.
In his view, Nestle is increasingly threatened by isolation from the market,
and its brands imprisoned in a 'ghetto' from which advertising provides no
escape. The only way to break out is by finding more effective ways of
forging relationships with consumers and building brand loyalty.
Brabeck's gloomy diagnosis is based on three broad developments. The first
is the growing concentration of the formerly fragmented food retailing trade
into fewer, bigger supermarket chains, many of which actively promote their
own 'private label' products in competition with manufacturers' brands.
This trend, which is particularly pronounced in Europe, has increasingly
placed control over the supply chain in the hands of the retailers and
enabled them to dictate terms even to their biggest suppliers. 'We have been
blocked out from the consumer by the trade,' says Brabeck.
Secondly, the growth of new media such as satellite television is
splintering the mass audience, while consumers are also becoming more
resistant to advertisers' messages.
'There is no mass consumer any more, and people today don't act just because
someone tells them something,' says Brabeck.
'They can look at advertising and say 'this is very interesting, I like it'
or 'I don't like it', but they are mentally switched off. You can treble
advertising spending, but if you can't establish a credible communication
link with consumers, they won't act.'
Third, food manufacturers have sent the wrong signals by basing their
marketing and brand strategies too narrowly on product and process
technologies, such as frozen foods.
'But people today do not think in terms of frozen foods, they think in terms
of concepts like Lean Cuisine, Weight Watchers and Healthy Options,' says
Brabeck.
'Frozen food is not important to them. Twenty years ago, it stood for
technological advance, for freshness, for premium products. Today, at worst,
it means something which is old and stale.'
That is not to dismiss the importance of technology. As Nestle points out,
regular updating of the Nescafe formula has helped keep it the world's
best-selling instant coffee and the company's most profitable product.
However, consumers are not interested in how food is processed, but chiefly
in taste, aroma, texture and convenience.
That message, Brabeck concedes, is only gradually being absorbed by Nestle,
where attitudes remain heavily influenced by the company's traditional
preoccupation with product management and its faith in technology as a prime
source of competitive advantage.
In such a large and decentralised company, change cannot simply be imposed
from the centre. To speed things up, Brabeck plans to use Buitoni, the
Italian pasta maker acquired by Nestle in 1988, as a testbed for marketing
innovations.
Buitoni was chosen because it was unambiguously not a 'technological' brand,
he says.
Rather, the name of the game is creating instant heritage. At Brabeck's
suggestion, Nestle has bought the Buitoni family villa in Tuscany, which
will serve both as the Italian company's development centre and as the
central theme of its future brand image.
Buitoni's packaging is being re-designed to carry a 'seal of quality',
featuring a painting of the villa. Once the villa is inaugurated in October,
Nestle will invite consumers to enter competitions, for which the prizes
will be a week's cooking course there and a chance to participate in
Buitoni's product development.
Brabeck is also creating a Buitoni 'club' with its own magazine, which will
carry features about Italian wine, food and holidays. 'If I communicate with
you about something you are interested in, my products become more part of a
full package. The people I am really talking to are those who are interested
in Italy,' he says.
These efforts to build consumer loyalty will be buttressed with experiments
with distribution channels, independent of the supermarket trade. Nestle has
already developed a prototype vending machine, designed to serve portions of
hot pasta to consumers on the move.
Other innovations will include selling Buitoni products at special shopping
mall boutiques and street market stalls, and promoting the brand with
travelling road shows which will stage performances, designed to appeal
particularly to children.
Further ahead, advances in electronic point-of-sale technology may offer
fresh opportunities to forge closer links with consumers. One would be a
system which would enable purchasers of Nestle products to earn 'points' and
qualify for special offers by punching electronic cards into terminals
installed in shops.
Nestle concedes that all these ideas face difficult hurdles. Setting up
alternatives to supermarket distribution is a costly proposition, and even
if it succeeded, the company would still require the supermarkets'
co-operation to achieve its ambitions.
'We want to make Buitoni a leading worldwide brand,' says Brabeck. 'The
problem is that I don't think the trade is very interested in having a new
brand created. If you look in a supermarket, you find that we are forced to
concentrate more and more on very few brands. We simply have no choice.'
Nonetheless, he remains convinced that in the longer term, advertising
spending should decline sharply in favour of increased emphasis on
point-of-sale promotion and other forms of marketing support.
'Today, the advertising-promotion split at Buitoni is perhaps 80-20,' he
says. 'For me, it should be 50-50.'
