FT  14 AUG 92 / The Property Market: Partnership in the cities - Vanessa
Houlder explains how the developers' role is being reassessed
During the 1980s, much of the responsibility for regeneration of the inner
cities was placed on the shoulders of the property developers. Today,
dissatisfaction with the results of this arrangement, together with the
downturn in the UK economy, have prompted a reassessment of the developers'
role.
There is a move towards greater co-operation between property developers,
central government and local authorities, while a new quango, the Urban
Regeneration Agency, is designed to overcome the shortcomings of both local
government and the private sector.
With the onset of the recession in the past couple of years, which has
claimed a large number of casualties in the property sector, the developers
have largely lost their enthusiasm for inner-city projects. Their central
role in urban regeneration has also come increasingly under fire.
Critics say that billions of pounds have been poured into flagship property
schemes, while public transport and social housing have been neglected. Even
where developments have transformed the appearance and vitality of inner
cities, they have rarely provided substantial numbers of jobs for local
people.
Nevertheless, private sector-led growth is still widely considered to be the
main long-term answer to urban deprivation. But the framework in which the
private sector operates in inner cities is changing, partly as a result of
new government initiatives.
Two announcements made by the Department of Environment over the last month
 -its proposals for the Urban Regeneration Agency and the second round of
the City Challenge scheme - are directly concerned with regeneration.
The Urban Regeneration Agency is designed to bring derelict and under-used
land back into productive use. Its advocates say it will overcome the local
authorities' lack of property expertise and the private sector's aversion to
risk, by researching schemes, reclaiming sites, installing infrastructure
and selling off land in plots.
The URA, which will manage City Grants and Derelict Land Grants and
encompass English Estates, the government's property development arm, is
intended to bring greater cohesion to the country's urban programmes, which
were described as 'a patchwork quilt of complexity and idiosyncrasy' by the
Audit Commission in 1989. Even so, it leaves out the Urban Development
Corporations, City Challenge, the Urban Programme, Task Forces and City
Action teams. Some critics argue that, rather than replacing existing
agencies, it merely adds another bureaucratic layer.
Another widespread criticism is that it is underfunded. Its proposed budget
of Pounds 250m - only one and a half times the budget of the Welsh
Development Agency - is small beer, considering the 150,000 acres of vacant
land in towns and cities.
Critics also attack the URA's lack of an inward investment arm. 'It is no
use producing sites if no one wants them - we must create demand from
end-users,' says Mr Nigel Smith, a partner of Drivers Jonas, the chartered
surveyor.
Yet another reservation is voiced by Mr Christopher Jonas, president of the
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, who believes the URA's remit is
too narrow, as it ignores social infrastructure like housing, schools, shops
and hospitals: 'Promotion of housing should be a priority in inner cities.'
But the narrow definition of the URA is defended by Mr Smith of Drivers
Jonas. 'I see little point in the URA burdening itself with a vast
bureaucracy handing out grants for creches, youth clubs, youth groups, day
centres and the like,' he says. The URA's consultation paper states that it
should work alongside other programmes 'to ensure that communities gained
the maximum benefit from the development it brought about'.
The onus on a government agency to work in partnership with other
participants in urban development is, in some respects, a break with the
past. In the 1970s, the local authorities shouldered the burden of urban
regeneration, to the exclusion of the private sector. For most of the 1980s,
the local authorities were excluded as the private sector took the
initiative.
But, increasingly, they are beginning to work together. Evidence of their
ability to do so is provided by City Challenge, a scheme in which local
authorities compete for extra government cash. Despite many criticisms, City
Challenge's emphasis on a partnership between central government, local
government, the private sector and voluntary groups is widely applauded.
'The methodology is almost more important than the money on offer,' says Mr
Gerald Cary-Elwes, secretary-general of the British Urban Regeneration
Association.
In general, however, the amount of public money on offer for urban
regeneration is critical for maintaining its momentum at a time of
recession. Mr David Taylor, managing director of AMEC Development, one of
the few developers still active in inner cities, says the proportion of
public money needed to make an inner-city scheme viable has increased from
20 per cent of the total to 30-50 per cent of a scheme's total cost.
In addition, prospective property developers could be discouraged by revised
proposals for a Contaminated Land Register, which identifies polluted sites.
The proposed changes have been fiercely criticised by those involved in
inner cities, where contamination is common, because sites cannot be removed
from the register, even when they have been treated.
Even when developers do invest in inner cities, they still have to overcome
the lack of demand for their product, particularly in the office sector.
However, the outlook is not uniformly bleak. This week, for instance,
Cardiff Bay secured a 115,000 sq ft relocation of NCM Credit Insurance. And
even where demand for offices cannot be resuscitated, land costs may be
cheap enough to generate demand for other uses, such as housing and the
expansion of universities.
But few inner cities expect to attract large-scale manufacturing jobs. There
have been some successes: in Newcastle, for example, Twinings has built a
tea factory opposite the Meadowell estate, one of the country's most
turbulent housing estates. But it is generally recognised that the decline
of manufacturing industry in inner cities, which provided most of its
inhabitants' jobs, cannot be reversed.
This mismatch between the skills of those who live in inner cities and the
type of jobs that have been created by urban regeneration policies is at the
root of the inner cities' predicament. A report by the independent Policy
Studies Institute last month suggested that the problem is getting worse,
not better. Over the past 15 years, deprived inner-city areas have seen
teacher-pupil ratios and examination results decline. And, with the
exception of the north-west, it was found that fewer people from deprived
areas than expected were on employment training schemes.
The report said it was too early to judge the success of schemes such as
City Challenge or the Urban Regeneration Agency. However, it concluded that,
'given the record so far, it is difficult to have much confidence in more of
the same or to feel at all hopeful about the future prospects for deprived
urban areas'.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                          RENTAL GROWTH (%)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Retail   Office   Industrial   All Properties
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Year to June 92             -1.5    -12.9         -4.8             -6.6
Quarter to June 92          -0.5     -3.4         -2.2             -2.0
Month of June 92            -0.2     -1.3         -1.0             -0.8
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Investment Property Databank
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
