FT  02 APR 92 / Business Law: Lessons from Brent Walker
The complex restructuring of the Brent Walker leisure group over the last 17
months was the biggest corporate rescue ever undertaken in the UK.
Little more than 18 months go, Brent Walker employed more than 14,000 people
and had an annual turnover of Pounds 1.76bn.
The forces that almost drove Brent Walker into receivership are easy to spot
with hindsight - the 'deal too far' to acquire the William Hill betting
shops, over-exposure to the property sector and the impact of rapidly rising
interest rates on its debt built up to finance acquisitions in good times.
Emergency measures to deal with the inevitable liquidity crunch - raising
Pounds 103m by a bond issue, the use of off-balance-sheet financing
techniques and concentrating business operations on the generation of
short-term cash - side-tracked and exhausted Brent Walker's management. They
had only known good times and the rapid change in the company's fortunes
quickly turned their apprehension into demoralisation.
The problems facing lead bank Standard Chartered and its advisers were
quickly identified. These are, to varying degrees, present in most
restructurings of substantial UK corporations:
the need to tackle public debt with the attendant onerous requirements for
public communication and no certainty that the rescue will ultimately
succeed;
the need to assess the qualities of existing management, with the
consequence that incumbents may have to move aside in favour of a new team
better able to manage a crisis;
the selection of a cohesive steering committee of banks which can assess at
an early stage the full extent of the problems (not always easy where the
patient's record-keeping has not been up to scratch) and determine whether
the subject of the rescue is a suitable case for treatment or whether some
form of insolvency procedure is inevitable. Brent Walker is proof of the
belief common among lenders that a controlled wind-down of unprofitable
businesses outside the insolvency framework is to be preferred to a
receivership or administration where the lenders' direct control would be
curtailed;
the need for a breathing space which will allow for the preparation of a
business plan and during which the patient will almost certainly require
feeding with new money just to maintain the status quo. This is often the
price banks have to pay in order to obtain the security required to put them
at the top of the creditor tree.
All of these issues had to be confronted in Brent Walker, but, in addition,
there were four specific business problems that had to be resolved:
the Pounds 50m due to Grand Metropolitan from Brent Walker arising from the
original purchase of William Hill;
an unwinding of the ill-fated Walker Power joint venture that owned, among
other things, the Trocadero in Piccadilly, London;
Brent Walker's wish to exploit opportunities presented by the regulatory
changes to be introduced in the UK pubs sector. It proposed to enter into a
complicated deal with Allied Breweries for the leasing of 734 pubs to
Pubmaster Limited. The Brent Walker lenders were, therefore, faced with the
unusual problem in a rescue of the patient wishing to develop a core
business while in financial difficulties).
the bond holders who had put up Pounds 103m in 1990.
All this was being handled against a background in which the Bank of England
was playing a less central role than formerly, relying to a much greater
degree on the experience which had been built up among UK clearing bankers
and the greater awareness among bankers in the London market of the need to
follow 'the London Rules'.
The principal novel feature of the Brent Walker refinancing strategy was
that it had to be agreed in stages. With so many interested parties with
entirely separate concerns, it was impossible for Brent Walker to satisfy
them all at the same time.
Standard Chartered's masterstroke was to tackle the problems one at a time.
Everyone was anxious to ensure that no stone was left unturned, no potential
for a negligence action left open. Despite this anxiety, lawyers not usually
attuned to the flexibility needed to enable such a step-by-step approach to
succeed were able to do so on this occasion.
It became vital in the process to limit the areas which had to be returned
to on completion at a later stage. It was essential that only the chief
commercial points were understood to be agreed at any stage, and yet that it
was also understood that the parties had agreed to agree the minor issues
without revisiting major ones.
The process has taken 17 months, while at the same time repairing the
enormous damage of the final battle by Brent Walker for survival in
something like its original form. The company has undergone a Serious Fraud
Office investigation and even managed to implement some of the strategies
for the future, such as the deal with Allied Lyons. This deal is itself a
first for a company still on its back.
The banks led by Standard Chartered finally agreed to waive their previous
requirement that a settlement be reached with Grand Metropolitan prior to
completion of the restructuring. The decision was, in effect, to let
sleeping dogs lie provided that the ultimate downside could be assessed and
contained. This exemplifies another classic lesson in rescues.
One of the last knots was unravelled when Power Corporation acquired the
Walker part of the Trocadero and released Brent Walker from its obligations
to Walker Power.
The Brent Walker Group has at least until March 1994 to jump its next
hurdle, which is the possible refinancing of the William Hill Group.
At the beginning of a rescue, a company's management are exhausted. They
have already fought a battle to preserve the company's business and lost.
The overriding imperative of those involved in a rescue is to put the
company into a position where it can resume operations on a realistic basis.
All else must be subordinated to this purpose. It is the touchstone against
which solutions to every problem must be tested. Any solution which
endangers this paramount requirement must be discharged. Experience of
rescues, large and small, shows that the two most important ingredients of a
rescue are likely to be the agreement of the creditors to hold the ring and
a change at the company's helm.
Chairmen and chief executives will normally insist that they are the ones to
lead the company to better things and it is almost inevitable that, other
things being equal, they will be given that chance. Sadly, the record of
rescues shows that they were usually wrong to have tried. In this case, the
chairman and chief executive voluntarily agreed to relinquish the chair to
Lord Kindersley.
From a legal point of view, the plan which had been agreed to many months
before could not be implemented until this week. But that was never
important. As all discussion inevitably took place under the shadow of the
grim reaper of commercial endeavour it was more important that everyone
understood at the relevant stage what they would eventually be expected to
agree.
Perhaps the last word should be left with Lord Kindersley who concluded his
latest circular letter to the group's shareholders by saying of the
restructuring: 'It would have been a phenomenal achievement at any time, but
it is little short of miraculous against the background of the deepest and
longest recession of post-war history.'
The authors are members of the banking group of City solicitors Theodore
Goddard.
