FT  08 AUG 92 / Bundesbank firm on goals
THE Bundesbank has no immediate plans to raise its Lombard rate as part of
the drive to curb inflation and money supply growth, but remains concerned
about domestic price trends, Mr Helmut Schlesinger, president of the German
central bank, said.
He admitted that the Bundesbank had been taken aback by the criticism of its
decision to raise the discount rate by 0.75 percentage points to 8.75 per
cent last month.
It left the more important Lombard rate unchanged at 9.75 per cent.
Talking to journalists on Thursday night, he said some analysts had raised
unrealistic expectations that the bank might ease monetary policy soon.
But the reaction among foreign governments showed respect for the bank's
determination to damp down inflation and money supply expansion.
M3 has grown at an annualised rate of some 9 per cent, reflecting a rapid
rise in bank lending as investment, much of it subsidised, is stepped up in
east Germany.
At this week's Bundesbank council meeting, interest rates were left
unchanged. There had been mild speculation that the Lombard rate, the
ceiling for money market rates, would be raised. But Mr Schlesinger said the
bank saw 'no reason for rates to rise'.
Mr Schlesinger said the Bundesbank was sticking to its goals of 2 per cent
inflation and a growth range for the M3 monetary measure of between 3.5 per
cent and 5.5 per cent, though neither would be met this year. 'We are not
operating an anti-cyclical policy, but a stabilisation policy with a
longer-term horizon. We have to accept any criticism'.
He said inflation rose at an annualised, seasonally adjusted rate of 4 per
cent over the last six months. The official rate was down to 3.3 per cent in
July from 4.3 per cent in June, but this was because consumer tax rises had
now been in effect for a full year.
He was concerned about wage trends, especially the fact that public sector
wages in east Germany would rise to 80 per cent of levels in the west next
July. In addition, next year's rise in value-added tax from 14 to 15 per
cent could push up inflation again.
