FT  07 DEC 92 / Ian Davidson on Europe: Last chance for Maastricht
In the run-up to this week's European summit at Edinburgh, we are faced with
one absolute certainty, and one high probability. The certainty is that
everything hangs on the Danish problem. The probability is that, by Saturday
night, the Maastricht Treaty of European Union will be dead or dying.
Everything hangs on the Danish problem because, unless it is solved, nothing
else can be. Ratification of the Maastricht treaty is the necessary
condition for the Community to move ahead on all other fronts. Unless there
is an agreement enabling the Danes to reverse their No vote of last June,
there cannot be an agreement on a new multi-annual budget package, there
cannot be an agreement on subsidiarity and transparency, and there cannot be
an agreement on the admission of new members to the Community.
This morning, nobody has the faintest idea whether there will be an
agreement in Edinburgh on the Danish problem, but the omens look poor. The
British government has put forward an ingenious draft, which would give
Denmark various forms of opt-out from the Maastricht treaty, but British
officials do not sound very confident that it will be the basis of a deal.
'If there is an agreement,' said one UK diplomat last week, 'we shall not
get it until Edinburgh, and probably not until late on Saturday evening.'
That means in plain English that the British expect a long struggle which is
likely to drag the summit several hours into overtime.
From a formal point of view, it is a cunning text, because it meets the
Danish request for a document which would be 'legally binding', without
making any formal changes to the treaty. The trouble is in the substance,
however: it may not go as far as the Danes would like, but it goes much too
far for some of the other member states. Indeed, it has already been
denounced by five Christian Democrat governments for voiding the treaty of
much of its substance.
The heart of their objection, is the new and much strengthened Danish
opt-out from economic and monetary union. In the Maastricht treaty, the
Danes already have a protocol which would allow them to decide, at the
appropriate moment, that they did not wish to enter the final stage of Emu,
with full monetary union and a single currency. Under the British draft
proposal, Denmark would take that negative decision right now, without
waiting for 1999 or whenever.
Community lawyers have apparently ruled that this twist is consistent with
Maastricht as it stands. The treaty allows Denmark to notify its partners
that it will not go into stage three of Emu; but since it does not specify
when such a notification should be made, there is no reason why the Danes
should not make it today.
This may satisfy the lawyers; any ordinary person can see immediately that
it is just legal sophistry. It is one thing to concede that, at some future
date, taking one thing with another, in the circumstances of the time, and
politics being what they are, the Danish government and parliament of the
day may not be able to accept a single currency. It is quite different for
the Danish government to reach that decision even before the treaty has been
ratified. This isn't an opt-out, this is a carve-up; in spirit it is a
rewriting of the treaty.
Here we are getting close to the heart of the problem: does Denmark
subscribe to the general objectives of the Maastricht treaty or not? The
central characteristic of the treaty is that it is a compendium of
programmes for future action: Emu, foreign policy and defence, immigration
and justice, and so on. If Denmark can denounce one of the primary
objectives of the treaty even before it comes into force, Maastricht will
look like a meaningless scrap of paper.
Actually, if the truth be told, most of the other member states do not care
too much about Denmark. As a senior diplomat from the Benelux said last
week: 'The problem is not Denmark; the problem is Britain.' If Denmark can
set such a damaging precedent, Britain may stampede through the gap; and
Britain makes a real difference to the political viability of the Community.
Cynics say the Maastricht treaty has in any case been discredited by events.
But they do not have any alternative solutions. Monetary union is a logical
response to a single market with free capital movements and an exchange rate
mechanism. It is obviously very ambitious; but do the cynics believe that
the problem will simply go away; or do they imagine that France, Germany and
the Benelux will instead vote to disband the European Monetary System? If
the Euro-sceptics defeat the Maastricht treaty (and they may), they will not
prevent an inner core of committed countries from seeking alternative routes
to a more integrated Europe.
Throughout its presidency, the British government has done its best to turn
the Community in the direction of an inter-governmental free-trade area. The
attempt has failed - so far. But the Danish protocol looks like the last
throw for the same stakes.
If the British draft for the Danish problem is accepted by the other 10
member states, we shall know that they have virtually consigned the
Maastricht treaty to the waste paper basket. If it is not accepted by the
10, the odds will rise sharply against Danish ratification. In either event,
the situation will start to become clearer, and those who want to go ahead,
will go ahead.
