FT  10 NOV 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Italy appears stuck with
aluminium white elephant - It looks as though taxpayers will to have to
carry on footing the bill for Alumix
THIS MONTH could see some light shed on the uncertain fate of Alumix, the
Italian aluminium producer, part of the Efim state holding company, which
was put into voluntary liquidation in July.
The government has set a mid-November deadline for deciding how to deal with
Efim's wide-ranging operations. While healthier parts of the group, which
has operations ranging from glass to health spas, are likely to be sold off,
the long term future of the aluminium subsidiary is much less clear.
Alumix, which lost L420bn (Pounds 200m) on sales of about L1,200bn last year
and now has debts of some L1,300bn, is by far the most difficult of Efim's
many problems.
Many industrialists question why Italy, lacking reserves of bauxite
(aluminium ore) and highly dependent on imported energy, the biggest cost
factor in aluminium smelting, ever created an aluminium business in the
first place.
The answer is largely political. With the bulk of its smelting activities on
the island of Sardinia, Alumix was designed partly to provide jobs, and
through them, votes. Its plants are further examples of the tendency to
develop large industrial plants in fringe locations on the basis of social
policy rather than market forces.
The fear of losing votes and boosting unemployment explains the willingness
of successive Italian governments to be relatively patient as the problems
of Alumix - and Efim as a whole - steadily mounted. After its liquidation,
Efim was found to have debts of about L17,500bn - double previous estimates.
Alumix scraped together meagre net profits of L4bn and L9bn in 1988 and
1989. But in the past two years, its losses have been growing as a result of
the collapse in aluminium prices and steeply rising electricity charges.
Although many forecasters expect demand for aluminium to increase later this
decade, Alumix's problems look set to worsen in the short term.
On purely economic grounds, many Italians think Alumix should be closed
down. But in its latest decree law on winding up Efim, published last month,
the government appeared to grant the group yet another reprieve. Noting the
social importance of providing labour in the hard-pressed Sardinian economy,
where unemployment is high, the government of Mr Giuliano Amato appeared
willing to sanction yet another restructuring plan in the hope of turning
Alumix round.
Company officials draw attention to the important steps that have already
been taken in slimming down an industry born of the merger between the
former private-sector Alusuisse activities in Italy, based in Porto Marghera
near Venice, and the state-owned Aluminia group in Sardinia.
Production has been concentrated in Sardinia, where about 130,000 tonnes of
Alumix's total 160,000-tonnes-a-year output is now based. According to an
official, the Sardinian works are relatively up to date, while those in
Porto Marghera are much older. Among other achievements claimed by the group
is the creation in November 1991 of a four-division structure covering
smelting, extrusion, lamination and packaging, in an attempt to reduce costs
and improve co-ordination.
There has also been some reduction of the work-force, which by March this
year had fallen to about 6,500 on a group basis from 7,100 at the end of
1991.
However, Alumix claims many of the measures needed to restore its fortunes
depend on the government rather than its management. Redundancy programmes
are linked to government-sponsored early retirement schemes, which rely on
Rome for financial support. And in spite of ministerial agreement to a
L500bn cash boost agreed in 1991, and due to take effect at the end of that
year, the fresh money has never come, the company complains.
But Alumix's biggest grumble - and by far the most controversial aspect of
the business - concerns the price of electricity. At L44 per kilowatt hour,
Alumix complains its energy costs are far above the European average. In
July, the government agreed to slash electricity tariffs for the group's
Sardinian smelters by 40 per cent, bringing the cost down to L24 per KwH.
'That has helped', says Ms Chiara Benelli, a company official 'but it
doesn't cover production at Porto Marghera.'
Surprisingly, Ms Benelli does not expect the price cut to provoke a protest
among competitors in the European Community. 'It's not a subsidy, but just a
reduction of the excessive price rise introduced earlier', she says. Until
two years ago, Alumix was paying L28 per KwH.
The government appears to have already granted Alumix a short-term stay of
execution, although this month may still bring further surprises. Given that
a sale or public flotation of the group is inconceivable in its present
condition, ministers appear willing to provide some resources to help it put
its books straight. In the meantime, some fringe activities may be hived
off.
Alumix says virtually all its operations except the primary smelting
business are now in, or nearing, profits, at least at the operating level.
So conceivably, a subsidiary like its Comital foils and flexible packaging
business, based in Turin, could be sold off separately.
Yet even one-off sales are limited by the strong vertical integration
between many of the group's operations. Laminates, based at Porto Marghera,
are dependent on output from the adjoining smelting works. So for the time
being it looks as though for the Italian taxpayer wil have to carry on
footing the bill for the country's expensive aluminium business.
