FT  18 APR 92 / The party is finally over for campaign workers
NO SOONER has the race for seats at Westminster ended than the race to cut
costs is under way.
After nearly 18 months of extravagant electioneering all three main
political parties are scrambling to get their costs under control.
Mr John Major's 'battle bus' is off the road and everything from mobile
phone reinforcements to the campaign aircraft have been returned to their
owners.
But, above all, the staff reductions have started. Mrs Gillian Shephard, the
new employment secretary, may look in vain for 'glimmers of hope' in the
April and May unemployment figures if trends among political workers are any
guide.
The Labour party is engaged on arguably the severest retrenchment, issuing
redundancy notices to between 90 and 95 staff around the country who were
hired on temporary contracts over the past two years.
Those receiving notices include Mr David Hill, Labour's director of
communications - although in his case the contract is likely to be extended.
The party said: 'We are not proposing to move ahead in three weeks' time
without a director of communications.'
All told, Labour is aiming to reduce numbers to fewer than 200 around the
country from about 300 at the height of the campaign. The cash-strapped
party is expected to run a tight ship in the aftermath of the election,
operating with fewer staff than it had on the books two years ago. On a more
positive note, the party said it had stayed within its election budget and
had grossed more than Pounds 2m from fund-raising activities during the
campaign.
It made a profit from escorting journalists on Mr Neil Kinnock's energetic
campaign tour. Many newspapers, having paid more than Pounds 5,000 for the
privilege of accompanying the Labour leader, will not be surprised by this.
At Conservative Central Office numbers will be whittled down to a core staff
of 150 from 335 during the election campaign, as volunteers depart. Several
longstanding employees will also take advantage of a natural break to move
or return to City firms or lobbying. The focus of activities will switch
from communications to research.
The Liberal Democrats will part company with most of their workers hired on
temporary contracts, although the party will try to ensure that no full-time
employees lose their jobs.
A review of staffing at Westminster and party headquarters is to be
undertaken in the next month.
