FT  08 SEP 92 / Survey of Mobile Communications (8): The party winds down -
Cellular service providers
at least for the time being. Already slimmed down from a figure of 70 in the
late 1980s, further rationalisation of the sector will almost certainly
follow. For the survivors, however, there may be the reward of a mass
market.
For the cellular service provision sector in the mid-1980s, the good times
seemed to roll. Many small radio telephone dealers, such as Frome's Carphone
Group, saw their businesses transformed from local installers of a few
high-priced phones a week to national names with tens of thousands of
subscribers, each contributing to the company's revenues every time they
made a call from their new mobile phones.
But all was not as it seemed. 'As far as I know, none of the service
providers to date have actually made an operating profit,' says Mr Garry
Garrard, mobile communications expert at London-based PA Consulting. 'Up
until now the only people who have made money out of service provision have
been those who have sold their businesses,' he adds.
In the case of the Carphone Group, this was in 1988 when its shareholders,
led by company chairman Mr Graham Thomas, sold out to fixed network operator
Mercury Communications. Some 40 other companies did the same thing.
'The business is now dominated by the big boys,' says Mr Andrew Lockwood,
general manager responsible for cellular radio at BT. According to his
estimate, the top five companies serve over 60 per cent of the UK's 1.3m
cellular subscribers, leaving the other 35 to share just 40 per cent of the
market between them. Sooner or later, he believes, all of the smaller
players will either decide to 'cash in their assets or look for particular
niches', leaving the development of the market to the top five.
The current top five are, in falling order of subscriber base, Hutchison
Service Provision with 170,000 subscribers, BT with about 160,000, Talkland
with 150,000, Vodac with 130,000 and Mercury with 120,000. But even the top
five may not be all that safe, however.
The entrance of powerful new players has been predicted for some time. Many
believe the introduction of the subscriber identification module card with
GSM - and the consequent separation of the sale of the cellular handset from
the sale of the cellular service - will draw credit card companies such as
American Express or Visa into the market.
Others see a growing mass market as likely to attract high street names,
such as Dixons and Comet.
At the same time, the network operators are showing increased interest in
by-passing the service providers and selling directly to their larger
customers.
'The cellular service providers are facing the squeeze from two sides - the
corporate and the consumer market,' says PA Consulting's Mr Garrard. He sees
network operator Cellnet's recent announcement to use Club 24, the in-store
credit card company, to help set up a back-office transaction bureau as an
attempt to bring newcomers, such as high street chains, into the field.
'It allows anyone to become a service provider,' he says. And large
customers, he says, expect to be served directly by network operators. All
that remains for the current service providers is the gap in the middle, he
says, 'and that is getting smaller and smaller'.
BT's Mr Lockwood believes there is 'more than enough room' in the market for
direct sales and service provision. Mr Barry Moxley, managing director of
the market-leader, Hutchison Service Provision, believes his company's
emphasis on quality of service will carry it through.
The only hint of problems ahead comes from the sector's spokesman Mr David
Savage, chairman of cellular service provider Astec. Mr Savage, who is
chairman of the Federation of Communications Service Providers, is concerned
that network operators - who make 80 per cent of their revenues from each
call on their network - will use this money to buy customers.
'I don't have any problem with the network operators selling directly to
users providing there are no cross-subsidies. But I don't think that is the
way it will work out,' he says.
Cellnet's managing director, Mr Stafford Taylor, makes no secret of the fact
that he believes it is time for a change in the cellular service provision
sector.
'I'm very much in favour of service providers,' he says. 'They are an
established route to market, but they are not the only one. If they want to
survive they've got to decide to do things differently to the past. They
need to find ways of finding a much broader appeal to consumers.'
Mr Taylor believes Lifetime, the low user tariff launched by Cellnet in
June, and LowCall, Vodafone's response to the Cellnet announcement give
service providers paths towards the consumer market. Using Cellnet's back
office transaction processing facility could take them yet further, he says,
by cutting overheads on increasingly tight margins.
But whether service providers take up the challenge is up to them, he says.
Mr Taylor argues that direct sale of cellular airtime is inevitable. He
bases his view in part on his experiences as the man who managed the launch
of the IBM personal computer in the UK. 'We've now entered an era of direct
sales from companies such as Dell,' he says. 'I believe there will almost
certainly be some form of direct distribution in the cellular business at
some time in the future.'
Mr Savage agrees change is inevitable. But he does not believe this is
necessarily for the worse. 'We were going to change anyway - whether or not
Cellnet has its own direct team, whether or not Dixons are capable of
selling these things. If you don't change you don't progress.'
But, he says, the consumer market is big enough to handle a variety of
retail paths. 'Only a proportion of it will ultimately be handled by the
likes of Dixons and Comet. There are still umpteen other different ways of
doing business.'
