FT  28 JAN 92 / Jordan keeps a wary eye on the Islamic surge in Algeria
EVENTS in Algeria are being monitored closely in Jordan, which is itself
taking first democratic steps and which also has an influential Islamic
movement vying for power through the ballot box.
There are already strong indications that the Moslem Brotherhood, the
Ikhwan, will dominate the 80-seat parliament after elections in November -
thanks in part to the disarray of its left-wing and pan-Arabist rivals.
For many political analysts in Amman, Algeria offers a salutary warning to
Jordan's political leaders, who will seek to avoid being caught between
allowing the Brotherhood to take over parliament and a disruption to the
fledgling democratic process.
Two years ago, in the last polls, the Brotherhood rose to prominence by
winning a third of the seats in the parliament. It received a substantial
boost from the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) victory in Algeria - the more
so since the military-backed cancellation of Algeria's second round poll is
widely felt to have eroded the credibility of Arab leaders' attempts to
introduce democracy.
Algeria and Jordan cannot be directly compared, however, and some analysts
argue that Amman's system has enough safety valves to prevent outright
confrontation between the Brotherhood and King Hussein.
While the FIS emerged in the 1980s as an alternative movement to the ruling
National Liberation Front in Algeria, for instance, Jordan's King always
allowed the Brotherhood a special status for having supported him during the
1950s against Arab left-wingers and radicals.
Moreover, the Brotherhood's leaders have constantly sought to avoid
confrontation with the state and have opted in the past to use its
privileged status to take influential positions in government institutions.
However, relations between the palace and the Brotherhood have grown
increasingly strained over the past few years as King Hussein has publicly
attacked the movement's efforts to change the country's relatively liberal
lifestyle. The Brotherhood has found itself further alienated from the King
since his reconciliation with former radical opponents and his decision to
enter peace talks with Israel last October.
According to some members of the Brotherhood, the movement's most prominent
leaders are concerned to retain a conciliatory policy towards the King. But
they are coming under pressure from an increasingly militant power base.
In response to events in Algeria, the Brotherhood has found room within
itself for both radical and moderating voices. The movement has attacked the
cancellation of elections in Algeria as 'usurpation of power from
Islamicists', though some officials from the movement have also criticised
FIS for 'confrontational tactics'.
For its part, the palace remains wary about the movement's declared aim of
establishing an Islamic state in Jordan, despite the fact that more radical
members of the Brotherhood criticise its leaders for 'co-option' into the
state.
