FT  03 JUL 92 / Survey of Corporate Finance (3): Bout of painful adjustment
 -US, in the 1980s credit was easy - but things have changed
A FLOOD of equity issues and debt refinancings is transforming corporate
America's balance sheet as the US gradually recovers from the financial
excesses of the 1980s.
This painful adjustment process has meant a sharp drop in the frenetic
takeover and leveraged buy-out activity which characterised the 1980s, and
large increase in corporate bankruptcies.
In the 1980s leverage was fashionable and credit was easy, encouraging many
US corporations to take on more debt than they could comfortably service
when the economy turned down.
The recession of 1991 therefore forced many companies into the protection of
the courts under Chapter 11 of the US bankruptcy code, which gives them a
breathing space while they try to restructure their balance sheets and
substitute new equity for debt. Some 23,989 companies filed for Chapter 11
in 1991, compared to 20,783 in 1990. It was the highest total since 1986.
Although the economy is now staging a modest recovery, and the wave of
bankruptcies seems past its peak, some substantial Chapter 11 filings may
still be to come.
The recession helped burst a speculative property bubble, leaving many of
the nation's largest banks nursing extremely large portfolios of
non-performing commercial real estate loans. That in turn has discouraged
them from making fresh loan commitments, although the resulting so-called
credit crunch appears to have been substantially ameliorated by increased
lending by foreign institutions.
Even relatively healthy companies with substantial debt burdens or operating
results hit by the recession, have needed to issue equity to shore up their
balance sheets or their ratings with the leading credit agencies.
Happily for them, the tail end of the recession produced a bull market in
shares as Wall Street anticipated the rising earnings which an economic
recovery would bring.
The result has been record stock market levels and an ideal climate for new
equity issues. Last year total US equity issues reached a record Dollars
56bn, almost three times the level of 1990, and in the first three months of
this year the total, including preferred stock was Dollars 29bn.
Among the most prominent issues was General Motors' recent Dollars 2.14bn
issue, the largest stock offering ever in the US excluding a controversial
Dollars 2.8bn rights offering to investors by media group Time Warner in
1991.
General Motors, which reported Dollars 4.5bn in net losses in 1991 and had
suffered an erosion of its credit rating, needed the new equity both to
sustain its heavy programme of investment in new models and to bolster the
credit rating.
The Time Warner offer was unusual for the US, where rights issues are rare,
and the company's first proposal ran into a wall of investor objections. Its
sliding subscription price, which depended on shareholder demand, was judged
to be coercive and had to be changed to a more conventional fixed price
offering.
The past year has also seen a rise in company flotations on the stock
markets. The amount of money raised in so-called initial public offerings
totalled Dollars 16.3bn in 1991, compared to just Dollars 4.6bn the year
before and a record Dollars 18.3bn in 1986.
Many of these issues have been of companies which were the subject of
leveraged buy-outs in the 1980s now returning to the public market place and
allowing buy-out investors to cash in their stakes at extremely attractive
price/earnings multiples.
The recession has meant a sharp drop in US interest rates. This has prompted
all companies to reshape their debt portfolios to lower their servicing
costs.
The US Securities Industry Association reckons that 35 per cent of all
corporate debt issued in 1991 was due to companies calling in their
outstanding fixed income obligations, whether bonds or bank loans, and
issuing new debt with lower yields.
The result has been record issuance of corporate bonds, which totalled
Dollars 507bn last year, up 74 per cent on 1990. Much of that was in the
form of asset backed securities, which allow banks and other deposit-taking
institutions to remove liabilities from their balance sheets and more easily
meet regulatory capital requirements. The flood has continued into this
year, helped by the Federal Reserve's cut in interest rates just before last
Christmas.
Asset-backed securities apart, most of the new issues have been of
investment grade quality, although there has been a modest revival of
interest in junk bonds - the high-yielding securities, issued by companies
below investment grade, which provided the fuel for the 1980s takeover
spree. Last year saw Dollars 13bn of junk bonds issued, compared to Dollars
40bn at the 1986 peak, but in the first quarter of this year alone some
Dollars 7bn was sold.
The much diminished market for junk bonds has taken the heat out of the
takeover business, since corporate raiders no longer have the financial
clout to launch hostile bids against vulnerable targets. Recession,
furthermore, has forced companies to concentrate more closely on the
efficient running of their existing businesses, rather than indulge in
empire building.
Takeovers are still being done, but they tend to be agreed rather than
hostile; be within a sector and have a strong industrial logic, rather than
being propelled by financial considerations; tend to involve more equity,
relative to debt, than in the 1980s; and involve mainly US companies, rather
than foreign bidders.
Much of the activity is concentrated in three sectors undergoing
restructuring - defence, which is responding to the cuts in Pentagon
spending; telecommunications, which is consolidating; and banking, which is
involved in a lengthy merger process which will cut the number of
institutions in this overcrowded and inefficient sector.
