FT  16 JUL 92 / Book Review: Harry's human touch
TRUMAN By David McCullough Simon &amp; Schuster, Dollars 30
Publishing magnate Henry Luce once described President Harry Truman as the
reductio ad absurdum of the common man. Fellow snobs among the east coast
establishment shared Luce's disdain for the one-time haberdasher from
Independence, Missouri, dismissing him as a blunderer doomed to remain in
the shadow of his towering predecessor, Franklin D Roosevelt.
Truman never quite silenced the critics. Even his upset victory over Thomas
Dewey in the 1948 presidential election, when he defied the collective
wisdom of the press, Wall Street and many in his own Democratic party,
failed to re-move doubts about his ability and judgment.
The end of the cold war, however, has induced much nostalgia in the US for
the Truman years. The Marshall plan, the Nato alliance, the Berlin airlift
and the Truman doctrine of 'containing' Soviet power are now viewed as
historic achievements. Advisers such as George Marshall, Dean Acheson and
Clark Clifford now merit the status of 'wise men'. Truman himself appears
bold, decisive and far-sighted.
David McCullough's biography, 10 years in writing, is the latest book to
discover hidden virtues in plain-spoken, 'give 'em hell' Harry. The
president is portrayed as a courageous leader willing to take up unpopular
causes: he sent the first civil rights message to Congress, desegregated the
armed forces and led the world in rec-ognising the state of Israel. It was
Truman who ordered the atomic bomb dropped on Japan, who developed the
H-bomb and who fired General Douglas MacArthur, a national hero, for
insubordination in the Korean war, upholding the principle of civilian
control over the military.
McCullough is at his best when describing Truman's Midwest roots, the
Missouri of Mark Twain and Jesse James. A one-time bankrupt, Truman spent
years struggling with debt. His family's financial troubles deprived him of
a full education and forced him back on the farm. It was only after several
disastrous business ventures that Truman concluded his future lay in
politics, signing up with the powerful Pendergast machine which ruled Kansas
City and later sent him, aged 50, to the US Senate. McCullough captures the
man's stubborn confidence in his own ability, but also his sense of awe when
he became president.
The book's chief weakness is that McCullough does not draw out the important
lessons of the Truman years. Under President Truman, the US became a world
power. The decline of Britain no doubt hastened America's assumption of
world leadership; but it was by no means a foregone conclusion that the
American public would support the activist role in foreign policy which they
had earlier spurned. How Truman overcame these difficulties is a model of
presidential leadership in action and a sober commentary on the drift and
inaction in present day Washington.
In 1946-47, when the Soviet Union consolidated its hold over eastern Europe,
Truman was still viewed as a caretaker president. In the November 1946
election, the Republicans captured majorities in the House and Senate,
seemingly promising a stalemate between the executive and legislature. The
political debate turned not on a prospective world leadership role for the
US, but whether the new Congress would roll back the New Deal, slash
military spending and foreign aid, and go back to the isolationism of the
1920s.
A lesser man would have looked at the polls and packed his bags. But Truman
elected to stand for what he thought was right for the country, rather than
what he thought was politically expedient. He fought for foreign aid to
Greece and Turkey in the spring of 1947 and won. Months later, his
administration produced the Marshall plan, which dispersed billions of
dollars to aid the economic recovery in western Europe.
The Marshall plan was based not only on American largesse, but also on a
hard-headed calculation that the recovery of Germany and Japan served vital
US interests. Far from being an example of American imperialism, the
Marshall plan grasped an essential truth: that the strongest alliances are
based not on subordination (pace Moscow's relationship with its east
European satellites) but on common democratic values and economic
interdependence. This was the historic accomplishment of the Truman
administration which underpins American power today, even though some of the
institutions which supported the postwar liberal order such as Nato now
require an overhaul.
Truman's other legacy is that he showed it was possible to be president and
remain a human being. He was the warts 'n' all president who won the
affection of the masses because he never lost touch with them. Today, the
American public craves this authenticity. This year's presidential
candidates, including Ross Perot, the rich man's version of Harry Truman,
are desperately seeking to respond. Each could do a lot worse than read this
book to understand what it takes to be the genuine article.
