FT  07 DEC 92 / Armed police patrol the City
ARMED City of London police are conducting random road checks and the force
has placed cameras on buildings around the City to monitor potential
terrorist activity.
The City force is also calling on businesses to make sure their own external
security cameras are functioning properly. Private security video recordings
have proved to be a vital source of evidence on terrorist movements.
Elsewhere in London, Metropolitan Police set up armed roadblocks at the
weekend in an attempt to detect terrorist movements and reassure the public.
Both London police forces say they are relying on increased public vigilance
in the fight against the IRA's threatened Christmas bombing campaign. The
forces are working together but they have different approaches to the
sensitive issue of armed officers and protection of the public.
City firearms officers carry their weapons openly but their counterparts in
the Met are under orders to keep them out of sight unless they are needed.
In the Met area, vehicles are searched in a 'sterile zone' between the
roadside and a solid line of police vehicles. Pedestrians and traffic are
diverted to the far side of the barricade.
In the City, pedestrians are free to walk past the search operation and
there is no barricade between it and passing traffic.
In activities on Friday and Saturday night, up to 45 armed police, dog
handlers and traffic officers stopped and searched more than 80 vehicles,
mostly vans, at roadblocks in locations around the east end of London, where
police believe an IRA cell is based.
No weapons, explosives or terrorist suspects were found in the operation,
codenamed Rolling Rock, but similar activities are likely in future. The
legal powers to conduct random checks have existed for some time, but have
not been used in London before.
The new tactic was a response to the IRA's recent bombing campaign using
vans packed with large amounts of explosive parked outside buildings or near
road junctions.
Several explosions have been prevented after suspicious vans were noticed
already parked by their targets or while on the move.
The Lord Mayor of London, Mr Francis McWilliams, has written to the prime
minister saying that the 'serious problems' between insurers and the
government over cover for commercial property damaged by terrorists must be
resolved urgently before uninsurability affects foreign investment and
London's commercial property.
The Association of British Insurers, which has recommended its members to
exclude terrorist damage from new commercial policies, said that some
insurers were considering cancelling existing policies on 30 days' notice,
rather than waiting for them to expire.
Monday Interview, Page 32
