FT  04 NOV 92 / Prudential chief urges statutory regulation
SELF-REGULATION of the UK's financial services industry was a failed
experiment, Mr Mick Newmarch, chairman of Prudential Corporation, Britain's
largest life insurer, said last night. He said it should be scrapped and
replaced with statutory regulation.
'The Financial Services Act is an unsatisfactory basis for the adequate
protection of savers,' Mr Newmarch said in a lecture at the Staple Inn
Actuarial Society.
'The implementation of the act was bold and well intentioned but the
government should now acknowledge that the experiment has failed and begin
to organise investor protection on a fully statutory basis under direct
government control.'
He also called on his own industry, life insurance, to face up to valid
criticism of its sales practices launched by consumer groups, the Office of
Fair Trading and the press.
If the OFT cannot be persuaded to endorse current practices 'we must take on
board the message that our products and our methods of presenting them have
not kept pace with the changing expectations of the public'.
After Mr Newmarch's speech, the audience of about 300 life insurance and
pensions practitioners expressed near-unanimous support for his proposals
through a show of hands.
His remarks come as the Securities and Investments Board, chief watchdog for
the self-regulatory system, prepares a review for the Treasury about its
role. Mr Andrew Large, SIB chairman, has said he favours more statutory
regulation.
Mr Newmarch's remarks are the first call in public by any leading industry
figure to scrap self-regulation and the first public acknowledgement by the
industry of consumer concerns.
Mr Newmarch said he hoped to prompt the industry to begin thinking
constructively about alternative regulatory structures. He also said the
SIB's efforts to reorganise self-regulation for retail financial services -
the toughest issue now before it - faced failure.
The SIB a new framework, the Personal Investments Authority, to subsume two
existing bodies, Fimbra and Lautro, as well as absorb a third of the
membership of another, Imro.
The life insurance industry in general, and Prudential in particular, had
warned it would not join the new PIA unless banks and building societies
joined. So far, those have shown no inclination to join.
Man from the Pru calls for openness, Page 14
Editorial Comment, Page 22
