FT  27 NOV 92 / Survey of FT Traveller, Paris (23): Treasures on display -
Apart from the famous Louvre, Paris is also the home of a series of smaller,
but no less appealing museums
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE had an eye for art, particularly for art owned by other
people, so much so that whenever his armies stormed a city or won a battle,
his soldiers were under orders to ransack the buildings, to prise paintings
off walls and sculptures off plinths, and to send them back to Paris.
This artistic swag was put on show in the Louvre, the old royal palace that
Napoleon commandeered as his own home. The citizens of Paris trooped
patriotically through the galleries peering at the Titians, Leonardos and
Greek busts, the spoils of their emperor's military triumphs. Napoleon's
booty is still on display in the Louvre, dotted around its miles of
galleries. And the Louvre is still the museum in Paris. The latest addition
to the Louvre complex is IM Pei's notorious glass pyramid (see the main
front cover photograph). Whatever one thinks of it aesthetically, the
pyramid is now established as a Paris landmark, and has also made it much,
much easier to navigate around the museum.
Impressive though the Louvre's permanent collections may be, its temporary
exhibitions have been rather lack-lustre in recent years. The Grand Palais,
built for the 1900 Exhibition on the leafiest stretch of the Champs-Elysees,
is now the forum for the big Parisian art shows.
Across the Seine, the Musee d'Orsay is still run along more traditional
lines. The d'Orsay, a 19th century railway station which was immaculately,
if a little antiseptically renovated in the early 1980s under the aegis of
the Italian architect, Gae Aulenti, has now established itself as one of
Paris' most popular museums.
It houses a wonderful collection of works, mainly from the end of the
Workers' Revolution in 1848 to the beginning of the First World War in 1914.
It is best known for its Impressionist paintings, which were moved here from
the old Jeu de Paume. But it also has some stunning Gaugins, Van Goghs,
Cezannes and Seurats as well as one of the world's best collections of Art
Nouveau furniture and a replica of Charles Garnier's Opera.
The chief complaint about the d'Orsay is that the labyrinthine lay-out makes
it virtually impossible to find your way around. But the collection is of
the finest quality and offers an unrivalled 'snapshot' of the watershed in
19th century art, with the shift from the neo-classical formalism of
Delacroix, to the musey Impressionists, and later of the sea-change towards
the early abstraction of Cezanne. The best time to visit is on Thursday
evening, when the galleries are open until 9.45pm.
Beaubourg, or the Pompidou Centre as it is officially called, follows on
from where the Musee d'Orsay stops as the national museum of 20th century
art. The fourth floor is the home of the permanent collection with wonderful
works by Matisse, Picasso, Cezannes.
AMONG the smaller, but no less appealing museums, the Musee d'Art Moderne de
la Ville de Paris has emerged as Beaubourg's chief competitor on the modern
art scene by carving a niche as a centre for younger contemporary artists
and for conceptual art.
The Cite des Sciences et de l'Industrie, is a great place to take children,
who can run around the sculpture park, or gawp at the futuristic silver dome
of the Geode cinema, as well as getting a taste for inter-galactic life from
the rockets and satellites displayed in the Explore exhibition hall.
Meanwhile anyone interested in 20th century art should see the fruits of the
French government's tax deal with the Picasso family. Musee Picasso is an
immaculately restored Marais mansion, which combines some of the very best
examples of Pablo Picasso's own work with his personal art collection of
Braques, Cezannes and Matisses, which merits a gallery of its own.
Paris also has its musees sentimentaux, based in the places where artists or
writers lived and worked - there are a dozen or so dotted around the city.
The most opulent is the Musee Rodin, set in Auguste Rodin's stunning 18th
century hotel.
