FT  12 SEP 92 / Danish opposition offers compromise plan
A FORMULA which could resolve the impasse caused by Denmark's 'No' to the
Maastricht treaty has been put forward by the opposition Danish Social
Democratic party (SDP).
The minority Conservative-Liberal coalition needs the support of the SDP -
the largest party in the eight-party Folketing (parliament) - for any
agreement with the Community.
The SDP's plan would require a special arrangement under which Denmark would
participate in European union with exemptions in important areas such as
monetary policy and defence.
In particular, the SDP blueprint comes out against Danish membership of the
Western European Union, the nine-member European security group conceived as
eventually organising common European defence.
The proposals, to be formally approved at the SDP's quadrennial congress
tomorrow, are likely to be a crucial ingredient of any deal over Denmark's
future relationship with the EC.
Suggesting substantial common ground between government and opposition, Mr
Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, the foreign minister, described the SDP plan as 'very
realistic'. Mr Poul Schluter, the prime minister, said: 'It goes in the
right direction.'
The Danish proposals, which will be worked out in detail later this autumn,
have been made necessary by Denmark's rejection of the treaty in its
referendum on June 2.
Assuming that France approves the treaty on September 20, the EC will need
to work out a deal with Denmark - involving a new referendum next year -
before the treaty can go into effect.
Many of the SDP's reservations concern key areas of future EC policies.
However, provided France votes Yes, the Community is likely to show
considerable willingness to countenance Danish 'opt-outs' to allow a
face-saving Maastricht compromise.
As well as opposition to common European defence - laid down under
Maastricht as a future goal of inter-governmental co-operation - the SDP
document reaffirms Denmark's refusal to commit itself to a common European
currency.
During treaty negotiations, Denmark already reserved its position on
economic and monetary union (Emu), by making its participation in the final
phase of Emu conditional on a further referendum.
Among other demands, the SDP favours an assurance from the EC that Denmark
decides its own social welfare policies. It wants clarification of the
'subsidiarity' principle, laying down that decision-making should be made at
the lowest level of government.
It also seeks safeguards against erosion of influence of the small member
states in EC institutions.
Additionally, the SDP also rejects the concept of European citizenship - put
forward in the Maastricht treaty in connection with voting rights in
countries of residence of citizens of other EC members.
However, since Denmark already allows foreigners to vote in its local
elections after three years' residence, this SDP stipulation is unlikely to
represent an important obstacle to Community acceptance.
