FT  23 APR 92 / World Trade News: Keating warns of Pacific bloc if Gatt
fails - Australian leader blames 'indifferent' Europeans as the EC and US
put a positive gloss on their Uruguay Round talks
MR Paul Keating, Australia's prime minister, warned yesterday that a Pacific
trading group might emerge to counter European and North American blocs if
Gatt's Uruguay Round trade talks fail.
Speaking on the second day of his official visit to Indonesia, Mr Keating
blamed the 'indifferent progress' of trade negotiations on 'a lack of
determination on the part of the Europeans to make the Gatt round succeed'.
He characterised the EC as 'very much a United States of Europe'. In
response to the EC and the development of the North American Free Trade Area
(Nafta) grouping the US, Canada and Mexico, a third trade area in the
Pacific might emerge, he warned.
A Pacific trade bloc would not be in the interests of Australia, Mr Keating
said. To prevent its occurrence, he called on the US in particular to review
its policy towards Asia.
'It is important that the US plays a role beyond its continental boundaries
in trade in Asia,' he said.
'The policy of the United States should be broader, deeper, wider than
simply the strategic policy of the US defence department or the US navy.'
Mr Keating suggested that the Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation group
(Apec) should be used as a forum where 'the two largest economies (the US
and Japan) can resolve some of their differences'.
Japan and the US are important trading partners for Australia, Mr Keating
said, and 'we don't want our (Australia's) loyalties tested between these
two friendly countries'.
Australia is likely to find resistance amongst some Asian countries to
giving Apec an enhanced role, especially if it were to undermine existing
trade groups such as the Association of South East Asian Nations (Asean).
Mr Ali Alatas, Indonesia's foreign minister, said his government saw
'validity' in Mr Keating's proposal but wished 'to mull it over some more
 .and see when the best time would be to initiate this idea'.
The two countries yesterday signed economic and political agreements on
fisheries, double taxation and extradition. They represented evidence of
Australia's determination to look towards Asia for its economic future, Mr
Keating said,
Both countries sought to defuse any 'misunderstanding' over East Timor
following statements by President Suharto the previous night that Indonesia
would not accept foreign interference in its domestic affairs.
Earlier, at a meeting with Mr Alatas, Mr Keating had suggested that East
Timor, the former Portuguese territory annexed by Indonesia in 1976, should
be given special territory status. He also expressed concern at the
prosecution of East Timorese nationalists.
Mr Alatas said yesterday that President Suharto's remarks had been
misinterpreted.
'What he (President Suharto) was trying to say was: 'Don't misunderstand
us.' We do accept criticism, we do accept friendly advice.'
Mr Keating told the Indonesian Foreign Policy Forum yesterday that East
Timor had received 'disproportionate attention'.
