FT  18 JAN 92 / Hong Kong welcomes deal averting US-Sino trade war
US and Hong Kong business groups yesterday applauded a last-minute
settlement averting a trade war with China over its failure to protect
adequately copyrights, patents and trademarks.
In a memorandum of understanding, signed yesterday, China agreed to provide
protection for US inventions and copyrighted works, including computer
software, product patents, sound recordings and trade secrets.
In Hong Kong, the government and business establishment yesterday responded
with a positive, if cautious, welcome. The agreement has averted punitive
trade sanctions against China, under 'Special 301' section of the 1988 US
trade law, which would have harmed the colony's economy.
The broad US-China agreement was won by insistent pressure in six rounds of
negotiations and will be seen as a victory for US use of bilateral
negotiations under the 'Special 301' provision
This success will be noted in Congress, if the Uruguay Round trade talks
produce weaker sectoral protection measures such as those contained in the
text proposed by Mr Arthur Dunkel, the director-general of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt). To accept a Gatt agreement, the US
will probably have to give up what has been a powerful weapon in its 'fair
trade' arsenal.
China promised to extend protection to existing copyrighted works and sound
recordings as well as new works; protect computer programmes as literary
works with a term of protection of 50 years after it joins the Berne
Copyright Convention later this year; and confirm that copyright owners of
computer programmes and sound recordings will have control of the rental of
their works.
However, the resolution of this US-China dispute is seen in Hong Kong as
just the first of three obstacles which US and Chinese negotiators have to
overcome before fears in the colony are allayed.
Mrs Hills is preparing further actions against China, under the 301
umbrella, over trade policy issues; and, Congress gives every indication of
wanting to fight President George Bush on the renewal of China's Most
Favoured Nation (MFN) status. Mr Bush has to renew China's MFN status by
June 3.
The prospect of China losing its MFN status was 'in the realm of the
unthinkable', one senior Hong Kong trade official said yesterday.
