FT  23 JUL 92 / Drug baron in jail shoot-out
MR PABLO Escobar, chief of Colombia's Medelln cocaine cartel, was reported
to be entrenched in a tunnel in his jail yesterday after resisting attempts
to transfer him. The army is battling to take control of the prison.
Mr Escobar and 13 fellow-prisoners used weapons taken from guards to seize
hostages - including Mr Eduardo Mendoza, deputy justice minister, and
Colonel Hernando Navas, director-general of prisons - on Tuesday night.
Troops were sent in and the hostages released after a shoot-out.
Reports say at least two people have been killed and several injured.
President Cesar Gaviria called an all-night national security council
session late on Tuesday and postponed his trip to the Ibero-American summit
in Madrid.
A local radio station reported that Mr Escobar had said on tape he was
prepared to resist to the last, rather than be transferred. His nephew
confirmed that Mr Escobar and others were in a tunnel under the jail with
enough food to survive for some time.
The government decided to transfer Mr Escobar following a series of
kidnappings and deaths of people linked to the Medelln cartel after they had
visited him in jail. The killings were widely attributed to Mr Escobar's
desire to consolidate his power over cartel business.
A government communique said that 'recognised criminals' had been into the
jail and that Mr Escobar continued 'to be involved in committing crimes
directly and personally from inside the jail,' with the complicity of prison
guards.
Mr Escobar's refusal to leave the jail coincides with rumours that competing
trafficking gangs were planning an attack on him. He paid for the luxurious
jail's construction before surrendering to the government just over a year
ago, in exchange for leniency.
AP adds from Bogota: Mr Escobar was the architect of what became the world's
largest cocaine cartel; Forbes magazine once listed him as one of the
world's wealthiest men.
He and his lieutenants have not been tried, as Colombia's justice system
works slowly, but the government has accused Mr Escobar of masterminding
hundreds of terrorist acts, including the 1986 assassination of Mr Guillermo
Cano, publisher of a Colombian newspaper that campaigned against the drugs
trade.
