FT  08 JUN 92 / Slovak nationalist poll win raises fear of split
MR VACLAV Havel, the Czechoslovak president, last night called on Mr Vaclav
Klaus, the federal finance minister, to try to form a new federal government
following Mr Klaus's right-wing Civic Democratic party's strong showing in
the weekend general elections.
But he will face strong opposition from Slovak nationalists led by Mr
Vladimir Meciar, whose Movement for a Democratic Slovakia won a clear
victory in Slovakia, fuelling fears that Czechoslovakia will split.
Mr Meciar instantly withdrew his support for Mr Havel's presidential
candidacy and repeated his pledge to push a Slovak constitution through the
Slovak parliament. This would violate the federal constitution drawn up in
1968 by the communists.
The strong support for nationalist and left-wing parties in Slovakia is
reflected in the federal parliament, where they will be able to form
alliances with Czech opposition groups to block attempts by Mr Klaus to form
a new coalition federal government or push through constitutional reforms.
But the Slovak nationalists are also internally divided into different
factions, with several ready to stop short of an outright break-up of the
federation and anxious to continue economic reforms, albeit at a slower
pace.
The Civic Democratic Party obtained 29.7 per cent of the vote for the Czech
parliament, where Mr Klaus will be able to form a majority coalition,
enabling it to accelerate market reform. He won 34 per cent of the vote for
the federal parliament.
The Czech right-wing parties won a convincing victory in the Czech
parliament over the left-wing opposition led by the Czech communist party
with 14 per cent of the vote, followed by the Social Democrats with 6.5 per
cent.
The extreme right-wing Republican Party, which appeals to the growing
resentment against gipsies, also managed to surpass the 5 per cent threshold
to gain seats in the Czech parliament.
But right wing parties were heavily defeated in Slovakia where 12 per cent
unemployment has fuelled resentment against radical market reforms which
have hit hardest at the republic's heavy engineering and arms industries.
Mr Meciar's movement, a loose coalition of nationalist forces, won 37.3 per
cent of the vote and is expected to form a majority coalition with the
pro-independence Slovak National Party which obtained 7.9 per cent.
In Slovakia the reformed communist party led by Mr Peter Weiss, gained 14.7
per cent while the Social Democrats led by Mr Alexander Dubcek, leader of
the failed 1968 Prague Spring revolt against communist rule, managed to gain
a handful of seats.
The Christian Democrats of Mr Jan Carnogursky, the former Slovak prime
minister, who replaced Mr Meciar earlier last year, gained only 8.9 per cent
while the attempts of Mr Klaus' party to gain a foothold in Slovakia failed
to surmount the 5 per cent barrier.
Czechs and Slovaks reconsider the federation, Page 15
