FT  04 JUL 92 / Arts: Chaos and Casablanca
WHEN A man reaches 50, he has a decade or so to go before the gold watch and
carpet slippers. When a movie reaches 50 and people still watch it, it has
transcended age and found immortality. New generations will pour into
cinemas to gape at that accident of nature called a Hollywood classic.
Why are such films accidents? Because no single mind designed them.
Casablanca is one of those multi-author lucky strikes, like Gone With The
Wind and The Wizard Of Oz and Singin' In The Rain, which pour scorn on the
long-established and increasingly discreditable Auteur Theory. Who could
possibly be the 'author' of a movie with two directors, one quarrelsome and
capricious producer (Selznick) and umpteen indecisions of casting (Gone With
The Wind)? Or of a film with nine screenwriters and four directors (The
Wizard Of Oz)? Or of a screen musical whose two writers and two directors
were told to string a light comedy plot around a bunch of pre-existing,
never-popular-before songs (Singin' In The Rain)?
But the grandaddy of all Hollywood's accidents of nature must be Casablanca,
which returns to our screens next week in a new print specially struck for
the film's 50th anniversary. I once researched Casablanca for a radio
programme. As if I were not in love with it already I fell in love again on
realising the utter mayhem of its genesis. It confirmed my deeply-held creed
 -I was born and shall die an anti-auteurist - that great popular cinema is
too complex to be devised by any one human agent, only by fate working
through divine mischance.
Poring over Warners Studio files in the University Of Southern California, I
learned that Casablanca originated in an unproduced play; that it was at
first considered quite unfilmable; that its makers had a chronic attack of
political nerves as they wondered whether the film should be nice to the
Nazis (pre-Pearl Harbour) or nasty (after); and that it went through agonies
of casting unrivalled since GWTW.
George Raft was first choice for the Bogart role. Ronald Reagan might have
played Paul Henreid's freedom fighter. (Connoisseurs of prophetic lexical
coincidence will note that Casablanca is Spanish for White House). And Ann
Sheridan came within a coat of nail-varnish of playing the heroine, who was
then called 'Lois' and was a low-life broad who had two-timed Rick back in
Paris. When Bergman moved in, the Swedish actress changed the heroine's
name, history and character. As Ilsa and Laszo, she and Henreid could waft
clouds of dignified Euro-provenance into the film while Bogart growled away
as Our Man in the Casbah.
The blessed accidents multiplied. No one knew how the film would end till
the day came to shoot the last scene; though Henreid later claimed he had it
written in his contract that he would keep the girl. None of the
screenwriters still living remembers who wrote any of the famous lines: the
ones about gin joints, hills of beans and rounding up the usual suspects.
Best of all to the collector of Chaos Theory memorabilia is the revelation
that Dooley Wilson's Sam, of 'Play it again' fame, might have been a
Samantha. Ella Fitzgerald was the early favourite for the role.
Even the song 'As Time Goes By', a good decade old even when the film was
made, was under threat. It was a non-favourite with Warners composer Max
Steiner, who wanted to throw it out and compose something fresh himself. He
knew all about royalties.
In short, chaos. But does anyone still believe that popular American films
are made any other way? Years of burrowing into archives have taught me that
intentionalism has no place in Hollywood cinema. Let me illustrate by a
story each from the films I rank alongside Casablanca as the great celluloid
flukes.
In The Wizard Of Oz Buddy Ebsen would have played the Tin Man if he had not
contracted aluminium poisoning and been rushed to hospital after his first
make-up trial. The role went to Jack Haley. Ebsen, whose gangling dance
style was more individual than Haley's, might have radically changed the
balance of the supporting cast. (Ebsen, though, has had the last laugh: he
is still alive today when everyone who had a major speaking or singing role
in The Wizard film is dead.)
In Gone With The Wind the homosexual director George Cukor, who began the
movie, would have completed it if Clark Gable had not had an attack of
homophobia and referred to the director as 'that fairy.' Exit Cukor: enter
Victor Fleming, who came to GWTW after cutting short his work on a previous
project. Which was? The Wizard Of Oz. In Singin' In The Rain the rainswept
title number, guaranteed to give the performer a cold or 'flu, was performed
by a man who had both already. Gene Kelly was running a temperature of 100
as he danced under an acre of black tarpaulin while the soundstage faucets
spurted on and off at the whim of a water-pressure crisis caused by an LA
dry spell.
There is, of course, a difference between the fundamental anarchy of cast
changes, script changes or director changes and the minor shambles of a
great dancer-singer with the 'flu. But the point is the same: chaos is the
natural state in which a multi-collaborative art like cinema, especially
Hollywood cinema, operates. What guides a popular movie project towards
greatness is not the 'single hand on the tiller' beloved by auteur theorists
but the convergence of happy accidents. Even Kelly's 'flu in Singin' In The
Rain is a felix culpa. It surely helped to define and refine that head-cold
voice which was born to warble under a downpour.
As for Casablanca, the guiding hand was not director Michael Curtiz nor
producer Hal Wallis nor any of the conveyor-belt scenarists rolled in and
out of the studio's famous Writers' Block. It was the snowballing effect of
a runaway kismet. Set a promising story on the right slope, make sure that
on its downhill run it bumps over a good selection of stars, script-lines
and subplots, and you have a chance in a thousand that it will become a
popular perennial. No more precise prescription is possible. The rest is up
to the great mogul in the skies.
