FT  03 DEC 92 / Brazilian Senate vote seals Collor's fate
THE Brazilian Senate last night voted by a landslide to approve the
recommendation that suspended President Fernando Collor be definitively
stripped of office for 'crimes of responsibility'.
Although the final judgment of Mr Collor takes place only on December 22,
yesterday's vote made clear that his political career is over for the coming
years. Of the 81-member Senate only three voted in his favour and 67 voted
against, far more than the two-thirds that will be needed to condemn him. A
repeat vote in three weeks will mean Mr Collor is barred from running for
public office for eight years.
Only two senators spoke in Mr Collor's favour. The pleas of Mr Ney Maranhao
that 'we shouldn't condemn this young Brazilian full of enthusiasm' fell on
deaf ears in the three-hour session.
As Brazil's first directly elected president for 30 years, Mr Collor was
suspended from office in September by the lower house of Congress after
allegations by his younger brother had brought to light a multi-million
dollar corruption scandal and provoked nationwide protests.
Mr Collor has never had much support in the Senate and was not expected to
survive its judgment. In a recent interview with the Financial Times he
complained that he was undergoing 'summary execution'.
Mr Collor has contracted Mr Paul Lombard, a French lawyer, to help with his
defence. However, after the weight of last night's vote there is growing
pressure on him to resign and avoid further humiliation. One of his aides
has recently been in Paris where Mr Collor has a luxury apartment,
apparently negotiating a visa. Mr Collor may not, however, be able to avoid
a criminal trial recommended by the Attorney General.
In the run-up to the Senate vote on December 22, President Itamar Franco,
the former vice-president, has opted to put the government on hold, ignoring
the country's desperate need for direction.
Tuesday night's decision to call off negotiations with the International
Monetary Fund over a new accord was the strongest evidence of the confusion
within the two-month-old administration.
Mr Franco has cancelled a planned address to the nation, delayed a new wage
policy and dithered over privatisation.
Last week he cancelled a privatisation by fax and issued a decree putting
himself in control of all prices in order to be able to readjust tariffs
below inflation - in direct contradiction of IMF recommendations.
His rejection of the orthodox economic programme elaborated by Mr Gustavo
Krause and Mr Paulo Haddad, the economy and planning ministers, because it
was 'too Collorite' almost caused the two men to quit last weekend.
Not only has Brazil failed to meet the targets of the Dollars 2.1bn (Pounds
1.4bn) accord signed in January, there seems little prospect of improvement.
Inflation has been more than 22 per cent a month for the last year, the
fiscal deficit is estimated at 7 per cent of GDP, domestic debt is at its
highest since 1989, and tax receipts are down 25 per cent. GDP per capita
has fallen 10 per cent since 1990.
Financial institutions are in chaos. The Federal Savings Bank has a Dollars
21bn hole. Petrobras, the state oil monopoly, is raising costly short-term
money to cover Dollars 5bn owed by the government and other state companies.
Mr Murilo Portugal, the Treasury secretary, says the government's cash
situation is critical.
The lack of policy definition has destroyed hope of a rapid economic
turnaround. Consultants are revising forecasts downwards weekly and the
government research institute IPEA has changed its projections from a 2.5
per cent growth in GDP to a 1.5 per cent fall, despite an expected trade
surplus of Dollars 15.5bn.
This is the backdrop to the economics team's reluctance to re-open talks
with the IMF. The official reason for the delay was the congressional
impasse over a Dollars 12bn fiscal reform project crucial to balance next
year's budget. The project is unlikely to pass before the year's end.
This year had been seen as crucial for economic stabilisation as the next
two years will be taken up with a referendum on the political system, a
constitutional revision and elections for congressmen, senators, governors
and president.
