FT  11 APR 92 / International Company News: Benetton rival carves out its
own identity - Stefanel hopes to step out of the better-known group's shadow
Only 30 kilometres and the fast-flowing Piave river separate Stefanel, the
Italian clothing group familiar for its brightly coloured knitwear, from
Benetton, its bigger and better-known rival.
The two have more than just local roots in common. Together, they have
spearheaded the international rise of Italian casual clothing, which has
found buyers from Brighton to Bogota, thanks to attractive designs and
affordable prices.
The similarities between Stefanel and Benetton stretch to the way they run
their businesses. Both depend on substantial sub-contracting, which has
restrained overheads and allowed a strong element of family control, even
after going public. The two have also emphasised heady sales growth in their
rush to conquer both developed markets and lay down their markers elsewhere.
As the smaller of the two, Stefanel tends to stress its differences with
Benetton, rather than their similarities. Although its product range largely
overlaps that of Benetton, it is still best known for its patterned
knitwear, which tends to be slightly more expensive than its rival's
apparel. Around 70 per cent of Stefanel's buyers are women, a higher
proportion than for Benetton, and it appeals to a slightly older public.
Stefanel also makes clothing under other names - another difference. The
business has developed through takeovers of smaller Italian specialists.
Last year, it even struck a deal with Romeo Gigli, an avant-garde designer,
to produce an up-market ready-to-wear line called G Gigli.
Problems at Stefanel's subsidiaries partly explain why sales and earnings
for 1991, due to be released on April 28, will be virtually static at a time
when Benetton has reported substantial increases. Turnover will be static at
about L435bn (Dollars 355.6m), while net profits will broadly match the
L36.1bn made in 1990.
Mr Giuseppe Stefanel, the group's 40-year old chairman, ascribes the outcome
partly to difficulties at its CFM subsidiary, which cost around L32bn in
lost turnover last year.
Mr Stefanel, who took over the company after his father died in 1987, also
admits that earnings have been squeezed by tougher economic conditions in
many markets, Italy included. Recession has made consumers much more price
conscious.
'If you say we've reached the day of truth, I agree. You can't sell an item
for L100,000 if it's only worth L50,000,' Mr Stefanel says.
Consumers are weighing up prices much more carefully against quality and
fashion content than in the past, he believes. However, he remains
confident: 'Our company has always done best in moments of crisis.'
In spite of claiming that headlong sales growth is not its main aim - unlike
Benetton - Mr Stefanel is also keen to raise turnover. The group expects
sales to climb by around 15 per cent to about L500bn this year, in spite of
shoppers' greater caution. The eventual target is growth of 15 to 20 per
cent a year - admittedly not easy when retail prices 'are virtually
constant,' he admits.
The increase will come through further gradual expansion of the group's
franchised store network, which currently numbers around 1,450 outlets. Much
of the emphasis is being placed outside Italy, which already accounts for
about two thirds of Stefanel's shops and about 70 per cent of sales.
The medium-term term objective is to increase sales to L1,000bn to L1,200bn.
That means roughly doubling the current number of outlets to 3,000. With the
domestic market already well covered, the bulk of the growth will have to
come abroad. He expects domestic sales to fall to about 40 to 50 per cent of
total turnover in the medium term.
In its effort to stand out from Benetton and carve out its own markets,
Stefanel has embarked on ventures in a number of out-of-the-way locations
such as China and eastern Europe. Stefanel boutiques are already operating
in Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Romania, and its first store
opened recently in Beijing.
The new shops have potential, but their contribution to sales has been
limited so far. Mr Stefanel admits the company has a medium-term outlook
towards its ventures. 'We started with enthusiasm. Now we have to take
account of reality,' he says with just a tinge of disappointment.
While new stores in markets of the future may fuel longer-term growth, the
world's established economies are the key to Stefanel's immediate success.
Completing its European coverage takes pride of place.
Stefanel is already well-placed in Germany, where it sells through the
Karstadt department store chain, alongside some independent high street
stores of its own. France and Spain are its two other European targets. The
aim is to increase the number of European stores, including Italy, by half
from around 1,000 at present.
Much the same is planned for Japan, where there are now about 60 Stefanel
outlets. As in Germany, many are 'corners' in big department stores rather
than the independent units. Growth is also planned elsewhere in Asia, where
there are already 150 Stefanel outlets in all. The company's first
Indonesian store is due to open soon.
Surprisingly, the US, where there are just 10 Stefanel shops so far, is low
on the priority list, in spite of a recent move into an eye-catching
location on New York's Fifth Avenue. 'The US doesn't really interest us for
now,' says Mr Stefanel. 'Our first aim is to complete our plans elsewhere,
and then to confront the US. It's the sort of market which you should either
take on properly, or not at all.'
