FT  28 JAN 92 / Newhaven-Dieppe ferry faces closure
A FURTHER cross-Channel ferry service faces the threat of closure following
a decision by the sole operator of the Newhaven-Dieppe service to pull out.
Societe Nouvelle d'Armement Transmanche, a subsidiary of French railways,
said it would shortly stop operating the 144-year-old route because of
unsustainable losses.
Its move comes less than a month after Sealink Stena Line of the UK closed
the 148-year-old Folkestone-Boulogne route to concentrate its resources on
Dover-Calais services.
If no company offers to replace SNAT on the Newhaven-Dieppe route, the
combined effect of the closures will be to leave a gap in cross-Channel
ferry services stretching from Dover-Calais to Portsmouth-Le Havre.
SNAT and Sealink Stena Line sail their vessels under the Sealink banner, a
pooling arrangement under which they market each other's cross-Channel
services.
Newhaven-Dieppe is operated by two French-crewed SNAT vessels, the
now-closed Folkestone-Boulogne service was operated by two British-crewed
Stena vessels, and Dover-Calais - by far the busiest route - is operated by
two vessels from each.
Mr Frederic Avierinos, an executive director of SNAT, said the company's
losses on the Newhaven-Dieppe route had been caused by restrictive working
practices and a long series of industrial disputes.
Hardest hit by the ferry services closure would be the port of Dieppe, which
benefits not only from the employment created by the French-based vessels
but also from the influx of tourists from Britain.
Mr Avierinos said SNAT would keep the route open until it had been
established whether or not another operator was prepared to take it over.
Yesterday three possible candidates - P&amp;O European Ferries, Sally Line and
Brittany Ferries - ruled themselves out.
Sealink Stena Line, however, said it might be interested if the costs of the
service could be reduced.
One uncertainty facing would-be buyers is the planned opening of the Channel
tunnel between Folkestone and Calais next year, which will create a severe
competitive threat to the nearest ferry crossings.
P&amp;O's Dover-Boulogne service is also seen as a candidate for early closure,
and some ferry industry leaders predict that Dover-Calais will be the only
short-sea crossing to survive the tunnel's opening.
