FT  12 DEC 92 / The Edinburgh Summit: Greece blocks Macedonia deal
EUROPEAN Community foreign ministers yesterday failed to agree on the
recognition of the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia, after Greece had
refused to accept such a move as long as the country used the name
Macedonia.
Following what the Greek foreign minister, Mr Mihalis Papaconstantinou,
described as 'very long and very cruel' discussions, the ministers decided
to refer the problem to their heads of government, meeting in Edinburgh for
a two-day European summit which is due to end tonight.
Greece has long argued that, if the former Yugoslav republic wins
international recognition under the name Macedonia, it is likely to provoke
territorial claims by militant nationalists in that ethnically diverse
country on the northern Greek province of the same name.
Compromise proposals by an EC presidency envoy, Mr Robin O'Neill, a former
British ambassador to Belgium, which would incorporate the name Macedonia in
a distinctive designation such as the Macedonian republic of Skopje (its
capital) or the Republic of Northern Macedonia have also been rejected by
the Greeks.
In a letter to Mr John Major, the British prime minister and current EC
president, Mr Constantine Mitsotakis, Greek premier, reminded Community
leaders that, in their Lisbon declaration of June this year, they had
specifically undertaken to recognise the former Yugoslav republic only under
a name which did not include the term Macedonia.
On the basis of that declaration, Mr Mitsotakis added, the Greek government
had undertaken 'a series of positive initiatives' towards Skopje, 'in order
to help lessen tensions and build confidence between us', including a clear
guarantee of its territorial integrity.
'It is crucial, therefore, that we demonstrate that we mean what we say by
reaffirming the Lisbon decision here in Edinburgh,' Mr Mitsotakis said.
Greek opposition to the recognition of Macedonia has caused increasing
irritation among governments of other member countries, particularly since
Greece has been contributing to the economic difficulties of the republic by
holding back oil deliveries for which Macedonia has already paid.
That irritation has been compounded by evidence that Greek companies were
systematically breaking the UN trade embargo against Serbia.
Even if EC leaders find no solution to the problem of recognition, the UK
presidency hopes it can persuade its partners to accept an interim solution
under which Macedonia would become a member of the International Monetary
Fund and be able to benefit from international financial aid.
Nato ready to back UN, Page 5
