FT  04 AUG 92 / UK Company News: David James adds Lep to list of rescues -
Even after its refinancing debt of almost Pounds 330m will remain
FOR Mr David James, Lep Group represents the fifth company rescue that he
has been involved in over the past eight years and it entails the biggest
bank debt.
Even after the refinancing, the freight forwarding and security group will
have bank borrowings of nearly Pounds 330m. This is about 4 1/2 times the
resuscitated figure for shareholders' funds of Pounds 71.2m - an improvement
from the December deficit of Pounds 108.8m.
Mr James said the banks had taken a huge hit in swapping Pounds 180m of debt
for equity. 'They also have to take a chance on the interest (on Pounds
145.7m) being rolled up for three years and carry the consequences of
providing working capital.'
Part of the agreement involves the banks releasing Pounds 20m of asset-sale
proceeds as well as providing a new Pounds 12m working capital facility.
Some compensation will come from their share of the Pounds 10.3m allowed for
fees and expenses.
Mr James's refrain, which will be familiar to shareholders in Davies &amp;
Newman, owner of the Dan-Air airline, is that there is no alternative short
of receivership.
'Nearly 12,000 people would lose their jobs, the pension fund would have
remained severely deprived, about Pounds 40m of trade creditors would have
lost everything, the shareholders would have lost whatever recovery value
there now is.'
What remains is a company with between Pounds 1.3bn and Pounds 1.4bn of
turnover, the bulk of it in freight forwarding. Last year's operating profit
came to Pounds 26.5m (Pounds 55.6m), most of it contributed by National
Guardian Corporation, the US security arm.
With this year's trading no better than last, the amount of debt to be
serviced has been reduced to Pounds 182m. The restructuring, negotiated with
about 25 banks, covers the rest of the Pounds 507.8m net debt. Altogether,
Mr James said, Lep had '42 separate relationships with 34 banks'.
As for the future, the alternatives are that the group slims down to the
freight forwarding and NGC subsidiaries, or that these two parts are spun
off as independent entities. Sorting out the twin core businesses incurred
nearly Pounds 29m of exceptional costs.
The price of withdrawing from non-core businesses was reflected in Pounds
172.1m of extraordinary charges. Apart from Pounds 103.3m of property
write-downs, the interests to be ditched include bearings distribution and a
Tanzanian gold mining project.
In spite of the scale of Lep's debts, Mr James said that the salvage
operations had been more difficult at both Eagle Trust, a mini-conglomerate
where the repercussions have included criminal proceedings, and at Central &amp;
Sheerwood, another industrial holding company.
The recent weakness of Davies &amp; Newman's share price - it closed at 16p last
night compared with the deeply discounted rescue rights price of 50p - shows
how the initial refinancing cannot solve all the problems. Mr James is still
involved with D&amp;N, which has had to warn that this year's pre-tax profits
will not come near the Pounds 20m forecast at the time of the rescue.
Lep will hold an extraordinary general meeting to discuss its restructuring
plan in London on August 24.
