FT  03 JUN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Canada welcomes EC fishing
curb, with reservations
CANADA HAS welcomed the European Community's unexpected decision to suspend
fishing in the north-west Atlantic, but with the strong reservation that
more time is needed to assess whether it will be implemented effectively.
A senior government official in Ottawa said yesterday that the move was 'a
positive first step'. In particular, the Canadians welcomed the move as an
acknowledgement by the EC of the serious conservation problem in the
north-west Atlantic.
According to Canadian surveillance records, community vessels caught less
than 7,000 tonnes of northern cod in the first four months of this year,
about a quarter of their catch a year earlier. The EC's total self-imposed
quota for this year is 27,000 tonnes.
There is concern, however, that the EC decision, which affects only northern
cod and some minor species, could mark the beginning of a strategy of
'pulse' fishing similar to that pursued by the Soviet Union in the late
1960s. This involves concentrating on one species until it is all but
destroyed.
'We're waiting to see if that's what they're going to do,' the Canadian
official said. Ocean perch and southern cod are seen as especially
vulnerable.
The Canadians also question the strength of the community's commitment to
enforce the suspension. Canada spends CDollars 10-15m (Pounds 4.5m-Pounds
6.8m) a year on aircraft surveillance in the north Atlantic (including the
use highly sophisticated radar equipment), and has 1,000 uniformed and armed
fisheries inspectors.
While welcoming the EC decision, Canada sees strong political overtones in
its timing. Some politicians suspect that it is designed to blunt a
resolution on fisheries conservation proposed by Canada and 39 other
countries at this week's Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro.
The Canadian government is also upset that news of the EC decision was
released only to the media in Ottawa, and only in French. Mr John Crosbie,
Canada's fisheries minister, does not speak French, nor do the vast majority
of Canadian fishermen.
The EC warned that its decision might be rescinded in October or November if
stocks recovered sufficiently and emphasised that in its view Canada's
problems were due above all to overfishing within its 200-mile territorial
waters, not to EC activity, which it called insignificant given the scale of
the problem.
The community's decision to declare a moratorium coincided with a two-day
meeting of the North-west Atlantic Fisheries Organisation's scientific
committee in Halifax, Nova Scotia, to discuss the question of fish
conservation in the area.
'We will abide by anything (the committee) suggests,' said a European
Commission official yesterday. 'But we still maintain that even if there is
a very serious problem with the stocks (in the Grand Banks area), that is
not the reason for the problems within Canada's 200-mile limit.'
The commission reacted angrily to suggestions that its moratorium would
simply provide Portuguese, Spanish and German boats with an excuse to fish
out other species in the area. It also dismissed the allegation that it had
only released the statement in French - a common practice in Brussels - to
pique the Canadian fishing authorities.
'We want to show that we are credible as far as respecting our own quota is
concerned,' said the official.
