FT  25 NOV 92 / Arts: It's a funny thing, comedy - Television
It may seem like a fool's game to try to provide an over-view of comedy in a
week when a comedian as renowned as Rowan Atkinson has come such a cropper
attempting something similar. In the first of his six-part BBC2 series Funny
Business Atkinson tried to have things both ways. On the one hand he sought
to send up the idea of solemnly analysing comedy by adopting the role of an
owlish Oxford don giving a lecture on the subject. Nigel Planer has proved
exhaustively that this sort of gag works in small quantities: two minutes,
OK; five minutes, maybe; 55 minutes, disaster.
On the other hand Atkinson seems to have genuine ambitions to teach us all
about comedy. He told us that it was to do with mimicry, parody, things
being unnaturally big, unnaturally fast, spooky, appearing suddenly,
disappearing suddenly, exaggeration, humiliating surprises, causing offence,
spreading confusion, role reversal, embarrassment, and much more. The
absurdity of this catalogue, which merely proved that you could find comedy
in anything, never seems to have occured to him. (No, it was not the silly
don who was so blind, it was Atkinson - or his script writers). Worse,
Atkinson seems to believe that his own physical comedy style bears
comparison with those of Chaplin, Tati, Cleese and even the master, Keaton.
It does not. Though I have smiled occasionally at his silent sketches, far
more often when I see Mr Bean I feel embarrassed for Mr Atkinson.
However, it is not the purpose of this column to puzzle out why we laugh at
the pratfall (the best in Funny Business was from David Jason, leaning
nonchalantly on a non-existent bar in Only Fools And Horses). The question
people are always asking television critics is 'Why aren't there any really
funny series around any more, you know, like Fawlty Towers and Dad's Army
and Steptoe And Son?'
The first answer is that all those series are still with us and are being
re-run either on the new repeats channel, UK Gold (now available to dish
owners free from the Astra satellite, though eventually we shall have to
pay; at midnight on Saturday I bumped into The Young Ones and stayed for
Three Of A Kind, the series which really established Lenny Henry and where
Tracey Ullman last did consistently good work) or they are being repeated on
one of the terrestrial channels, or they are available for a pittance from
your local video shop.
The second answer is that if only we would take off our rose tinted
spectacles and look carefully at today's television we would find that there
is much more comedy than in the days of Harold Steptoe or even Basil Fawlty;
that it is more varied in form, length and style; and that the best of it
does stand comparison with the greats of old. No doubt 20 years from now our
children will be saying to their children 'Of course you don't remember TV
comedy in the good old days. Do you know, there was a time when new series
of Drop The Dead Donkey, Red Dwarf, Waiting For God and The Golden Girls all
began in the same year'.
If we do limit ourselves to sitcoms there are some splendid examples around.
Waiting For God is not only top of the present heap but one of the best
ever: writer Michael Aitkens will brave any subject from euthanasia to
childbirth, forcing himself into superb displays of knife-edge balancing,
avoiding both pathos and bathos; the acting from Stephanie Cole and Graham
Crowden is as good as you will find anywhere in British drama; and you know
you are onto something special when supposedly subordinate characters such
as those played by Daniel Hill and Janine Duvitski are given lines like
these: 'Tom Bower, what was he doing throwing a boomerang from a moving
train?' 'Testing Einstein's theory of relativity'. 'Einstein? Who's he,
another troublemaker?' 'A scientist and philosopher who theorised that the
space-time continuum was probably a curve'. 'Oh that Einstein'. 'Tom, by
throwing an object that curves naturally in flight, was trying to show that
it would return to the same place a second before it left'. 'And what
happened?' 'It broke the window of the buffet car'.
Jennifer Saunders' new BBC2 series, Absolutely Fabulous, about a couple of
1960s freaks working in the fashion business has been rolling-about funny so
far, though it may be showing its limitations after only two episodes. As
the sloshed Sloane, Joanna Lumley steals every scene she appears in. The New
Statesman, just returned to ITV with Rik Mayall as Alan B'Stard, a greedy,
callous, randy, power-mad Tory politician, would never have got near the
public airwaves in the days before Spitting Image, a series which is a prime
example of how television comedy has diversified. Even further over the
edge, dealing almost entirely in the currency of outrage, is the other
Mayall series, Bottom, which he shares with his old partner Adrian Edmondson
 -the second batch was a huge improvement on the first, being on a par with
the best of The Young Ones - and also Channel 4's Australian import, Let The
Blood Run Free, most of which is spoiled by being too studiously
preposterous.
But why limit our consideration to sitcoms, or indeed the other conventional
forms? True, we still have double-acts reminding us of the days of Morecambe
and Wise: Hale and Pace who cause me to cringe as much as cackle, and Smith
And Jones who, not yet 40, are beginning to feel like elder statesmen. But
some of the funniest material on television today occurs in forms which did
not exist in the days of Morecambe and Wise. If there were an award for
television's fastest ad-libber it would be contested between Paul Merton on
BBC2's news quiz Have I Got News For You, which is not only one of the
funniest but surely the most legally risky series currently on air, and
Clive Anderson, whose Channel 4 series has taken the drift in chat shows to
its logical conclusion (Dame Edna showed the way) and turned the guests into
a sequence of - seemingly - unscripted feeds.
Laughter is the most straightforward yardstick and I laugh more in front of
series such as Clive Anderson Talks Back, Whose Line Is It Anyway? and Have
I Got News For You than I do in front of BBC1's 'recession sitcom' Get Back,
ITV's 'house husband' sitcom The Upper Hand or Channel 4's cloying American
sitcom The Cosby Show, which between them do not seem to have a single
original thought about the human relationships upon which they concentrate.
The rate of stomach-heaving guffaws is not the only criterion, anyway. One
of the most heartening aspects of current British television is the
development of the comedy drama series where the humour is often more subtle
and subdued and there is no audience bursting with laughter out of a blue
sky as there is in series such as Last Of The Summer Wine. In ITV's Gone To
Seed, a sort of sequel to Gone To The Dogs, Jim Broadbent, Warren Clarke and
Alison Steadman play cockney triplets who are done out of their inheritance
by the evil Wesley (Peter Cook having rather too much of a good time). Nice
Town on BBC2 dares to take sex as its central theme and, despite immaculate
production values and some delicious tongue-in-cheek humour, has
consequently already taken something of a drubbing from the more tender
flowers among television critics.
Best of all, however, is BBC1's Look At It This Way which is like a cross
between Old Men At The Zoo and Capital City with the quirks and expert
dialogue of the first combined with the post modernist feel (Docklands
locations, fading yuppy attitudes, brittleness, knowingness) of the second.
It is rare to find a drama which paints a truly accurate picture of even
some aspects of the world you live in. To find one which manages so many of
them and is also very funny is quite extraordinary . . . and nothing
unnaturally big or unnaturally fast in sight, let alone a pratfall.
