FT  04 APR 92 / Election 1992: Whiff of success may turn out to be a lemon -
Ralph Atkins and Richard Tomkins on why the Lib Dems may be winning the
campaign but losing the election
DIRTY CUPS and packets of microwave curries litter the Liberal Democrats'
Cowley Street headquarters. Boxes of fruit block landings in the red-brick
Westminster building. Offices overflow. The party's staff and volunteers do
not care.
In a political tale of David versus two Goliaths, the third party's
slingshot has forced Labour and the Tories to wobble. Liberal Democrats are
relieved they have not been squeezed, pleased at the attention they are
receiving - but, understandably, not quite sure what happens next.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, the zest-filled leader is on a high, surviving on a few
hours sleep and the odd cigarette snatched out of camera shot. The swing
against the Conservatives and a trend towards tactical voting will almost
certainly win seats but Labour may also benefit from exceptional swings in
some areas.
Mr Des Wilson, campaign director, has brought professionalism and
pyrotechnics to campaign rallies and photo-opportunities, in contrast to the
Alliance's disastrously disorganised 1987 election campaign.
But there remains the air of an infant party, chuckling at its successes but
unproven in high political drama of the sort that a hung parliament would
create. Tensions among MPs of the last parliament over Scottish devolution
and on the toughness of terms for coalition government are palpable.
Less excitable insiders do not expect the party's share of the vote on
Thursday to be more than a few points higher than its current 19 per cent
rating in the opinion polls. Mr Ashdown openly admits he expects Labour or
the Conservatives to attempt minority government.
Third-party politics has always been, the art of believing the impossible
and, from the campaign's outset, the party has successfully defied political
gravity. Mr Ashdown knew he had to be bold, but the border is fine between
bravado and recklessness.
His pledge of a penny on income tax for education was vulnerable to a
Conservative obsession with opposition parties' fiscal intentions. The
decision to stand aside from the row over Labour's health broadcast, and a
macho leader's tour taking Mr Ashdown to as many places in the time
available, add to the impression of a zany strategy that, perversely,
happens to work.
The education promise scores highly in opinion polls. There is also popular
support for higher environmental taxes and for Scottish and Welsh
devolution.
The small, over-stretched, campaign team, has not been plagued by the
intemperate squabbles of 1987. The irrepressibly enthusiastic Mr Wilson is
teased, not detested.
Mr Bob Worcester, chairman of Mori, says Mr Ashdown, 'is winning the
campaign, if losing the election'. That is the paradox facing the Liberal
Democrats. National campaigning prowess does not automatically translate
into parliamentary representation under the first-past-the-post electoral
system the party is so keen to change - even in the supposed Liberal
Democrat heartlands.
Seats such as Portsmouth South and Hazel Grove, in Manchester, with Tory
majorities of 205 and 1,840 respectively are high on the Liberal Democrats'
target list. While in many other seats the Liberal Democrat will breathe
heavily down the necks of Tories there are few seats where the margin is so
slim.
Bath (held by Mr Chris Patten, Tory chairman), Cheltenham, Richmond and
Barnes, should topple easily but having been targeted for so many general
elections there is a sense of incredibility in tipping Liberal Democrat wins
this time.
Gains are more likely in places such as North Devon, dominated by
agriculture and tourism. Held until 1979 by Mr Jeremy Thorpe, former Liberal
leader, a 4.1 per cent swing would oust the Conservatives.
Other wins will depend on the precision with which the Labour vote is
squeezed in seats where the Alliance was second in 1987, and how local
factors are exploited.
Take Falmouth and Camborne, in Cornwall. Superficially there is no reason to
put it higher than a 'good prospect' but Cowley Street is extremely hopeful
because of the local factors.
Hugely popular for his maverick, pro-Cornish stance, the retiring Tory MP,
Mr David Mudd, (majority 5,039) at the last election, could have been
confident of retaining the seat. His replacement, the Olympic gold
medallist, Sebastian Coe, is an odd choice for a county where a candidate's
Cornishness matters at least as much as political affiliation.
Labour and Liberal Democrats have been galvanised into a fierce fight. The
Liberal Democrats start from a stronger base: they may also capture the
personality vote with their Cornish candidate Mrs Terrye Jones, the
articulate and well-known local council chairman.
Cowley Street knows it has to fight on more than one flank. It is defending
22 constituencies and is prone to Labour's advance since 1987, which could
cost seats such as Inverness, Rochdale near Manchester, Southwark and
Bermondsey in London, and Liverpool Mossley Hill - all of which depend on
the strength of the local candidates.
Net gains in parlia-mentary strength of more than about half a dozen look
improbable.
So, if in the sobering light of Friday morning, neither Mr Kinnock or Mr
Major are able to command a majority, Mr Ashdown's promises of how he would
seek to influence the government may begin to smack of arrogance.
Paradoxically, the tough terms set by Mr Ashdown could prove his saving. He
knows the difficulties he will have in holding Liberal Democrats together in
a coalition. The diversity of local factors which propel its MPs to
Westminster, give a complex look to the parliamentary party.
Pacts with Labour and the Tories are equally dangerous. Mr David Bellotti,
the victor of the 1990 Eastbourne by-election, risks alienating his voters
if he lets Labour in. Mr Simon Hughes, environment spokesman, has publicly
expressed his scepticism over a deal with the Conservatives.
The lesson of the 1977-78 Lib/Lab pact is that internal pressures could
become irreconcilable but a tough position, which ruled out a deal might
keep the party in one piece.
In a hung parliament, minority government with the instability and
indecision of which Mr Ashdown has often warned, would become reality.
Electoral advance would not have won him any influence.
He may have sold the electorate a lemon.
