FT  12 DEC 92 / The Edinburgh Summit: Leaders order action on growth
EUROPEAN Community leaders yesterday told their economics and finance
ministers to prepare a growth initiative for the EC amid growing concern
about rising unemployment in the 12 member states.
British officials reported that a meeting yesterday of finance ministers
attending the Edinburgh summit took a bleak view of the EC's economic
prospects next year. No one was bullish, while most ministers expected a
slowdown and some a drift into recession. Against this grim background, the
ministers were ordered to put forward ways of injecting more growth into the
Community economy today on the second day of the summit.
At the national level the growth initiative will urge governments to divert
public spending to capital projects to encourage investment and boost
business confidence. At the Community level, the ministers discussed EC
Commission proposals to increase lending by the European Investment Bank and
the possible creation of a European Investment Fund to guarantee investments
in infrastructure and small and medium sized businesses.
The commission has proposed a boost of about Ecu5bn (Pounds 4bn) to EIB
lending within the EC and an investment fund with a subscribed capital of
Ecu2bn that could guarantee projects with a value of up to Ecu6bn.
Ministers yesterday expressed concern about Europe's worsening employment
prospects. The Paris-based Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development recently forecast that unemployment in its European member
states (which include non-EC as well as EC nations) would average 10.4 per
cent of the labour force next year against expectations six months ago of
9.3 per cent for next year.
However, the ministers have only limited scope to influence their economies
through fiscal policy. They agreed yesterday there was little room for
manoeuvre on public spending.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, outlined Britain's recent Autumn Statement
strategy of giving priority to capital spending over current expenditure in
departmental spending plans for the coming financial year.
A number of ministers urged policies to restrain public sector wages with
some calling for wage restraint in the private sector.
The growth package will reaffirm the EC member states' commitment to medium
term economic objectives such as low inflation, sustainable growth, open
markets and sound public finances.
The finance ministers yesterday stressed the importance of controlling
inflation, underlining that this was the key to their economies meeting the
strict economic convergence criteria needed for economic and monetary union
under the Maastricht Treaty.
The UK presidency yesterday circulated a 20-page document outlining economic
policy options for next year. The document forecast that growth in the
community would be 1 per cent this year and unlikely to exceed 1 per cent in
1993. It underlined the importance of making markets function more smoothly.
