FT  21 APR 92 / 'Hard-as-nails' finance policy pledged by Waigel
WEST Germany may face four years of belt-tightening to pay the bills for
unification with the east, Mr Theo Waigel, finance minister, warned at the
weekend.
'Increases in national spending must be kept far below rises in economic
output. . . Federal outgoings should rise only 2.5 per cent annually over
the next four years. State and local authority expenditure should not go up
more than 3 per cent,' he said.
The difference between these limits and expected nominal economic growth of
up to 7 per cent a year would cover about 80 per cent of unification costs,
the minister claimed. Latest estimates suggest that west-east transfers this
year, mainly for social and welfare benefits, will reach DM155bn (Pounds
53.2bn).
Promising a 'hard-as-nails finance policy' to back his programme, he said
there would be no increases in spending commitments without cuts elsewhere.
The government would not take on any new spending obligations until 1996.
Although the planned moratorium could mean 'cuts for the citizens', his
scheme was designed to restructure the welfare system, not to destroy it, he
said. In the meantime, he added: 'I will do everything to avoid tax
increases.'
Mr Waigel's declaration, which he claimed had the support of Chancellor
Helmut Kohl, is an attempt to seize the high ground for the relatively
hardline policies of the senior Christian Democrat/Christian Social Union
coalition partners in talks expected soon with the opposition Social
Democrats (SPD).
After shock gains by far-right parties in state elections earlier this
month, Mr Kohl invited SPD leaders to talks after Easter to discuss economic
and constitutional reform.
The minister's proposals are unlikely to have an easy passage. Objections
can even be expected from the liberal Free Democrats, the junior coalition
party, which is stoutly against any interference with welfare benefits. The
SPD, meanwhile, has recognised that the burdens of unification have left the
government with little room for manoeuvre.
Mr Waigel, interviewed in Die Welt, said not everyone yet realised that a
part of western economic growth had to be set aside for the east.
Underlining the urgency of the need for economies, he ruled out federal
funding for projects such as the Olympic games in 2000, for which Berlin is
a leading bidder, and the next world Expo exhibition, planned for Hanover.
He also reinforced Bonn's pleadings for a fairer division of the costs of
supporting reconstruction in the former Soviet Union. It would be a priority
topic at the G7 summit in Munich during July, he said. 'My pockets are sewn
shut.'
