FT  16 APR 92 / Survey of Swindon (12): First stop in the West - The town is
seeking ways to encourage tourism
LIKE MANY towns of comparable size and importance, Swindon has begun to seek
ways of encouraging tourism.
Several schemes are afoot. The local authority, Thamesdown Borough Council,
has joined forces with other Wiltshire councils to implement a Pounds
300,000 Tourism Development Action Programme over three years. It has just
agreed a new corporate image, 'Swindon - First Stop in the West Country',
and is about to fund a hotels' study over the next few months to see what
can be done to improve occupancy.
In practice, Swindon is not doing badly in the tourism market. Recently
published figures, covering spending in 1990, indicated that it accounted
for some Pounds 330m or 18 per cent of tourism in the West Country and
Wiltshire.
Even so, the council believes there is scope for improvement. 'We don't
expect people to come to Swindon for a fortnight's holiday. But we have a
good hotels' infrastructure and we think more people can be persuaded to
stop on their way to and from the West Country and visit attractions in the
vicinity,' explains Mr Keith Duesbury, Swindon economic development manager
with special responsibility for tourism.
The town also recognises that it must have good attractions and that one
tourism asset which it is not yet exploiting to the full is its unique
railway heritage.
There is a museum celebrating Swindon's historic role as the 'Great Western
Railway town', set in the heart of Brunel's railway village, itself a fine
example of model housing from the Victorian era.
The local authority recently started advertising the museum and as a result
it attracts some 40,000 visitors a year. But the council would like to make
far more of its fame as a railway town and create a more extensive
attraction in collaboration with Tarmac, owners and developers of the Brel
railway workshops site. Hitherto, it has not had the financial resources to
do so.
On the other hand, Swindon recently received confirmation of some news of a
development which will make the town, in some ways, heritage capital of
England. The Royal Commission on the Historic Monuments of England (RCHME)
announced in February it had reached agreement with Tarmac to relocate its
headquarters and archive records from London to Churchward, the former
British engineering works site. RCHME will occupy a 19th and 20th century
grade II listed building known as 'The Chief Mechanical Engineer's Office'
and also build alongside an environmentally-controlled archive store
containing a unique record of all the available evidence of England's past,
from pre-history top modern times.
The RCHME was established in 1908. Its central role is to maintain a record
of England's heritage by identifying all 'historic constructions' and
ensuring there is an adequate inventory and record of what survives.
Half its 200 staff are occupied with recording evidence on the ground, the
other half on building up its archive and increasingly sophisticated data
base.
RCHME maintains the National Buildings Record, a National Archaeological
Record and a National Library of Air Photographs. The Air Photography Unit,
headed by Dr Rowan Whimster, has already moved to temporary accommodation in
Swindon as an advanced guard for the main move in 1994.
Aerial photography is still a rich source of archaeological discoveries - an
exceptionally dry summer will make visible as many as 1,000 previously
invisible archaeological remains, ranging from a barrow to a large neolithic
village.
The unit also has responsibility for more than 3m aerial photographs of
England dating back to 1947-48 when the Royal Air Force was given the job of
systematically photographing the whole of Britain from the air for the first
time. The Ordnance Survey subsequently used this survey to produce 6
inches-to-the-mile scale maps of Britain.
Between them, RCHME's records provide a gazetteer of all identified sites of
historic interest in England and an archive of plans, drawings, and
photographs to support them. This unique national collection will be housed
in the new archive store to be built at Churchward. Its design will be, to
say the least, unusual.
Internally, to guard against risks of accidental damage, it will have no
water pipes or electricity cables. It will also be divided into sections
with different temperature and humidity environments to suit the particular
material being stored, and each section will have its own fire break.
Externally, the store presents an architectural challenge. The RCHME is
anxious not to produce a pastiche but a modern building which fits
harmoniously into the surroundings. That said, however it can have no
windows.
How big a tourist attraction might the new RCHME facility become? Visitors
to the RCHME's present archives total fewer than 10,000 a year. The
organisation is also experimenting with a prototype computer imaging system
which could provide users with the ability to tap into the archive data base
from afar. And obviously there is a physical limit to the number of visitors
using an archive store.
On the other hand, Dr Whimster stresses, the organisation does want to
increase public usage. To this end it has just appointed a director of
marketing to develop new services and products and to ensure this unique
English national resource is used more frequently and efficiently.
