FT  30 OCT 92 / Ronson may lose 95% of Heron stake
MR GERALD RONSON, his family trusts, and the Ronson charitable foundations
would see their 100 per cent stake in Heron International, their private
property and trading company, cut to 5 per cent if a restructuring plan put
to banks and bondholders yesterday is approved. There is also a proposal to
have the group's debt and equity listed on a stock exchange.
Although the plan would save the group from liquidation it marks the end for
the Ronson empire founded in 1965 and also sees the resignation from the
board of Mrs Gail Ronson, Mr Ronson's wife, and the other non-executive
directors.
Heron said the group would appoint three non-executives to the board,
including a chairman, who would be acceptable to the creditors. Mr Ronson
will continue as chief executive.
The proposal is designed to repay the group's debts, which total Pounds
1.4bn, and leave a business with potential for growth. Mr Ronson, backed by
a group of investors, will offer to buy the Heron Suzuki importing business
and the Heron service station chain, for cash from Heron.
Banks and bondholders which lent Pounds 775m to the Head Office group are
being offered Pounds 400m in equity, Pounds 300m in senior debt maturing in
March 1997, and Pounds 75m in junior debt expiring in 2000. However, some of
the principal amount will be repaid as property disposals are made.
Banks which lent to other parts of the group will be repaid in cash from
disposal proceeds over periods up to 1997.
Directors and senior managers face pay cuts and there will be redundancies,
saving about Pounds 6m head office costs a year. The group's management
would receive up to 15 per cent of the equity if or when the debts are
repaid.
The banks are being asked to put in Pounds 20m of capital. The group's net
worth has worsened slightly since June and is stated at a negative Pounds
225m as at March 31, the financial year-end.
The proposals, supported by the steering committee of five banks headed by
Barclays, were put to the 82 banks and lead managers and representatives of
the bondholders yesterday.
Some banks indicated a positive response. However, some bondholders wanted
the choice of putting Heron into liquidation.
Ronson's rapid reversal, Page 25
