FT  15 JUL 92 / UK Company News: Future of Amps questioned as BET redeems -
Credit rating is key to success of hybrid issues
BET's decision to redeem its Dollars 500m (Pounds 262m) auction market
preferred stock again raises the question of the role of these US-traded
instruments in companies' financing structures.
The removal will take away about a quarter of the value of issues from UK
borrowers, although the total market is still worth more than Dollars 20bn.
While BET and others, such as English China Clays, Rank Organisation, the
leisure group, and Tarmac, the building materials producer, have decided to
redeem part or all of their Amps, other companies remain enthusiastic about
them. Elf UK, part of Elf Aquitaine, the oil group, which has Dollars 250m
of Amps outstanding is currently issuing another Dollars 250m of stock which
is being privately placed in the US.
BET's concern that it was paying significantly above commercial paper rates
on its Amps, 121 per cent of the levels in recent months, is not a problem
shared by more highly rated credits, although Tarmac admits to paying 150
per cent of commercial paper rates on its remaining Amps. Elf UK, for
example, has a AA rating and achieves far lower interest rates than BET.
Cadbury Schweppes, the confectionery and soft drinks group, is more than
happy with its Amps, which can be sold in Canada as well as the US, adding
to the range of potential buyers. Its last two auctions achieved interest
rates of less than 3 per cent, a little more than 80 per cent of commercial
paper rates.
Redland, the building materials group, also pays rates below commercial
paper rates. Mr Gerald Corbett, finance director, points out that Redland's
latest auction produced an interest rate of 3.2 per cent.
Redland's Amps make up 8 per cent of shareholders' funds while BET's Amps
account for 72 per cent.
The interest rate on Amps is reset regularly, typically every 28 days,
through auctions of the stock. BET's stock is divided into four series with
one reseting each week.
Bidders set the rate of interest. If not enough buyers are found the
previous holders continue to own the stock but are paid a fall-back rate of
interest, relating to the company's credit standing. The Amps market is
driven by credit ratings. When a company's rating falls, the interest rate,
as a percentage of commercial paper rates, rises sharply.
In January this year Ratners, the jewellery retailer, saw its credit rating
cut from BBB to B and the next auction of a tranche of its Amps failed. When
Ratners then stopped paying interest on its Amps, and on other preference
shares, the rate was locked at 250 per cent of commercial paper rates and
has been accruing at that level since.
The Ratners experience has proved, though, that Amps behave like equity
rather than debt when a company is in difficulties, a point which was
debated among issuers, their shareholders and auditors for some time.
Eventually the accounting standards board came down in favour of Amps being
treated as a 'non-equity' portion of shareholders funds.
BET also cited declining investor demand as a reason for redeeming. However,
Mr Corbett said Redland had 'not seen any signs of a lessening of investor
interest'.
Market observers note, however, that the sharp fall in US short-term
interest rates has left the dollar yield curve steeply positive. Investors
are therefore looking to longer term investments to pick up a higher
interest rate rather than the 28-day paper.
One investment banker said: 'The size of your audience is crucial to the
health of your transaction.' Those investors still interested in Amps are
wary of all but the best credit risks.
A new market is opening for companies to tap, though. Fixed rate perpetual
preference shares have been used by banks but in December last year they
were opened to industrial companies by General Motors, the vehicle group,
which found such good demand for an issue it was increased from Dollars 300m
to Dollars 1bn.
More recently, Enterprise Oil was the first non-US industrial company to tap
the market with a Dollars 150m issue which paid interest at 10.5 per cent.
Elf UK is planning to make a portion of its Dollars 250m issue, perhaps
Dollars 100m, a fixed rate preference share.
When UK companies own assets in the US they need to match them with dollar
capital, debt or equity. When one market closes they will look for another.
It may be that dollar-denominated perpetual fixed rate preference shares
will plug that gap.
