FT  31 OCT 92 / Fashion: As naked as the day that he was born . . . -
Clothes often denote one's role in life. Would we be better off without
them? asks Hugh Dickinson, Dean of Salisbury
ACUTE embarrassment. That awful knotting of the muscles of the solar plexus.
The cold sweat. The desperate search for a route of escape, knowing there
can't be one. The rapid rehearsal of multiple excuses; anything to deflect
the pitying, amused, slightly startled glances of fellow guests. It's the
stuff of nightmares, but this is reality. I have come in the wrong clothes]
Yes, I have arrived for the party in a suit and tie when all my fellow
guests are in dinner jackets. But was there? wasn't there? a little note in
the corner of my invitation, 'lounge suit' or 'black tie', or (much the
smartest) 'don't bother to dress'? Hiding behind a large Appeal court judge
who looks me up and down and turns his back on me I swig my dry, oh so dry,
sherry, and take a surreptitious peep at my invitation card. Nothing. Thank
goodness] It's not my fault. I have been tricked, deceived by my hostess's
carelessness. I can explain.
But then the awful truth dawns. These people, all these loud confident
people in their black ties and these loud confident women in their
extraordinary asymmetrical dresses, they know without being told. They are
all instinctively wired for the nuances of dress appropriate at the time,
the place, the hostess. They know by instinct. And now they know I do not
belong. I am not one of them. And they are so kind, so understanding. I wish
I could die.
But next time. Ah, next time I will get it right. I will dig out my 1954
dinner jacket, brush off the verdigris, hunt desperately among the screws
and paperclips for my studs and arrive - yes, once again to find everyone
else in pastel polo-necked sweaters and pale, pale trousers sipping Campari
and orange from long thin glasses.
Getting it wrong. That's what clothes are all about. It must be just about
as old as Adam. (My dear, did you see Cain's fig leaf? At this time of day]
Really I don't know what will become of the fellow. And isn't Abel dishy?)
A huge amount of human time and attention has been devoted to the
demarcation of social groups and to the devising of indicators of status,
wealth or profession. The courts of the Manchu emperors had hundreds of
grades of hierarchy signified by buttons or tassels or rosettes on those
amazing hats or on the sleeves or hems of their grotesque robes.
Men were executed for getting it wrong. It is a process of natural
selection. The chap who doesn't know his tassels isn't the sort of chap to
make an 11th Grade Mandarin. Not reliable. Won't toe the line. Bad genes.
Off with his head.
In any hierarchical institution knowing one's place is essential if the
machinery is to work. Institutions function with roles which have designated
tasks allotted to them, regardless of who may be occupying the role. The
subtle differentiation of uniforms and their trimmings come to represent the
ordering of the institution, so any tampering with even the smallest part of
the signal system threatens to dismantle the whole complex edifice. Hence,
the seemingly ridiculous resistance of the judges to abandon their wigs and
all their 18th century paraphernalia. Take away one curl from a red judge's
topknot and it seems as if British Justice will collapse.
But there is more to it than silly traditionalism. The wig denotes the role.
Beneath the wig hides the man, or, aha] the woman. Inside the role lurks the
human being, the quirky, passionate, vulnerable, prejudiced and all too
human being.
That man (or woman) under the wig had odd ideas, eccentric intuitions and
deep feelings, but not the judge. He and she (but not His or Her Honour the
Judge) has sexual longings, despairs and hatreds. She had a father who
abused her (but not the judge) who happens to look just like this nasty
fellow in the dock. He (but not the judge) had a daughter who left home and
was the spitting image of this girl up before him now. The institution need
the role, the role needs the clothes, the clothes must cover up the human
being.
Uniforms defend the institution against the vagaries of the human heart.
Only those with supreme confidence in the rightness of their own personal
vision can afford to care nothing about clothes. They are usually madmen,
geniuses, or, according to P G Woodhouse, peers of the realm, especially
earls.
In my own calling clothes are curiously important. I am, after all, a 'man
of the cloth'. I may deride the nobles of the splendid courts of eastern
emperors in all their meticulous finery, but sartorial signals of hierarchy
litter the ecclesiastical wardrobe both in and out of church. In church we
all dress up like Welsh wizards, wear funny hats (if we are top persons) and
embroidered duvets.
We keenly eye the exact length of lace on the surplice or cotta worn by the
cleric in front of us in the procession as a sure indicator of it's wearer's
theological position or status. Buttons down the front of cassocks are High,
but not as High as birettas (a hat, not 007's gun); but high collars are
Low. Grey stocks are liberal; a white-knotted tie and soft shirt is Oxbridge
agnostic/radical. Sandals are social-gospel Franciscan; brown suede shoes
socialite HTB charismatic. Fun, isn't it?
The arrival of women on the scene has added delicious complications. They
have to have specially cut shirts and stocks, and the pin-striped assistants
in the ecclesiastical outfitters perspire pinkly as they circle those
glorious but unfamiliar contours with their trembling measuring tapes. But
within those limits the uniform remains austerely unchanged.
The cultural shock of seeing earrings swinging above the cassock and
high-heeled shoes peeping out under the hem has been considerable. But it is
soon dispersed by the recognition of the uniform which designated a familiar
role - the vicar. The uniform is unisex, androgynous.
Here is not just a man, not just a woman, but a minister of the church, yes,
in many places now a priest, whose private feelings, sex and personality are
veiled to give place and power to the role. That accounts for the lubricious
shock-horror which always accompanies the disclosure in the tabloids that
sex still goes on under the cassock. But it equally accounts for the fact
that the ministry of women clergy is readily accepted once it has been
experienced. What it will be like when we see a mass of auburn curls under a
mitre I am not sure.
There are dangers too. Tyrants put their subjects into uniform as prisons do
and give them numbers not names. It is a form of depersonalising control, a
step towards robotics. Wearing a uniform is a sign of submission as well as
membership. Individual choice of bright colours or personal style are, like
laughter, a sign of freedom. Tyrants and authoritarian institutions forbid
them.
Men and women in professional roles in hierarchical institutions can easily
get eaten up by their roles. The judge becomes judicial at home, the
schoolmaster a domestic didact, the priest a professional Good Man whose
implacable saintliness becomes intolerable to his spouse who longs for some
good red-blooded lust or rage to prove the man is still alive inside the
cloth.
As some great civic services I sometimes let my eye wander along the rows of
judges, mayors and generals, the lords lieutenant, sheriffs, bishops and
archdeacons in all their amazing, dotty, ceremonial robes, and think what
fun it would be to invite them all to a party in a sauna. What human truths,
what unexpected delights would come bubbling to the surface in the tranquil
steam? And what fun to write in the corner of each invitation 'Don't bother
to dress.'
Well, why not? After all that's the kind of invitation God has extended to
all of us from Adam onwards.
