FT  08 MAY 92 / America's poor are very different: Michael Prowse on
competing visions of how to transform welfare policies
The rioting in Los Angeles last week was some of the worst in US history.
Pessimists will assume that little has changed since the late 1960s: the
inner cities are as poverty stricken as ever while blacks and other
minorities still endure racial discrimination.
Yet this may convey too bleak a picture. By most indicators, overt racism in
the US has declined in the past quarter-century; the reaction to the
acquittal of the white policemen in the Rodney King case was so violent
partly because the decision seemed so out of line with contemporary
standards of racial justice. At the same time, a relatively prosperous black
middle class has emerged: income and wealth differentials are now much
greater within than between different racial groups.
Residual discrimination remains a fact of life, but the main problem is that
a rising economic tide has not lifted all boats. In real terms, living
standards have risen by about 80 per cent since President Lyndon Johnson
launched his War on Poverty in the early 1960s. Yet the growing affluence of
the suburbs has not spilled over into the inner-city ghettos.
Faced with these realities, many conservatives now argue that the US took a
wrong turning in the 1960s. Although well-intentioned, the wave of publicly
financed programmes for the poor  - collectively known as the 'Great
Society'  - contributed to the problems they were intended to solve by
helping foster 'a culture of dependency'.
Such critics would add that, although the Reagan and Bush administrations
gradually withdrew support from some Great Society programmes, they failed
to throw their weight fully behind alternative reform agendas. The result is
a lack of effective policies for tackling inner-city decay.
There are at least two competing visions of how to reform traditional
welfare policies. The first are a set of Thatcherite doctrines proposed by
the free-market right; until Los Angeles these were only weakly supported by
President George Bush. The most eloquent exponent of such ideas within the
Bush cabinet is Mr Jack Kemp, the secretary for housing and urban
development.
The US, he says, 'must discard the failed bureaucratic model for fighting
poverty and instead empower individuals to control their lives through the
power of property ownership and entrepreneurship'. His agenda for urban
renewal includes items such as:
The creation of 'enterprise zones' by abolishing capital gains taxes for
those who work, save and invest in inner cities;
Measures to allow public housing tenants to manage and ultimately own their
own homes;
The abolition of welfare rules that encourage family break-up supported by
incentives for families that stay together.
Mr Kemp's ideas are attracting considerable support across the political
spectrum. Many mayors like the sound of 'enterprise zones', although few
believe with Mr Kemp that the abolition of capital gains taxes 'would flood
the inner cities with capital'. Relaxations on welfare recipients' ability
to earn and save are also popular, although the high cost of raising these
ceilings may not be appreciated.
The notion that government must do more to help families is the idea that
resonates most powerfully. The very sharp rise in the proportion of families
headed by single women, widely seen as one of the core reasons for
dysfunctional behaviour in the inner cities. The figures for blacks are
particularly striking: more than half of families have female heads
indicating a serious lack of male role models.
While sympathising with much of the Kemp agenda, other conservatives
question the premises behind some of the policies. Free marketeers tend to
assume that barriers are somehow preventing the poor from responding to the
same economic signals as everybody else. Misquoting F Scott Fitzgerald, an
alternative view is that the poor are different, not because they have less
cash but because they have a different psychology. This school  - known as
the 'new paternalists'  - believes that welfare policies must be explicitly
designed to mould behaviour.
Mr Lawrence Mead, a political scientist at New York University and author of
The New Politics of Poverty, just published by Basic Books, is at the
forefront of the movement. He argues that US society already offers big
economic rewards for those willing to compete in labour markets. The main
cause of poverty today, he suggests, is not lack of job opportunities,
childcare or skills but the reluctance of increasing numbers of the poor to
work.
In 1989, fewer than half of the heads of poor families had any earnings at
all, a drop of a fifth in 30 years. At the height of the economic boom of
the 1980s, he says, only 23 per cent of 16-19-year-olds in New York City
were in the labour force  - less than half the national rate.
Mr Mead sees the poor mainly as 'dutiful but defeated'. He believes they
mostly share the same values as the rest of society but are simply less in
control of their lives. There is also a defeatist mentality at work that
'refuses to believe that opportunity exists, even when it does'. Economic
incentives are not enough because the poor lack the competence to take
advantage of them. Mr Mead believes the solution lies in more authoritarian
policies: he supports workfare and other mandatory programmes because they
'get people involved and overcome their pessimism'. Authority thus operates
as 'the midwife, not the antithesis, of freedom'.
The 1988 Family Support Act did introduce elements of workfare. But the new
paternalists want its provisions to be toughened and extended to cover a
bigger fraction of the welfare population.
How do left-leaning liberals respond to the onslaught from conservatives?
They start by emphasising that President Johnson's War on Poverty was hardly
a failure. It reduced the poverty rate from 19 per cent in 1964 to 11 per
cent in 1973. (The rate has since risen to 13.5 per cent.)
The Great Society also made big advances in healthcare, education  -
including the universally praised Head Start programme for pre-schoolers  -
and pensions, where more generous payments have largely eliminated poverty
among the elderly.
Perhaps the most serious criticism is that too much cash was siphoned off by
programmes that primarily benefited the middle classes. Targeted benefits
for the poor, by contrast, have steadily declined. Since the early 1970s,
for example, the real value of Aid for Families with Dependent Children (the
main welfare programme for single mothers) has dropped 27 per cent.
During the Reagan-Bush years federal government has also savagely cut
support for cities, where the deadly cocktail of drugs, crime, broken
families, unemployment and poverty does the greatest harm. According to the
National League of Cities, direct federal aid has declined by more than 60
per cent since 1981.
Many on the left of centre also reject the conservative analysis of the
causes of family breakdown and poverty. The idea that welfare policies have
undermined families, for example, seems, at best, an exaggeration: big
variations in state welfare benefits are not closely linked with marriage
rates or the frequency of teenage pregnancies.
Mr William Julius Wilson, a black sociologist at the University of Chicago,
sees the urban underclass as primarily the product of structural economic
change, reinforced by greater social mobility. The plight of inner cities
reflects:
Global economic forces that have reduced the demand for and wages of US
blue-collar workers. Young unskilled blacks do not form stable families
because they cannot find jobs that will support wives and children or,
indeed, themselves;
Improved race relations which, ironically, have allowed professional blacks
to emulate middle-class whites and migrate out of cities. The communities
left behind lack both financial resources and role models; the vacuum has
been filled by crime and drug dealing.
On this view, the priority ought to be intensive skills training to make the
urban poor more employable.
Mr Ronald Mincy, an economist at the Urban Institute in Washington, shares
the view that 'irreversible economic changes' have put a greater premium on
scarce job skills. But, while not sympathising with the authoritarian
approach of the new paternalists, he puts considerable stress on behavioural
factors. As a black he argues that attitudes within the black community must
change.
He points out that of a list of 100 prominent blacks compiled by Ebony
magazine only five or six had achieved recognition through entrepreneurship.
Other ethnic groups, such as Asians and Koreans, did a great deal to create
employment opportunities for their own people: blacks should do the same.
He also worries that extraordinarily high unemployment rates among young
blacks reflect their contempt for menial jobs (which immigrants are willing
to take) and their less than compliant behaviour. But the refusal to accept
pay rates commensurate with their skill levels is exacting a heavy toll  -
evident in soaring crime and incarceration rates. 'We are willing
collaborators in our own destruction,' he says, adding that this is a
message that only a black could deliver.
On the positive side, many self-help black groups are working to change
attitudes among young blacks. In Oakland, California, for example, Mr Derek
Wilson is project co-ordinator for the Hawk Federation, a manhood
development project serving 60-80 blacks aged seven to 16. The programme
aims to raise 'competence, confidence and consciousness' by instilling moral
values, encouraging pride in African culture, yet also cultivating the
entrepreneurial skills needed for success in the free market.
The most encouraging sign in the US is the plethora of ideas about how
inner-city problems might be tackled  - as well as the apparent success of
some small-scale programmes. The biggest obstacle to progress in recent
years has been White House indifference to the urban underclass. After Los
Angeles, the prospects for a more constructive attitude must surely have
brightened.
