FT  02 JUL 92 / Management: Batman returns with a vengeance - A
multi-million dollar promotion
Batman Returns opened two weeks ago to mixed reviews and the best box office
returns in Hollywood's history. Warner Bros, the Hollywood arm of Time
Warner, may not have been able to control the critics, but the studio has
carefully orchestrated the marketing of the movie and related merchandise in
the hope of producing yet another money-making machine.
The scope for Bat-products seems limitless. There are hundreds of licensed
goods including T-shirts, Batman tortilla chips and cereal, radio-controlled
Batmobiles, talking Batman toothbrushes and, reportedly, a leather Catwoman
chair.
The studio hopes to repeat the money-making performance of the first Batman
film which brought in Dollars 251m in US ticket sales and about Dollars 500m
in related product sales. Merchandise was even more lucrative overseas,
garnering about Dollars 800m in sales compared with a more paltry Dollars
140m box office take.
By all accounts, the phenomenal success of the first Batman movie, which set
box office records in 1989, caught Warner unprepared. The hype started
months before the movie opened and by the time of the first public
screening, Batman T-shirts could be found on the streets of every American
city and fashionable New York teenagers sported hairdos featuring the
Bat-logo. An estimated Dollars 200m worth of merchandise was sold before
opening night.
'We gave a licence to anyone with a bolt of black cloth,' Dan Romanelli,
president of Warner's merchandise arm, is fond of saying when describing how
the company ended up with about 19 T-shirt licensees for the first film.
This time, the Batman merchandising machine kicked into action years in
advance. Master T-shirt licences were granted in 1991 to only two companies
 -Shirt Shed and Signal Apparel. The licences extend for two years beyond
the movie's release. Kenner has a master licence for toys for the second
movie, with exclusive rights to make most of the toys associated with the
sequel, such as Catwoman and the Penguin. Warner will not reveal how much it
reaps from licensing, but studios generally get about 10 per cent of the
gross sales.
Warner also started discussing links with hotels, soft drink manufacturers
and fast food chains well in advance. MacDonald's, Coca-Cola and Choice
Hotels came on board, adding more than Dollars 50m to Warner's coffers and
providing essentially free publicity for the film through their ad
campaigns. Warner is expected to spend about Dollars 20m on its own
advertising.
MacDonald's, whose history of movie tie-ins includes Hook and The Little
Mermaid, has revamped its packaging to fit in with the Batman theme to an
unprecedented degree. There are Batman french fry bags and MacDonald's soft
drink cups come with Bat-disc lids that double as flying discs. 'With the
movie trailers, the toys and the theme parks, it's amazing how well marketed
it is,' said one industry executive. 'Everyone knows about Batman.'
Warner also took a different approach to the movie's publicity this time,
waiting until last month before unleashing the trailers and ads for Batman
Returns. 'There was a definite design to this programme,' said an industry
executive. 'Everything came down the pipe very close to release.'
There is method in Warner's delay. The studio is launching an animated
Batman television cartoon series in September and hopes to keep the movie's
momentum going until then. There will, of course, be more merchandise linked
to the cartoon characters.
With this in mind, Warner has been trying to avoid Batman overkill in an
attempt to keep consumer interest alive through to the important Christmas
retail season. 'Movies have roughly a six-month window of opportunity before
people move on to the next thing,' said one industry source.
Warner may be keeping a tighter rein on Batman marketing, but the studio
still has to contend with the problem of counterfeiters. The studio
estimates that in addition to the 20m licensed T-shirts sold last time,
counterfeiters sold another 10m. This time, Warner has taken a tip from the
credit card industry and issued Batman hologram labels to mark the genuine
Bat-articles.
The company, which filed hundreds of copyright infringement suits for the
first film, has also hired law firms around the country to stamp down on
counterfeiters. In New York, it is employing Dennis Cavanaugh, a former CIA
officer and now a lawyer at Selverne &amp; Flam, to co-ordinate a team of
part-time investigators who prowl the streets for fakes.
In spite of the safeguards, Warner is bound to lose money to counterfeiters.
Nor is there any guarantee that Batman Returns will bring in the same
returns as the first film. Ticket sales, while extremely strong, started to
trail in the second weekend.
Lisbeth Barron, an analyst at SG Warburg in New York, expects Batman Returns
to have US box office sales of about Dollars 195m and another Dollars 125m
abroad. Warner is expected to receive about 53 per cent of the box office
gross. She also expects merchandise sales to be lower than the original.
'The novelty effect is not there for this one, although the
characterisations are as interesting as the first time round.'
However, with total film production and marketing costs at about Dollars
80m, Warner should easily be in the black on the US release.
