FT  27 JUL 92 / US Money and Credit: Three-way tug-of-war takes up the
strain
THE stage is set for a complex tug-of-war in the US credit markets between
political opinion polls, currency markets and economic statistics.
The three were neatly on display last week as central banks intervened to
support the ailing dollar; as Mr Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve
chairman, gave his twice yearly Humphrey Hawkins testimony to Congress; and
as Mr Bill Clinton, Democratic presidential candidate, continued his surge
in the polls.
It is slowly dawning on Wall Street that Mr Clinton could well be the next
president. The Bush campaign is in such disarray, and the Clinton/Gore
ticket seems to be so successfully tapping into an underlying desire for
change, that Mr Clinton must have a reasonably good chance of winning.
If Mr Clinton sustains his momentum, Wall Street will grow increasingly
jittery and the bond market particularly so. The Democrats, with their 'tax
and spend' history, are seen as the party of inflation, and Mr Clinton has
yet to explain convincingly how he will fund his national investment
programme.
Wall Street remains relatively sanguine, but the first twinges of anxiety
are being felt in the foreign currency market, which is additionally
concerned about Clintonian tax policies which could hurt foreign investment
flows.
Political uncertainty, further signs of tardy American GDP growth and the
huge interest rate differentials between the US and Germany, have meant a
sharp fall in the dollar recently.
Last Monday, however, the US ended its long-standing benign neglect of the
dollar's value and the world's central banks intervened to support it. The
move stabilised not only the dollar but US bonds.
Yet the dollar could fall further if European rates stay high and if the
Democrats sustain their advantage. And dollar weakness would be bearish for
the bonds market.
However, pulling against these potentially adverse factors is the reality of
a very weak US recovery, and low domestic inflation. Further evidence of
economic sluggishness last week helped push the yield on long bonds down to
the lowest level since January, with the yield touching 7.53 per cent on
Thursday before ending the week at 7.56.
Mr Greenspan's testimony provided no surprises for the credit market. His
faintly upbeat forecast that economic expansion would gain momentum soon
concurred with the Wall Street consensus. He also said the Fed was leaning
towards cutting money supply growth targets, as the relationship that
existed between money supply and economic growth was not as strong as
before. The implication is that this year's slow M2 growth, - well below the
Fed's target - may not be so bad after all.
The upshot was to leave the market expecting little change in Fed policy,
apart from a possible 25 basis points off the Fed funds rate if economic
statistics turn grimmer.
Nevertheless, many analysts expect long bonds to continue rallying as
inflationary concerns subside. But that may be to place too little emphasis
on political risk, the Treasury's heavy funding needs, and the influence of
foreign markets.
