FT  24 FEB 92 / Management: Looking west for inspiration - Japanese
companies are for the first time seeing a rise in worker-power.  Steven
Butler investigates how executives are coping
Japanese management is facing a serious challenge. An acute shortage of
labour is edging the balance of power toward employees. Working hours are
going down, job hopping is on the rise, and big companies are having to hire
mid-career employees.
These may be common trends in the west. But this is Japan, where lifetime
employment at large companies has traditionally given Japanese executives
unusual flexibility to manage their businesses.
It has been a critical ingredient in the world-beating success of Japanese
corporations. Yet this critical ingredient is coming under pressure.
'Eventually the system of lifetime employment will be destroyed,' predicts
Akira Ono, an economist at Hitotsubashi University.
Lifetime employment was a two-way contract, at least in theory. Companies
guaranteed security of employment, while employees gave back loyalty and
commitment, even to the point of accepting wage cuts during hard times and
giving up holiday entitlements.
Can Japanese companies continue to excel without it? This is more than a
speculative question. Toyota Motor, Japan's biggest car maker, slashed
production by 150,000 vehicles this fiscal year because it kept a promise to
employees to cut 100 hours from the annual work load of 2,300 hours.
It was unable to hire enough workers to make up the difference.
Conveniently, demand for cars has also slumped.
Toyota had no realistic choice but to cut working hours. Otherwise it would
have had even more trouble retaining and hiring workers. Toyota - and other
big manufacturers - are being forced to think about management in a way that
never appeared necessary in the past, when they managed the workforce pretty
much as they liked.
Daiken Trade and Industry, a fibreboard maker, has just announced a 'New
Personnel System' that includes fast-track promotion for capable employees.
Kazuhiro Izumi, personnel manager, says the company needed to overhaul the
promotion system or risk losing talented employees. 'People want to be told
what their potential is and they want to know where their skills fit into
the company's plans,' Izumi says.
Yet the system upsets another of the 'rules' of Japanese management: that
harmony should be maintained by basing all promotions on seniority. Daiken
managers are now fielding complaints from long-serving workers who are left
behind by fast-trackers.
Rising affluence combined with greater choice afforded to job seekers has
also changed attitudes, making motivation of the workforce a new problem.
Toshihiro Takahashi, general manager of human resources at Toyota, says:
'The young generation does not see the value of manufacturing, does not see
what it means to the country as a whole'.
Yoshio Higuchi, an economist at Keio University, is concerned about the
impact of the labour shortage on in-company training programmes, which are
effectively the only places for Japanese workers to get practical training.
'If the job separation rate gets higher, then on-the-job-training doesn't
work.'
He fears companies will not get a sufficient return on investment in
training if employees are hired away after finishing an in-house programme.
Masamichi Shimizu, general affairs manager of the Japan Management
Association, says that Japanese management style is rigid in dealing with
individual workers' needs, and that changes in the work environment prompted
by the labour shortage will highlight that rigidity. 'There are many
admirable managers in Japan, but if the working environment continues in the
present direction, what westerners regard as Japanese management style may
not be appropriate,' Shimizu says.
Japan's birth rate is falling, with the average number of children born to a
women at 1.53 in 1990, far below the 2.1 needed to maintain a stable
population. School graduates will peak next year at 1.23m and decline
relentlessly to 960,000 by the turn of the century.
Roughly twice as many new jobs are on offer as there are applicants, a ratio
that has declined only marginally as a result of Japan's economic slowdown.
Big employers like Toyota and Nissan have for several years filled vacancies
by hiring mid-career employees, unheard of in the past.
About 9 per cent of Japanese workers are changing jobs each year. This is an
historic high, and compares with a ratio that has fluctuated between 8 per
cent and 6.5 per cent in the past 15 years. The job hopping rate for
technical and professional employees has risen steadily over the period.
These trends can only become more severe in the years ahead. At least as far
as the workers go, the trends are positive.
Ono says: 'The labour shortage has given workers a good opportunity to put
an end to unreasonable practices'.
Men often work for extended periods, separated from families, because they
have to accept orders to work anywhere in Japan. Workers are unable to say
no when the boss asks them to do overtime, or give up the annual holiday.
Shigehiro Murakami, of Nippon Gasket, a supplier of parts to Toyota Motor,
says the lifetime employment system was a product of post-war poverty, not
the choice of workers.
'The security that lifetime employment offered was a great attraction for
people afraid of the poverty that went with unemployment. Now, instead of 10
people fighting for one job, young people have a choice of jobs.' he says.
Employers are competing among themselves to offer better recreational and
housing facilities and are investing heavily in plant and equipment aimed at
making work easier and more pleasant.
The new power of the employee has changed the chemistry of management
relations within the corporation.
Koji Matsumoto, a former official at the Ministry of International Trade and
Industry, argued in a recently translated book* that lifetime employment and
the relative powerlessness of employees were key pillars of the Japanese
corporate system.
The mere knowledge by company employees that they have the option of
changing jobs could erode this atmosphere of trust and prevent a company
from pulling together to see the way through bad times.
It is plainly too early to predict the downfall of the Japanese corporate
system. Yet life at the top is already becoming more difficult for Japanese
managers.
Just as western managers have found inspiration in Japanese success, western
models may soon have far more relevance in Japan.
*Koji Matsumoto, The Rise of the Japanese Corporate System, translated by
Thomas I Elliott, Kegan Paul International, 1991, Pounds 45.
