FT  24 OCT 92 / Schools for free or fee: what's the difference?: The
FT-1,000 survey shows that the best of British state education is a match
for many private schools
WHAT PRICE three A-levels? Between Pounds 70,000 and Pounds 140,000, if you
put your child through the independent system. Nothing at all in the British
state sector.
At upwards of Pounds 25,000 an A-level, a private education is the most
expensive asset many parents buy after their house. And the bill is rising
rapidly: school fee increases have shot ahead of inflation for the last
decade and they will probably continue to do so. But why pay Pounds 70,000 -
the going rate for 11 years at a mid-ranking prep and independent day school
 -if you can get it for nothing, bar your tax?
For results, parents say in chorus. Surveys shows that more than anything,
parents believe they are paying for better exam grades. Few mention for
squash courts or social cachet.
The private sector still includes the very best schools and remains an
escape route for parents unwilling or unable to move into the neighbourhood
of a good state school. Even so, The FT-1,000 survey of this summer's
A-level results, to be published as a special supplement to next Saturday's
FT, will, come as shock to many a mortgaged parent. For it shows that judged
by results, the best of state education is easily a match for much of the
independent sector.
The first complete survey of exam results from both the state and
independent sectors across England and Wales, the FT-1,000 shows, county by
county, the top state schools in strong competition with the independent
sector. That is on the basis of average A-level results, which mostly
under-represent the achievement of state schools - particularly
comprehensives with their non-selective intake. Pupil by pupil, much of the
state sector probably does as well for individual students as its
independent counterpart.
True, judged by A-level results, the leading public schools are without
doubt the Rolls Royce of the national system. Not a single state school or
college comes in our top 50 schools and colleges: the top state school - the
Judd School for Boys, Tonbridge, Kent - comes 62nd, with only three others
in the top 100.* It is hardly surprising that the leading independent
schools form about a third of each year's admissions to Oxbridge.
The top few hundred schools are not, however, the only good schools - just,
in the main, the most selective. Go further down the list, and the picture
changes. Schools ranked between 250 and 350 are still the national cream:
they gain average A-level results of around three grade Cs, and send most of
their sixth-formers on to higher education. Of that 100, 34 are state
institutions (19 grammar, 13 comprehensive and two sixth form colleges). Of
the next 100 on our list, gaining average grades of CCD, 46 are in the state
sector.
The imbalance is still marked - but less so than you might think, given that
a fifth of all sixth formers (as opposed to 7.5 per cent of the school-aged
population) is in private schools.
Yet beware of generalising from the top or from average results. Most
parents are looking for a school close to them; and as boarding becomes ever
less fashionable (boarding numbers are down 10 per cent in the last three
years alone), that is increasingly true. Even boarding schools now tell you
that for much of their clientele a '90 minute rule' applies - the maximum
driving time a parent is prepared to endure.
So for most parents, it is the county or regional market that matters.
There, no single picture emerges from the FT survey.
In two counties - Essex and Northumberland - the top performing school is in
the state sector. In many others you can pay day fees of Pounds 5,000 a year
for a school the average results of which are no better than those for
nearby state schools.
Unsurprisingly, grammar schools top the state sector: 25 out of the top 30
state schools are grammar schools, while the top two comprehensives -
Hasmonean High in London and Wolverhampton Girls High - are, respectively, a
religious foundation and a school which has opted out of local authority
control.
Take Kent. Of the county's top 20 schools, ten are in the state sector.
Kent's leading grammar schools are a match for all but three of its
independent schools. In Orpington, Tunbridge Wells, Gillingham,
Sittingbourne, Gravesend and Maidstone the best-performing schools are in
the state sector.
The picture is more dramatic still in Buckinghamshire and Lincolnshire. Six
of Buckinghamshire's grammar schools - led by Dr Challoner's, Little
Chalfont - outperformed Stowe, the prestigious public school, which charges
day fees of Pounds 8,200 a year. Lincolnshire has eight state schools in the
top half of the FT-1,000, including two comprehensives, with the independent
sector nowhere outside Stamford.
Kent, Lincolnshire and Buckinghamshire's state schools, which survived the
national mania for forcing the state system into the comprehensive mould in
the 1960s and 1970s, achieve unusually impressive results. It is no
accident, perhaps, that Bucks and Lincs have among the weakest independent
sectors in the country, since few, if any, grammar schools left the state
sector under threat of reorganisation in the 1960s and 1970s. The survey
shows that a large proportion of the highest achieving private schools are
schools which, until 20 years ago, were an integral part of the state
sector.
Significantly, many comprehensives with professional middle-class catchment
areas score almost as highly as the leading grammar schools. Oxfordshire's
top state school is Cherwell, a comprehensive serving don-infested North
Oxford; Avon's is Chew Valley, in Chew Magna, mid-way between Bath and
Bristol; Bishop Luffa in Chichester heads the list in West Sussex; and so
on. County by county, state institutions in the wealthiest areas, with
professional clienteles, gain the best results, whatever their formal
status.
Indeed, an FT survey of Bristol schools, included in next week's supplement,
surmises that the city's independent day schools may well be more socially
representative than the highest achieving state schools in the city, most of
which are in its affluent suburbs or commuter belt.
In the state sector, then, education by mortgage has to a large extent
replaced education by ability. The relationship between schools' performance
and house prices is marked. All of the ten top performing counties in our
survey have higher than average house prices.
Within cities and towns, estate agents will tell you that houses in the
catchment areas of high-performing state schools go for a premium. According
to Jason Lamb, of Douglas Maloney, an agent for the catchment area of
Cranbrook School, a state grammar in Kent: 'It is very important that houses
are in the catchment area. Frequently it is the first thing that people
mention.'
By contrast, our survey shows that the level of fees charged by independent
schools has little bearing on academic performance. Fee levels generally
have more to do with the wealth of an institution's endowment, or the
grandeur of its recent building projects, than the quality of its teaching.
Collectively, private schools in Leicestershire, Greater Manchester and
Greater London have the best A-level results in the country, yet day fees
are typically below average in all three counties. Next week's supplement
includes value-for-money tables.
Recent surveys have attempted to assess the relative 'value' schools add to
their pupils by comparing grades achieved at A-level with those achieved at
GCSE. This measure is of only limited - if any - significance, since it
ignores progress made by pupils in their first five years at a school. It
also fails to take into account a school's sixth-form admissions policy -
how many of the weaker pupils get weeded out at age 16.
Next week's FT-1,000 is the first survey to publish institutions' stay-on
rates. It reveals wide variations, even among top schools. While at St
Paul's Girls' London all fifth formers stayed on last year, 85 per cent did
so at Haberdashers' Aske's School for Girls, Elstree. Several independent
schools in the top 100 had stay-on rates of less than 60 per cent - lower
than many comprehensives with a wider academic mix. Stay-on rates are not
just a reflection of the capacity of pupils, but they make for revealing
comparisons between schools.
Last year's FT survey of the independent sector showed single-sex schools
leading the field. Next week's FT-1,000 reveals the same pattern in the
state sector. Of the top 30 state schools, 25 are single-sex - most of them
grammar schools. The survey finds some excellent co-educational schools, but
overall the results of mixed-sex schools are disappointing even among
grammar schools.
Why are single-sex schools so comparatively strong? Any explanation, however
tentative, is bound to be controversial. But in the state sector, one thing
is clear: successful single-sex schools are among those which have best
defended their character against external attempts by politicians and
bureaucrats to reform them. It is time, perhaps, that British educationists
paid more attention to the pioneering work by US scholars John Chubb and
Terry Moe** on the deleterious impact of state bureaucracy on the
achievement of schools.
There is more to schools than results. There is also more to results than
A-levels: vocational courses suit many post-16 pupils far better than a
narrow academic regime, and Further Education Colleges are pioneering new
courses alongside more traditional avenues.
Yet high-performing institutions almost invariably make exam results a
priority. Strong exam performance generally also goes with a strong
extra-curricular side and intense efforts for those at the lower ability
end.
In a recent survey to find out why parents chose it, Queen Elizabeth's
Hospital, an independent day school in Bristol, found academic results to be
by far the most important factor. Next, in order, came its small size, its
happy atmosphere, the headmaster and discipline. 'There's no point trying to
re-invent the wheel,' says Dr Richard Gliddon, its headmaster. 'Results are
the most significant aspect of achievement.'
* Precise figures are subject to slight revision for late information.
** John Chubb and Terry Moe, Politics, Markets and America's Schools,
Brookings.
