FT  11 NOV 92 / Judicial inquiry ordered into Iraqi defence contracts
MR JOHN MAJOR acted yesterday to quell the mounting furore over the Matrix
Churchill affair by ordering an independent judicial inquiry into
allegations that ministers colluded to break government guidelines on
defence trade with Iraq up to the invasion of Kuwait.
But his pledge of full co-operation with the inquiry failed to weaken the
storm created by the release of some 500 pages of secret Whitehall documents
on Monday after the collapse of the trial of three directors of the
Midlands-based machine tool company accused of making illegal sales to Iraq.
In a letter to the prime minister last night, Mr John Smith, the Labour
leader, dismissed his response as inadequate and demanded a public tribunal
of inquiry where ministers can be called to testify on oath.
Backbenchers of all parties expressed anger that four government ministers
had invoked 'public interest' immunities to suppress the publication of
government papers. They claimed the action was equivalent to 'sacrificing'
the businessmen to long terms in prison in order to defend dubious national
security interests.
The classified documents appear to show that a policy change in 1988,
relaxing the policy on sales of defence related equipment to Iraq, was still
in force within weeks of Baghdad's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990.
One Ministry of Defence paper - written after the invasion - draws an
unnamed minister's attention 'to the way in which 'UK Ltd' is helping Iraq,
often unwillingly but sometimes not, to set up a major indigenous arms
industry'.
Another internal Foreign Office paper criticised as 'disingenuous' the
Department of Trade and Industry's official 'line' to journalists that there
was no evidence machine tools exported to Iraq were being used for military
purposes.
At question-time, Mr Smith said the chief concern was that equipment was
sold which could have been used against British troops and that 'a secret
change of policy' had taken place which had been concealed from the public
and the Commons.
Mr Smith asked the prime minister: 'Do you recall assuring the House in
January 1991 that 'for some considerable time we have not supplied arms to
Iraq'?
'How do you reconcile that with the revelation in the government's documents
produced at the Matrix Churchill trial that as late as July 27 1990 - only
six days before the invasion of Kuwait - machine tools known to be intended
to make fuses for missiles and artillery shells were supplied to Iraq?'
Mr Major replied: 'As you know from 1985 until the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait,
the government operated under guidelines first set out by the then foreign
secretary, Lord Howe. Since the invasion we have operated and continue to
operate the full embargo.'
Last night, Mr Robin Cook, Labour's trade spokesman, tabled a sharply
critical motion, citing three occasions when Mr Major, his predecessor, Lady
Thatcher, and, Mr John Redwood, then a trade minister, allegedly gave
misleading answers about the Matrix Churchill case or breaches of the policy
on sales of defence-related equipment.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, released a letter from Mr
Major, dated December 6, 1990, in which the prime minister claimed 'machine
tools . . . are not lethal'.
His letter implied that alongside the guidelines against sales of
defence-related equipment, government approval for granting export licences
took into account the need not to prejudice British industry and jobs.
Formally announcing the inquiry yesterday, Sir Nicholas Lyell, the attorney
general, attempted to assure the Commons that Lord Justice Scott, the judge
appointed to head the investigation, would have access to all departmental
papers and the right to call ministers.
It would be up to the judge to hold public proceedings if he so chose. His
report and evidence, where it did not breach national security, would be
published.
Page 8
Bush administration 'knew of arms network'
Ministers face sack if they fail to testify
