FT  28 MAR 92 / International Company News: Apple and Sharp in development
link
APPLE Computer will join forces with Sharp of Japan to produce the first of
a new class of pocket-sized electronic devices. The trans-Pacific
partnership gives substance to the much-heralded convergence of the computer
and consumer electronics industries, both of which are looking for new
sources of growth.
'Strategic partnerships like this one will be the key to business success as
the gap between personal computers and consumer electronics products
continues to close,' said Mr John Sculley, Apple chairman and chief
executive.
The two companies have set up product development teams and are aiming to
put their first personal electronic devices on the market early next year,
with different versions to be sold under both Sharp and Apple brand labels.
Details of the planned product, dubbed as 'personal information management',
remain a closely guarded secret. However, the device is expected to
incorporate an electronic calendar and phone book and be capable of sending
and receiving messages.
It will be a hand-held device and will probably incorporate a pen, rather
than a keyboard, for entering data. It is expected to sell in the US for
less than Dollars 1,000.
The joint development effort will combine the strengths of both parties.
Sharp is a leader in personal electronics products such as its Wizard
electronic organiser. The Japanese company also has expertise in key
technologies such as flat panel displays.
Apple is known for its innovative software that makes computer technology
easy to use.
Under the agreement signed in Tokyo on Friday by the two companies, Apple
will grant Sharp a licence to use new software specifically designed for use
in its new family of personal electronics products.
Terms of the agreement were not revealed, but Sharp is expected to pay
royalties to Apple for use of its software.
Apple also plans to license this as-yet unreleased software to other
parties. Sony of Japan is said to be another potential Apple licensee.
Apple announced in January that it intended to enter the consumer
electronics field with a new class of products that bridge the gap between
personal computers and consumer electronics.
These products would essentially be single-function, hand-held computers and
could include , for example, electronics books, electronic organisers,
multimedia players, electronic note takers, display telephones or personal
communicators.
Apple has formed a new business group to pursue the consumer electronics
market, separate from its established Macintosh personal computer business.
In addition to the joint development and software licensing pact, Sharp has
agreed to distribute Macintosh personal computers in Japan from next month.
Apple sales in Japan have been growing rapidly, especially after
introduction of its Powerbook notebook computers last year.
