FT  21 FEB 92 / Glaxo rises 14% to Pounds 709m at interim: Pharmaceuticals
group announces 41% dividend increase
GLAXO, Europe's largest pharmaceuticals group, yesterday announced a 14 per
cent rise in interim pre-tax profits from Pounds 623m to Pounds 709m and a
41 per cent dividend increase.
Sales exceeded analysts' expectations as they increased 24 per cent from
Pounds 1.59bn to Pounds 1.97bn. At constant exchange rates, sales rose 18
per cent.
Dr Ernest Mario, Glaxo's deputy chairman, said only 1 per cent of the growth
in turnover was generated by price increases. This meant increasing pressure
from governments worldwide to reduce pharmaceutical prices was irrelevant
for the company, he explained.
Sales of Zantac, the anti-ulcer drug and the world's best-selling
pharmaceutical, grew only 6 per cent at constant exchange rates.
Dr Mario explained US sales had been affected by providing discounts worth
Dollars 55m (Pounds 31.5m) to Medicaid during the first half of the year.
During the second half of this year, it will offer discounts worth about
Dollars 60m, but this will not have a great effect on the results as Glaxo
had given about Dollars 50m worth over the same period last year, explained
Dr Mario.
Zantac sales in Italy had been affected by wholesalers running down their
stocks before a 2 per cent reduction in price at the beginning of the year.
Analysts said Zantac sales should pick up over the second half of the year,
but in the longer term revenues from the drug were likely to slow.
Sales of Glaxo's new generation drugs accounted for 8 per cent of the
group's revenues. These included Zofran, the anti-emesis drug which had
sales of Pounds 120m and which the company expects to generate at least
Pounds 250m by the year end; Imigran, a new migraine drug which generated
sales of Pounds 13m; and Serevent, an asthma drug with sales of Pounds 9m.
Revenues from Serevent had been held up by worries about the drug's safety.
Mr Ian White, pharmaceuticals analyst at Kleinwort Benson, said: 'There's
not really enough evidence to be really confident that the new potential
blockbuster drugs will provide the necessary revenue streams to take over
from Zantac when its patents expire.
'We should know whether there is another drug on the scale of Zantac within
the next 12 months.'
Earnings per share increased 14 per cent from 14.6p to 16.7p.
The board recommended a dividend of 6p (4.25p). Dr Mario said the dividend
increase had been motivated by a desire to ensure the gap between the final
and interim dividends was not too large.
Glaxo's shares closed down 10p at 816p.
Lex, Page 20; Markets, Page 40; Astra results, Page 25
