FT  25 JUL 92 / Survey of Second Cars (8): Still very much a curiosity -
Battery Cars / For many a household, a second car with a 13 amp power socket
instead of a petrol filler cap would be ideal
A BATTERY CAR would be cheap to run, especially if its power cells were
recharged at night with low tariff electricity. It would also be virtually
silent, entirely non-polluting (at least it would be at the place where it
was being used) and exceptionally easy to drive.
Environmentalists keep on saying the battery-electric is the car of the
future. They may be right. And there is no doubt one would suit many second
car users right now; the kind who average a couple of thousand miles a year
and rarely go more than 10 or so miles from home.
With so much apparently going for it, why does the battery car, which is as
old as the motor industry, obstinately remain a curiosity?
First, it has to be said that an electric battery is not a source of energy
but merely a convenient means of packaging and storing electrical energy
generated elsewhere. That usually means in a thermal power station, spewing
hundreds of tons of sulphurous fumes and carbon dioxide gas from its
chimneys every day. And which actually turns into electricity only 30 per
cent of the energy contained in the mountain of coal burned in its boilers.
Once the electricity has been generated, it has to be carried around in the
car's storage batteries. They are its Achilles' heel. A kilogram of petrol
contains 300 times as much energy as a kilogram of lead/acid batteries.
There are other kinds. Alkaline batteries cost more and are just as heavy,
though they do have a longer service life.
Super-efficient batteries, two or three times as powerful for their weight
as today's lead/acid kind, have been under development for years. They are
costly and still far from commercial production. Some have to operate at
several hundred degrees Celsius. A pack of those would not be the happiest
companion in a small car.
Every major manufacturer has produced prototype battery electric cars. All
suffer to a greater or lesser extent from the same intractable problem. You
can give a battery car quite a long range, vigorous acceleration or a high
top speed - but not all together. They are mutually exclusive.
Britain leads the world in the use of battery-electrics. There are about
30,000 on the UK's roads: most of them are milk floats. They go well enough
when fully charged so they do not hold up the traffic when leaving the dairy
before dawn. But it's a different story a few hours later. Batteries half
discharged, they creep back to base, dragging tails of exasperated motorists
behind them.
However, something must be done to reduce city centre noise and air
pollution. Demand for non-polluting vehicles will grow and electric
propulsion will have a big part to play.
It is, though, a Catch-22 situation. Until there is a demand for large
numbers of battery electric cars, they will cost far more to make than much
more practical internal-combustion engined cars. And until they are as cheap
as - ideally cheaper than - motorcars, there will be no real demand for them
unless it can be artificially stimulated.
Electric cars are already exempted from the Pounds 110 annual tax and more
concessions might be offered to popularise them. Perhaps owners might be
allowed to park them on single yellow lines or use bus/taxi lanes at peak
times.
There needs to be some incentive. Knowing you are setting a good example is
not enough to persuade many people to buy a slow, limited range
battery-electric, costing twice as much as one running on petrol as a second
car.
Battery-powered cars already exist. Peugeot has been producing a limited
number of electric 205s, with a bonnet full of batteries instead of a petrol
or diesel engine. It is said to have a range of up to 100 km (62 miles) at
modest speed on level ground and a top speed of 100 kmh (62 mph), though not
for very long.
With all that weight up front, it cannot help being heavy to steer but it
hums along the flat, climbed hills well and goes down them even better. It
has no gears and its fuel costs are a fraction of a petrol car's - but the
massive battery pack will need replacing every four years or so at a cost of
perhaps Pounds 1,000.
More recently, Fiat has introduced a battery-electric Cinquecento baby car
at the same time as the two petrol-engined versions. The Cinquecento Elettra
is only a two-seater; the batteries take up the space of both rear seats and
boot. Quaintly, the electric motor drives the front wheels through the
petrol car's clutch and five-speed gearbox, though you can treat it as a
one-gear car if you wish.
Neither car is on sale in Britain.
Perhaps the battery-electric second car will only take off if (some think it
is when) petrol or diesel engined vehicles are prohibited from using urban
centres altogether. This is unlikely to happen until the 21st century (less
than eight years away, remember) but let no-one think it impossible.
Motor dealers in California, where the exhaust catalyser first became
mandatory, have been told that 2 per cent of the cars they sell must be
totally non-polluting, which means battery-electric, by 1998. By 2003, the
proportion will be 10 per cent.
Surely it couldn't happen here? But who could have forecast in 1985 that by
the end of this year every petrol-engined car sold in Britain and throughout
Europe would need to have a catalytic converter? For all their snags,
battery electric second cars could become a popular choice sooner than now
seems possible.
The shape of second cars to come? Honda's EP-X concept car is specifically
designed as ultra-compact, personal transportation for two. The tandem
seating allows the car to be narrow for slipping through traffic, while
allowing more side impact protection than is possible with two-abreast
seating. A one litre engine and lightweight aluminium body promote fuel
efficiency; a lift-up canopy allows driver and passenger to enter from
either side of the car.
As with most concept cars, the EP-X itself is unlikely ever to enter
production but some of its core design ideas are expected to appear on
future models.
