FT  04 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: 'I'm a believer in the power of
fear' - Anthony Nelson shares his opinions on financial regulation with
Richard Waters and Ralph Atkins
MORE than six years ago, Mr Anthony Nelson, an ex-merchant banker turned
backbench Tory MP who had been passed over for ministerial office many
times, warned that UK investment regulation failed to pay enough attention
to investors.
Now economic secretary at the Treasury and the man in charge of financial
regulation, Mr Nelson's views have hardly budged.
'Many of the misgivings that I expressed in the mid 1980s have come to
pass,' he said yesterday in his first wide-ranging interview since taking
over responsibility for financial services nine months ago. He singled out a
number of examples of how the 1986 Financial Services Act had failed: the
Maxwell scandal, the mis-selling of home income plans, and the market
manipulation a year ago at Fox, the soft commodities exchange.
Given his first ministerial office by Mr John Major - a closer political
ally than Lady Thatcher, the former prime minister, ever was - he has the
chance to make changes.
Mr Nelson, 44 and MP for Chichester for nearly two decades, is also the
first Treasury minister to have responsibility for the City since the
supervisory functions were gathered in the department.
That means, he says, that 'I can see much more clearly the need for change
where it arises and I'm much better able to take action than where there was
a demarcation of responsibilities'.
But there is no radical overhaul of the present regime planned - and no
intention for the government to extend its direct involvement in financial
regulation. 'I believe that while there is much that is wrong, there is much
that can be done within the existing structure to redress that.'
He is unwilling to bring forward new financial services legislation. With no
unanimous view in the City about the way forward, and given uncertainties
about how any legislation might be reshaped as it passes through parliament,
the outcome of any attempt to formulate a new law would be difficult to
predict, he warned.
Instead, the government appears bent on sticking with what Mr Nelson called
'a bit of a statutory fudge' created in 1986, because of the prevailing
'political climate' and City attitudes. He shrugged off any suggestion that
the UK should seek to copy the US's approach to investment regulation.
'I'm not seeking to emulate the SEC. We already have our own background.'
Nevertheless, Mr Nelson clearly envisages a significant shift in emphasis,
with a more aggressive approach to enforcement and prosecution. As he summed
it up: 'I'm a believer in the power of fear.'
He was careful not to pre-empt the review being undertaken for him by Mr
Andrew Large, the chairman of the SIB, but made clear that some changes lie
ahead.
First, the SIB will be expected to use its powers to investigate and
prosecute offences more vigorously. 'I'm not satisfied that those powers
have been adequately used,' he said. 'I want it to be more intrusive,
incisive, where necessary more penal.'
This may lead to a 'slight swelling' of the size of the agency, though the
extra cost is something the City would not complain about, he said.
Second, the self-regulatory bodies will be expected to become tougher. The
interests of investors, rather than the financial industry, should be at the
heart of the system, Mr Nelson said - an argument that he made as a
backbencher when the FSA was passing through parliament.
Third, the fragmentation of the regulatory system, which involves
overlapping agencies pursuing parallel investigations and which Mr Nelson
believes has 'mitigated against a clear line of command', will be reduced,
although not as dramatically as some in the City have suggested.
Mr Nelson gave strong support to the creation of a single Personal
Investment Authority to handle retail investment regulation, while claiming
that his own influence to prompt such a change is only slight.
There will be no attempt to reduce the number of bodies with the powers to
investigate suspected offences, for instance by bringing the Serious Fraud
Office and the SIB together. 'I'm very impressed by what they (the SFO) do
and find it difficult to believe they would do it any better if they were
merged with or became a subsidiary of the SIB,' he said.
While Mr Nelson fends off pressure for a new law on financial regulation, he
is already bent on pushing through parliament a piece of legislation that
has antagonised many in the City.
According to lawyers and investment houses, the insider dealing provisions
in the Criminal Justice Bill could outlaw legitimate City practices in the
financial markets and prevent the flow of information from listed companies
through analysts to the world at large.
That, according to Mr Nelson, is neither the intention nor the effect. 'I
have no intention whatsoever of jeopardising one of the City's great
strengths, its professional and analytical skills.'
City analysts should continue to play a central role in companies'
communications with their shareholders, and large institutional shareholders
should continue to talk directly to company management without greater fear
of prosecution, he said.
Of the links between companies and their shareholders, he said: 'I want, if
anything, to see those strengthened and improved rather than inhibited by
the new law.'
The difficulty with the legislation is that the government has had no choice
but to use it to implement the European Community directive on insider
dealing as it stands.
Mr Nelson has tried to limit the scope of the bill with a new defence for
some legitimate market practices. But he said it was impossible to frame a
law that was precise enough to catch every activity that the government
might want to prosecute while leaving out of the net all those practices it
considered legitimate.
If that gives little solace to professionals in the City, he at least offers
the reassurance that a wave of new prosecutions is not planned. 'I'm not
about to embark on some kind of witch hunt for insider dealers in the City
which will bring fear not only to employees but to employers,' he said.
Guidance on how the government will interpret the new law, due at committee
stage, should also calm City fears, he said.
Where he is less conciliatory is over the interest and other charges imposed
by high street banks on small businesses and others.
He insists that he, the chancellor and the prime minister 'do take
opportunities, and will take further opportunities, to draw very directly to
the attention of major banks these criticisms.'
But, lest anyone should accuse him of being too much of an interventionist,
Mr Nelson sees clear limits to the government's role - he ruled out a public
inquiry - and blamed customers almost as much as he blamed the banks.
'We have moved away a little bit from the reliance people placed in the past
on their own good sense in terms of managing their own funds and savings,'
he says,'and we have to remind people that at the end of the day they must
take a close interest in the management of their own savings.'
