FT  10 JUN 92 / Republics caught in great divide
THE CRISIS over Czechoslovakia's future as a federal state is taking place
against the background of a political landscape which has already been
transformed by last weekend's elections.
The anti-communist intellectuals, who kept passive resistance alive after
the 1968 Soviet invasion and led the 'velvet revolution' of November 1989
have been eclipsed. Their movements, the Civic Forum in the Czech lands and
its Slovak version, the former 'Public Against Violence', were already
gravely weakened by earlier splits. Both failed to gain the 5 per cent of
votes needed for seats in parliament.
The consequent departure of men like Mr Jiri Dienstbier, the foreign
minister, and 12 other members of the outgoing 18-man federal government,
has weakened President Vaclav Havel.
He looks like an isolated monument from that brief period of euphoria when
poets and philosophers replaced apparatchiks. His re-election next month has
been threatened by the opposition of Slovak nationalists and former
communists although he retains the affection of many ordinary Czechs and
Slovaks.
But the polarisation of politics between 'left-wing' nationalists in
Slovakia and 'right-wing' market reformers in the Czech lands which has put
the federation at risk has also weakened other 'centrist parties', like the
former ruling Christian Democrats in Slovakia.
The erosion of the centre, and the return to respectability of the
communists, especially in their reformed and renamed Slovak version under
the young and personable Mr Peter Weiss, has greatly narrowed the victors'
scope for coalition-forming.  In Slovakia, Mr Vladimir Meciar, the former
communist whose nationalist Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) just
failed to win an overall majority in the Slovak National Council, has to
choose between Mr Jozef Prokes, leader of the outright separatist Slovak
National Party, or the Democratic Left Party (DLS) of Mr Weiss.  First
indications, after talks with both leaders yesterday, are that Mr Meciar is
leaning towards the reform communists.
An alliance with the DLS would give Mr Meciar both more seats - and more
flexibility in talks on the federal future. The choices open to Mr Vaclav
Klaus, whose Civic Democratic Movement won 80 out of 300 seats in the
federal assembly, are more limited.
The size of his electoral success squeezed out his naturally, the Civiv
Democratic Alliance (CDA) and his right-hand man, Mr Vladimir Dlouby, the
former federal economics minister.
The failure of the Civic Democratic Alliance to surmount the 5 per cent
barrier means that Mr Klaus will need other allies than a handful of Czech
and Slovak Christian Democrats.
In order to confront the Slovak nationalists and Czech and Slovak
ex-communists ranged against him in the federal parliament he needs a deal
with the Social Democrats, who up to now he has dismissed as unrealistc
believers in 'a third way' between capitalism and communism.
Ironically, a decision to end the federation would greatly simplify politics
in both republics.
Both Mr Meciar and Mr Klaus dominate their republican parliaments and would
be able to implement policies which would move both halves of the present
republic in opposite directions.
