FT  13 JAN 92 / Port privatisation bidders face gag by government
AN INFORMATION black-out has been imposed on the privatisation of Britain's
remaining trust ports to prevent a repetition of the political embarrassment
caused by the sale of Tees &amp; Hartlepool, the country's second biggest cargo
port.
The Department of Transport has told other trust ports preparing for
privatisation that no information about bids is to be released at any stage
of the privatisation process apart from the identity of the successful
bidder.
Companies involved in the bidding will be required to accept confidentiality
clauses preventing all but the winning bidder from revealing their interest
in any of the ports even after the sale.
This means there will be no information available to the public or the
bidders on how many bids were received, the value of the bids, the identity
of the bidders, or the value of the winning bid.
The department acknowledged, however, that it could prove difficult to
enforce the gag on unsuccessful bidders.
The change in policy follows the bitter row over the privatisation of Tees &amp;
Hartlepool, the first trust port to be sold under the Ports Act.
Three named companies and a management buy-out team submitted competing bids
for the port, with the buy-out team quietly confident of victory. But the
port authority chose neither the buy-out team nor the highest bidder, but a
newly-formed consortium with no experience in port ownership.
The decision, supported by Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the transport secretary, has
caused a furore in the ports industry and is likely to lead to a rough ride
for transport ministers when it comes up for ratification in the Commons
tomorrow
Other trust ports seeking privatisation are Forth, Clyde, Medway and
Tilbury. Forth announced on Friday that it had won the transport
department's agreement to opt for a stock market flotation, so avoiding the
competitive tendering process.
The department acknowledged that procedures had changed since the Tees &amp;
Hartlepool flotation, saying it had learned from experience.
The department's advisers, accountants Price Waterhouse, said the tension
created by secrecy was likely to produce a better price than a more public
auction.
Privatisation of big ports sails into a storm Page 7
