FT  06 JUL 92 / Share of EC investment falls sharply
BRITAIN'S share of total inward investment in European Community countries
last year fell to its lowest level since 1984, reflecting the severity of
the recession.
Although the UK continued in its traditional role of attracting the largest
share of EC inward investment, the proportion fell to 33 per cent from 39
per cent in 1990.
France and Belgium were the next most successful, with 17 per cent and 14
per cent respectively of the EC funding total. Their shares rose from 11 per
cent and 9 per cent in 1990.
The unpublished figures from the Bank for International Settlements, the
central bankers' bank, cover investments in individual EC nations by foreign
companies.
They indicate that Britain's strong record in gaining such finance - which
in recent years has included large sums from Japanese companies - may be
starting to wane.
A central feature of UK government policy in the 1980s was to create the
conditions for large investments by overseas companies. Their spending has
buoyed important sections of UK manufacturing, particularly cars,
electronics and chemicals.
As Britain has moved into a recession which has been significantly worse
than those affecting most other parts of Europe, its power to attract
spending may have decreased.
Another factor may be that some overseas companies started to run down their
investments last year, reflecting their heavy spending in previous years in
areas such as new buildings and tooling.
Britain's 33 per cent - the total dropped to Dollars 64.7bn from Dollars
86.3bn in 1990 - was the lowest since the 4 per cent recorded in 1984. That
figure reflected a statistical quirk - a large transfer by the UK subsidiary
of the Royal Dutch/Shell oil group into an overseas operating arm - which
depressed the overall figure for capital inflows into the UK.
Leaving aside 1984, last year's UK share of EC investment was the lowest
since the 30 per cent recorded in 1978. The figures for the UK (apart from
1984) have not been lower than 30 per cent since the bank started records in
1975.
