FT  21 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Liberated Molins edges ahead
MOLINS, the tobacco machinery and packaging manufacturer, yesterday unveiled
its first set of results since the exit of hostile shareholder Leucadia, to
show a 2 per cent rise in pre-tax profits to Pounds 15.5m for 1991.
The group, which has escaped five attempts in four years by hostile
shareholders to win control, managed the increase through shaving interest
costs by Pounds 300,000 to Pounds 3.3m. Operating profits were steady at
Pounds 15.6m on turnover up 13 per cent to Pounds 155m.
Mr Michael Orr, chairman, made only the most discreet of references to the
two-year attempt from the US financial conglomerate to win control.
'Leucadia is behind us now and we are enjoying the chance to concentrate on
the business,' he said. Leucadia shed its 48.4 per cent stake in Molins in
November after its proposal for seats on the board was defeated at an
extraordinary general meeting.
Molins rewarded shareholders with an increased final dividend of 9.75p (9p),
making a 12.75p (12p) total. Earnings rose from 36.9p to 37.3p.
The packaging machinery division increased trading profits from Pounds 2.9m
to Pounds 3.1m. The Langston business, one of the leading names in the US,
had increased its market share, the chairman said.
The tobacco machinery division, which represents two-thirds of group sales,
had come under pressure from its dependence on the lower margin Third World
business.
However, the weak result from the refurbishment of old machines had masked a
strong performance in the original equipment and spares business.
Molins also announced that it hoped to put proposals forward to pension fund
trustees aimed at unlocking the Pounds 38m surplus allowable by law. The
actual pension fund surplus as calculated by Molins actuaries is Pounds 90m,
and has been cited as the main reason for the past hostile bids. Last year
Molins received a Pounds 3.2m (same) net pension credit.
COMMENT
Molins is not the most exciting of stocks, leaving many to wonder why so
many bids. The pension surplus is perhaps the biggest reason, with further
unrealised potential in the company's Flexible Manufacturing Systems patent.
This has been the subject of litigation for several years, and now Molins is
merely awaiting judgment following the court hearing in January 1991. The
timing of that judgment is as uncertain as a London bus. Meanwhile, Molins
maintains its position as one of the top three tobacco machinery
manufacturers, and the packaging industry offers great scope for expansion
after the pension surplus is used to wipe out the already low gearing of 13
per cent. Profits are expected to creep up to Pounds 16m this year, for a
prospective p/e of 10. This looks undervalued, especially when the net asset
value per share of 408p is taken into consideration.
