FT  29 JUL 92 / SFO and judge blamed for Blue Arrow 'disaster'
THE Blue Arrow fraud trial was a 'costly disaster' for which the trial judge
and the Serious Fraud Office were responsible, the Court of Appeal said
yesterday.
The total costs of the year-long trial, estimated at Pounds 35m, must be met
by the taxpayer, three appeal court judges also ruled.
The court issued warnings to judges and prosecutors in future fraud trials
that legal proceedings should be simplified as much as possible to prevent
any recurrence of the debacle.
The judges, headed by Lord Justice Mann, were giving reasons for their
overturning earlier this month of the convictions returned by the jury in
February against four City advisers found guilty of conspiracy to defraud.
Mr Jonathan Cohen, Mr David Reed and Mr Nicholas Wells, all former County
NatWest executives, and Mr Martin Gibbs, a former Phillips &amp; Drew director,
had all been convicted of conspiring to mislead the markets over the result
of the 1987 Blue Arrow rights issue.
Their convictions had been quashed because the last-minute decision of the
judge, Mr Justice McKinnon, to cut the indictment down to one central issue
had been made too late for any convictions to be safe, Lord Justice Mann
said.
The length and complexity of the proceedings meant that by that stage - 11
months into the case - the trial should have been abandoned instead, he
said.
Criticising the SFO, the judges said it had presented its case in an
unnecessarily complex way. The multiplicity and size of the issues proved
'incapable of accommodation within the context of a jury trial'.
However, had the prosecution concentrated on the one central issue that
eventually went to the jury, eight of the original 10 defendants could have
been tried manageably and fairly.
'This was not an example of the unprosecutable allegation,' Lord Justice
Mann said.
Criticising Mr Justice McKinnon, he said judges had the ultimate
responsibility for ensuring the manageability of trials. Mr Justice McKinnon
should have used his powers much earlier.
'Judges must not be reluctant to exercise their power in order to secure
that end,' Lord Justice Mann said. 'But, and importantly, they will seldom
have occasion to do so if the prosecuting authorities frame indictments
which have due regard to the limitations of a jury trial.'
The director of the SFO, Mr George Staple, said later the SFO could not be
happy at the court's comments. However, it had learnt from the case.
'We have got to ensure that we do not overload indictments and charge too
many defendants while still presenting the full criminality of cases to the
jury,' he said.
Four other City advisers are still charged with fraud over the affair. The
SFO will announce on Monday whether it is continuing proceedings against Mr
Charles Villiers and Ms Elizabeth Brimelow, both formerly with County, and
Mr Paul Smallwood and Mr Tim Brown of Phillips &amp; Drew.
Page 6: Cleared defendant Jonathan Cohen attacks prosecution; Judges decry
overloads on scales of justice
