FT  04 NOV 92 / Deficit and politics sway Cavallo: Argentina's economy
minister has taken tough steps to protect industry
THE prospect of Argentina's first trade deficit since 1981, the threat of
recession and the political priorities of President Carlos Menem have forced
Mr Domingo Cavallo, the economy minister, to backtrack on his promise to
apply the full discipline of the market on Argentina's unruly economy.
Last week he agreed to industry's demands for additional support for exports
and increased protection from imports, notably from Brazil. His measures
also aim to avoid recession in 1993, an election year. The measures, which
amount to an indirect 5-10 per cent devaluation of the peso became
inevitable as Argentina's currency became increasingly overvalued.
Mr Cavallo has eliminated a fuel tax and broadened tax rebates for
exporters, a boost worth about Dollars 1.1bn a year. He reduced the highest
import tariff from 35 per cent to 20 per cent and maintained a zero tariff
for some capital goods while raising tariffs for many intermediate
industrial products. He 'temporarily' raised to 10 per cent a previous 3 per
cent statistics tax on nearly all imports.
This has the virtue of offsetting preferential tariffs on Brazilian imports.
Taxes are not affected by the 1991 treaty creating the Mercosur common
market between Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay, which is gradually
lowering tariffs.
Industry's cries for help to stem a mounting trade deficit with Brazil -
which is expected to exceed Dollars 1bn this year - were the catalyst for
last week's package.
Mr Manuel Herrera, secretary of the Argentine Industrial Union which
represents manufacturers, says: 'Twenty per cent of Brazil's output is
equivalent to all our output. They are selling products at artificial prices
here that they cannot sell in other markets.'
Alarm over Brazil is now acute. Officials say that economic chaos there
makes the December 1994 deadline for full integration increasingly
improbable.
Many Argentines want to scrap Mercosur and opt instead for rapid association
with the North American Free Trade Agreement. But US officials warn
Argentina has no chance of joining Nafta soon and urge perseverence with
Mercosur.
Mr Cavallo is confident of eliminating Argentina's trade gap in 1993. This
year's deficit is estimated at between Dollars 1bn and Dollars 2bn, against
1991's Dollars 3.87bn surplus. This is because imports are up 60 per cent
over last year while exports remain steady at about Dollars 12.0bn.
Exports, which represent only 8 per cent of GDP, clearly need encouragement
and industrial exports need special attention. The share of manufacturers in
Argentina's exports has declined every year since Mr Menem took office in
1989. Farm goods and raw materials now account for two-thirds of exports.
However, Mr Cavallo has previously said that a trade deficit was no reason
for concern. After the peso became fully convertible and was pegged to the
dollar in April 1991, the theory was that prices and productivity would
converge at world levels. Divergences would be automatically corrected by
recession.
Mr Cavallo has made great headway in trade lib-eralisation, privatisation
and deregulation, but he has not tamed inflation. Retail prices have risen
by over 40 per cent since April 1991, relentlessly increasing pressure on
the exchange rate and making recession inevitable.
But Mr Menem's political agenda allows no room for a bruising recession. He
wants his Peronist party to sweep the 1993 congressional mid-term elections
and forge ahead with his controversial bid to amend the constitution to
allow him to stand for re-election in 1995.
Initially, economic reform boosted the government's popularity by driving
inflation down to between 1 and 1.5 per cent a month and unleashing a
consumer boom. But the spending cuts, unemployment and brutal shakeouts now
required are not popular anywhere.
Pessimists will say last week's decisions are depressingly familiar.
Argentina's governments have a tradition of embarking on impressive reform,
only to retreat when the going gets tough.
Mr Cavallo says he is only fine-tuning the economy and has reaffirmed his
commitment to fiscal rectitude and liberalisation. He says his new package,
plus a previous round of deregulation and cost-cutting, will boost
productivity by between 16 and 21 per cent.
However, the changes ease the pressure on industry to perform. An American
trade analyst says: 'Companies must instill a new kind of management. They
have to become stingy penny-pinchers and fight harder for markets. But
they've learnt - and they're being proved right again  - that it's easier to
lobby for rule changes and devaluations.'
By creating a precedent for special pleading, Mr Cavallo will come under
more pressure to soften his policies. Further concessions would worsen
inflation and diminish his credibility. Independent economists already
predict higher inflation will wipe out the package's effects by early next
year.
Argentina is still ridden with inflation, despite the pace of reform, as it
originates from a rigid labour market and retail sector.
Hiring and firing is difficult and expensive, wage costs are high and
productivity low. Mr Cavallo's repeated attempts to tackle the labour market
have failed because Mr Menem cannot risk losing the unions' backing.
As a result, an average industrial worker costs companies Dollars 1,000 a
month in wages, taxes, social security contributions and other costs. Heavy
deductions cut net wages to only Dollars 600 a month, so unions are
constantly agitating for pay increases. They have now called a general
strike for November 9.
Consumer prices are high because retailers, facing little competition, raise
prices with impunity. Wages may seem princely by regional standards, but
their purchasing power is probably less than in Chile or even Brazil.
Mr Cavallo has shown weakness for the first time in his 21 months as
minister.
He must, at all costs, accelerate reform if he is to avoid repeating so many
brave, but ultimately abortive, attempts to halt Argentina's inexorable
decline.
