FT  17 JAN 92 / Israel's chances slim on full loan guarantees
ISRAEL'S prospects are receding of obtaining the full Dollars 10bn (Pounds
5.5bn) of loan guarantees it has sought from the US to help finance the cost
of absorbing Jewish immigrants from the former Soviet Union.
Although President George Bush is not expected to seek any further
postponement on the loan guarantees, the administration is unlikely to back
the full Israeli request for guarantees on Dollars 2bn of borrowing a year
for five years unless Israel agrees to new conditions on its settlements in
the occupied territories of the West Bank and Gaza.
President George Bush won a battle of wills with Israel last September when
he asked Congress to delay considering the loan guarantees for 120 days. He
said the issue would jeopardise the Middle East peace conference which was
then due to open in Madrid.
The administration is now expected to come up with a proposal by early
February.
Mr Bush is extremely sensitive about the Israeli settlements.
He is said to feel that Israel has reneged on promises not to use earlier
US-guaranteed loans for construction in the territories.
Arab delegations to the US-sponsored Middle East peace talks, meanwhile,
insist that the settlements are obstructing the peace process.
'There can be no progress in any area, in any sphere, unless all settlement
activity ceases,' said Mrs Hanan Ashrawi, the Palestinian delegation's
spokeswoman.
Mr Bush is expected to insist either on more explicit pledges from Prime
Minister Yitzhak Shamir, or on a formula such as that suggested by Senator
Patrick Leahy, who chairs the Senate foreign aid appropriations
sub-committee, which would deduct any money spent on settlements
construction from the guarantees.
Few analysts in Washington, however, believe Mr Shamir can concede enough on
settlements to satisfy Mr Bush.
But without the White House's explicit backing, congressmen who favour the
loan guarantees believe it will be politically difficult to win enough
support.
Politicians are finding foreign aid, of which Israel is the principal
recipient, with Dollars 1.8bn of military assistance and Dollars 1.2bn of
economic support this year, increasingly unpalatable when their constituents
are suffering from recession and the federal government is strapped for
cash.
And although Israel is only asking the US to guarantee its borrowings, not
provide fresh grants, the request is not cost-free: new budget rules require
the US to set aside a proportion of the guarantee to cover the estimated
subsidy element behind the loans.
Credit analysts suggest Israel would probably not be able to find such large
sums at all without the guarantees, except through very short-term
borrowings - rather than 30-year loans.
But if Israel cannot give way on its right to continue building new
settlements in the occupied territories, it may have to give up at least
part of the Dollars 10bn guarantees it has requested.
