FT  10 JUL 92 / Survey of European Finance and Investment, Ireland (7): New
framework for stock market - Regulatory structure to be updated
ABOUT a year from now, the Irish Stock exchange will sever an historical
link with London which goes back almost two centuries to when dealers first
traded out of coffee houses in the main cities of the British Isles. The
link was formalised in 1973 with the amalgamation of the seven regional
exchanges into the Stock Exchange of Great Britain and Ireland.
A new Bill is due to be passed next summer which will break this umbilical
cord, creating a new regulatory framework for the market, and giving
statutory control to the central bank. This, in turn, will delegate the
day-to-day policing of the market to the Irish Stock Exchange itself.
The move is not due to national chauvinism or disenchantment with London. It
is simply that the legislative framework in the UK has evolved rapidly in
recent years, triggered by Big Bang, and the need to regulate an
increasingly sophisticated market based on on-screen and paperless trading.
The event will not produce a major trauma for the market: indeed, most
traders will barely notice the difference, according to Mr Tom Healey,
general manager of the Irish Stock Exchange, who says there will be minimal
changes. 'There will be an updating of the regulatory structure, to reflect
the many new instruments and ways of doing business that have evolved in
recent years but there will be no effect on listings. It is more to do with
brokers and the relationships with their clients.' All leading Irish stocks
are quoted on the London exchange and this will continue after the change.
Dublin will be linked to the Taurus electronic settlements system in London,
but Mr. Healey says it will not be necessary to duplicate the legal
structure that has been put in place in the UK - 'the UK took the pathway of
dematerialisation, but there is the alternative of demobilisation of paper,
which can have the effect of creating a paperless market without
dematerialising it. Dematerialisation would require entirely new
legislation'.
The close association with London will be maintained - 'our criteria will be
to adhere as closely as possible to London standards as that is what the
market wants.' If and when detailed investigations became necessary, these
could be contracted out to the London Exchange in order not to duplicate
efforts.
Unfortunately, the new stand-alone exchange will be deprived of what was
hoped would be its biggest single quoted company, GPA, the aviation leasing
group whose international offer was withdrawn at the eleventh hour last
month due to a lack of institutional interest.
With a forecast capitalisation of around IPounds 2bn, it would have
represented 20 per cent of the market's total capitalisation. The flotation
failure has disappointed brokers and investors alike, who are concerned at
the lack of dynamism in the Dublin market. At the end of June, the ISEQ
index fell back to where the market was a year ago, prompting analysts to
downgrade their earlier expectations of 15-20 per cent overall growth in the
market in 1992. Brokers say that, since the abolition of exchange controls
in 1989, most Irish institutional investors have been diversifying into
overseas equities with the result that Irish equities now only form some 30
per cent of their portfolios.
Last year Irish companies raised IPounds 816m on the Dublin exchange, up 11
per cent on 1990. The flotations of Greencore and Irish Life accounted for
IPounds 312m of that sum, and nothing of that scale is likely to be repeated
this year or next. The market is depressed and the GPA flop has added to the
sense of languor, but dealers console themselves that things could be much
worse. As one broker says: 'If Ireland had voted against Maastricht, there
would have been a disaster.'
