FT  28 FEB 92 / A-Z of Personal Finance (26): A measure of value but also of
risk - Yield
IT IS vital for any investor who wants to buy shares or bonds to understand
the principle of yield. Put simply, the yield on an investment is the rate
of return that the investor can expect. It may come in the form of income
(interest or dividends) or capital growth.
Yield is calculated by dividing the return (in whatever form) by the price
of the investment returned. This leads to the golden rule that, as prices
rise, yields fall - and vice versa.
Consequently markets use yields as a measure of the value of shares and
bonds. If a share or bond has a higher than average yield, this may be a
sign that it is attractive; that the price is set to rise (and the yield to
fall).
On the other hand, a share or bond may be trading at a higher than average
yield because the market perceives it to be risky. Investors may fear that
dividends will not be paid, or interest payments met. The price of such a
bond or share falls to a point where the yield is deemed sufficiently
attractive to compensate investors for the higher risk.
Some believe that these higher-yielding shares and bonds offer rewards that
more than compensate investors for risk. In the US, the now imprisoned
Michael Milken, of Drexel Burnham, persuaded many investors to buy so-called
'junk bonds' with very high yields, which he argued would bring above-normal
returns.
In the UK, a number of fund managers have prospered by investing in
high-yielding equities. UK equity income unit trusts proved to be the second
best sector over 10 years to January 1 1992, with an average rise of 405.2
per cent. But the recession in the UK has caused many companies cash-flow
difficulties, and a number are considering cutting their dividend, a move
which would result in a fall in the share price. This would badly affect
equity income trusts.
Yield on bonds: The rate of return on a bond is not the same as its coupon -
the slip of paper which the investor presents for payment of the interest or
dividend on the due date - because the bond is bought at its prevailing
price and not at its redemption price. The yield on a bond can be calculated
in two ways:
Current yield: This measures the income that an investor receives from
holding a bond over the next year. The calculation involves dividing the
bond's coupon by its price and multiplying the result by 100 to obtain a
percentage.
Redemption yield: Also known as the yield-to-maturity, this is a more
accurate, but complicated, way of calculating the yield. It takes into
account the fact that, as well as earning interest, a capital gain or loss
may be made by owning a bond until its redemption date. The calculation is
made and published in the Financial Times tables of British funds (see G for
gilts).
Yield curve: Another important aspect of yields is the different returns on
offer for short- and long-term investments. These can be plotted on a graph
and shown as the 'yield curve'.
In the late 1980s, short-term interest rates were pushed to very high
levels, above the returns offered by gilts. This was, in the jargon, a
backward-sloping yield curve. But short-term rates have fallen, and the
yield curve has flattened. This means in practical terms that private
investors can earn returns on gilts that match, and sometimes beat, those
available from building societies.
Dividend yield: This is the measure of yield for shares, calculated by the
relationship of the gross dividend to the share price. It can be a very
useful way to decide the cheapness or expensiveness of shares in general.
The historical average dividend yield is 5 per cent. As a rule of thumb,
when the market yields substantially more than this, shares look cheap; when
they yield less, shares are relatively dear.
As an example, in the black days of 1974, yields rose to 12 per cent, just
before the great bull market; and in the summer of 1987, yields fell below 3
per cent, just before the crash.
Earnings yield: This is another way of examining the 'value' of share prices
(see V for value investing). It relates a company's profits to its share
price. In essence, it is the inverse of that oft-quoted measure of share
value, the price-earnings ratio: a share with a p/e ratio of 10 would have
an earnings yield of 1/10 - ie, 10 per cent.
