FT  10 FEB 92 / Dispute over the need for Trident fails to submerge: The
future of the nuclear deterrent
HMS VANGUARD, first of Britain's Trident nuclear-missile submarines, is
being readied for its first appearance. The day is set, but not yet made
public, for it to leave VSEL's dock hall at Barrow-in-Furness and to be
lowered into the water.
It will be the coming-out ceremony for a programme that until recently
appeared to be slipping out of the focus of political controversy. But in
the past few weeks, with the US and Russia proposing deep cuts in their
nuclear arsenals, with more jobs being cut at the VSEL yard, and with an
impending general election, the debate surrounding the new Pounds 10bn
nuclear deterrent has suddenly been revived.
For the first time, cancellation of the programme is on none of the main
parties' election agendas. Ironically, Labour's shift since 1987 towards
accepting Trident and backing its deployment happened just as the cold war,
which gave Trident its raison d'etre, was melting away. The remaining
argument is about the size and firepower of the Trident fleet, due to start
being deployed in the mid 1990s.
The row began again over the weekend when Mr John Major, the prime minister,
repeated his commitment to Trident. Labour is committed to stopping the
fourth Trident boat but there are signs that the party may try to get off
that hook if it wins the general election, partly for the sake of jobs at
Barrow.
Work on 'long-lead items' for the fourth boat has been under way for some
time, pending completion of contract negotiations, and Pounds 138m has been
spent on it - about a quarter of the building cost.
The four-submarine fleet has been conceived with the idea that there will
always be one boat undergoing refit. A second will usually either be
preparing for a refit or 'working up' after one. This leaves two in the
'operational cycle', but there may be only one of those actually on patrol,
with the other in transit.
Maintaining the credibility of a UK deterrent, the argument goes, means
being in a position to use it at all moments and having at least one
submarine on patrol. With four new boats there will often be two on patrol
and sometimes three. But with old boats it can be a struggle to keep to the
minimum.
Britain's Polaris fleet is due to continue in service until the third
Trident boat goes to sea. Renown has been in refit since 1987. Reported to
have suffered cracks in its reactor piping, it should have been out more
than two years ago. Revenge, another Polaris boat, has had a long-overdue
refit cancelled. This leaves the main burden on the remaining two
submarines.
Submarines could fire their missiles without leaving the Faslane base in
Scotland. But keeping an ocean patrol is a central tenet of UK deterrence
policy. A submarine's value is that its whereabouts remain secret, it is
immune to pre-emptive attack and will therefore always be in a position to
retaliate. Officials reject the idea that it could perform the same role in
port. If it then put to sea in the midst of a crisis, it could provoke,
rather than deter, an escalation.
More flexible, in the official view, is the firepower installed in the
Trident submarines. Like the Polaris boats, they will carry up to 16
missiles each. These missiles, which will be collected in the US and then
mated with their British warheads, are more accurate than their
predecessors, with a range of up to 5,000 miles compared with less than
2,500 miles for Polaris.
The Polaris missiles, which Britain updated with its own Chevaline system in
the 1970s, carry up to three warheads. The Trident II was designed for up to
12, but the government (after switching its choice of missile from the
Trident I) stuck to a maximum of eight. In practice it is expected to
produce far fewer than the 512 warheads which would be needed to provide
full payloads for four fully armed submarines. Requirements may now be
reduced in the light of US-Soviet disarmament.
Mr Tom King, defence secretary, has refused to hint at how low the total
might go, but has confirmed that 'we're not going to carry the maximum'.
With concerns shifting to possible threats from countries with newly
acquired nuclear and ballistic missiles, Royal Navy officers argue that the
Trident system is flexible enough to enable it to adapt, taking on a
'sub-strategic' as well as a strategic mission.
In the east-west context, the case for 'sub-strategic' weapons has been to
give credibility to the threat of nuclear retaliation, providing an
intermediate option short of ultimate devastation.
Apart from Polaris, Britain's main nuclear weapons are ageing RAF bombs. The
government plans to replace these with aircraft-launched missiles - at a
cost estimated at up to Pounds 2.5bn - but has put off a decision on whether
to join a French missile programme or buy a suitable weapon from the US.
The case put for an air-launched 'sub-strategic' weapon is that it would
would serve as a deterrent against, say, a Third World dictator. In such a
case, the threat of using the full force of a strategic weapon system might
not be taken seriously.
Ministry of Defence officials are sticking to the idea that Britain needs
separate strategic and sub-strategic weapons. But the debate is very much
open. A recently retired army officer put the issue succinctly: 'Do we
really now need a second ticket to Armageddon?'
