FT  27 JUL 92 / Building groups take desperate measures: How construction
companies are taking on work for little or no profit to survive the
recession
already weakened by the collapse of residential and commercial property
prices - are facing a new threat.
Contractors desperate for cash to reduce large borrowings raised to buy land
for housing and commercial development during the 1980s have been bidding
for building work at prices which do little more than cover their overheads.
Such bids could rebound on them when demand for construction starts to
recover and material and labour prices begin to rise again before the work
is completed. In many cases, prices already suggest that losses will be made
on some contracts.
Even a small increase in costs could turn these marginal jobs into heavy
lossmakers. Companies already close to insolvency could be pushed over the
edge, according to Sir Brian Hill, president of the Building Employers
Confederation, the industry's largest trade association.
Southern England, where hundreds of completed office blocks stand empty, has
been worst affected by the downturn in construction orders.
Mr Peter Birse, chairman of Birse Group, an aggressive contractor which grew
rapidly in the mid to late 1980s, says: 'Anybody who says they are doing
better than just covering overheads on contracts won in southern England is
lying.'
The National Economic Development Office has forecast that construction
output will fall 6.5 per cent this year following a drop of 9 per cent last
year. Commercial construction, mainly offices and shops, is expected to fall
25 per cent this year and 10 per cent next year.
Large customers of the industry such as the Department of Transport and
Anglian Water, one of the biggest water companies, estimate that prices for
building and civil engineering work have fallen by between 20 per cent and
30 per cent since the late 1980s.
Main contractors have been assisted by sharp falls in sub-contractors'
prices as well as in building material and labour prices.
Mr Robert Napier, chief executive of Redland, one of the UK's biggest
building material producers, estimates that prices of the cheapest bricks
have fallen 40 per cent since 1989. He says: 'Brick prices in the past 12
months have fallen on average by 20 per cent. The industry has the capacity
to produce 3.8bn bricks a year but is only selling 3bn a year. There is
currently six months supply of unsold stock standing on factory forecourts.'
The price of roof tiles has fallen 15 per cent since 1989 and 10 per cent in
the past 12 months, according to Redland. Ready-mixed concrete is being sold
at a loss, according to Mr Napier, and margins have virtually disappeared on
coated stone for roadbuilding. Constructional steel prices have fallen by a
quarter since 1989.
Dr Derek Tordoff, director of of the British Constructional Steelwork
Association, says: 'Contractors pricing a construction job have been taking
the lowest quoted steel price and then knocking 10 per cent off that. They
have been able to get away with it because of over-capacity in the
industry.'
It has become harder for contractors to do this as steelworks have closed
and capacity has been reduced - 50 companies are estimated to have shut down
since 1989. Constructional steel prices, in one or two instances, have
started to rise very slightly during the past couple of months, says Dr
Tordoff.
Even without a rise in material and labour prices, contractors could be
facing serious difficulties on some jobs. Few will admit openly that they
are taking lossmaking jobs. Privately, they say their businesses would
disappear within six months if they did not accept a proportion of work at
zero or even lossmaking margins.
Mr Birse tells of a team of contract estimators at a rival construction
group who had reduced their bid to as low as they dared when they were
ordered to slice a further Pounds 1m off the price. 'Profits on the job were
irrelevant: the company needed the cash,' says Mr Birse. Stories like these
are legion in the industry.
The only hope for companies bidding rock-bottom prices is that they will be
able to justify claims for extra payments as the job progresses and project
designs and construction timetables are modified.
Mr Anthony Edwards, a partner specialising in construction litigation at DJ
Freeman, the law firm, expects legal claims for additional payments to
spiral as contractors attempt to recover margins.
Falling construction prices have meant that there has seldom been a better
time to build a new motorway, sewerage works, home extension or even a fifth
terminal at Heathrow airport.
According to BAA, formerly the British Airports Authority, the cost of
building the fifth terminal has halved from Pounds 1.6bn to Pounds 800m. The
decline is partly due to improved designs and better project management but
also to lower building costs since the scheme was first devised.
A comparative study by EC Harris, the international cost consultants, of
current developments and similar buildings constructed in the late 1980s,
reveals that construction prices in London have fallen on average by more
than a fifth since the second quarter of 1989.
Motorway and trunk-road prices last year were about a fifth lower on average
than had been forecast in the transport department's budget. The fall in
prices means it can bring forward schemes which were expected to take place
in future years.
The department carefully vets tender lists to ensure that construction
companies have the financial strength as well as physical skills to carry
out the job. Less careful customers could find that they are storing up
trouble by accepting an unrealistically low bid should their contractor be
forced out of business or seek redress through the courts by claiming extra
payments.
