FT  07 SEP 92 / Japanese Bonds: Pessimism on economic recovery grows
WHILE hopes of an imminent cut in Japan's official discount rate were dashed
by the Japanese government's package to stimulate growth, bond market
participants remain bullish after continuing weakness in the country's
economy.
Last month's announcement of a Y10,700bn fiscal spending package brought a
temporary halt to the bond market rally, and the yield on the 10-year
benchmark rose 15 basis points. However, the yield has since returned to the
4.9 per cent level, as pessimism towards an early economic recovery is
growing.
Downward earnings revisions by leading companies are reflecting underlying
weakness. Nissan Motor said it would post its first loss since 1946, and
suspended dividend payments for the interim period. NEC and Toshiba, the
electronics makers, also cut forecasts for the current year to next March
due to poor demand.
Corporate profits have been hit by the unexpected slump in economic
activity. Although the Japanese government initially expected firm consumer
spending to support the economy, consumer confidence has deteriorated during
the past few months. Nomura Research Institute, the research arm of Nomura
Securities, last week forecast a bigger than expected fall of 17.9 per cent
in company profits for this year.
Although the government has forecast that the fiscal package would boost
economic growth by 2.3 per cent during the next 12 months, NRI said the
announcement of the package had been delayed, and the effects of public
works spending would not be felt until next fiscal year.
For the bond market, additional spending is likely to mean financing through
additional issuance of bonds. Although details of the financing remain to be
seen, the government last week increased the amount of bonds auctioned from
the usual Y800bn to Y1,000bn.
Although an imminent credit easing has become unlikely due to the package,
anticipation towards a cut in the official discount rate within this year is
growing. 'The consensus seems to be a cut sometime in November or December,'
says Mr Robert Feldman, economist at Salomon Brothers in Tokyo.
In addition to hopes of monetary easing, investors have held on to their
bond holdings due to the lack of attractive investments elsewhere. Although
the size of the fiscal package and the surge in the stock market discouraged
some market participants, the cash bond market has remained relatively
stable. Instead, volatile movements were seen in the bond futures markets.
'Investors were heavily selling in the futures market to hedge their cash
positions,' explains Mr Marshall Gittler, analyst at Merrill Lynch in Tokyo.
Meanwhile, the government bond market has seen a change in its 10-year
benchmark. On August 27, the No 129 bond, which only had some eight years
until maturity, was replaced by the No 145 bond.
For the coming months, bond yields are expected to remain firm due to dim
prospects for the economy. This week, Bank of Japan will announce its tankan
 -quarterly survey of business sentiment - which is expected to indicate a
further decline in confidence among corporations.
However, the upside on bond prices seems limited, and a sharp jump is not
foreseen. Mr Feldman at Salomon Brothers predicts that the yield on the No
145 will rise to 4.75 per cent during the next few months.
Int'l Bonds Page 22
US Money &amp; Credit Page 24
UK Gilts Page 24
