FT  04 APR 92 / Arts: French flair at the fair
The Champs de Mars is the military soul of Paris, where Napoleon lies in
monumental splendour and, in Les Invalides, Louis XIV's grandest building
project in his capital, the wounded still parade the horrors of war.
For a few days in March the image strengthens with the appearance of tented
white pavilions on the greensward. Inside the tents a desperate campaign is
fought, with antique dealers trying to sell their stock to economically
shell-shocked collectors.
The Salon de Mars appeared four years ago as an attempt to liven up Paris's
art market in the long gap between the autumn Biennales. It quickly
established itself as an important date on the international art fair
calendar, attracting 115, mainly French, dealers this year, and 50,000
visitors.
Success has brought change. At the start the Salon was provocatively
original, with no nonsense about dates. Challenging contemporary art was
shown alongside re-assuring antiquities; solid 18th century French commodes
nestled with sinister items of tribal art. Now the extremes have been
subsumed inside a comprehensive art fair.
Some of the character has been lost, but the ingrained French feel for
style, for outward show, has been retained. The long arm of the interior
decorator might be sensed reaching down the avenues between the stands, but
it is decorators with taste rather than decorators with the ability to
persuade the rich to pay over the odds for kitsch.
Foreign dealers are slow to take up the Fair, but Michael Goedhuis of London
was happy enough, selling Dollars 100,000 of oriental works of art at the
opening party. The other London dealer showing for the first time,
Stoppenbach &amp; Delestre, was also pleased with its decision to bring home the
French artists it usually offers in Cork Street. It quickly sold views of
Paris by Harpignies.
The recession has split dealers in their attitude to fairs. Some wonder why
they bother to operate from expensive galleries; they could trade to their
traditional customers just as effectively from home, while meeting new
clients at fairs; others think fairs are just another expense in dreadful
times. But fairs get dealers out and about; expose them to the stock of
their competitors; and, in Paris at least, ensure a constant flow of
viewers. So far the trade in Paris has been less badly hit than in London,
and sales at the Salon while not brisk were certainly steady. The delegation
from the British Antique Dealers Association, there to pick up tips for its
own fair under canvas, planned for Chelsea in May 1993, was impressed.
So what caught the eye? As always the stands of Perrin and Segoura, two of
the handful of grandes antiquaires who set the standards in Paris, offered
18th century furniture, topped with clocks, porcelain, and indeed beds, all
unfussy but shrieking refined taste. Galerie Mechiche best summed up the
barrier-breaking tradition of the Salon by juxtaposing paintings by Balthus
and Tapies with Chinese pots dating back 4,000 years, Graeco-Roman
sculptures, and 18th century furniture bearing the stamp of Jacob. And it
all looked fine. Gisele Croes from Brussels stopped you in your tracks with
a collection of Chinese art, Tang figures, somehow enhanced by the loss of
their original paint, quiet, enduring symbols of a millenium and more ago.
The attraction of the Salon is that it welcomes bizarre dealers like
Gallerie Acteon, which offers 'art de la locomotion', scale models of boats,
cars and trains - and a full size papier-mache horse presumably used by an
artist painting Napoleon's generals. The drawback is that it is still French
centred; coming so soon after Maastricht many foreign dealers feel they
cannot exhibit at both. But the verdict this week was that demand had been
fair to good, especially where dealers had reduced prices. Now that the
Salon has built foundations it needs to bring in foreign galleries at the
expense of some of the more meretricious contemporary dealers.
