FT  04 NOV 92 / Cheese factory rescue fails
A YORKSHIRE businessman who wanted cheesemaking to resume at the now defunct
Hawes creamery in Wensleydale has withdrawn his offer to buy the plant after
months of inconclusive negotiations with its owners, Dairy Crest.
The decision by Mr Martin Sterne, a Ripon businessman, is a serious blow for
the Hawes Dairy Rescue Committee, a group of local businesspeople that has
led the campaign to save Wensleydale's last commercial cheese-making site.
The committee had strongly supported Mr Sterne's bid, thought to have been
about Pounds 250,000, in the belief that it offered the best chance of
safeguarding Wensleydale's 800- year-old cheesemaking tradition and that it
would create much-needed employment.
Mr Peter Annison, a member of the committee and chairman of Hawes Chamber of
Trade, said yesterday the committee sympathised with Mr Sterne's decision to
pull out of talks with Dairy Crest, the Milk Marketing Board's manufacturing
subsidiary.
Mr Annison said: 'We've always had the suspicion that Dairy Crest were not
interested in allowing that site to be sold to potential competition; that
suspicion has grown as the weeks and months have gone by. It's very sad for
the area.'
Dairy Crest closed the creamery in May and moved Wensleydale production to
its plant in Longridge, Lancashire, to increase competitiveness and cut
surplus capacity. The closure cost remote Hawes 59 jobs.
Mr Sterne sold catering butchers Holmesterne to the Sims Food Group several
years ago.
He made his offer for the creamery in the summer after lower bids by the
rescue committee were rejected.
He now plans to concentrate on developing his new catering butchers
business, Smith and Sterne, based at Wetherby, West Yorkshire.
Local hopes of reopening the creamery now hang on a bid by several ex-Hawes
management staff who have avoided publicity.
Dairy Crest denied yesterday that it did not want to see cheesemaking resume
at Hawes, but declined to say why no deal had yet been concluded. 'We are
continuing negotiations with other interested parties,' it said.
