FT  05 FEB 92 / International Company News: Merck drug clears key FDA hurdle
MERCK, the world's biggest drugs company, yesterday was given a big boost
when the US Food and Drug Administration's advisory panel decided that the
benefits of the company's Proscar drug, to treat and control benign prostate
disease, outweighed the risks.
Merck said the committee was not asked to vote on whether the drug should be
cleared for marketing. However, the FDA is now expected to give its final
approval in the coming months.
The potential market for Proscar is enormous. About half of all men over 50
suffer from prostate enlargement. Although there are other drugs available
to treat the symptoms of prostate enlargement, there is no other drug on the
market that inhibits the enzyme that triggers the production of DHT, which
causes the condition.
Merck paced the pharmaceutical industry through the 1980s with its new drug
introductions, and analysts view Proscar as Merck's next blockbuster.
Ms Hayley Kissel, an analyst at Smith Barney, said: 'This is probably
Merck's most significant new drug between now and the end of 1995.' She
believes that Proscar could generate sales of between Dollars 750m and
Dollars 1bn by 1995.
On Wall Street, anticipation of a favourable recommendation helped Merck's
shares climb Dollars 4 7/8 to Dollars 158 7/8 . The decision came after the
close of trading.
The advisory panel said Proscar had no significant side-effects. The
benefits of the drug, while limited to a small group of patients studied,
significantly outweighed the risks of the drug.
Proscar's side-effects include reduced sexual drive, but the advisory panel
concluded that these problems were not serious and were reversible in many
cases.
The test results considered by the FDA showed that the drug reduced prostate
size by about 20 per cent. It also reduced the levels of the hormones
implicated in prostate enlargement by as much as 70 per cent.
However, some analysts had been concerned about the efficacy of the drug.
The tests showed that only one-third of patients achieved the target urinary
flow rates. They pointed out that drugs already on the market created more
symptomatic relief than Proscar.
Merck has argued that the drug deals with the cause of problems by retarding
the growth of the prostrate. Proscar may be capable of halting progression
of the disease and could also be used with existing symptomatic relief
drugs, the company said.
The drug is the first in a new class of drug called 5-alpha reductose
inhibitors which deal with the underlying hormonal changes such as those
causing prostrate enlargement.
Merck applied for European licences last summer.
