FT  20 FEB 92 / Technology: Robots set sail for Thamesport
Two hundred tons of steel come to a precise halt, a hoist is lowered, the
spreader locks on to a 40-foot container and winches it more than 100 feet
into the air.
At first sight there is nothing particularly unusual about the towering
cranes going about their business at the Pounds 140m Thamesport deep water
container terminal on the Isle of Grain, the first purpose-built container
port in Britain.
But these are 'robot' cranes and they are being controlled and monitored not
by a chunky mainframe, but by a desktop PC sitting several hundred yards
away in the port's office block.
What is more, the computer knows the position of every container in the
seven quarter-mile long 110-foot high 'stacks'. It uses magnetic swipe cards
and radio modems to direct a truck driver to the right position to collect,
or to deliver, a load.
Thamesport, which began operations in May 1990 and will have a capacity of
400,000 con-tainers when the last of its three development phases is
completed, is probably the world's most automated port.
Three years ago, when Thamesport was still in the planning stages, Keith
Archer, Thamesport's business systems manager, was charged with developing
an automated container port system which would provide a quick and efficient
service with the minimum manning levels and cost. And, unlike conventional
ports, it would permit the servicing of ships and haulage independently.
'I had to get it up and running fast,' Archer recalls. Initially he looked
for a packaged software system to control the port's complex administration,
communications and cargo handling needs. He settled on a customised solution
based on the Global 3000 Development Suite from TIS Software, a subsidiary
of the Misys computer services group.
Working with Farnborough-based software house Advanced PC Products, Archer
designed the main elements involved in the automation of the port, the back
office administration system and port control system.
One of the most innovative features of the Thamesport's system is the
control of remote peripherals. Using customised communications software,
radio modems and swipe cards the system supervises the movement of all
machinery within the port, including the five monster ship-to-shore 'robot'
cranes and the 14 gantry cranes, which unload the containers from the ships
and then organise them into the storage stacks before loading them on to
trucks. At the moment the cranes are still manned, but are expected to go
fully automatic shortly.
Truck drivers entering the port to load or unload cargo are guided and
monitored remotely by the system. System peripherals verify customs'
clearance, photograph the container, direct the lorry to the appropriate
gantry slot and print an itinerary of the driver's stay at the port. A swipe
card identifies the truck and its load. On average 350 trucks enter the port
each day and 85 per cent of them are inside the Thamesport gates for less
than two hours.
The system also provides the communications facilities. Electronic data
interchange, fax and telex message functions connect Thamesport with data
processing systems at its customers, HM Customs and Excise, government
departments, overseas ports, banks and insurers.
Despite the complexity of the port's operations Archer was able to get the
system up and running within 15 months, and incorporate additional hardware
as the port's facilities have expanded. The core hardware cost Pounds
200,000 and Archer says the port could be run on three PCs, one for
accounting and office systems, one for control and one as a back-up.
