FT  11 APR 92 / Struggle to save the half-life of a silent reactor: A
scientists' campaign to show that an old nuclear station is still safe and
viable
BRADWELL, a quiet village near Southend-on-Sea, is particularly quiet this
month. The humming noise that used to be heard in the village has gone.
Bradwell power station, Britain's oldest surviving commercial nuclear
station, closed this month, its 30th birthday.
It cannot reopen until Nuclear Electric, which owns and operates Bradwell
and the other nuclear stations of England and Wales, convinces the Nuclear
Installations Inspectorate (NII), the industry watchdog, that it is safe.
Today, the station looks deserted. Above the reactor core, a few
white-coated men are gathered round a piece of equipment. Outside, radiation
monitors registering zero radiation stand like silent washing machines in an
old-fashioned launderette.
Nuclear Electric is fighting to reopen Bradwell, commissioned in 1962. Its
efforts to keep running Bradwell and the six other stations of similar
design - named Magnox after the fuel they use  - is controversial. The
stations are all more than 20 years old.
Environmental lobby groups such as Greenpeace believe they are unsafe and
should close. Bradwell is doing its best to convince the public that that is
not true. Posters on the walls of the visitors' room explain why the nuclear
disaster at Chernobyl could not happen at Bradwell.
Nuclear Electric has spent Pounds 10m on refurbishing the station, on top of
a share of the Pounds 80m it has allocated to all seven Magnoxes.
It wants the inspectorate's permission to continue operating Bradwell for a
further seven or so years. Nuclear Electric also hopes to extend the life of
the other Magnoxes beyond 30 years.
That means intensive testing to show that the stations are safe. Mr Andrew
Clarke, the company's technical services manager, says: 'We've inspected the
pipes - to check they are still fit  - and the cables, using special
infra-red techniques to check for overheating.
'We have looked at the reactor vessel. We have a scheme which monitors
samples of the plate material inside the vessel . . . We'll finish the
inspection by the end of June, and we think the NII will reach a view by
then.'
Opposition to extending the life of Bradwell and its sister stations is
strong. Nuclear Electric's critics say the company is stretching out the
life of the Magnoxes because it cannot afford to close them. If it did, it
would lose revenues from the cheap power they generate - because their
capital costs are written down - and would have to pay to dismantle or
decommission the stations.
Mr Simon Roberts, energy campaigner for Friends of the Earth, says: 'The
cost of decommissioning is beginning to make the PSBR look like small
change.' He believes the government itself might could find it hard to do
without the revenues from the stations. 'There will be economic pressure to
keep them open,' he says.
Nuclear Electric agrees that decommissioning the eight Magnoxes will cost
around Pounds 1,200m, but denies ignoring safety issues because of economic
pressure. The Magnoxes, Nuclear Electric argues, are 'good engineering
workhorses.' Their original 20-year lifespan was not based on the length of
the period during which they would be safe. It was simply an economic
payback period.
Bradwell, with its 1960s design, certainly looks out of date. But, Mr Clarke
stresses, safety is paramount.
Whatever the government and the NII decide, Bradwell's fate will only be
postponed, not averted. Within another decade, the station will be
permanently silenced.
