FT  15 MAY 92 / No more jobs for the boys: 'Non-employment' is the burning
issue, not 'unemployment'
Slow growth and rising unemployment are fuelling social discontent across
the developed world: anti-immigration French nationalism, a threatened
general strike in Spain, rising crime in Britain, riots in America are all
worrying examples.
At next week's ministerial meeting of the Organisation of Economic
Co-operation and Development in Paris unemployment is at the top of the
agenda. Yet the representatives of the world's richest and most successful
market economies will have little alternative but to wring their hands and
shake their heads. Everyone knows unemployment is a problem; but nobody
fully understands why it has remained so high for so long, or how to reduce
it.
The ostensible cause of the rich countries' renewed concern is the
combination of forthcoming elections and rising unemployment: not one with
which politicians can feel happy. But a deeper sense of unease is revealed
in the internal OECD papers prepared for next week's meetings. These
describe how the developed countries have become increasingly troubled by
the links between joblessness and economic deprivation: drug use and abuse,
racial tensions and a rising tide of crime and violence. The OECD fears that
the economic slowdown, and ensuing increase in unemployment, will make these
problems both more perceptible and acute, with dangerous consequences for
social cohesion and political stability.
At least the OECD is sure that it understands the facts: unemployment has
risen in almost every important member country in the 1980s; the rise was
concentrated among men, not women; it has remained persistently and
exceptionally high in Europe.
The experience of two countries that did not follow the trend - the US and
Sweden - are the basis for the OECD's rather tentative policy
recommendations. America's flexible and deregulated labour markets have
allowed it to to absorb a large inflow of immigrant labour, without any
apparent rise in unemployment, while Sweden's extensive and expensive labour
market programmes underpin the OECD's support for 'active' policy measures
to re-train the unemployed and help them back to work.
But is the OECD's reading of the facts correct? The concentration of
long-term unemployment in Europe is only part of the wider picture. By
focusing on 'unemployment' - people who are available and actively looking
for work - the OECD excludes a group that should be of great importance to
policy-makers: people who have no jobs and have given up the search for
employment.
Male labour force participation has dropped sharply over the past decade as
many have shifted from being 'unemployed' to 'economically inactive'. The
common characteristic of these two groups is that they do not have jobs; all
can be classified under the general heading of 'non-employed'.
The international pattern of non-employment looks different from that for
registered unemployment. The US may be a low 'unemployment' country, but it
is a low employment country too as the chart shows. The US has, in fact,
been the standard on which the rest of Europe has converged. The
non-employment rate of men aged 25-55 has doubled in the US since 1970, but
tripled in the UK, France and Germany.
This suggests the OECD should be asking two fundamental questions: Why do so
few men work now, compared with 20 years ago? And what do they do, instead?
Slow growth: Unemployment rises in recessions when growth is depressed. The
OECD's latest forecasts are for subdued growth of 1.8 per cent among OECD
countries this year. .The European unemployment rate is expected to jump
from 8.7 per cent in 1991 to 9.4 per cent in 1992, and continue rising into
next year. Yet slow growth cannot explain why non-employment remained so
high throughout the period of strong economic growth in the latter half of
the 1980s.
Unions and real wages: Alternatively, maybe trade union 'insiders' pushed up
their real wages when growth picked up, preventing the unemployed
'outsiders' from being re-employed. If so, advises Professor Dennis Snower
of Birkbeck College, London University, governments should reduce trade
union power and make it easier to fire insiders by reducing severance pay or
simplifying firing procedures.
This is music to the OECD's ears; but does it fit the facts? The pace of
real wage growth across Europe in the 1980s was rapid in light of the
overhang of unemployment, especially in the UK. But why did this rise in
non-employment in the UK occur when trade union membership was falling and
labour market regulations were being relaxed?
Co-ordinated wage bargaining: The pattern of wage bargaining is yet another
explanation for permanently high non-employment. Trade unions may be more
effective in obtaining higher real wages for their members when collective
bargaining is decentralised as in the UK, rather than centrally co-ordinated
as in Germany and Sweden (as the chart shows). Unions encourage employers to
pay above-average wage settlements to motivate their workers, but at the
expense of higher wage inflation.
Sweden's centralised wage bargaining requires comparatively small increases
in unemployment to bring inflation under control. Yet Australia has suffered
from high non-employment despite centralised bargining and moderate real
wage growth.
Disincentives for job search: Vacancies were high in the late 1980s, so
either the unemployed were not looking for available jobs or they were
unqualified for those available.
What appears to affect the behaviour of the unemployed is not the level of
unemployment benefits but the length of time they are paid, according to
Professor Richard Layard and Dr John Philpot of the Employment Institute, a
UK-based independent think tank. Countries such as Sweden and the US, with
limited duration of unemployment benefits, tend to have lower unemployment.
Yet the link between unemployment benefits and unemployment is misleading.
Studies find a positive, but small, relationship between benefits and
unemployment. But once unemployment rates are replaced with non-employment
rates, the simple correlation between benefit duration and joblessness
breaks down.
The duration of benefits may, instead, merely determine how joblessness is
recorded. 'The real problem is non-employment and not unemployment,' argues
Professor Larry Summers of Harvard University. 'Countries with what appear
to be long-term unemployment problems are often just countries where the
non-employed keep being counted as unemployed for longer.' More brawn than
brain: The variation across countries - in rates of economic growth,
wage-bargaining institutions, benefit levels, and active support for the
unemployed - are large. But these national disguises conceal something they
all share: the collapse in the demand for unskilled male labour over the
past two decades.
The rise of low-cost suppliers in the newly developed countries and the
comparative advantage of developed countries in highly skilled,
technologically advanced production has rendered much of the developing
countries' manufacturing capacity obsolete. The rapid rate of productivity
growth in manufacturing has been as important.
This structural shift has left a residue of poorly educated, unskilled male
labour whose market value has fallen sharply. These are the groups which
have been hit hardest by unemployment.
Countries have been affected in different ways, and their policy responses
have differed. In the US, where wages are very flexible, the real wages of
the lowest-paid 10 per cent of workers have fallen by 30 per cent since
1970, while the wages of college graduates have grown.
Very low relative wages for unskilled jobs and a lack of income support have
been cited as one cause for the rise in crime. The LSE's Professor Richard
Freeman points to the way the increase in incarceration has been
concentrated among the uneducated in the 1980s. By 1986, 7.4 per cent of US
male high school drop-outs aged 25-34, and 26 per cent of black male
drop-outs, were in prison.
Continental Europe has taken a different route. The relative rigidity of
wages, and high unemployment benefits, have prevented unskilled real wages
from falling. But employers have been unwilling to hire the unskilled at
those wages. Unskilled men subsist on state benefit.
The UK lies somewhere in-between. The real wages of the low paid have not
fallen, but wage inequality rose more sharply than in Europe as labour
market regulations were dismantled. Unemployment benefits, though permanent,
are low compared with the rest of Europe. Little wonder then that the UK has
taken on many US characteristics: high vacancies and rapid female employment
growth alongside a rising pool of non-employed, and increasingly
unemployable, men 'active' outside the system.
Sweden appears to have bucked the trend. It, too, suffered a fall in
manufacturing employment. But it has maintained relatively low unemployment
and non-employment, high unemployment benefits and a relatively equal wage
distribution. Sweden has provided an alternative: employment in the public
sector. Public sector employment has tripled over the past two decades; by
1987, more than 30 per cent of employed Swedes worked for the government
compared with 15 per cent in the US. Japan has taken a not dissimilar route,
but through highly inefficient private service sector employment.
The heavy costs of Sweden's third way have meant a much larger public sector
and higher marginal and average tax rates than in other OECD countries. The
electorate has now rebelled, electing a conservative government pledged to
reduce the size of the public sector.
Dealing with the collapse in the demand for men whose principle skill is
their physical strength is at the root of the economic and social problem
facing all OECD countries. Nobody has yet found a satisfactory solution:
supporting the unskilled unemployed to do nothing is wasteful; giving them
public jobs is expensive; excluding them from society altogether is
dangerous. The Los Angeles riots suggest inaction can have painful, and
expensive, consequences.
