FT  14 SEP 92 / Labor pins its election hopes on Kiwi-bashing: The
Australian party is prepared to go to extreme lengths to fend off the
prospect of political oblivion
TELEVISION viewers in Victoria, Australia's second most populous state, have
been entertained recently by a series of Labor party advertisements showing
disgruntled New Zealanders complaining about their conservative government.
The campaign provoked an exchange of insults between Melbourne and
Wellington, including a graceless jibe by Mr Jim Bolger, the New Zealand
prime minister, about the physical appearance of Mrs Joan Kirner, Victoria's
Labor premier.
It was an unedifying incident which is probably best forgotten, except that
it illustrates the lengths to which Labor is prepared to go to fend off the
looming prospect of virtual political oblivion.
Labor has been the dominant force in Australian politics since the defeat of
Mr Malcolm Fraser's tired and ineffectual conservative coalition by Mr Bob
Hawke in 1983.
Mr Hawke, together with Mr Paul Keating, then deputy prime minister, and
state leaders such as Mr Neville Wran in New South Wales, Mr John Cain in
Victoria, Mr John Bannon in South Australia and Mr Brian Burke in Western
Australia (WA), gave Labor a modern, technocratic image at odds with its
class-based past.
For a while it looked as though Labor had emerged as Australia's natural
party of government, especially when the conservative Liberal and National
parties began to fragment in the face of personal and ideological tensions.
There were big differences between the style and policies of the various
Labor leaders. Mr Hawke's generally free-market and deregulatory approach
contrasted sharply, for example, with the interventionist policies pursued
by Mr Cain.
Nevertheless, the Labor vote was swollen almost everywhere by the economic
boom which swept the country between 1983 and 1990. By the end of the decade
the party was in power in Canberra and in every state except New South
Wales.
Two years into the 1990s, every one of Labor's big names of the 1980s has
retired in the face of public disapprobation, with the sole exception of Mr
Keating, who forced Mr Hawke aside after a messy leadership struggle in
December.
Since 1990 Labor has faced an election only in the small island state of
Tasmania, where it was defeated by the Liberals. But the electoral cycle is
gathering pace, and the party faces the prospect of further defeats in
Canberra and three other states over the next 18 months.
Much of the decline has been caused by regional issues, notably poor
economic management which has forced Victoria and South Australia to bail
out failed state-owned financial institutions, and a long-running scandal in
Western Australia over allegedly corrupt links between ministers and local
businessmen. Thanks to good electoral management, the first test will come
this Saturday in Queensland, where Labor has a good chance of retaining the
power it won in 1988.
However, while the Queensland poll will be good for Labor morale, the likely
victory will be based on local issues with little relevance elsewhere  -
mainly continued repugnance at the corruption of the previous National party
government of Sir Jo Bjelke-Petersen.
A more reliable guide to national political sentiment will come on October
3, when Mrs Kirner's Victorian Labor government goes to the polls in an
election it has almost no chance of winning.
If Labor's unpopularity was based solely on state issues, the federal
government would have little to worry about, since Australian voters
frequently switch between parties at federal and state elections.
But the opinion polls show that voters are also holding the federal
government responsible for a recession and weak recovery which has increased
unemployment to more than 11 per cent since the economy began to slow in
1989.
Mr Keating's strategy has been to pump-prime the economy through a series of
economic packages, while trying to divert attention from economic issues
through campaigns to change the flag and abolish the monarchy.
Meanwhile, the conservative coalition has been revitalised under the
leadership of Mr John Hewson, the Liberal leader, who has put forward a
comprehensive plan to shake up Australian industry through labour market
reform and free trade.
Perhaps unwisely, Mr Hewson has let it be known that he admires the economic
transformation wrought by successive New Zealand governments, which have
substantially improved competitiveness by liberalising the capital and
labour markets, squeezing out inflation and abandoning protective tariffs
and subsidies.
In the short term, however, the more obvious effects of change in New
Zealand have been a lengthy recession and social dislocation caused by
privatisation and government spending cuts.
It is this aspect of the New Zealand experience which is providing
ammunition for Labor in Victoria, and for federal leaders such as Senator
Peter Cook, the employment minister, who recently suggested that Wellington
was creating an economic under-class which would subsequently flee to
Australia.
The strategy has the dual advantage for Labor of presenting the
conservatives as free-market demagogues while also playing to the widespread
Australian prejudice against New Zealanders.
Kiwi-bashing is an old sport among Australians, some of whom find
disparaging their closest cousins a useful element in the national struggle
to define a distinctive post-colonial identity. However, in the absence of a
rapid improvement in the economy, and a consequent decline in unemployment,
it is unlikely to save Labor from the consequences of its own mismanagement.
Bashing the Kiwis may also be a more risky strategy than Labor leaders
think. The signs are that New Zealand is achieving a return to
non-inflationary growth. By the middle of next year, when the next federal
election must be held, that could be a severe embarrassment for Mr Keating.
