FT  30 JUN 92 / Dublin faces a political storm over meat scandal: Tribunal
begins to interview ministers
THE Irish government yesterday braced itself for a political storm as
ministers made their first appearances before the tribunal investigating
allegations of fraud, malpractice and political connivance in Ireland's
multi-million pound beef industry.
Mr Des O'Malley, the Irish industry minister, stood by allegations he made
in parliament three years ago that there was political favouritism in the
beef industry and extensive abuse of the export credit insurance scheme,
while the present prime minister, Mr Albert Reynolds, was in charge of
administering the scheme in 1987 and 1988.
Mr O'Malley is the first cabinet minister to be called to give evidence in
the six-month long inquiry into the beef industry, and his declarations,
which are expected to continue throughout this week, could force a split in
the coalition.
Mr O'Malley, from the small Progressive Democrat party, joined the coalition
after the 1989 general elections. Mr Reynolds is leaders of the Fianna Fail
party.
Mr O'Malley told the tribunal that he believed his earlier allegations
'understated' the magnitude of what was happening in the beef industry, and
that in 1988 export credit insurance for beef sales to Iraq made up almost
50 per cent of all export insurance available at the time. 'This was to just
two companies, for one product to one country,' he said.
The companies involved were Goodman International and Hibernia Meats. He
said that 80 per cent of the insurance was given to the Goodman group,
Europe's biggest beef processor, and that at one point the contingent
liability of the government to cover the Goodman contracts was IPounds 172m.
Mr O'Malley said it was unjustifiable to have continued export cover to Iraq
as, although it was a very lucrative market, it was 'very high risk'.
'Iraq had to pay high prices for its beef because it was a high risk market.
Key to getting in there was export insurance. Those (companies) who were in
had a tremendous advantage,' he told the tribunal.
He said that some of the meat for the contracts had been sourced from
outside Ireland, contravening the rules for the granting of export cover,
and had disadvantaged 'many other Irish beef exporters that wanted to get
into the market'. He said that cover had also been given for 'abnormally
long periods of between 12 and 24 months' whereas the usual period for
comestible products was from 28-30 days. This locked up funds and was
prejudicial to other exporters, he said.
When Ireland raised its overall export insurance ceiling from IPounds 300m
to IPounds 500m in June 1988 he said 'No indication was given to the Dail
(parliament) that the reason for increasing the limit was because of what
was happening in the Iraqi market'. He went on to say that the Irish beef
sold under the contracts 'most likely went to feeding the Iraqi military'.
The tribunal heard in earlier evidence last month that several beef
companies made substantial donations to party funds, the majority going to
Fianna Fail. Fianna Fail has so far refused to divulge to the tribunal
details of political contributions arguing that they were made 'in
confidence'. The opposition Fine Gael party, and Mr O'Malley's Progressive
Democrats have also expressed reluctance to divulge details of
contributions.
