FT  11 MAY 92 / Government labour policies condemned
GOVERNMENT policies on unions and unemployment have come under attack from
the International Labour Organisation, the United Nations body responsible
for labour affairs.
Failure to resolve the dispute with unions over representation at the
Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), the intelligence centre where
unions were banned by the government in 1984, has brought strong criticism
from an ILO committee of experts.
Its annual report 'deplores' that the committee is 'unable to note any
tangible progress on this question or even a resumption of discussions'. The
report emphasises that, under a convention to which the UK is a signatory,
'workers have the right to establish organisations of their own choosing'.
The government has argued that in many countries the activities of GCHQ
would be carried out by military personnel - a category of employee excluded
from the convention.
The committee urges the government to 'resume in the very near future
constructive discussions calculated to lead, through genuine dialogue, to a
compromise acceptable to both sides'.
The ILO is also critical of the 'volume and complexity of legislative change
since 1980' on industrial relations. The Trades Union Congress says that
although the government has indicated that it may consolidate legislation in
future, it does not intend to amend earlier laws that have been criticised
by the ILO.
They include, the TUC says, removing the right of unions to discipline
members who go against ballot decisions on strike action; restrictions on
unions' immunity from civil action over strikes; and allowing the dismissal
of striking workers.
On unemployment, the committee calls on the government to demonstrate how
its policies comply with ILO requirements that countries should pursue
policies designed to promote full, productive and freely chosen employment.
It notes 'the deterioration which has taken place in the employment
situation' and urges the government to consult workers' organisations 'in
the formulation and implementation of employment policies'.
