FT  20 JUN 92 / Markets: At the core of BET's problems - The Bottom Line
BET, the business services company, used to have one of the catchier
corporate advertising slogans; 'You look after the core businesses; we'll
take care of the chore businesses.'
After buying more than 150 businesses in five years, it is difficult to see
what BET's core is. In spite of 1991 results published on Monday, which
demonstrated laudable progress, John Clark, chief executive since April last
year, still has more than a little house-cleaning to do.
Eighteen months ago, BET was a company in deep trouble. Expansion under the
chairmanship of Nicholas Wills, the son of the previous chairman, had led to
a Pounds 163m outflow of cash in the first six months of 1981 after five
years of acquisitions.
This expansion had taken BET into interests as diverse as road haulage,
cleaning services, engineering, television, publishing, joinery and plant
hire.
The company had also concentrated heavily in the UK, which was moving into
the worst recession for at least a decade.
The business had spiralled so far out of control - or had been swept along
in the general 1980s euphoria - that last year was the first time since 1986
that BET generated any cash.
The year ending March 1992 will go down as a turning point. Granted, pre-tax
profits fell from Pounds 217m to Pounds 18.5m, after a series of exceptional
costs relating to asset right downs and business closures, on sales down 11
per cent at Pounds 2.34bn. And the dividend was more than cut in half to
6.5p, a level the company is unlikely to be able to lift again for some
time.
But the company has removed Pounds 62m of costs and started the very
necessary process of trimming the number of operating companies, including
selling at a very full price its Biffa waste management company to Severn
Trent.
Most encouraging, however, was the very strong cash flow, which allowed debt
to be reduced from Pounds 425m to Pounds 107m, and led Clark to hope the
company would be ungeared by the end of this year.
Although Clark's new management has brought BET to this turning point, he
admits that there are two more years of work to return the company to a
growth path.
Looming largest is the not insignificant chore of dealing with Dollars 500m
of auction market preferred shares, a hybrid form of equity and debt that
effectively raises BET's gearing to over 300 per cent.
Some analysts believe that even if BET were to continue its impressive cash
generation the company would do little more than nibble at the edges of the
AMPS debt without a large disposal or even a rights issue.
There is even talk that Boulton &amp; Paul, the loss making joinery business may
have to be sold.
BET will also have to finance higher levels of working capital when recovery
arrives and it will have to resume a more realistic capital spending
programme.
Normally, a business's depreciation would be higher than capital
expenditure, if it is growing, or at least at the same level if capital
stock was being properly maintained. Last year, however, BET spent, after
disposals, less than 20 per cent of its depreciation charge on capital
expenditure.
Given that Clark now has the right management team, augmented by Bob
Mackenzie, a former Hanson executive, as finance director, shareholders at
least stand a chance of seeing their company make the transition from a
financial holding company to an operating company.
But investors will have to be patient. With the possibility of the company
seeking to refinance its AMPS with a rights issue - as ECC, the china clay
company, did in February - they may also need to have deep pockets.
