FT  23 MAR 92 / Bonn faces immigration setback: Pleas for Volga Germans to
stay put in Russia fall on deaf ears
THE German government's campaign to persuade up to 2m ethnic Germans living
in the former Soviet Union not to emigrate received a serious setback at the
weekend.
Representatives of the so-called Volga German community called on both
Russia and Germany urgently to draw up a plan to enable all who wish to
leave to do so in three to five years.
They rejected promises by Mr Boris Yeltsin, the Russian president, to
re-create the autonomous German homeland on the Volga river as amounting to
'an effective refusal to take effective measures to recreate German
autonomy'.
The three-day congress of Volga Germans in Moscow heard an appeal by Mr
Horst Waffenschmidt, the German state secretary for internal affairs, to
accept the offer of a new homeland in Russia.
'The door to Germany is still open,' he told the congress, 'but I must say
clearly and honestly that we can only accept a limited number of
immigrants.'
He was answered bluntly by Mr Heinrich Groth, chairman of the largest
organisation of Volga Germans, called Rebirth: 'All those who want to
emigrate, must be allowed to emigrate.'
Most of the Soviet Union's ethnic Germans were deported from the Volga
region and Ukraine to Siberia and Kazakhstan by Stalin during the war. The
slim chance that, in the present chaotic situation in Russia, they might be
persuaded to resettle rather than opt for their constitutional right to
return to Germany, seems now to have been undermined by Mr Yeltsin.
Although the Russian president promised in Bonn last year to re-establish
the Volga republic, the reality seems decidedly unattractive. On a
subsequent trip to Saratov, former capital of the Volga republic, he
proposed resettling the community on the abandoned missile-testing site at
Kapustin Yar - a clear sop to local Russian fears.
The prospect of mass immigration of anything up to 2m Volga Germans, many of
whose ancestors came to Russia up to 200 years ago, is one which fills the
authorities in Bonn with alarm.
The issue of asylum seekers in Germany, arriving in the country at more than
30,000 a month, is already causing political and social problems. The German
authorities are extremely anxious not to see that immigration issue mixed up
with the sensitive question of allowing ethnic Germans to return, which is
enshrined in the constitution.
The country has seen a flood of Germans returning, initially from eastern
Europe and increasingly from the former Soviet Union. Between 1989 and 1991
there were almost 1m, although the number fell from a peak of more than
397,000 in 1990 to almost 222,000 last year.
Mr Waffenschmidt's brief is to offer substantial German government
investment wherever the emigre communities can be persuaded to stay where
they are.
