FT  03 FEB 92 / Ballot box conundrum: The merits of proportional
representation
Mr Paddy Ashdown favours it. Mr John Major doesn't. Mr Neil Kinnock is
thinking about it - but agreed to it for Scotland and London last week.
Every other country in the European Community except France has it. All the
emerging democracies in eastern Europe have chosen it.
'It' is proportional representation (PR) as the system for electing
political representatives, and the debate on its pros and cons is
intensifying in the UK as the election looms.
Mr Ashdown's Liberal Democrats have a vested interest in a proportional
voting system. As a third party with support spread across the country, the
first-past-the-post system serves them ill: the Liberal Democrats and their
predecessors have never won more than 23 seats (out of up to 650) in a
general election since the second world war, despite gaining up to 26 per
cent of the vote. With strict proportionality, they would have been entitled
to about 150 seats in 1987, and held the balance of power.
However, the growing interest in electoral reform is due not to the Liberal
Democrats alone, but to the possibility of a hung parliament after the
election. Mr Major has ruled out trading PR in a deal with Mr Ashdown. But
Mr Kinnock, whose Labour party last won an election nearly 18 years ago, is
already moving towards electoral reform.
Last week, Labour agreed to PR for elections to the Scottish Assembly and
the Greater London Authority it plans to set up. It is also likely to
introduce PR for elections to the European Parliament, where the UK's
adherence to first-past-the-post has produced extreme distortion, affecting
the overall party balance at Strasbourg.
It might not be too difficult for Mr Kinnock to go the whole hog and
introduce PR for the House of Commons should Labour require Liberal Democrat
votes to oust the Tories in a hung parliament - provided there can be some
agreement on which system to adopt.
The variety of PR systems has been an obstacle to wider discussion of
electoral reform - first-past-the-post at least has the merit of
familiarity. The detailed working of Ireland's system of single transferable
vote are understood by few, and even sophisticated German voters have
difficulty in grasping their additional member system.
Yet in reality, there is little complex about the options, which can be
reduced to five broad choices (see illustration). The decision about which
voting system is to be chosen depends on the weight to be given to five
factors:
Fairness. The traditional raison d'etre for supporters of PR is that it is
fairer - the number of MPs would correspond more closely to the popular vote
than under first-past-the-post.
The degree of fairness can be measured using the index of proportionality
devised by Professor Richard Rose of Strathclyde University. This
widely-accepted measure is based on the sum of the differences between each
party's share of seats and its share of the vote, divided by two and
subtracted from 100. The higher the index, the greater the degree of
proportionality.
The UK index has fallen from a peak of 97 in 1951 to 80 in the 1987 general
election, as the rise in popularity of the Liberal Democrats and their
predecessors has failed to be reflected in the Commons. It is now well below
the range of 87 to 99 for PR systems used in other countries.
However, comparisons between different countries show that some countries
which use first-past-the-post do produce proportional results. In the US,
for example, first-past-the-post elections to the House of Representatives
gave an index of 94 in 1988 - with only two serious parties, there are fewer
'wasted votes'. In Spain and Greece, both of which use list systems, the
index of proportionality is less than 90 because voting is based on regions
and there are rules to exclude small parties.
Whether any PR system is more or less proportional than first-past-the-post,
therefore, could depend on the rules of the game and national party systems.
Coalition government. The chief argument of opponents of electoral reform is
that it militates against 'effective government'. First-past-the-post in the
UK usually gives the party with the most votes a majority of seats in the
Commons.
Under PR, outright parliamentary majorities for a single party are unlikely
because smaller parties are encouraged. That means government by coalition,
in which legislative programmes are assembled by horse-trading after
elections, and where smaller parties can wield undue power by threatening to
withdraw their support.
The economic performance of different European countries, however, suggests
that the identification of effective government with one-party rule is not
convincing. Strong economies have flourished in countries such as Germany
which have entrenched PR systems, while the UK's lack-lustre performance has
been under a series of one-party governments.
But the experience of Germany does illustrate one feature of PR which many
opponents find hard to swallow: it often gives a pivotal role for centre
parties such as the Liberal Democrats in any coalition. Germans joke that
they can vote for any government so long as Mr Hans-Dietrich Genscher of the
liberal Free Democrats is foreign minister.
Extremist parties. There is a danger in any system of proportional
representation that being fairer to small parties may end up being less fair
to larger parties - and to the majority of people who have voted for them.
The Israeli list system, for example, provides seats in the Knesset for
religious and extremist parties with 1 or 2 per cent of the popular vote.
They can force the larger parties to implement policies for which there is
no popular support as a condition for coalition.
Elsewhere, extreme right-wing parties, such as Jean-Marie Le Pen's National
Front in France, have achieved parliamentary representation under PR
elections which has been denied to their UK equivalents under
first-past-the-post.
Most PR systems try to exclude small minorities, usually by some form of
threshold which excludes parties which fail to win a minimum share of the
popular vote. In Germany, the figure is 5 per cent, which has excluded small
right-wing parties but allowed the Greens to enter the Bundestag. But such
thresholds do mitigate the proportionality of the final result.
Accountability to the electorate. One feature of the UK's
first-past-the-post system is that there is a one-to-one link between MPs
and their constituencies. Most proportional representation systems break
this direct link to some degree.
The list system does this most radically, by creating regional or even
nationwide multi-member constituencies. It also puts more power in the hands
of the party leaders who select the candidates for the list.
Single transferable vote, the Liberal Democrats' favoured system, also
creates multi-member constituencies - typically with three to five members.
While this breaks the direct one-to-one link between constituency and MP, it
may allow constituents to approach an MP from the party they voted for
(assuming that MPs from more than one party are elected).
Labour's strong desire to retain a direct constituency accountability for
MPs means that the party is most likely to endorse the additional member
system used in Germany. Half or more of the MPs are directly elected by
constituencies, with the rest being allocated to ensure representation which
matches the popular vote.
Representation of minorities. The UK parliament does not fairly reflect the
composition of British society - less than 7 per cent of MPs are women, and
only five are from the black and Asian ethnic minorities. Clearly, this
reflects the choice of candidates by parties, and could be changed if
parties had the will to insist on it. But some PR systems make it easier to
create a more representative legislature.
For example, the list system can be used to promote greater representation
by women and ethnic minorities simply by ensuring that they appear near the
top of the parties' lists. Similarly, women and minority representatives can
be used in the topping-up process which makes Germany's additional member
system proportional.
It would, however, be nave to think that weighing of such issues will
determine the character of a reformed electoral system. At the end of the
day, inter-party haggling will decide the issue - as it always has.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
ELECTORAL SYSTEM - THE MAIN OPTIONS
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
First-past-the-post: The candidate with the highest number of votes in a
  constituency is elected, even if he/she receives a minority of the
  votes cast.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Alternative vote: Voters number candidates in order of preference. If no
  candidate wins more than 50 per cent of the votes, the second choices
  appearing on the ballot for the candidate with the lowest umber of
  votes are re-allocated until one candidate wins a majority of votes
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
List system: Voters vote for party lists of candidates in multi-member
  constituencies. Seats are divided between the parties in proportion to
  the vote gained in the constituency and allocated to candidates from
  the top of the list, working down.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Single transferable vote: Multi-member constituencies, with voters
  numbering candidates in order of preference. Complex formula elects
  candidates receiving more than a set quota of votes. Second and
  subsequent preferences on votes in excess of the quota and those with
  the lowest numbers of first preferences are redistributed until enough
  candidates reach the quota.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Additional member system: At least half the seats are elected on a
  first-past-the-post basis. The rest are allocated to parties on some
  sort of list basis, so that the number of representatives reflects the
  distribution of the popular vote.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
