FT  31 OCT 92 / Finance and the Family: Interesting alternative to building
societies - Philip Coggan considers the advantages of bond funds which
invest in government securities and corporate debt
INTEREST rates are falling rapidly and savers will inevitably be looking for
alternatives to the building society.
In the US, one option which is commonly favoured by investors is a bond
fund, which invests in government securities and corporate debt. Bond funds
make up a substantial proportion of the US mutual funds (the equivalent of
unit trusts) market.
In Britain, the market is much smaller. There is some Pounds 670m invested
in UK bond funds, out of a Pounds 50bn plus unit trust industry.
But unit trusts have high hopes that bond funds are a route to attracting
those investors who still have memories of the 1987 stock market crash and
are frightened of investing in equities.
Indeed, the graph shows that gilt and fixed interest funds have performed
rather better than their equity rivals over the short term. The average gilt
unit trust beat the average UK equity growth trust over the one, two, three
and five years to October 1. It is only over seven and 10 years that equity
funds pull ahead.
So what are the characteristics of a bond fund? A manager puts together a
portfolio of bonds with the aim of providing a steady income, and sometimes
modest capital growth. The investor hopes that the manager's skill in
handling this portfolio will justify the charges.
The prospect of charges may put off those investors who are aware that gilts
can be bought cheaply through the post office. But initial charges have been
falling across the sector, with Abtrust, for example, launching two funds
without any front-end charge in September. Fidelity, Guinness Flight and
Invesco MIM have all cut charges on bond funds this year.
A further potential disadvantage of gilt funds is that profits made by a
unitholder are subject to capital gains tax, unlike direct holdings in gilts
which are CGT-free. However, since few investors realise enough profits to
breach the annual Pounds 5,800 (after indexation) CGT allowance, this is not
a problem which will deter many.
Bond funds divide into three rough categories; those which invest in UK
gilts; those which invest in preference shares or other fixed rate
instruments; and international funds.
The process of choosing a fund thus involves several stages. First you have
to decide on the type of fund you want. Gilt funds are probably the most
straightforward, since there is no real credit risk - you can be certain the
government will repay its debts. If the fund is an onshore unit trust, then
the Investors Compensation Scheme would cover Pounds 48,000 of the first
Pounds 50,000 should the manager fail.
That is not to say that the bond fund cannot decline in price, either due to
managerial incompetence or perhaps a rise in interest rates.
With a preference or non-gilt fund, you also have a credit risk that the
company involved might fail; with an international fund, you have the
foreign exchange risk that other currencies might fall against the pound (it
may seem unlikely in the wake of recent events, but it could happen).
A further key factor is the yield. Do not be seduced into thinking that the
trust with the best yield is necessarily the best investment. The fund could
be investing in gilts with a high running yield, but which are trading well
above par value. So the high yield could be at the expense of capital loss
in the future.
The yields on onshore gilt unit trusts are shown each day in the Managed
Funds section of the Financial Times. For example, the Commercial Union
preference share fund (top of the UK sector over 10 years) yielded 8.67 per
cent gross on Friday morning; Abbey Capital Reserve (top of the sector over
five years) yielded a gross 7.26 per cent.
If you want a regular income, then you should pay careful attention to
dividend payment dates. Guinness Flight offers a portfolio which pays
monthly dividends, using three trusts - Premium Fixed Interest, EMU (which
invests in European bonds) and Global High Income. The average dividend
yield works out at 6.9 per cent, net of basic rate tax and expenses.
For non-taxpayers, offshore bond funds have the advantage that they can pay
income gross. The funds frequently invest in Eurobonds, which are not
subject to withholding tax. But Barlow Clowes illustrates the dangers of the
offshore route; investors may want to restrict themselves to managers with
household names, or in countries such as Bermuda, Guernsey, the Isle of Man
and Jersey which have investor compensation schemes.
Past performance is at best only a guide in fund selection and even then,
one should not assume that the top fund in the sector over one time period
will do as well in the future. Consistency is a very important factor. In
the UK gilt sector, the following funds have an above average performance
for the sector over one, two, three, five, seven and ten years; Aetna
Preference; Barclays Unicorn Gilt &amp; Fixed Interest; Invesco Mimstar Gilt &amp;
Fixed; Kleinwort Benson Gilt; Legal &amp; General Gilt and Swiss Life Fixed
Interest. Abbey Capital Reserve Account, Eagle Star UK Preference and
Whittingdale Short Dated Gilt have not been running for ten years, but all
have above average performances over all periods from one to seven years.
In the international fixed interest sector, few funds have been running for
more than five years. Abbey Worldwide Bond is top of the sector over five
and ten years and second over one and three years. S &amp; P International Bond
is top over seven years, and above average over all periods from one up to
ten years.
The final important factor to remember is charges. In the long run, a good
performance should outweigh higher charges but of course, future performance
is unknown whereas charges are clear at the outset. So, if two trusts have
similar performance records, the odds favour the one with the lower charges.
The bond fund sector is particularly active at the moment with two current
fund launches. Schroders is launching a global bond funds which will have an
estimated gross yield of 6.25 per cent. The initial charge is 3 per cent and
the annual charge is 1 per cent. There is a minimum investment of Pounds
1,000, or Pounds 25 a month for regular savers.
A new trust from Exeter Fund Managers, ExBal, will invest in a different
sector of the market - permanent interest bearing securities. These are
issued by building societies and tend to offer a higher yield than gilts,
although, of course, this reflects a higher risk. If a building society goes
bust, holders of PIBS would be behind depositors in the queue for repayment.
Exeter claims it can pick and choose the best PIBS, which will form around
60 per cent of the trust's portfolio. the remainder will be invested in zero
coupon preference shares of investment trusts, which will provide capital
growth and, via reinvestment, the prospect for a growing income.
ExBal will have an initial gross yield of 6.5 per cent. The initial charge
is 5.25 per cent and the annual charge 1 per cent. The minimum investment is
Pounds 750.
Meanwhile, Framlington has combined its trusts which previously were first
and third in the sector over three years. The combined trust is managed by
Alpha Global Fixed Income Managers, which says it manages the trust for
total return (a combination of income and capital growth).
