FT  03 MAR 92 / Parliament and Politics: Walters joins criticism of income
tax cuts - Economy
THE PROSPECT of income tax cuts paid for from borrowing came under fire from
two opposing directions yesterday, as a leading free-market economist joined
Labour in warning that reductions would inevitably be followed by rises.
The Conservatives are confident that tax remains one of their strongest
cards, and yesterday again highlighted claims that both taxes and prices
would rise under Labour.
Sir Alan Walters, formerly Mrs Margaret Thatcher's economic adviser,
condemned as a 'fraud' Budget tax cuts paid for out of borrowing.
'A feel-good Budget may win the election for the Tories but the cost to
Britain will be substantial,' Sir Alan wrote in London's Evening Standard
yesterday.
'The Thatcher reforms will be further eroded as the government commands more
and more of people's savings in order to pursue the hare-brained ideas of
Heseltine and the social soporifics of Patten and his 'compassionate
Conservatives'.'
Sir Alan's attack follows a warning from Professor Patrick Minford, director
of the Liverpool Macro Economic Research department, at the weekend that the
UK's economic policy was paralysed by the exchange rate mechanism.
Labour returned to claims that a fourth-term Tory government would extend
value added tax to goods and services presently zero-rated or exempt which
they had not specifically pledged to protect: these included transport
fares, house purchases and postal services.
The Tories denied that they had any plans to switch the tax burden further
from earnings to spending than the shift implied by a basic income tax
target rate of 20 per cent with no corresponding reduction in indirect
taxes.
Mr Chris Patten, Tory party chairman, predicted higher taxes and prices
under a Labour government - the 'double whammy'. Labour's policies 'knocking
the economy for six' will be the theme of a Tory party political broadcast
on Thursday.
Yesterday the party cited a range of independent opinion to support its
case. The average of the forecasters' predictions was an interest-rate rise
of 2.5 per cent, and a fall in share values of 387 points.
Labour yesterday sought to counter suggestions that it is the 'anti-car'
party by publishing a charter for motorists aimed at giving better consumer
protection and improving road safety.
Transport spokesman John Prescott denied that an incoming Labour government
would axe the Department of Transport's Pounds 20bn roads programme to pay
for a substantial increase in expenditure on public transport.
The debate within the Conservative party over the Budget took another twist
yesterday with the publication of a report calling for radical reductions in
taxation, Philip Stephens writes.
The report, by the Thatcherite Conservative Way Forward group, argues that
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, should abolish the current 40p top rate of
tax on March 10, cut the basic rate of tax by 1p and abolish or dramatically
reduce inheritance tax.
The paper also calls for longer-term action to reduce capital gains tax and
National Insurance. It argues that the government should meet its target of
a 20p basic rate of tax during the next parliament.
Joe Rogaly, Page 23
