FT  01 AUG 92 / Property: Retirement village on the Algarve
WHILE much of the property offered in leisure resorts on sunny coasts is
said to be suitable for holiday homes or the retired, usually there is
little designed for all-year use by older people. Apartments will have
minimal heating for winter months, the floors are likely to be chilly tiles,
and facilities in many developments will close down out of season.
Portugal's Algarve once attracted a large number of older Britons. There are
few retirement developments there now. But Mary Cornelius-Reid and her
husband have acquired a 22-acre site a few miles from the market town of
Loule and are building a village of 30 retirement properties.
These will be a cross between cottages and apartments, built in short rows
around a square and echoing the local cottage style. Although the site looks
out over miles of open countryside, it is only a short drive to the beaches
or Faro airport.
Work is to start soon on the cottages, which will have one and two bedrooms
with a kitchen and dining area, living room with terrace and barbecue, and
an internal patio and courtyard. There are gardens and a swimming pool.
The cottages are in the grounds of a nursing home, which has been converted
from a farmhouse and guest house. But they are not intended for people in
need of medical treatment; the planners simply felt that some of the nursing
home's amenities - such as the shop, hairdressing salon and restaurant -
would be useful to cottage residents as well. In addition, some might be
happier knowing the home's back-up services were there if needed.
The cottages will be available on an interest-free loan system. A payment of
between Pounds 85,000-Pounds 125,000 is made, returnable after the property
is vacated. There is a charge of Pounds 140 a week for a single person and
Pounds 170 for a couple. This covers cleaning, laundry, air-conditioning or
central heating, domestic help, external maintenance, a 24-hour call
facility and lunch in the restaurant. For further information, telephone
0980-622-957 (UK).
