FT  21 SEP 92 / Maastricht - The Economic Fallout: Indicators to guide UK
policy
MR Norman Lamont, British chancellor of the exchequer, said the UK
government intended to base its monetary policy on a range of financial
indicators, following last week's suspension of British membership of the
European Exchange Rate Mechanism.
He also made clear that among the conditions for Britain's return to the ERM
was greater synchronisation of economic conditions between the UK and
Germany.
In his speech to the International Monetary Fund's policy-making interim
committee at the weekend, the chancellor said it was the goal of government
policy to continue bearing down on inflation. 'People must understand that
low inflation is a pre-condition of sustained growth,' he said.
Earlier Mr Lamont told journalists that British interest rates would in
future be set in the light of a number of financial indicators. The UK's
narrow money target of 0 to 4 per cent annual growth in M0 would remain.
The government would also monitor broad money, asset prices and, in
particular, house prices and exchange rates. 'No government can be
indifferent to the level of the exchange rate,' he added.
The chancellor declined to be drawn on whether an opportunity now existed to
cut interest rates substantially, underlining instead the government's
determination to reduce inflation. He said the government would 'in due
time' make clear the criteria for the different monetary aggregates. It was
not considering giving independence to the Bank of England.
Mr Lamont laid down three conditions for sterling's return to the ERM.
The turmoil in the exchange markets should be over. The UK and German
economies 'should be more at the same stage of the cycle and have more
convergent conditions and interest rates'. The situation in Germany would
also be taken into account when determining British policy.
He also said the government would 'want to look at the co-operation and
working of the Exchange Rate Mechanism'. Although he refused to go into
details, he said the UK wanted to examine some technical aspects of how the
mechanism operated and of how co-operation and intervention worked.
In spite of a very public reconciliation between the chancellor and his
German opposite number, Mr Theo Waigel, it is understood the chancellor
continues to believe that sterling was undermined by unhelpful comments from
Germany in recent weeks.
He said all participants at Saturday's Group of Seven meeting in Washington
agreed the UK had done everything it could over the past week.
But circumstances were almost unique. 'There was a fixed date when people
thought there would be a realignment and gave them the opportunity to
speculate against that date, creating intolerable pressure and huge currency
flows.'
When asked whether it would be days or months before Britain re-entered the
ERM, Mr Lamont said it was 'not a question of time. It's the conditions'.
Earlier Mr Wim Duisenberg, the Dutch central bank governor, predicted that
the UK would not return to the ERM for several weeks.
