FT  23 JUL 92 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals (6): Prices continue to be a big
issue - Marjorie Shaffer examines developments in the US
THE US pharmaceutical industry prospered mightily in the go-go years of the
1980s. Profit margins widened and revenue growth marched steadily and
reliably upwards.
But no one expects a repeat performance in the 1990s amid continuing
pressure from Washington, patient advocacy groups and insurance companies to
slow the rise in prescription drug prices.
Over the past decade, the industry habitually raised the price of
prescription drugs in the US at least twice or three times the rate of
inflation. The steep price increases contributed to hefty double-digit
profit gains of 17-20 per cent.
But because of the pressure to limit price increases, most analysts agree
that annual profit gains will slow to 13-15 per cent by 1995. Some analysts
even predict that overall industry earnings growth could dip below 10 per
cent.
Whatever the numbers eventually turn out to be, heavy criticism of US
prescription drugs is forcing the industry to act with more restraint.
Pharmaceutical giant Merck said last year it would not raise prices more
than the rate of inflation and other companies, including Pfizer and
Bristol-Myers Squibb, have followed suit.
'I think there is less pricing flexibility than in the past,' said a
spokesman for Warner-Lambert, a New Jersey-based drug company which has
announced that its price increases will be 'reasonable'.
The pressure to stem the rise in drug prices is apparently taking a toll
already in some areas. Earlier this year, drug companies reported below par
first-quarter results, leading to a sell-off on Wall Street. The first
quarter is when the industry usually puts through its annual price raises.
This year, price increases were halved to 5-6 per cent from the 10-12 per
cent typical of the past five years.
Analysts say continuing pricing constraints will hurt companies without
strong product pipelines.
Upjohn, a drugs company based in Kalamazoo, Michigan, that many analysts say
lacks a strong research and development pipeline, has announced that it
expects its second-quarter net income to be flat. It said it was offering
voluntary retirement to about 10 per cent of its workforce to reduce costs.
Bristol-Meyers Squibb surprised Wall Street last month when it released a
disappointing second-quarter earnings forecast.
While price increases have apparently moderated, Americans still pay some of
the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs. In most other
countries, prices are subsidised by governments that negotiate with drugs
companies, but drugs companies in the US have long set their own prices.
Elderly consumers bear the brunt of the costs, according to a study by
Purdue University's Pharmaceutical Economics Research Center in Layfayette,
Indiana. The Purdue study estimates that the elderly account for nearly 35
per cent of retail expenditures for prescription drugs in the US.
The cost of prescription drugs can be an overwhelming burden for people on
fixed incomes. Senator David Pryor, chairs the Senate Special Committee on
Ageing and is a critic of prescription drug prices. Earlier this year the
Senate defeated a bill proposed by Senator Pryor to control pharmaceutical
prices, but he intends to keep the pressure on.
Some well-publicised prices for newer drugs underscore the issue. In May,
cancer experts criticised Johnson &amp; Johnson for setting too high a price for
the drug Levamisole to treat colon cancer. The company set the price at
Dollars 1,250 to Dollars 1,500 for a year's supply, some 100 times higher
than an older version of the drug used in veterinarian medicine.
Advocates for the mentally ill have attacked Swiss drug giant Sandoz for the
price it has set for Clozapine, used to treat schizophrenia: Dollars 7,500
for the drug itself plus a required weekly blood monitoring.
And even before the experimental cancer drug Taxol is out of clinical
trials, advocates for breast cancer patients wonder if the price of the
drug, which may eventually reach Dollars 2,000 a gram, will simply be out of
reach of most women.
The pharmaceutical industry has long justified its prices by citing huge
research and development costs. According to the Pharmaceutical
Manufacturers Association (PMA), the industry's trade group in Washington,
research costs will near Dollars 11bn in 1992, up from Dollars 9.6bn in 1991
and about Dollars 600m in 1970.
The industry argues that it has to recoup its R&amp;D costs. In the US, it
spends a little over 16 cents out of each sales dollar for R&amp;D, compared to
4.5 cents to 5 cents for all other industries, said Mr Jeff Trewhitt, PMA
spokesman. 'Of course in nations where there are price controls, like
southern Europe, the prices are lower', said Mr Trewhitt, adding that in
those countries with price controls there is little biomedical innovation.
'Between 1975 and 1989, 47 major world-class drugs originated in the US
alone. This innovation has been fostered in a free-market atmosphere.
Certainly, the R&amp;D costs have to be covered', said Mr Trewhitt.
Despite the industry's protests, drug prices continue to be a big issue,
according to analysts. 'It will stay very difficult to increase prices three
times whatever the consumer price index is,' said Mr Neil Sweig, a drug
analyst with Capital Institutional Services.
Indeed, as the US pharmaceutical industry braces itself for a colder
business climate, analysts say the near future will be filled with lower
growth rates and lower share prices.
