FT  18 FEB 92 / Leading Article: Labour and the unions
IN THE 1970s, the leaders of the UK's largest unions were household names.
Jack Jones, Hugh Scanlon and Clive Jenkins were powers in the land,
commanding large and disciplined memberships. Mr Len Murray's Trades Union
Congress enjoyed direct access to the corridors of power.
Now, 13 years after the winter of discontent, few members of today's TUC
General Council would be recognised on a Clapham omnibus. Britain's unions
have lost a third of their members, much of their influence and almost all
of the power they once wielded. Under the low-key leadership of Mr Norman
Willis, the TUC has all but disappeared from sight. It seems perverse,
therefore, that ministers should be frightening impressionable minds with
threats of a return of unbridled union power if Labour wins the election.
Yet the questions raised by yesterday's Conservative attack on the links
between Labour and the unions need to be answered. The Labour party is one
of the few national institutions in which the trade unions remain
influential. They supply more than 60 per cent of Labour's income - and a
higher proportion of the party's election war-chest. Their block votes
dominate the Labour party conference.
Judging by the results of Labour's Policy Review, the unions' organisational
strength gives them considerable influence in making party policy. The
degree of this influence can be seen in the priority Labour gives to
policies favoured by the large general unions such as the minimum wage and
the removal of compulsory competitive tendering. The unions have secured
promises to ease the weight of legislation oppressing them.
Winter of discontent
Their influence is also revealed in some important gaps in party policy  -
such as the lack of a public sector pay policy, an issue at the root of the
winter of discontent which blew Labour out of power in 1979.
However, the Conservative charge that Labour would give the unions 'legal
privileges which have never before been granted' is clearly hyperbole. While
Labour's proposals on trade union law are open to criticism (for example,
for removing from the courts' armoury the ultimate deterrent of total
sequestration of union assets), the package advocated by Mr Tony Blair,
Labour's employment spokesman, would not significantly shift the balance of
industrial power. It is also much less than some union leaders had hoped
for.
Watering down
In fact, the watering down of the unions' wish list for repeal of trade
union legislation is one indicator of the degree of influence that unions
might expect under a Labour government. That is well appreciated by the
unions themselves: after 13 years of battering by six rounds of employment
legislation, they would be grateful just for a breathing space.
Labour also has a new confidence in its dealing with the unions. Mr Blair
demonstrated this on becoming employment spokesman by unilaterally reversing
the party's policy on the closed shop, effectively challenging the unions to
use their block votes at conference to overturn him (they didn't). The
unions know that they need a Labour government more than Labour needs them:
Mr Kinnock knows that too.
Also, the party is seeking to demonstrate a more arms-length relationship by
beginning to curb the influence that unions wield in its deliberations. The
reduction of the block vote now enjoys widespread support throughout the
party and unions, and is to be welcomed. In the longer term, an alternative
basis for funding political parties would be the best inducement for Labour
to break free of its union paymasters.
However, there remains a valid suspicion that a Labour government would be
susceptible to undue union influence, especially if measures unpopular with
the unions were necessary, as is likely. The unions will always have a
special relationship with a Labour government - Labour will need to work
hard to ensure that the distance looks sufficient. Meanwhile, voters will
want to read the lips of selected union barons, as well as those of the
would-be ministers.
