FT  27 MAY 92 / Exchange grows heated over computers / A look at why market
makers are again becoming angry over plans for new technology
NOT since the Seaq quote-distribution system expired with a whimper during
Big Bang in 1986 has there been such a fuss over Stock Exchange technology.
The immediate cause is the exchange's decision, announced last month, to
pass responsibility for running its computer operations to Andersen
Consulting, one of the world's largest business consultancies.
The contract, worth between Pounds 10m and Pounds 15m a year to Andersen
over the next five years, is of a kind known in the computer business as
'outsourcing'. The exchange's 305-strong data-processing staff were
transferred overnight on to Andersen's payroll and the consultancy has
agreed to meet stiff terms on service delivery and performance.
It has also agreed to work in partnership with the exchange to 're-engineer'
the market support systems, implementing modernisation plans which the
exchange's top management has had in place for some time.
Outsourcing is increasingly popular with large companies anxious to
concentrate on their core businesses rather than run large and expensive
data-processing operations. Since the announcement, however, Mr Peter
Rawlins, the Stock Exchange's chief executive, has found himself under fire.
Some critics say he has given away the heart of the exchange's operation
with its technological capability.
Others say that Andersen was unfairly favoured when the contract was awarded
without competitive tendering. The latter point to the fact that until 1983
Mr Rawlins was an Andersen partner, admittedly on the accounting rather than
consultancy side.
Mr Rawlins gives such insinuations short shrift, arguing that Andersen was
selected on merit after four months of intense evaluation and that the
decision was taken by the full board of the Stock Exchange.
The conflict has tended to obscure the real issue. The exchange's sprawling
systems undoubtedly should be replaced urgently, but is what Mr Rawlins has
in mind the best way forward and has his vision of the future the support of
the members?
The exchange's computer systems for collecting and distributing price
information and settling bargains have grown piecemeal over the years. They
have been a victim of a continuing uncertainty within the membership over
the exchange designing and building its own technology.
Aconsequence has been erratic funding and a lack of management vision. Seaq,
for example, the centrepiece of the 1986 move to electronic marketmaking,
was a string-and-sealing-wax solution put together in too much of a hurry.
The central database, Epic, on which the rest of the operation depends, is
16 years old. There are eight different and incompatible kinds of hardware
in use: IBM, DEC, Tandem - even some old Modcomp machines kept going only by
cannibalising others for spare parts.
The exchange uses eight different programming languages with an emphasis on
Pascal - which is used elsewhere mostly for scientific and technical
computing. A simple business change such as earlier opening can take nine
months to implement.
There are nine different networks. Mr Rawlins complains: 'We are drowning in
wires; the people we are really enriching is BT.'
Maintaining and running the systems costs Pounds 52m a year exclusive of
property costs - more than a quarter of the entire exchange's operational
costs. In short, the present systems are too costly and inflexible to allow
the exchange to provide an economic service or remain competitive in global
terms.
Mr Rawlins' plan envisages an 'open systems' solution: standard hardware,
standard software and a single, common network. He estimates that such a
solution could cut costs by up to 40 per cent.
One drawback is that the existing system cannot simply be thrown away - it
is supporting the markets reliably, if inefficiently, and nothing can be
allowed to interfere with day-to-day trading.
Mr Rawlins says that all possible ways of re-engineering the critical
systems were investigated before Andersen was selected. An internal solution
was rejected because of a lack of resources.
Facilities management - using an outside firm to manage the existing systems
 -did not seem to offer cost savings. The exchange was determined to keep
control of the systems. Mr Rawlins says: 'These systems are the market. We
have to keep control.'
He does not, however, enjoy the total confidence of his membership. Many
suspect that the real thrust behind his plan is the development of an
order-driven electronic exchange - perhaps along the lines of the system
Andersen built for the Swiss Options and Futures Exchange.
Some critics fear that that would effectively spell the end of the existing
market-making system in London. Indeed, the exchange has just launched a
wide-ranging review of the marketmaking system which it introduced at the
time of Big Bang.
The abrupt way in which the Andersen contract was awarded has done nothing
to allay such fears.
