FT  03 NOV 92 / Laotian project slashes drugs output: The UN is being urged
to adopt a new multi-agency approach
The United Nations is to be asked to change radically its approach towards
the illicit drugs trade, in a renewed campaign to stamp out illegal
cultivation of opium, coca and cannabis around the world.
A pilot project in Laos, in the 'golden triangle' drug-growing region of
south-east Asia, is said to have cut annual opium production by at least 75
per cent in the area involved.
The new approach has been to build roads and foster general economic and
social development over a wide area, rather than just pay grants to
individual farmers to switch to legal cash crops, such as strawberries and
cabbage, in small localities.
The change has required planned, co-ordinated management of UN agencies,
funding bodies and international aid from developed countries, all of which
were poorly co-ordinated before. Mr Giorgio Giacomelli, executive director
of the UN's Vienna-based Drug Control Programme (DCP), will this month seek
General Assembly approval to extend the approach worldwide.
One of the first areas to benefit is likely to be the Bekaa Valley in
Lebanon, where the Syrian army has already eradicated drug production this
year.
UN policies have in the past been heavily weighted towards localised crop
substitution, coupled with tough law enforcement to deter farmers from
reverting to growing drugs. The policy was a fire-fighting one and failed
because many farmers have taken the money to grow new crops in one place
while shifting drug production elsewhere, usually involving other members of
their families or ethnic groups.
In spite of this, growing drugs has rarely raised families much above
subsistence level because cultivation is mostly a cottage industry. The
advantages offered by opium, however, have been high value-to-weight ratios,
easy storage and ready buyers to feed it into the international criminal
drug market. The big profits are made by refiners, distributors and dealers,
not the growers.
Moreover, a slash-and-burn approach to clearing land for growing has been
environmentally damaging, hindering long-term agricultural development.
The Laos pilot project has been operating for five years in the Muong Hom
district of Vientiane province.
The location of all poppy fields is known. The DCP says many growers,
predominantly members of the Lao Soung, an ethnic minority, were encouraged
to grow opium by military factions during various stages of recent
Indochinese wars.
Because of the resultant local dependence on opium growing and the need for
national integration of ethnic minorities in peacetime, the Laotian
government decided against simple eradication of poppy fields and rigid law
enforcement. It asked for help in trying wide-scale economic development
first.
Money has come from the International Fund for Agricultural Development
(IFAD), with a soft loan of Dollars 5.3m ,and Dollars 6m from the DCP. The
Japanese government has given farming equipment worth Dollars 800,000.
Road construction has been labour-based to help create work and develop
skills for more road-building later, while agricultural schemes have
involved livestock development, rural credit schemes, irrigation projects
and setting up advisory and supporting services. There has also been
investment in primary health care, basic education, community and self-help
activities, treatment of drug addictsand training planners.
The DCP's funders - mainly Italy, the US, Japan, Britain, Germany, France,
Sweden and other west European nations - are understood to be relieved about
the new approach. They had been increasingly concerned that the global war
on drugs was being lost partly because of unco-ordinated efforts and
inter-agency rivalry.
Mr Giacomelli says the DCP will co-ordinate and be a pump-primer, but will
not try to do everything itself. Working arrangements are being developed
with the World Bank, the Interamerican Development Bank, IFAD, and other UN
agencies, such as the World Health Organisation, Unesco, the UN Development
Programme and the International Labour Organisation.
Each will be encouraged to develop a 'drug dimension' to all economic
development projects in drug-producing countries of the third world.
Bilateral projects - where an individual western country puts in earmarked
money directly - will enable 'our larger and richer partners to intervene
with a multiplying effect', Mr Giacomelli says.
DCP officials acknowledge that trying to stamp out the problem at source
appears to have been recognised as futile on its own, especially if the
illicit drug trade accounts for 12 per cent of gross domestic product, as is
the case in at least one South American country.
Allied to this will be other worldwide programmes aimed at fighting drug
trafficking, making money laundering more difficult, and building solid
institutions in developing countries for law enforcement and administering
justice. Programmes are also being developed for reducing demand for drugs
in the market-place, so that traffickers will be squeezed from both ends as
well as in the middle.
