FT  07 AUG 92 / International Company News: Accor loses courtroom battle
ACCOR, the French hotels group which controls Wagons-Lits, must pay minority
shareholders in the Franco-Belgian travel company at least FFr950m on top of
the FFr2.2bn (Dollars 440m) it has already bid for the group, following a
landmark Brussels court ruling.
Accor is to appeal against yesterday's decision to the Belgian supreme court
on legal grounds.
But Belgian advisers to the Wagons-Lits investors were already describing
the judgment yesterday as the most significant blow yet struck for Europe's
minority shareholders. They believe the decision could eventually cost Accor
as much as FFr1.6bn if the French company is forced to raise its bid for all
minority shareholders.
The ruling should also strengthen the ill-defined Belgian takeover code,
making it more difficult for large investors to gain control of companies
through secretive private deals. In France, the controversy has already
played an important part in persuading the authorities to improve minority
shareholders' rights.
The Brussels commercial court and court of appeal have backed dissident
shareholders in their battle to establish that control of Wagons-Lits
changed hands in June 1990, when Accor and Societe Generale de Belgique, the
holding company, bought a 26 per cent stake at BFr12,500 a share.
They launched a joint bid last October at BFr8,650 a share, but both courts
have ruled that the two companies should have bid for the whole of
Wagons-Lits 15 months earlier and at the higher price. The initial stake
purchase was approved by the Belgian banking commission, which supervises
takeovers. The commission refused to comment yesterday except to say it
thought the ruling would have a 'positive effect'.
The court of appeal yesterday expanded the commercial court judgment by
adding interest to the compensation Accor will have to pay. The court also
said Sodexho, the French catering company, should be compensated for its
loss on a Wagons-Lits stake it has sold since June 1990.
The ruling will apply to the three shareholder groups involved in the appeal
 -Sodexho, Rolaco, the Saudi Arabian investment company, and Deminor, which
represents small Belgian shareholders. They hold some 10 per cent of the
group, but Accor has already committed itself to extending the payout to any
shareholders 'in a similar situation' if it finally loses its court battle.
Accor will have to cover any increase in the offer alone, because La
Generale exercised an option to sell its stake in the bid vehicle to Accor
at the end of June.
Accor's shares were suspended yesterday morning. After trading resumed they
recovered from FFr620 to close unchanged on the day at FFr638.
