FT  24 JAN 92 / Estonian cabinet forced to resign
THE government of Estonia resigned yesterday - the second post-Soviet
government to fall after Georgia's was forced out of office earlier this
month.
Mr Edgar Savisaar, the former communist whose two-year tenure as prime
minister saw Estonia move towards free prices and a market economy, paid the
political price when his request for a 'State of Economic Emergency'
designed to push through reforms was first narrowly passed by deputies, then
effectively torpedoed by parliament's refusal this week to set up a
commission to implement the State of Emergency.
The Estonian news agency ETA reported that Mr Savisaar had proposed that Mr
Arnold Ruutel, chairman of the parliament, should head a new government -
though it was not clear if he would, like Mr Boris Yeltsin, the Russian
president, combine that with the position of head of state.
Estonia, like the other two Baltic states dependent on Russia for energy,
has in the past month had to cut heating to offices and homes and ration
fuel supplies since Russia began charging world prices for its energy -
although it is paid for in goods through a barter system. A new agreement
with Russia to supply extra fuel was signed last week.
Plans for monetary reform based on the introduction of the Estonian crown,
originally planned for the middle of this year, have been postponed until
next April, according to Mr Siim Kallas, president of the Estonian central
bank. Mr Kallas told trade union leaders this week that unemployment would
rise as Estonian enterprises failed to sell their goods on the world market.
President Vytautas Landsbergis of Lithuania yesterday called on western
governments and institutions to provide a stabilisation fund to back the
introduction of a new national currency and support market reforms, writes
Anthony Robinson in London.
Lithuania, he said, was looking for around Dollars 1bn (Pounds 555m),
equivalent to the sum provided to Poland two years ago to back its
stabilisation policies. But Poland has more than 10 times more people.
Mr Landsbergis made clear that Lithuania does not consider itself a
successor state to the former Soviet Union and should not be treated as such
by western creditors seeking repayment of Soviet foreign debt. It would,
however, repay credits of around Dollars 100m which had been used directly
in Lithuanian projects, he added.
