FT  01 MAY 92 / Leading Article: Railway finance
BRITISH RAIL appears to have launched an early bid in this year's public
expenditure round, with a claim for an extra Pounds 7bn over the next five
years. Projects needing finance include the high-speed rail link between
London and the channel tunnel. A five-year moratorium on new rolling stock
orders is threatened unless additional cash is provided.
If the Treasury is reluctant to sanction increased government funding in an
already tight year, BR argues that it should be allowed to borrow from the
private sector. Sir Bob Reid, BR's chairman, has proposed that new rolling
stock be acquired by leasing, with a consortium of banks providing the
finance.
Restrictions on public sector borrowing cannot be so easily sidestepped.
Because no market exists for second-hand trains, the only kind of lease that
anybody would write for BR is one which made it liable for the full value of
the assets. The Treasury argues - correctly - that if BR buys now and pays
later, it is borrowing by another name and must be treated as such. The cost
of 700 channel tunnel freight wagons, recently acquired under a leasing deal
at advantageous terms, still counted towards BR's borrowing limit.
Critics of such rigour argue that other European rail operators such as
France's SNCF routinely raise finance on the capital markets and lease
rolling stock. But most continental railways are prone to indebtedness and
need recurrent write-offs at the taxpayers' expense. If private capital is
needed to modernise the UK's railway rolling stock, it would be best
admitted by opening up the railways to private rail operators - as the
government intends.
Rail infrastructure is a different matter. High-speed rail links between the
channel tunnel, London and the regions are essential to overcome the UK's
geographical disadvantage in the EC. They are unlikely to be built by the
private sector, and indeed the government appears to accept a role for a
publicly-owned track authority in its plans for the railways. Government
funds must therefore be found to build such links without further delay - if
necessary, by switching cash from roads.
