FT  17 NOV 92 / London Stock Exchange: BS at low in heavy turnover
INTERIM losses from British Steel (BS) might have been widely anticipated
but they still prompted the biggest turnover in the London stock market
yesterday. Also, the closing share price was strongly supported by heavy US
buying and the net fall gave a rosier picture than that seen by many UK
analysts.
Mr Peter Deighton of Smith New Court summed up the seeming anomaly when he
said; 'I can't understand how a major company passes its dividend and the
share price only comes off 3p.' The US has been buying Steel for long-term
recovery and now owns some 30 per cent of the stock. Mr Deighton said there
was a growing worry that unless the European Commission comes up with some
solution to the current squeeze on prices and volumes that support could
easily be reversed.
Forecasts for Steel's full-year losses were held to a range of Pounds 150m
to Pounds 180m. The shares gave up 3 to to 46 1/2 p, touching the previous
all-time low reached two months ago, with 22m traded.
Ratners supported
A sharp rise and busy turnover in Ratners confirmed growing confidence
amongst some in the market that the troubled stores group was making headway
against its current trading problems. The rise also prompted renewed talk in
some quarters that Ratners may be again discussing with its US executives
the possibilty of a management buy-out. This option was first said to have
been mooted a year ago, but has taken on a new urgency as Ratners fortunes
have gone from bad to worse. The group recently unveiled a rise in half-year
losses to Pounds 30.6m and debts of over Pounds 250m.
The sale of its US operations, which made operating profits of Pounds 5.1m
in the same period, could raise in the region of Pounds 300m. There was also
speculation yesterday that UK sales may have picked up and that some
institutions were clambering aboard in expectation of a good Christmas
trading period. The shares jumped 3 3/4 to 19 1/2 p in volume of 8m. The
price of Ratners shares has now more than doubled in the last two weeks.
BOC active
Industrial gases group BOC fell sharply in early trade on confusion over the
reporting of its full-year profits. However, the stock recovered when it was
appreciated that the headline figure included an exceptional charge and BOC
shares closed a penny firmer at 681p.
BOC is one of the the first UK companies to employ a new accounting
directive which alters the basis of the profit and loss account. As a result
it included Pounds 117m from the sale of US home healthcare business
Glasrock. When that was stripped out the profits came in around Pounds 342m,
still below the forecast range but acceptable. Partly because the shares
have come back a long way over the past few weeks several securities houses
improved their recommendation. Hoare Govett shaved its 1993 forecast to
Pounds 385m but altered its stance from hold to undervalued while a more
bearish Smith New Court came down to Pounds 372m from Pounds 380m but argued
that the stock should be bought on weakness.
Utilities switch
The water and electricity stocks marched higher during early trading but
thereafter moved in opposite directions with the waters retreating amid
'take-profits' adivce from brokers and the electricity companies tending to
mark time.
Panmure Gordon, the stockbroker, was among those recommending a switch out
of waters and into the 'recs'. 'We've told our clients to 'top-slice' the
waters which we feel at now at or close to fair value,' said Mr Angelos
Anastasiou, utilities specialist at Panmure. Mr Anastasiou said the 'recs
have been left behind.'
County NatWest was another broker to argue the case for the electricity
companies; 'The electricity companies would be well advised to exercise
restraint at the interims; we expect the sector average at the interims to
be little more than 10 per cent but anticipate growth of around 12-13 per
cent for the full year which makes the yields offered by some 'recs'
extremely attractive,' said County.
The poorest performers in the waters were the Footsie constituents, North
West Water, which dipped 7 to 497p, and Anglian which fell the same amount
to 477p. Seven Trent closed 3 off at 466p. Among the 'recs' London jumped 7
to 451p and South Wales 7 to 534p.
Concern over the potential tie-up with USAir and selling ahead of interim
results today left British Airways 8 1/2 off at 271p on heavy turnover of 6m
shares.
GPG, the old Guinness Peat banking group suspended around the 23p mark
resumed trading at 17p.
Barclays Bank was easily the heaviest traded of the big banks after the
weekend Press highighted long running market suspicions that the bank may
have to make provisions against possible losses arising from its loans to
Imry, the property company. Barclays shares, given a rough risd in recent
weeks by a series of earnings downgrades by all the leading broking houses
and forecasts of a probable cut in the bank's dividend, dropped 8 to 349p on
turnover of 5.2m.
The Imry worries plus last week's warning by stockbroker Panmure Gordon of
increasing and widespread bad debts in the banking sector, put the skids
under most of the banks.
Natwest mirrored Barclays, droipping 8 to 370p on 2.8m, while Lloyds fell 5
to 476p and HSBC 4 1/2 to 538p. TSB eased 4 to 136 1/2 p. The two big
Scottish banks move din opposite directions withthe bad debt scenario
casting a shadow over Bank of Scotland, 3 off at 117p. Switching from Bank
of Scotland, however, enabled Royal Bank to edge up 3 to 177p.
Life assurance shares were weighed down by vague suggestions that a line of
Legal &amp; General were on offer. Legal shares settled a net 15 weaker at 390p.
Commercial Union, due to announce third quarter numbers tomorrow - most
analysts looking for a marginal loss during the quarter - were fractionally
higher at 564p, but other composites were generally easier.
A big week for the insurance broking sector saw Sedgwick, scheduled to
reveal third quarter figures this morning, 7 off at 150p and Willis Corroon,
reporting third quarter numbers tomorrow, 6 down at 189p.
Companies with heavy exposure to the US benefited from the strength of the
dollar. Glaxo gained 12 to 812p, although the shares traded as American
Depositary Receipts were easier in early US dealing. Wellcome lifted 9 to
982p and Medeva gained 12 to 223p.
Weekend press comment on the European Fighter project helped British
Aerospace improve 3 to 137p.
Submarine manufacturer VSEL suffered from what one analyst called a
'misjudged press story' about the standard nuclear checks carried out on its
new Trident submarine. The shares have also performed well since results
last week but fell 14 to 494p yesterday.
Fears of losses at Euro Disney, which reports its interims on Thursday, sent
the shares plunging 65 to 918p.
Food manufacturer Unilever attracted attention as worries over the plight of
the German economy and nervousness about the group's dividend growth left
the shares 23 lighter at 1056p xd.
Hazlewood Food was in demand ahead of results tomorrow, the shares edging
forward 3 to 135p.
Kingfisher's tie-up with US group Staples was well heralded and the shares
retreated 8 to 545p. Better received was the news from Storehouse that it
was selling its loss-making Conran Stores which operates 19 Habitat branches
in the US. The shares rose 2 to 171p.
Mirror Group performed well as executive changes pushed back prospects of a
management buy-out and that the new appointments heralded a more commercial
line. The shares closed 1 1/2 higher at 71p.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1992
NEW HIGHS (60).
BRITISH FUNDS (1) Treas. 3pc '66 Aft., AMERICANS (10) Abbott Labs., Bankers
NY, Chase Manhattan, Colgate-Palmolive, Cont'l Bank, Gen. Elect., Hasbro,
Lockheed, Morris (Ph), Time Warner, BANKS (1) Bank Leumi (UK), BUSINESS
SERVS (1) Penna, CHEMS (1) Engelhard, CONGLOMERATES (1) Wassall, ELECTRICALS
(1) Ericsson, ELECTRONICS (1) Electrocomps., FOOD RETAILING (1) Kwik Save,
HEALTH &amp; HSEHOLD (3) Amersham, Astra, Huntleigh, HOTELS &amp; LEIS (1) Millwall,
INSCE BROKERS (1) Alex. &amp; Alex., INSCE COMPOSITE (2) Allianz, USF &amp; G, INV
TRUSTS (19) Abtrust New Dawn Wts., Abtrust Prfd. Zero Pf., Baring Tribune,
Broadgate, Drayton Blue Chip Zero Pf. English &amp; Scot., Fulcrum Zero Pf.,
Govett Amer. Smllr. Co's, Henderson Euro. Zero Pf., Indonesia Equity Fund,
Do Wts., Jakarta Fund, Kleinwort High Inc. Zero Pf., Malacca Fund, Murray
Intl., River Plate Zero Pf., Scot. Natl. Zero Pf., US Smllr. Co's, Do Wts.,
MEDIA (4) Carlton Comms. 6 1/2 pc Pf., Haynes, News Intl., TVS Ent. 7.4pc
Pf. '08, MISC (4) Bluebird Toys, Gestetner, Rhino, Waste Mngemt., OTHER
FINCL (4) Cattle's, Lon. Scottish, Perpetual, S &amp; U, PACKG, PAPER &amp; PRINTG
(1) Jarvis Porter, TELE NETWORKS (1) BT, TRANSPORT (2) Forth Ports, GATX.
NEW LOWS (57).
BRITISH FUNDS (1) Treas. 8pc '09 A, BLDG MATLS (2) Darby, Tudor, BUSINESS
SERVS (3) Air London, CRT, REA, CHEMS (1) Caird, CONTG &amp; CONSTRCN (1)
Prowting, ELECTRICALS (1) Bennett &amp; Fountain, ELECTRONICS (3) Control
Techniques, Kewill Syst., Peek, ENG AERO (1) Rolls-Royce, ENG GEN (8)
Bromsgrove, Dobson Park, Folkes N/V, Prospect, Richardson Westgarth, Simon,
Widney, Wilkes, FOOD RETAILING (2) Appleby Westward, Geest, HEALTH &amp; HSEHOLD
(1) Swallowfield, HOTELS &amp; LEIS (3) Bristol Scotts, Resort, Wembley, INV
TRUSTS (5) Aberforth Split Level, Archimedes Inc., I &amp; S UK Smllr. Co's, JF
Fledgeling Wts., Lloyds Smllr. Co's Pckg. Units., MEDIA (4) Aegis 9 3/4 pc
Pf., HTV, Lopex, VTR, MISC (2) Assoc. Brit. Consultants, Toye, MOTORS (2)
Abbey Panels, Caffyns, OIL &amp; GAS (1) Lasmo Ops., OTHER FINCL (1) Baltic 7pc
Pf., OTHER INDLS (2) Elkem, Headway, PACKG, PAPER &amp; PRINTG (3) Intereurope
Tech., Stat-Plus, Usher Walker, PROP (2) Merivale Moore, YRM, STORES (2)
Cantors, Dunhill, TEXTS (1) Martin Intl., MINES (5) Anglo Amer. Gold, Aztec
Expl., Gold Fields SA, Placer Pacific, Western.
