FT  18 SEP 92 / Franc, krone and punt fall to ERM floors
THE French franc, Danish krone and Irish punt yesterday fell to their floors
in the European exchange rate mechanism, prompting central bank
intervention, as speculators moved on to new targets after pummelling the
pound, lira and peseta on Wednesday.
That assault, which forced the British government to suspend sterling from
membership of the ERM on Wednesday night, led early yesterday to a temporary
withdrawal of the lira from the ERM and a 5 per cent devaluation of the
peseta.
Those moves were agreed at an emergency session of the European Community
monetary committee in Brussels after the Bundesbank - despite pressure from
other European governments at the meeting - had declined to deliver a
further cut in German interest rates.
Despite the currency turmoil, the European Commission mounted a solid
defence of the plan for a single European currency, with officials saying
the ERM had proved its efficacy but had also shown its limitations. They
argued that this week's events in the currency markets demonstrated the
imperative need for a single currency.
Mr Jacques Delors, Commission president and inspirer of the Maastricht plan
for economic and monetary union, acknowledged that the EMS was far from
being 'a miracle cure' but added: 'It is only through common disciplines and
a single currency that we can avoid the sort of events we have just
witnessed.'
France and Italy yesterday called for a European Community summit meeting
after Sunday's French referendum on the Maastricht treaty on political and
economic union.
Italy said European leaders needed to weigh up the referendum result and to
restore immediate monetary discipline as quickly as possible.
The new pressure within the ERM reinforced the view in financial markets
that the system in its current form may have been mortally wounded by this
week's speculative onslaught in currency markets.
The Italian government said it planned to rejoin the ERM on Tuesday, but
currency traders were sceptical that this would be possible in the event of
a No vote in the French referendum.
The British government - while reaffirming its intention to put sterling
back in the system - let it be known an early re-entry was not likely.
After intervention, the punt, krone and French franc finished above their
ERM floors against the D-Mark, but the free-floating lira slipped below the
new lower limit set only on Sunday.
Sterling closed 4 per cent lower against the D-Mark in London, at DM2.64,
compared with its pre-suspension DM2.778 floor in the ERM, a level it
maintained in late New York trading.
As the Far Eastern markets opened today, the pound remained steady around
last night's level, while the franc hovered close to its ERM floor against
the D-Mark. The lira was trading around L835 to the D-Mark, down from about
L829 in the European markets.
Last night, devaluation of the punt was ruled out by Mr Bertie Ahern, the
Irish finance minister. As the franc weakened, Mr Michel Sapin, French
finance minister, attempted to defend the currency by maintaining that its
value could only go up in the wake of the current chaos.
Bond market analysts in Paris argued that the ERM would take years to
recover and that monetary union was out of the question for the time being.
'The markets have already voted on Maastricht', said Mr Christopher Potts,
market strategist at Banque Indosuez. What was now at stake in the Sunday
vote was whether the franc would be able to continue to keep its link with
the D-Mark, he said.
The Danish government, like the Irish, reaffirmed its commitment to the
mechanism, arguing that the state of its economy did not justify a
devaluation.
In the British government bond market, short-dated bonds rose on
expectations that UK interest rates would soon move lower.
Italian bond prices also rallied sharply, gaining up to 1 1/2 points. But
Irish, Spanish and German bonds fell.
