FT  14 DEC 92 / NHS move 'will hit drug groups': Industry tells government
that jobs are at risk from proposed blacklists
BRITISH-BASED drugs groups stand to lose up to Pounds 450m in sales from
National Health Service reforms proposed by the government, the drug
industry claims.
The lost sales could cost up to 5,000 jobs in the UK and as much as Pounds
400m in lost capital investment, according to the Association of the British
Pharmaceutical Industry.
The proposals, announced last month by the Department of Health as part of
chancellor Norman Lamont's autumn statement, involve the creation of
blacklists of products that will no longer be provided by the NHS on
prescription.
The blacklists could cover up to 600 medicines in 10 therapeutic categories
and as many as 90m prescriptions a year.
The ABPI yesterday urged the government not to issue the blacklists. It
claimed that they were drawn up in spite of undertakings not to extend the
original list given in April by Conservative Central Office to US drugs
groups in the UK.
Exact details of the medicines affected by the measures are yet to be
disclosed. However, some groups could lose more than 70 per cent of their
NHS revenues.
The government's proposals are part of a Europe-wide drive by governments to
control spiralling drugs bills. In the UK, NHS drug spending has risen
annually by about 12 per cent over the past two years. The industry claims
the escalation is due to the ageing population and the government's own
programme of increased screening of patients. In 1991, the government spent
about Pounds 3.2bn on drugs.
Previous blacklists for seven therapeutic areas introduced in 1985 saved the
NHS Pounds 75m during the first year, according to the government.
The savings are contested by the ABPI. It argues that many patients were
prescribed more potent and expensive treatments instead of simpler and
cheaper medicines for which they would have had to pay.
The latest initiative is likely to affect significantly research and
development in the 10 therapeutic areas, warned Mr Mike Wallace, managing
director of Schering Healthcare, the UK drugs arm of the German group
Schering. He said that if new products were automatically blacklisted it
would provide a disincentive to invest in the field.
The 10 therapeutic areas include anti-diarrhoeals, hypnotics and
anxiolytics, appetite suppressants, contraceptives, topical anti-rheumatics,
as well as treatment for allergic disorders, vaginal and vulval conditions,
anaemia, ear and nose illnesses and skin diseases.
The most controversial area is that of contraception. The government could
save some Pounds 50m on prescriptions for the 3.5m women on the pill.
