FT  17 DEC 92 / Deals put in doubt by Kenyan poll
ONE OF Kenya's main opposition parties warned yesterday that questionable
projects involving British and other foreign companies would be reappraised
if it won this month's general election.
The warning came as the political temperature of Kenya's tense election
campaign rose a further notch. Police given orders to shoot to kill in the
trouble-torn Rift Valley Province, and election observers again criticised
the for its conduct of the election process.
In separate letters to the British High Commissioner and the Japanese
ambassador, Mr Robert Shaw, a senior official in the Ford (Kenya) party
listed five projects and a loan agreement involving state-owned
corporations.
Although this is not the first time some of the projects listed have been
the subject of speculation, the opposition claims to have gathered more
evidence.
In his letter to Sir Kieran Prendergast, the British high comissioner, Mr
Shaw stressed that a Ford (Kenya) government 'will honour all Kenya's
honestly incurred international obligations'.
But an independent firm of auditors would be asked to investigate alleged
'complicity in corruption by external financiers as well as the executors of
the projects' the letter continued.
Meanwhile the government's conduct of the run-up to the December 29 general
election has again been criticised by international monitors.
The Washington-based International Republican Institute yesterday expressed
'fears that the process has been significantly compromised by the government
on behalf of the ruling party'.
In its preliminary report the institute expresses concern about
'government's centralised and systematic manipulation of the administrative
and security structure of the state,' including use of 'substantial monetary
resources'.
Earlier this week the Commonwealth observer group warned that the election
was being jeopardised by nomination 'irregularities' that have led to 17
candidates of the ruling Kanu party being returned unopposed.
