FT  09 MAR 92 / China to start HK consultations with UK today
QIAN QICHEN, China's foreign minister, holds talks today in London with the
British government as part of a consultation process over Hong Kong
established when Mr John Major, the prime minister, visited Beijing last
September to sign an agreement on the territory's new airport, writes
Alexander Nicoll, Asia editor.
Britain and China agreed on six-monthly meetings at foreign secretary level
in order to head off misunderstandings such as the dispute over the airport.
China will assume sovereignty over the British colony in 1997.
As well as meeting Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, Qian will see Mr
Major and two of his Conservative predecessors, Mr Edward Heath and Mrs
Margaret Thatcher, and Mr Gerald Kaufman, Labour's foreign affairs
spokesman.
Mr Major is expected to raise human rights as well as arms control and
issues of common interest to the two countries as permanent members of the
UN Security Council, including the progress of the Cambodian peace process.
During his Beijing visit, Mr Major said he would take a personal interest in
Mr Hurd's discussions on human rights with Qian.
He said Britain intended to maintain 'unrelenting and unremitting' pressure
to win the release of political dissidents and other detainees, and
presented Li Peng, China's prime minister, with a list of individual cases.
In their talks on Hong Kong, Mr Hurd and Qian are expected to discuss the
promotion of investment, a new air service agreement, arrangements for a
British consulate-general in Hong Kong, Vietnamese boat people, and the work
of the Joint Liaison Group which maps out the detailed arrangements for Hong
Kong's future.
Mr Hurd is not expected to discuss with Qian two issues of burning interest
in Hong Kong: the governorship and the speed of the introduction of
democratic processes.
Lord Wilson, present governor, is to retire this year and London is expected
to appoint his successor, likely to be the last UK-appointed governor, after
the elections. The government is unlikely to consult Beijing on the
appointment.
Mr Hurd has said that he would raise with China the question of accelerating
the pace of democratic reform in Hong Kong beyond that already agreed with
Beijing. However, he is understood to believe that the time is not yet ripe
to do so.
The Chinese government rules out a revision of Hong Kong's Basic Law to
accommodate a larger number of directly elected seats on the Legislative
Council.
