FT  15 DEC 92 / International Bonds: Austrian offer fails to find interest
A CONTROVERSIAL Euroyen bond offering for the Republic of Austria yesterday
failed to attract investor interest. The Y75bn offering of eight-year bonds
was very aggressively priced, as even the lead manager, IBJ International,
conceded.
The par bonds carry a coupon of 5 per cent, which was as much as  1/4 point
lower than the pricings put forward to the borrower by other banks.
However, IBJ said that it had taken a view that the yen bond market will
look attractive in the early part of next year, and the issue was a way of
taking a position in the market accordingly. IBJ International arranged a
Y25bn five-year offering for the European Investment Bank on Friday, which
was also viewed as aggressively priced.
Dealers said there is now a broadly held view that a Japanese prime rate cut
will not come before the end of the year. However, the payment date for the
Austria deal is not until the second half of January, which provides IBJ
with something of a breathing space.
While it is not uncommon for banks to express a contrary market view by
taking bonds on their books, it is unusual to launch a new issue for this
purpose, especially one which is syndicated among a group of banks. In the
case of the Republic of Austria deal, IBJ assembled an underwriting group
consisting of 22 banks and securities houses. However, these underwriters
performed no practical function, merely selling the bonds allocated to them
back to IBJ at break-even. The only apparent reason for these banks to
participate was to have their names quoted as participants in a deal for a
prestigious sovereign borrower.
At the end of the day, the bonds were bid at 99.70, a 30 basis point
discount which is equal to full fees.
However, IBJ denied accusations from other houses that the deal had been
engineered to push IBJ a few notches up the league table of Eurobond lead
managers compiled at the end of the year, which many banks use as a
marketing tool.
