FT  24 SEP 92 / KIO to inject Dollars 1bn into Spanish industrial empire
THE Kuwait Investment Office (KIO) announced yesterday in Madrid that it is
to pump Dollars 1bn into its troubled industrial empire in Spain and convert
Dollars 1.4bn of debt at its Spanish holding company, Grupo Torras, into
capital.
The KIO holdings in Spain, including the large Ebro foods group, the Torras
Papel paper group, the large property developer Prima Inmobilaria and the
chemicals group, Ercros, have been troubled since June, when the new
management at the KIO decided to stop a flow of funds into the companies.
Ercros is in receivership.
The Kuwait Investment Office said yesterday that Torras Papel would receive
about Dollars 400m by the end of the year as part of the rescue plan, but it
said that Prima's precarious financial situation would have to be resolved
in conjunction with its creditors, raising fears that the company could yet
go into receivership as well.
Prima has gross debts of around Dollars 700m, while Ebro is fundamentally
sound.
The KIO made no mention of Ercros but is believed to be trying to revive
talks which could result in the group's disastrous fertiliser businesses
being taken over by Freeport MacMoran of the US.
A fresh injection of capital into the group was first urged late last year
by KPMG Peat Marwick, KIO's auditors.
However, the new management has until now been deeply suspicious of the
decisions and recommendations that were made under the agency's former
leadership.
The KIO now appears to have decided that the bulk of the Spanish investments
made over the past six years are worth saving.
The Kuwaiti government is believed to have been directly responsible for
triggering the collapse of Ercros, and a credit crisis at Prima Inmobilaria,
by cutting short a transfer of funds for 1992 to the Spanish industrial and
property assets of the KIO. The KIO is believed to have passed Dollars 700m
to Grupo Torras, its Spanish holding company.
However, the transfers were not considered as fresh capital by the Kuwaiti
authorities and the Finance Ministry, over-riding the Kuwait Investment
Authority, the KIO's governing body, decided they should be stopped or
dramatically curtailed.
