FT  16 MAY 92 / Finance And The Family: The Week Ahead
Whitbread will open a round of brewers' results on Monday by reporting its
first fall in earnings for 16 years. The impact of the recession,
culminating in a Pounds 37m provision for bad and doubtful debts, is
expected to reduce full-year pre-tax profits by more than 20 per cent to
between Pounds 225m and Pounds 230m.
Market forecasts for Allied-Lyons on Tuesday suggest pre-tax profits in the
new management's inaugural year of about Pounds 635m - marginally ahead,
excluding last year's Pounds 147m on foreign currency dealings. The results
are likely to have less influence on sentiment than statements about the
group's plans for the future and the benefits expected from restructuring.
Interim results from Bass on Wednesday should show a 20 per cent rise to
Pounds 263m on last year's weak first half. The country's leading brewer is
continuing to benefit from cost savings from brewery closures, but pub sales
to comply with the government beer orders will hit retailing profits.
At least Pounds 290m pre-tax for the year to March is expected from British
Airways, which reports its finals on Tuesday, against a Gulf crisis-affected
Pounds 130m. Strong second and third quarters lie behind the recovery.
BOC, the chemicals group, is expected to report interim pre-tax profits of
about Pounds 166m on Tuesday. This compares with Pounds 144.7m last year,
when the figure was depressed by some above-the-line charges.
Courtaulds, also in the chemicals sector, reports full-year results on
Wednesday. Pre-tax profits of about Pounds 200m are expected, compared with
Pounds 186.3m. Attention will focus on performance materials and the quality
of business in fibres and films.
Commercial Union, the most successful of the UK's composite insurers, could
show a slight fall in pre-tax losses to between Pounds 15m and Pounds 25m
when it reports its first-quarter results on Wednesday. CU will benefit from
premium rate increases in the UK.
With continuing overcapacity in milling and baking, the interim pre-tax
outcome at Ranks Hovis McDougall looks set to fall sharply. Estimates for a
tough first half, to be reported on Wednesday, range from Pounds 50m to
Pounds 52m, down from Pounds 76.5m.
BT, the telecommunications group, is expected on Thursday to report pre-tax
profits for the year to the end of March marginally up on the previous
year's Pounds 3.07bn. Profit growth has been held back by the recession,
competition from Mercury Communications and a tighter price cap.
Storehouse, the retailing conglomerate which owns BhS, Habitat, Mothercare,
Richard Shops and Blazer, will announce a mixed bag of trading fortunes when
it reveals its annual results on Thursday. Although group profits are likely
to be down from Pounds 21m to Pounds 13.5m, there should be progress on
several fronts, particularly at BhS.
Also on Thursday, Argyll Group, which runs the Safeway chain of
supermarkets, will demonstrate the continued resilience of food retailing as
it looks likely to lift yearly pre-tax profits by about a quarter to Pounds
360m.
