FT  11 AUG 92 / Technology (Technically Speaking): Smart cards hit the
streets
Is the 'smart card' a technology whose time has finally arrived? The recent
decision by the Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Executive, the local
authority in charge of public transport services, to issue smart cards to
passengers is bringing into the limelight a technology that has been
standing in the wings since the late 1980s. These credit-card style devices
that incorporate semiconductor chips have so far failed to live up to the
optimistic projections of manufacturers and market analysts who had
predicted that the smart card would rapidly replace magnetic-stripe cards in
the bank card field and become widely used by the early 1990s. Instead,
while there are several well-known examples of smart card use, such as
French telephone cards and toll road payment schemes, the magnetic stripe
card is still the overwhelming standard for bank cards and for most other
applications. New interest in smart cards has been generated by rising
concerns about the security shortcomings of magnetic cards which can be
fraudulently reproduced using relatively inexpensive equipment. Card forgery
is a growing international problem that is driving a search for technology
solutions. In this environment, banks and other financial institutions are
reassessing smart card technology and watching closely as Manchester
transport officials begin to implement their smart card-based ticketing
system. Initially, the scheme will involve 500,000 cards, to be used on
Manchester's 2,700 buses, the city's 'Metrolink' and rail systems.
Ultimately, the system will require more than 1m cards. Each card will have
a monetary value loaded on to it and will be used as a prepaid ticket. The
cost of each journey will be deducted from the card as the passenger boards
the bus. As well as eliminating delays while passengers fumble in pockets
and purses for change to pay the bus fare, the smart cards will store a
record of journeys taken, providing customers with a record of how they have
used the card. The transport executive will also be able to track ridership
patterns more accurately.
But this is just the beginning. In Manchester, bus riders might also use
their cards to purchase newspapers or coffee for their morning commute.
Ultimately, the cards could be used as debit cards to make cashless
transactions. By renting out space on the memory chips contained in smart
cards to other organisations and then clearing the transactions through
their computer system, the transport executive has opened up a considerable
business opportunity.
If banks have been slow to recognise the potential of smart cards in the
past, the prospect of a transport authority usurping the traditional role of
a high street bank has been enough to grab their attention now.
The advantages of smart cards over conventional magnetic stripe cards were
difficult to define. Coupled with the higher cost of smart cards - about
Pounds 5 per card in large quantities versus about 40p for a magnetic card -
potential reliability problems have discouraged widespread adoption.
However, the Manchester scheme uses 'contactless' smart cards, developed by
GEC Card Technology of Walsall, England. The card has no surface contact and
operates when it is brought within a few centimetres of the reader device
thus avoiding any reliability problems. 'We believe that once contactless
smart cards are seen operating in large numbers, there will be a strong move
from contact smart cards toward the contactless alternative,' says John
Baker, managing director.
However, the bigger challenge is to replace magnetic stripe cards with
contactless smart cards. In this regard, smart cards are finally beginning
to look like a serious contender for space in your wallet. For bank
executives faced with a rising tide of fraud and the threat of competition
for the business of their high street branches there may be little choice
but to adopt the technology.
