FT  13 JAN 92 / The little things that mean a lot: Inadequate provision of
childcare remains one of the biggest obstacles to women's career
opportunities
When Mr John Major, the prime minister, recently used the term 'social
revolution' to describe the changed role of women in the UK workforce, he
was not exaggerating. While mothers in the 1950s were widely expected to
stay at home to look after the children, today nearly two-thirds work. The
difficulty for these women is that there has been no corresponding
revolution in the provision of childcare.
Relatively few men consider that combining career, marriage and children
will pose dilemmas, said Mr Major last October at the launch of Opportunity
2000, the business-backed initiative to improve the position of women in the
workforce. But for women, he said, 'these three simple human ambitions are
still hard to combine'.
What makes them tough to reconcile for some women is the difficulty of
finding affordable and reliable childcare. Ms Jane Oakley, a former
high-flying civil servant and the mother of an eight-year-old and a
six-year-old, gave up full-time work when arrangements for the care of her
children broke down. She is now looking for a part-time job that will fit in
with her children's school hours. 'But what sort of 9.30-2.30 job am I going
to get that will be challenging and interesting? Filling shelves in a
supermarket is all that seems to fit the hours.'
The loss to the civil service of her skills, and the wasted expense of
training, is mirrored throughout industry as mothers take part-time, local
jobs that fail to make best use of their qualifications and abilities.
The economic advantages of greater public investment in nurseries and
after-school care have been strongly argued by the Institute for Public
Policy Research. This left-leaning think tank calculates that the cost to
the state of providing childcare facilities would be outweighed by increased
tax paid by mothers on higher earnings. An added advantage would be cuts in
social security benefits because single parents, in particular, would return
to the work force.
A further consideration is that, in addition to these economic benefits, the
improvement of childcare could help advance the role of women in the work
force.
According to Ms Joanna Foster, who chairs the Equal Opportunities Commission
(EOC): 'Lack of childcare remains one of the major barriers to equality of
opportunity for women, inhibiting their access to training and good
employment prospects.'
The position is particularly acute in the UK, where state support for
childcare is minimal compared with the public contribution made in other
European Community countries (see panel). The difficulties for women in the
UK are compounded by the level of paid maternity entitlement which is,
again, among the lowest in the EC.
Regulated daycare is available for less than 8 per cent of children under
five in the UK. Instead, women rely on a mass of ad hoc arrangements. Women
like Ms Rosemary Lindley, a primary school teacher, who swaps care for her
three children with a neighbour who also works part-time. 'When I'm not
working, I'm carting around a load of kids - my own and someone else's.
There's absolutely no break,' she says.
Relatives, mainly grandmothers, are the mainstay of the system, although
there are signs that even these arrangements are beginning to break down.
The extended family may be dispersed geographically, and grandmothers
themselves are increasingly likely to want to work.
Outside the informal network of friends, neighbours and relations, the
options are limited by availability or cost:
Nannies and private day nurseries, where they exist, eat up disproportionate
amounts of women's earnings in all but the highest-income households. The
cost of a daily nanny is likely to be Pounds 100-Pounds 200 a week,
depending on location in the UK. A full-day place at a private nursery in
London may cost Pounds 150 a week. State and voluntary-sector provision,
where it exists, is either part-time or restricted to those children
considered by social workers to be 'in need'.
Nursery schooling, provided free by local education authorities, is the main
plank of public provision, with about a quarter of the UK's three- and
four-year-olds now in nursery education. While this may sound encouraging,
it should be remembered that there is virtually no public provision at all
for children under the age of three. Moreover, most nursery schools offer
only half-day sessions, lasting two and a half hours at most, for the
limited school year.
Childminders provide the most readily available form of childcare, apart
from relatives. Registered minders provide places for an estimated 5 per
cent of children up to the age of four. The National Childminding
Association recommends a minimum weekly fee of Pounds 50, although there are
local variations.
Registration of childminders is supposed to be by the local authority social
services department, although IPPR calculates that at least one in five
minders is not registered. Long waiting lists for registration are reported,
as are failures by many local authorities to provide satisfactory
monitoring.
Playgroups, parent-and-toddler groups and creches usually require parental
involvement and tend not to cover the sort of hours required to enable a
parent to go out to work.
The problem is not solved as children reach school age. Schools finish in
the middle of the afternoon; and for 175 out of 365 days, schoolchildren are
on holiday. 'Latch-key kids' among the older age group may have to fend for
themselves during the school holidays and in the time between the end of the
school day and the return of a parent from work. Some estimates put the
proportion of unsupervised primary school-age children as high as 30 per
cent.
Women like Ms Celia Muldoon - who works a full day as a secretary and leaves
her nine- and 10-year-old boys alone for an hour after school - says paying
for childcare would eat into her earnings. 'It's tough. I just have to take
the chance that they'll be alright in the house on their own,' she says.
It could be argued that what she and others like her need is increased
flexibility in working hours rather than increased provision and
co-ordination of childcare on a national level. Indeed, in his Opportunity
2000 speech the prime minister made no mention at all of childcare but
pleaded, instead, with employers to increase the number of part-time jobs
and facilities such as career breaks.
More flexible hours and part-time working would certainly be welcomed by
women. However, without fundamental changes in attitudes by society to the
status of part-time workers, it is doubtful whether any significant
improvements could be made in women's earnings or promotion prospects if
this route is chosen. In most organisations, few things are more likely to
kill a career than moving from full-time to part-time work. There is still
widespread belief in industry that no position of any responsibility can be
held by anyone other than a very full-time worker.
If public, private and voluntary sector childcare remains skeletal, what
about employers' provision? Government statements and recent press reports
might give the impression that workplace nurseries are flourishing -
springing up from employers' fears about projected labour shortages and
being nurtured by government tax concessions. This impression would be
mistaken.
Certainly, employers in the late 1980s had intended to take practical steps,
including providing childcare, to recruit and retain women. But the
recession has intervened. The latest survey by Working for Childcare, the
voluntary group, found that there are just 350 workplace nurseries in the
UK. Even the leader in the field, Midland Bank, which pays for some places
at 130 nurseries, has had to cut back its original goal of involvement in
300. Other employers have simply abandoned or postponed their plans for
nurseries.
One reason is that many companies have found the costs of setting up and
running nurseries prohibitive. Littlewoods, the retail group, for example,
has announced that it is to be part of a joint venture to establish a
40-place nursery near its headquarters in Liverpool. Mr John Moores, a
Littlewoods director, calculates that it will probably be necessary to
charge about Pounds 50 a week for a place at the nursery - a hefty
proportion of a shop worker's weekly wage of about Pounds 150.
Mr Moores told Mr Major at the launch of Opportunity 2000 that he, like
other employers, wanted to increase the number of childcare places but
needed a financial contribution from the government.
The EOC argues that the consensus of opinion is swinging around to favour a
systematic approach to the care of young children in the UK. Says the EOC:
'Parents are clearly ready to contribute within their means, as are
employers, although . . . employers are generally not in a position to, and
are not going to, foot the bill alone.
'Everyone is waiting for a lead from government.'
This is the first in a series on childcare
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
NUMBERS OF CHILDREN UNDER 15 YRS
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
UK 1988
10.7m
of which over 3.5m are under 5 yrs
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
REGULATED PROVISION
DAYCARE SERVICES                      PLACES AS PERCENT OF
FOR UNDER FIVES                      POPULATION UNDER 5 YRS
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Local authority day nurseries              0.9 percent
Private and voluntary day nurseries        1.1 percent
Registered childminders                    5.0 percent
Nannies                                    0.8 percent
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Institute for Public policy Research/Cohen
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
