FT  05 SEP 92 / Private view: The fine art of stealing the world's finest
art
NEXT TIME you are in an art gallery in Europe or America, look out for a
pretty young woman with a cap pulled down over her face. She will not be
trudging along the walls but rooted in front of one painting, holding a
sheaf of colour reproductions in one hand and making notes with the other.
You are watching Susie Ray about to steal another masterpiece.
Of course, she is not going to wrench the picture from the wall. She is
merely going to lift the image, take it away and reproduce it in oils for
some rich, probably anonymous, client.
'You can usually get something on camera before the wardens start shouting
at you,' she explained gaily. 'But I'm getting a bit too well-known, so I
sometimes use an assistant.'
What Susie Ray does is perfectly legal, provided her deception is done
without intent to deceive and provided the work she mimics is out of
copyright (which in Britain means the artist must have been dead 50 years).
It is legal, but odd. Jonathan Swift would have relished a topsy-turvy world
in which a piece of painted canvas, originally purchased for a modest price,
becomes so valuable and such a liability that its owner is forced to hide it
or sell it, and feels obliged to pay again for someone else to paint another
piece of canvas in exactly the same way.
Temporarily housed in a corner of a big studio in a not-so-fashionable
district of south London where her husband John Stewart designs and sells
kites, Susie Ray told me why the copyist's art is once more in again.
Some of her clients are sentimental, she said, like the Texan couple who
before selling their little Sisley landscape to a Japanese wanted a copy of
it to put back above the mantelpiece, or like the security guard at
Rockefeller's private mansion who wanted a souvenir of one of his master's
paintings for his retirement.
Others, like the Arab with the huge collection of early Impressionists
stored in a bank vault in Geneva, are billionaire investors who will not pay
the insurance premium.
Or they are collectors who are going bankrupt, or who are afraid the art
market is collapsing, have stopped buying at auction and need new
acquisitions to give their friends the impression they are still active.
Some are doing up country houses, like the couple who commissioned Monet's
Santa Maria della Salute for their Venetian decor; like the English
industrialist Sir Anthony Bamford who needed Reynolds' portraits for his
Warren Hastings room.
Or they just want a van Gogh they've seen on holiday, such as the couple for
whom she copied Starry Night, or they want Modigliani, like the old man who
has commissioned four, or they want Stubbs, or Gauguin, Cezanne or
Caravaggio - even, in one case, Duccio. Occasionally, she has had brushes
with the underworld: 'I have had funny phone calls.'
Susie Ray is one of the first modern copyists in Britain to go publicly into
business. In Paris there is Daniel Delamare, who commissions other artists
to work for him and in Barcelona there is Miguel Canals who heads a large
studio whose output has been put up at auction.
Ray charges up to Pounds 4,000 for an Impressionist or post-Impressionist,
including the frame. For Old Masters she charges more. She does only one
copy of each masterpiece, calls them Susie Ray Originals (a cheeky use of
the word but one with precedents in fashion and music), then stamps the back
of the canvas with a certificate of non-authenticity.
When I asked her why only one, she replied: 'Because it takes a lot of time.
If you do it again you can't do it as well. You lose interest in it. You
can't concentrate. I just couldn't do it, even if the painting was
destroyed.' She did not add that the uniqueness of her copies might persuade
customers they were acquiring an asset.
Do you have an artist's eye? I asked her. Do you think of your clients as
philistines?
'It varies with the clients. But I don't see myself as a fine artist. I
wasn't trained as one. Had I been, I would have developed a style, a
technique, and that would have shown in my paintings. But because of my
training I am able to produce accurately. I call myself a technician.'
Her painstaking skill is the product of natural talent, a year's foundation
course at Chelsea Art College, four years studying scientific illustration
at Middlesex Polytechnic and two years working as a botanical artist at Kew
Gardens.
Are there any painters you can't do?
'I've turned down two Canalettos, not because I can't do them, but because
it would take for ever.' What about technically?
No, I haven't come across one yet. I think contemporary painters would be
hard, with drips down a canvas. Anyway, they're not out of copyright.
'Old Masters take longer but technically they're easier. With Impressionists
have to get the brush strokes looking spontaneous, especially when they
painted so fast.'
But, I said, if you can knock up a pretty decent Monet aren't you tempted to
go out and find a subject for yourself?
'No, because I can't do that. I've tried. It would end up looking like a
photograph. This is the extraordinary thing.'
What are you lacking that you can't do it?
'I'm lacking the fine artist's way of painting.'
But it's a matter of looking, isn't it?
'Yes, but probably I just don't want to do it because Monet does it so much
better. If I tried it it would just be so bad.'
You don't have to paint like Monet.
'No, but I look at everything with an illustrator's eye.'
From prints or slides of her paintings it is impossible to tell they are
copies. Seeing them in the flesh it is still difficult (though isn't the
expression of that Modigliani nude a touch too saucy?) and even beside the
originals they might confuse.
So I applied the Turing Test for robots: let's say you can make a copy to
fool virtually everyone. What then is the difference between your copy and
the original?
'Visually, I hope, there shouldn't be - though I would be completely aware
of it. There's a big difference in the value, of course.'
So why is there such a difference in value?
'Why should a Stubbs be worth Pounds 60,000 and an Impressionist Pounds 6m?
Why should a de Kooning go for Pounds 2m? It's the art world. I don't
understand it.'
I pointed to the nude again. How would you describe the difference between
your Modigliani and his, apart from the fact that he had the idea and you
didn't?
'Because it was done by the original artist. It's as lame as that. There is
something there. If the two were side by side I think the original would
still have an aura.'
Would I get the same buzz from a copy as from the original?
'I would hope you'd get the same buzz.'
People say there's some quality inherent in an original work of art. Do you
think that's true?
'All I can say is that when I've done a copy of a painting that's hanging in
a gallery and I go back and see the original it's just very exciting. I
think 'Gosh, I've done it]'
'It's something that I feel I can achieve, and I have never seen anybody
else quite get it. And I'm going to get better. But it will never be the
same. Which is why I don't charge the same.'
Do paintings have souls? I left Susie Ray's studio with the aesthetic
conundrum unresolved. Perhaps she cannot answer the question for the same
reason that, brilliant as she is, she cannot paint her own pictures.
So if you discover Susie Ray stealing a picture from your gallery, don't
worry. She will probably leave a bit of it behind.
