FT  07 DEC 92 / Survey of Israel (1): Stirrings of optimism - After decades
of war, Israel feels that events are moving its way on the diplomatic and
economic fronts. Hugh Carnegy describes the mood in the Jewish State as it
tackles mass immigration and holds peace talks with its Arab neighbours
IN ISRAEL, which has been in a constant state of conflict throughout its
four decades as a state, the years have taught the wisdom of placing
prudence before optimism.
But as 1992 draws to a close, there are many Israelis who dare to imagine
that this has been a watershed year, when the country at last embarked on a
path of peace with its Arab neighbours and moved towards well-founded
prosperity.
This powerful and enticing vision is by no means assured, nor universally
shared: the Washington-based Middle East negotiations not only carry no
guarantee of success, they are opposed by Israel's vocal right-wing as
containing the seeds of a dangerous sell-out.
A surge in export-oriented growth this year is just a fragile beginning in
the daunting task of economic reform required if the country is to absorb
successfully hundreds of thousands of immigrants from the former Soviet
Union who have arrived since 1989.
But it is the belief that the Jewish state stands on the threshold of
opportunities unprecedented since its violent inception in 1948 that drives
the government of Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the prime minister who led his Labour
party to a landmark election victory in June.
The election produced a political sea-change. Mr Rabin, the army chief of
staff during the 1967 Six Day War, succeeded where Labour had hitherto
failed since its chief opponent, the hardline Likud party, first came to
power in 1977. He persuaded Israelis to vote for a party committed to
withdraw from Arab territories captured in 1967 in exchange for peace.
The Likud, under former Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, and its far-right
allies argue that there was no great popular swing away from the commitment
never to yield the West Bank, Gaza Strip and the Golan Heights. Indeed,
Labour was carried to victory largely by the votes of Israeli Arab citizens
and big support from the new immigrants who above all blamed the outgoing
government for their harsh economic predicament.
Nevertheless, it also appeared that many Israelis no longer believed in the
Likud's uncompromising stance in an era when the pro-Arab influence of the
Soviet Union had disappeared and many Arab countries had, in effect, taken
the same side as Israel in the 1991 Gulf conflict with Iraq.
Likud's representation was slashed from 40 to 32 members of the Knesset.
Labour won 44 seats and was able to build a coalition with the left-liberal
Meretz alliance and the ultra-orthodox Shas religious party that excluded
Likud for the first time in 15 years.
In his inaugural address to the Knesset, Mr Rabin made it clear he intended
to pursue a very different path from the siege mentality that characterised
Mr Shamir's leadership. 'We must overcome the sense of isolation that has
held us in its thrall for almost half a century,' he said. 'We must join the
international movement towards peace, reconciliation and cooperation that is
spreading across the entire globe these days - lest we be the last to
remain, all alone, in the station.'
His priority was to breathe new life into the Middle East peace talks
launched in October 1991 in Madrid, based on his government's acceptance of
the 'land for peace' formula contained in UN resolution 242 and demanded by
the Arabs as the foundation of any settlement.
Five months later, the process has not moved on much. The eighth official
round since Madrid of the core bilateral talks with Syria, Jordan, Lebanon
and the Palestinians is due to start today, but significant progress looks
unlikely at least until the new Clinton Administration is in place.
Talks with the Palestinians are bogged down in disputes over the scope of
power Israel will hand over to a Palestinian authority in the West Bank and
Gaza during an interim stage of self rule preceding negotiations on a final
settlement over the territories. Mr Rabin has offered Syria a partial
withdrawal from the Golan Heights, but Syria has baulked at signing even a
joint agenda for further talks without clear Israeli commitments to a full
withdrawal.
The disputes with Jordan and Lebanon appear more susceptible to quick
agreement, but are dependent on progress respectively with the Palestinians
and Syria. Meanwhile, in Israel, Lebanon and the occupied territories,
radical Arab groups hostile to the talks have stepped up acts of violence
aimed at upsetting the process; right-wing Israeli groups, including Jewish
settlers in the occupied territories, are also mobilising their opposition.
Mr Rabin has warned that the opportunity for peace must be seized within the
next two or three years or may lapse, to be replaced by the risk of
non-conventional war in the region. But he is not yet pessimistic. 'I
believe that we are on a path of no return. The reality of the international
situation, the regional situation, the genuine need of nations and
countries, is to arrive at a resolution of the dispute,' he said last month.
The perception that peace is possible has had an important bearing on the
other priority of the government - the economy. The advent of 450,000
immigrants since 1989 - a 10 per cent leap in the population - and their
continued arrival at a pace of some 70,000 a year has put a huge onus on the
economy to produce rapid and sustained growth.
This year, the growing anticipation of political stability has stirred the
interest of both domestic and foreign investors. The Tel Aviv Stock Exchange
has boomed. Tourism is at record levels. The business sector has grown by
around seven per cent - with exports rising by 14 per cent. Real GDP growth
will be around six per cent, giving per capita growth of up to three per
cent. Inflation is nearing single figures for the first time since Israel
was plagued by three-digit inflation in the early 1980s.
But unemployment, at around 11 per cent of the workforce, is also at record
levels. It has resulted in a slowdown in immigration rates which has
undoubtedly given the economy some valuable breathing space to adjust to the
inflow. But if Israel is to fulfil its most fundamental Zionist commitment -
to attract as many immigrants as possible - it must produce rapid growth
over a prolonged period.
This has been achieved before, in the 1960s, when Israel's per capita income
was similar to Japan's. Since then, however, the Israeli economy has largely
stagnated. Despite huge injections of US aid, currently running at Dollars
3bn a year, Israeli GDP per capita of around Dollars 10,000 a year has been
overtaken by countries such as Hong Kong and Singapore.
Mr Rabin's government has committed itself to dismantle much of Israel's
traditional state control over the economy to re-inject growth. It says it
will conduct a wide programme of privatisation and liberalisation, will
invest heavily in infrastructure while keeping a tight rein on public
spending. It is looking to extend Israel's 1975 free trade agreement with
the EC to cement links with what has become the country's main trading
partner.
There remains considerable scepticism over whether the government will live
up to its own rhetoric on reform, particularly given Labour's historical
role in building the state edifice and its continued close links with the
powerful Histadrut trade union federation. While the privatisation programme
has yet to see the government shed control of a major company, last month
two new government companies were founded to build a highway and to
administer the bank debts of the moshavim collective farms.
Nevertheless Mr Jacob Frenkel, the governor of the Bank of Israel, says he
believes the peace process is moving in the right direction. He says the
peace process could give its efforts an immeasurable boost by encouraging
investment and opening up new trade opportunities. 'If indeed peace breaks
out we can envisage a dam cracking and things happening in a big way.'
In both political and economic terms, therefore, a great deal is riding on a
successful outcome to the peace negotiations. That in itself gives Mr Rabin
more incentive to push them forward. If he succeeds, 1992 will indeed be a
turning point in Israel's history.
