FT  11 MAR 92 / Ivory trade ban to remain despite African objections
INTERNATIONAL bans on the trade of elephant and rhinoceros products will
remain in place, despite impassioned pleas yesterday from southern African
nations that a relaxation would be in the best interests of the two
threatened species.
The triennial conference of the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species (Cites) also agreed not to impose limits on trade in
Atlantic bluefin tuna, though Japan and other leading fishing nations
promised to reduce their catching of the fish.
At least two southern African governments, Botswana and Zimbabwe, threatened
to withdraw from the organisation after it became clear that a vast majority
of the 114 Cites member states opposed the lifting of a three-year ban on
trade in ivory and other elephant parts.
Both delegations argued that they could raise funds to expand their existing
elephant conservation programmes through limited international sales of
elephant hide and meat, and that a moratorium on trade in ivory would be
maintained for at least the next two years. A disappointed Botswana said
that it would now 'weigh the costs and benefits of Cites membership'.
While most other delegates were confident that the two governments will not
withdraw, their threat highlighted conflicts among Cites members in defining
'sustainable trade' in wildlife, particularly on emotional issues such as
the elephant.
Zimbabwe also argued that a limited trade in rhinoceros horns would enable
the country to bolster a campaign against heavily armed poachers whose
slaughter of the species has intensified over the past years. Delegates from
Zimbabwe said that 'we shoot people to protect rhinos' and that 'we place
the survival of the rhino population above the survival of the Cites rules'.
The bluefin tuna debate has provoked a strong reaction within Japan, the
consumer of three quarters of the bluefin exported from the western
Atlantic, most of which is used to make sushi. After a week of intense
public pressure from industry groups and of furious lobbying by Tokyo, the
Swedish government yesterday withdrew its proposal to ban trade in the
western Atlantic variety, though it did extract promises of reduced catches.
Japan, supported by the US, Canada and Morocco, had argued that an existing
body, the International Commission for Conservation of Atlantic Tuna, is
successfully monitoring bluefin stocks, and that Cites should not impose
restrictions.
The tuna argument highlighted the growing problem of Cites overlapping
existing trade monitoring organisations, often industry-run. This was also
shown in a debate on a Netherlands proposal limiting trade in two species of
tropical timbers, which it argued should fall within Cites's jurisdiction.
However, Malaysia, a large exporter of tropical timbers, said the proposal
was 'ill-conceived' and that Cites 'should not be used as a tool to
straitjacket international trade in timber'. The Malaysian government
insists that the International Tropical Timber Organisation is responsible
for overseeing that trade.
