FT  27 OCT 92 / Gonzalez, for richer and poorer: Why 10 years under the
Socialists has given some Spanish workers cause to celebrate, and others to
protest
THE SPANISH government had a good day on Sunday, celebrating 10 years of
rule by Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez's Spanish Socialist Workers party at
a massive rally in Madrid's main bullring. Mr Gonzalez announced he would
stand for re-election next year and said that what Spain needed most was
another 10 years of Socialist government.
Yesterday was less comfortable. Nearly 1,000 steelworkers who have walked
from northern Spain in protest at plans to cut 9,700 jobs and 1.5m tonnes of
capacity from the state's two integrated steelmakers in Asturias and the
Basque country arrived in Madrid. They were joined by another 10,000
protesters outside the industry ministry.
It might be going too far to suggest that some of the people in the bullring
on Sunday were outside the ministry last night, but what was being
celebrated and what was being protested are, in essence, the same thing.
The 10 years of Socialist government have been about preparing Spain for
life alongside the leading economies of the European Community and that has
meant raising the living standards and increasing the wealth of its
citizens.
But as the steel march starkly showed, it has also been about making some of
them poorer. Spain does not have an industrial policy as such but the state
owns a lot of industrial companies - from steel to shipbuilding, coal,
avionics, electricity and airlines - which, no matter how hard Madrid tries
to leave them to the markets, keep demanding its intervention or support.
This year Madrid merged its Asturian integrated steelmaker, Ensidesa, with
Altos Hornos de Vizcaya, which has a large plant near Bilbao. It drew up a
neat, almost bold, plan to trim their combined 24,500-strong workforce and
to cut steel output from 6m tonnes a year to 4.5m tonnes.
It assumed it could combine two Asturian sites into one, keeping some blast
furnaces in the port of Gijon open, and shutting those in nearby Aviles. The
Gijon furnaces would then send molten steel to be cast in a modern steel
shop in Aviles.
At AHV, all the furnaces would be closed but Bilbao would get, instead, the
world's biggest mini-mill which, through melting scrap in giant electric
furnaces, would produce about 900,000 tonnes of steel a year. The costs of
the jobs cuts and the new mill would be a huge Dollars 6bn.
Both Ensidesa and AHV are high-cost producers of relatively common products
which could be more cheaply imported from northern EC competitors. Their
combined losses in 1991 and this year will be Dollars 1.3bn.
But the spread of the vote that has kept Mr Gonzalez in power for a decade
makes it imperative that steelmaking continue in the Basque country and
Asturias, which is a powerful Socialist stronghold and heavily dependent on
subsidised steel and coal jobs.
The Socialists are strong in the Basque country, too, but, even more
important, might require the support in parliament in Madrid of the ruling
Basque party if, as seems likely, Mr Gonzalez's PSOE does not win a majority
at the next general election.
Thus, the opposition of the EC's competition commissioner, Sir Leon Brittan,
to the steel plan came as a rude shock to Madrid this month. Sir Leon, whose
job it is to ensure that European industries are not unfairly subsidised,
tried to persuade his fellow commissioners to have the Bilbao mini-mill and
a further 800 jobs cut from Spain's plans.
Last week the Commission compromised and asked Spain to find its own further
cuts, either in jobs, capacity or subsidies - the implicit warning being
that if it did not, industry ministers would reject the plan on November 24.
Madrid, then, is caught between Asturian and Basque anger at its original
plan, and the need to make even deeper cuts. An 'industrial shuttle', in
which Madrid's industry minister will try to win support for its plan from
sceptical EC partners in Britain, France and Germany before November 24,
begins this week.
It may work, but if 9,700 steel job cuts, spread over six years, cause this
much trouble, how will Spain ever trim its state industries before economic
and monetary union (Emu), to which Spain is still committed, in 1999? The
INI, the state industrial holding company, has just announced plans to shed
20,000 jobs in four years, when, at best, only 25 per cent of INI's 140,000
employees work in profitable companies.
But the day is not far off when the current trade off between votes and jobs
will become untenable. Not yet, though. This is an election year and Sir
Leon has given Madrid a perfect opportunity to tell the steelworkers that it
is, despite all appearances, fighting to save jobs.
