FT  16 SEP 92 / Survey of Wales (7): Europe's 'finest facilities' claim -
More business parks in mid Wales
AT THE START of last May, the Development Board for Rural Wales unveiled its
latest business park at Penrhyndeudraeth, little more than a stone's throw
from the burial site of David Lloyd George, one-time prime minister and one
of Wales's greatest sons, writes Anthony Moreton.
Glyn Davies, the ebullient chairman of the board, said at the launch that
the park was part of the strategy of marketing the whole of rural mid Wales
as one coherent business park.
'We have the finest facilities in Britain,' he said, 'the best quality of
life and the right atmosphere in which businesses can operate profitably.'
Several business parks have already been created in this vast area, which
stretches from the northernmost tip of industrial south Wales to the edges
of Snowdonia in the north, from Cardigan bay to the English border in the
east. Some of these parks, such as that at Newtown, have beenhighly
successful in helping create employment and economic activity in their
locality.
The problem which the board initially faced was rejuvenating small towns,
such as Llanidloes, Aberystwyth, Bala and Brecon, where there were
insufficient jobs to hold, let alone attract, young people.
It has also increasingly had to take into account the rundown in farming,
with its consequent depressant effect on incomes.
Having managed to arrest the decline in numbers - aided, it has to be
admitted, by a considerable number of incomers - and stimulated new
businesses, Glyn Davies's team at Newtown developed a new strategy for the
1990s in which the emphasis was placed on focused investment.
'We're focusing our activities on six growth areas - Aberystwyth, the
Ffestiniog valley, Brecon, central Powys, Newtown and Welshpool - and 12
special towns, ranging from Cardigan in the west to Presteigne on the
English border.
'This way we should ensure that the maximum number of people will benefit
from the new jobs and community facilities we are either providing or
helping to provide.'
