FT  22 JUN 92 / US Syndicated Loans: Banks regain enthusiasm for highly
leveraged deals
HIGHLY leveraged transactions (HLTs) in the US syndicated loan market are
creeping back into fashion in the wake of a strong high-yield bond market, a
recovering economy and historically low interest rates.
Although the rate at which banks are taking on HLT deals today is nowhere
near that seen at the height of the market's boom in the late 1980s, the
volume is running at a pace that should easily exceed 1991's total.
After limiting their participation in HLTs because of loan default problems
at the beginning of the 1990s, and then watching their HLT portfolios shrink
as the surviving borrowers paid off their debt, US banks are re-entering the
HLT market with renewed enthusiasm.
Typical of the deals currently in syndication is the Dollars 400m financing
for the supermarket group Grand Union. The deal is being put together by
Bankers Trust and consists of three tranches - priced at spreads of between
300 and 350 basis points (bp) over the London interbank offered rate
(Libor), and paying participation fees of up to 325bp.
Bankers Trust has been in the vanguard of much of the new HLT business. It
has also joined Chemical Bank and Barclays Bank in constructing a Dollars
680m deal for Coltec - priced at 275bp over Libor and paying fees of around
300bp - and is also working on a Dollars 750m HLT for soft drinks group Dr
Pepper, and a Dollars 470m deal for California supermarket chain Ralph's.
Both of the deals are being put together alongside initial public offerings
(IPOs) of stock.
In contrast with the mid to late 1980s, today's HLTs are not being used for
mergers or acquisitions, but for deleveraging - paying off loans that carry
high interest rates with funds raised through borrowings at lower rates.
After years of carrying junk, companies want to retire their high-yielding
debt, simplify their capital structures and generally clean up their balance
sheets.
As Mr Dick Trask, head of syndication at Citibank in New York, said of the
market today: 'You don't have the feeding frenzy, acquisition-driven stuff
you saw in the 1980s.' Today it is strictly about refinancing, deleveraging
and general corporate restructuring.
The watershed deal for the HLT market may have been the huge Dollars 1.25bn
syndicated loan in December involving textile company Burlington Industries.
The loan, alongside the proceeds from a simultaneous stock offering, was
used to retire or refinance all of the company's outstanding junk bond debt.
The Burlington deal, led by Bankers Trust and Chemical Bank, was typical of
many to follow. It involved a company overloaded with costly debt that
managed to turn its business around sufficiently to persuade bank lenders
and equity investors to provide fresh funds for a complete overhaul of its
balance sheet.
It was also typical in that the HLT was put together alongside an IPO. As
one banker explained: 'Banks are looking at deals where the original HLT has
seasoned for a couple of years, and where the company is now getting back to
the banks and saying: 'We'll bring in new equity to improve the
capitalisation and pay you a lot of fees'.' For many banks, it is a
difficult offer to turn down.
Not only are the fees on new HLTs enticing - some deals are paying 200bp to
300bp - but so is the pricing, which on recent transactions has been nearer
the top end of 250bp to 300bp above Libor, with even a few deals boasting
margins as high as 350bp above Libor.
At the same time, the risk profile of borrowers has improved, and the
companies are coming to the market, many of them after HLTs a few years ago,
with a reputation for much sounder management than in the late 1980s.
As Mr Charles Kiley, managing director in Bankers Trust Securities'
syndicated loans department, says: 'There has been an improvement in the
confidence level of the bank market, which is a function of the economy and
of these particular companies being pretty good success stories in their own
right.'
The recent decision by the US regulatory authorities to drop the HLT
designation on leveraged syndicated loans has also helped the market. The
authorities were worried that the HLT label, which scared away many
potential lenders, was preventing companies from raising funds. Its removal
could free up a fresh supply for capital-hungry companies.
The improvement in the economic outlook has also been a boon. 'Banks and
other investors are feeling more confident (about the economy) today than a
year ago, and they are open for business,' explained Bankers Trust's Mr
Kiley.
As for the outlook, a lot will depend on developments in the IPO market,
without which many recent HLTs would not have been possible. Recent signs
that investor demand for IPOs is waning suggests the growth of HLTs may
slow. Optimists, however, are hoping that as the economy recovers, and
interest rates stay low, new life will be breathed into acquisition-related
HLT business.
