FT  06 NOV 92 / Survey of Ireland (3): Undeterred by recession - 'A
successful unemployed economy'
depending on your viewpoint. Low inflation, sustained growth and a healthy
trade surplus add up to a classic textbook case of good economic management.
The appendix would have to point out, though, that almost a quarter of the
3.5m population is marginalised from the mainstream economy, and a
substantial proportion more has little to show for that good economic
management.
In Dublin, the carefully-tended gardens of the middle- and upper-class
neighbourhoods of the 'southside' - south of the river Liffey, which bisects
the city - give an aura of genteel prosperity. The only hint of anxiety is
the ubiquitous burglar alarm, now to be seen on almost any house with a
reasonable coat of paint. (It could probably rate alongside the personal
computer as a yardstick of the occupant's standard-of-living.) City centre
restaurants, with their uniformly expensive menus, seem invariably to be
full, and doing a thriving business.
On the other side of the Liffey on the 'northside' where lower-middle class
and working class neighbourhoods predominate, the pubs, supermarkets and
fast-food shops continue to ring up profits, but their trade is increasingly
being financed by transfers from the exchequer in the form of welfare and
unemployment benefits.
Despite the recession, Ireland continues to have one of the fastest-growing
economies in the European Community, averaging 5 per cent growth per annum
over the past five years. But it also has the longest dole queues; grown
longer by 30 per cent over the past two years. By the end of 1992
unemployment is projected to pass 300,000, over 21 per cent of the labour
force; easily the highest in the EC.
This has prompted one sarcastic commentator to remark that Ireland has 'one
of the most successful unemployed economies in the world.' Two things
explain this ambiguity: Ireland's demographic trends, and its membership of
the narrow band of the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) within the EC.
Although the birth rate has fallen to about 50,000 live births per annum,
from 70,000 10 years ago, there will be no significant reduction in the
number of people entering the labour market until the end of the decade.
Emigration, the traditional escape valve for those unable to find work in
Ireland, has declined from an average 30,000 per year in the late 1980s to
only 1,000 last year - because of recession in the UK and the US.
Meanwhile the government's policy to maintain a strong punt within the ERM
has severely restricted exchequer freedom to borrow and spend. This has had
a deflationary effect on employment and domestic demand, but has created a
stable macro-economic environment, attractive to export-orientated inward
investment. It is that sector which has shown the most dramatic growth in
recent years.
Merchandise exports are expected to be up by 10 per cent this year, while
manufacturing output is predicted to grow by 7 per cent. This impressive
performance is now under threat.
In September sterling abandoned the ERM and floated downwards. Some 32 per
cent of Irish exports are destined for the UK; about 42 percent of imports
are sourced there. The financial markets, having overwhelmed sterling,
turned on the punt, anticipating that the government would be forced into a
devaluation.
The government, however, has held firm. Using its remnant exchange controls
(which are scheduled to be abolished by the end of the year), raising
interest rates by 3 percentage points, and borrowing abroad to rebuild
reserves lost in defending the punt in the first speculative rush in
September, it has managed to throw together a credible defence of the punt.
Upon this the entire edifice of Ireland's economic policy is structured.
Maintaining the punt's link to the DM is Ireland's passport to the
'inner-core' of hard-currency EC states, which may press ahead with plans
for monetary union and a single currency if a two-speed EC eventually
emerges out of the ERM crisis. There is almost unanimous agreement across
Irish political party lines, and between employers' organisations and trade
unions, that to link the fate of the Irish economy to that of sterling and
the UK's ailing economy would be a fatal error.
The question is whether the very high real interest rates now being suffered
by the economy, currently in excess of 11 per cent, will prove more damaging
than sterling's devaluation. Mr Bertie Ahern, the Irish finance minister
says: 'The real level of interest rate is far too high, and for the
performance of the economy is almost ridiculous . . .if the Germans move (to
lower rates) this side of Christmas, it will allow us to do so as well, but
we will have to live with high interest rates certainly for this quarter.
(Then) in 1993 we would be trying to roll back that 3 per cent increase.'
Mr John Bruton, leader of Fine Gael, the opposition party, accuses the
government of having 'a foreign exchange policy but not an economic policy'.
He is arguing for thorough structural reforms in the economy - a sweeping
reform of the tax legislation which currently encourages capital-intensive
investment but discourages labour-intensive investment. High national
insurance contributions should be reduced and income tax bands widened to
encourage investment and job creation, he says.
Mr Ahern has a worried eye on next year's budget. This year the target of an
exchequer borrowing requirement of IPounds 590m, or 2.4 per cent, looks
likely to be met. Next year a 9 per cent rise in the public sector wage bill
is already locked in through outstanding agreements with the unions. This
leaves stark choices: either to abandon the convergence criteria for EC
monetary union, or implement significant spending cuts in public services.
With a general election looming, neither one of these is a politically soft
option.
