FT  14 DEC 92 / IMF may revoke membership of Yugoslavia
DIRECTORS of the International Monetary Fund meet in Washington today to
consider revoking Yugoslavia's membership, opening the way for Croatia and
Slovenia to rejoin the IMF and its sister institution, the World Bank.
The move would call into question around Dollars 1.7bn (Pounds 1.1bn) of
World Bank loans outstanding to the other Yugoslav republics, possibly
leading to a formal default for the first time in the Washington-based
development institution's history.
Discussions have been under way for some time over a legal formula that
would, in essence, declare that Yugoslavia no longer exists and that its IMF
membership has therefore lapsed. The World Bank would be obliged by its
rules to follow suit.
The republics could then be invited to reapply for membership, but under
conditions that would ensure that Serbia, viewed as the aggressor in the
civil war, would not qualify.
Croatia and Slovenia have accepted responsibility for their share of World
Bank loans made to Yugoslavia, although Serbia could repudiate its portion,
estimated at Dollars 1.5bn - roughly equivalent to a full year's net income
for the World Bank.
Bank officials say their exposure is already partially provisioned, but
acknowledge that if they had to provision their Serbian loans in full it
would cause a 'downward blip' in net income.
While the IMF has some credits outstanding to Yugoslavia, its exposure is
much smaller than the bank's, and some bank directors have questioned
whether their Fund colleagues are sufficiently sensitive to the financial
implications of ending Yugoslav membership.
But the twin political imperatives of, on the one hand, allowing Croatia and
Slovenia into the international financial community and, on the other,
drumming Serbia out, are likely to override these financial considerations.
The bank has already had to place Dollars 1.7bn of its total Dollars 2.02bn
loans outstanding to Yugoslavia - which includes the Serbian, Bosnian and
Macedonian shares - in 'non-accrual' status, which means they are not being
serviced, so repudiation would add little risk.
Counting Yugoslavia, the World Bank has around Dollars 3.8bn of loans in
non-accrual status, nearly 4 per cent of its outstanding loan portfolio. Its
provisions at the end of its financial year amounted to Dollars 2.54bn, or
around 2.5 per cent of outstanding loans.
Some industrial member countries have argued that this provision ratio is
inadequate, and Mr Denis Desautels, Canada's auditor general, last month
joined this criticism.
