FT  12 AUG 92 / International Bonds: Strong demand in Australian dollar
sector
A HIGH volume of redemption flows in the Australian dollar sector of the
Eurobond market is fuelling demand for paper in the sector, which normally
experiences a lull in August.
Redemptions of Australian dollar-denominated Eurobonds total ADollars 1.1bn
this month, according to Hambros Bank. The current weakness of the
Australian dollar is encouraging a high level of reinvestment, but the flow
of redemptions is set to tail off to about ADollars 200m in September and
October.
Following three deals last week totalling ADollars 425m, the South
Australian Government Financing Authority yesterday launched an ADollars
125m issue of 9 per cent bonds due 2002. Investor interest is concentrated
at the longer end of the market, according to dealers, due to the steep
yield curve in the Australian government bond market. For example, 10-year
government bonds, yielding 8.84 per cent, offer a yield pick-up of more than
 1/2 point over seven-year government bonds.
Also, despite the decline of Australian interest rates, the government's
success in curbing inflation (now at 1.1 per cent) means real interest rates
are still higher than in Europe.
The SAGFA deal, arranged by Hambros Bank, was bid at less 1 1/2 points,
comfortably within full fees of 2 1/8 points.
In the Japanese equity warrants market, Toyo Kanetsu, a manufacturing
company, launched a Dollars 100m four-year issue of bonds with equity
warrants attached, via Yamaichi International. The deal did not suffer from
further fallsin the Japanese stock market, leaving the Nikkei index below
the 15,000 level.
Most warrants are substantially out-of-the-money (that is, the exercise
price is far above the current stock price), and many are expiring
worthless.
Scarcity value, coupled with a sense that the stock market must bounce soon,
have boosted interest in new paper. The Toyo Kanetsu deal was bid at 105,
above its par issue price.
In the sterling market, Compagnie Bancaire launched a Pounds 100m issue of
senior, unsubordinated floating rate notes, paying interest at  1/8 point
above the London interbank offered rate. According to arranger UBS Phillips
&amp; Drew, the deal was placed mainly with UK institutions.
