FT  09 JAN 92 / World Trade News: Going Dutch in Brazil's heartland -
Christina Lamb visits a bulb and seedling export business based in a former
jungle
THE town, with its small bungalows set on clipped lawns and its ruddy-faced,
blue-eyed residents on their bicycles, is typical of a Dutch
flower-producing region, exporting its blooms all over the world. Except
that it is in the heartland of Brazil.
Founded after the Second World War when Brazil was open to large numbers of
immigrants, the town of Holambra, in Sao Paulo state, Brazil's economic hub,
has overcome countless adversities to become Brazil's biggest flower
producer with exports of more than Dollars 2m a year. Its rose and gladioli
bulbs and seedlings are sold mainly to Europe, including the Netherlands.
Largely due to the efforts of Holambra's growers Brazil's total floral
exports rose from Dollars 3m in 1987 to more than Dollars 5m last year.
Holambra's first arrivals in April 1948 found the land - bought by the
American and Dutch governments - 'was nothing but jungle inhabited by wolves
and jaguars', says 77-year-old Mr Wim Weil.
In June 1948 the Holambra co-operative was created and its 5,000 hectares
divided into lots. Many of the immigrants had been flower growers but it
seemed hopeless to try to grow flowers in such heat for such a huge a
country and no tradition of flower buying.
Mr Weil says: 'The first 10 years were really hard. We had to construct a
city as well as a company and we had no idea what would grow.'
The photo museum he now runs charts their not always successful efforts at
growing rice, beans, peanuts, oranges, corn, soya and cotton and raising
pigs and chickens. Cows sent out from time to time by the Dutch government
died of tropical diseases.
Many settlers left for other parts of Brazil or went back to the Netherlands
and the co-operative was on the verge of bankruptcy in the early 1960s. It
was bailed out by the Dutch government which provided credit that allowed
them to buy a truck they needed badly.
Holambra turned to flower-growing with the arrival in 1961 of Mr Henricus
Schoenmaker who brought with him three generations of expertise and
technology, setting up protected houses in which seedlings could be
nurtured. His son Cornelius says: 'It was a real struggle as there was no
market. In the Netherlands every house has a vase of fresh flowers but here
people used money to buy food not flowers. Only really in the last eight
years has it taken off.'
Today of the co-operative's 320 members, 110 are flower growers and last
year 25 per cent of total earnings of Dollars 100m came from flowers. The
co-operative grows more than 800 species of flowers and 1,000 tropical
plants and has a third of the Brazilian market.
While Brazil's third year of recession is sending Italian and Japanese
immigrants back to their native countries, many young Dutch people are
arriving, attracted by cheap land, a growing market and lack of competition.
Mr Renato Opitz, production manager of Holambra, says: 'They can earn here
in 10 years what would take a lifetime in Holland.'
The constant influx of new people keeps the town on its toes, he says. 'The
older Dutch people have to adopt the new ideas to survive and send their
children to the Netherlands to learn as Brazilian institutions do not have
the technology.'
Despite Brazil's economic woes, the country's Dollars 75m a year flower
market is increasing. Mr Opitz explains: 'People in the A and B
(socio-economic) groups always buy flowers even in a crisis and when there
is less money available those in the C and D groups also buy as a cheap
alternative to presents.'
Brazil's average flower consumption is 25 times less than that of Europe. To
augment this Holambra has launched a newspaper, a weekly TV programme on
flower care, and every September hosts a flower show that attracts 200,000.
However, the bigger growers such as the Schoenmakers are concentrating on
exports and joint ventures with Dutch companies. Mr Schoenmaker who is
hoping to expand on the 50m gladioli bulbs and cuttings he sells to the
Netherlands, explains: 'Although I think the Brazilian market has huge
potential I don't want to depend on it because of the instability of
government economic policy.' After the Collor Plan in March 1990, for
example, under which 80 per cent of the nations assets were frozen, for
weeks growers had to throw away their flowers.
