FT  06 JUL 92 / Patten will aim to leave legacy of substance: Hong Kong's
next governor must satisfy the needs of democracy and China
WHEN Mr Chris Patten, Hong Kong's governor-designate, arrives to take up his
pro-consular duties on Thursday he will face a set of political problems to
which there are no easy or obvious solutions.
Politics in Hong Kong is currently in a state of flux. Old certainties have
dissolved and new allegiances are in the making. In a political environment
where consensus once determined decision-making, there is now division,
debate and acrimony.
The focal point of this schism is China; its arena the local legislature in
Hong Kong.
Five years from the transfer of sovereignty, Hong Kong has still not come to
terms with its fate. Among ordinary Chinese, and most ethnic Chinese
politicians, there is a profound sense of ambivalence about the transfer.
They are torn between ties of ethnicity - a belief that they belong to the
great Chinese civilisation and that Hong Kong is a part of China - and
apprehension about being absorbed into a totalitarian state where the rule
of man, not law, will decide their fate.
One of the central elements of this dilemma is the pace of progress towards
democracy in the colony. Some see accommodation with China as the best way
of safeguarding Hong Kong's future; others contend that greater democracy is
the only way to providelasting protection.
The resolution of these emotional and political tensions, or at least their
mitigation, is seen as the main task of Mr Patten's governorship. When he
leaves Hong Kong for good on July 1, 1997, he will have achieved a
considerable political triumph if the people of Hong Kong are confident that
the prosperity they enjoy and the open society in which they live will
survive.
But Mr Patten will find that the instruments of power at his disposal
provide no sure way of achieving this. He will have to use his much-vaunted
political skills to pull it off.
He inherits what many in the colonial government describe as a 'cockeyed'
political structure. On paper, the governor is a powerful person.
He is advised by a 13-member Executive Council, or cabinet - nine of whom
were appointed by his predecessor, Lord Wilson, and four of whom sit by
right of their position in the administration. Behind him is a
180,000-strong civil service.
But, paradoxically, his power is limited. He presents his legislation to an
assembly which has the power to reject or amend it, especially his spending
plans. And, worryingly in this age of partially elective democracy, he is a
government without a party.
The legislature numbers among its 60 members 18 who were popularly elected
and rally to the 'liberal' cause, 21 who were elected to represent mainly
conservative interest groups via functional constituencies, 18 mainly
conservative men and women appointed by Lord Wilson, and three ex officio
members of the administration.
Since the colony's first partially democratic elections last September, the
legislature has further developed into a place which commands the public's
attention for its new-found assertiveness.
But those whom Lord Wilson appointed in the hope of having a legislative
majority - conservative plutocrats who have joined in a loose confederation
known as the Co-operative Resources Centre (CRC) - have, by a recent embrace
of Beijing, shown signs of divided loyalty. This is even more embarrassing
for Mr Patten since four of the CRC appointees to the legislature were also
appointed to the cabinet.
The CRC has found it increasingly difficult to stand with the government. It
wavered in March over the budget and had to be hauled into line. More
recently it broke ranks over the financing of the airport railway - one of
the core projects for the colony's new airport development - in a move which
at best gave aid and comfort to Beijing and which at worst undermined the
negotiating stance of the government.
On the other side of the legislature is the United Democrats led by Mr
Martin Lee. It functions as a disciplined political party. But, because of
the inability of Lord Wilson and Mr Lee to agree terms over the latter's
participation in the cabinet, the Democrats have adopted the role of an
opposition.
One of Mr Patten's early tests will be how he deals with them. An option is
to bring them into the cabinet. But it is by no means certain that switching
from the CRC to the Democrats will provide him with a reliable majority in
the legislature or a cabinet that can agree on policy towards China. Unlike
the CRC, Mr Lee's Democrats continue to argue for more directly elected
seats to the legislature - a policy China steadfastly refuses to
contemplate.
Also, Mr Patten risks an early row with China if he invites Mr Lee to join
the cabinet. Beijing has raised the stakes by implicitly accusing Mr Lee of
being a 'subversive' and publicising its opposition to his, or his
colleagues', cabinet membership.
Not to appoint Democrats, however, risks the accusation of 'kowtowing' to
Beijing, an accusation which dogged his predecessor.
There are, however, more than one means to the end of good government. Mr
Patten is expected to take a much higher profile in winning support for his
policies than his predecessor. In a status-conscious place such as Hong
Kong, a well-timed call from the governor could achieve a lot in building
legislative support for his policies. Some local politicians who now command
the political heights may find a more deft contender for the position.
But what will make Mr Patten's governorship one of substance more than mere
style is the political structure he leaves behind.
To many in the colony the conduct of the 1995 elections goes to the heart of
what Britain, through Mr Patten, can leave Hong Kong.
These people want to retain a robust political structure that can bolster
the colony's free press, its independent judiciary, and Hong Kong's open
environment for business.
Already forces are marshalling to prevent the 1995 elections from being
conducted fairly. The CRC has joined with pro-Beijing legislators to endorse
proposals for the elections designed to reduce the representation of the
Democrats, who swept last September's elections, in favour of themselves.
Britain is unlikely to convince China of the need for more popularly elected
seats in the 1995 elections, in spite of London's commitment to raise the
issue with Beijing. But what many want, at the very least, is elections in
1995 that are conducted fairly.
