FT  10 JAN 92 / GPs' pay system 'seriously flawed': Institute of Geographers
Conference
DOCTORS in London are receiving too much money from the government's GP
deprivation payments system compared with those in the north of England, the
Institute of British Geographers Conference in Swansea was told yesterday.
Mr Martyn Senior, from the University of Salford, said the Department of
Health's system for allocating money had serious statistical flaws. He said
that if the calculations were made fairly, nearly 5 per cent of the Pounds
26.3m spent last year on deprivation payments would be distributed
differently between electoral wards throughout England.
Deprivation payments were introduced for GPs in April 1990 to compensate for
heavy workloads in particular parts of the country. They are based on an
index of eight variables devised by Professor Brian Jarman of St Mary's
Hospital Medical School, London.
The index takes no account of the different sizes of population in the
electoral wards used to calculate it, which vary from 56 people to 41,875.
This can skew the deprivation rating of each ward.
Mr Senior said: 'The Department of Health has not seriously investigated the
technical difficulties. A good statistician needs to go through it.'
The main regions to lose payments under Mr Senior's recalculations would be
Greater London and Walsall. The largest gains would be to Salford and
Liverpool.
The index currently uses 1981 census data. Mr Senior said that when the
Department of Health updated the index with 1991 data, it should also change
how the index was calculated.
Women in rural areas are prevented from taking good jobs by traditional
attitudes as much as by a lack of opportunities, a study in three English
counties for the Rural Development Commission has found.
Nearly a third of the women questioned were not using their qualifications
in their current jobs, which were typically low-paid and often part-time, Ms
Jo Little told the conference.
The study of 350 women in Cornwall, Derbyshire and Wiltshire found lack of
childcare meant many women who worked had to rely on informal help from
friends. They feared this would damage their image as a mother, which
remains a significant factor in rural areas.
Wales is the most European of all parts of the UK and is by-passing the
government and forging direct links with other European Community regions to
help its future growth, the conference was told.
Mr Phil Cooke, of the University of Wales at Cardiff, said that an elaborate
process of 'networking' with key institutions in four other European regions
was helping to revitalise Welsh industry. The regions were working together
to establish joint ventures and collaborate on innovation and technology
transfer.
