FT  19 JUN 92 / International Capital Markets: Siemens withdraws from chip
plant deal with IBM
SIEMENS, the German elect-ronics group, is reducing its participation in the
semiconductor memory market in a move that could mean the end of European
memory production.
Siemens has decided not to build a manufacturing plant for advanced
semiconductor memory chips which it has been developing with IBM, the US
computer group, in an agreement made a year ago.
'We are not going to build a 64-megabit D-Ram facility with IBM,' a Siemens
representative said. 'The intention is that we will not be a major player in
the D-Ram market after the 16-megabit.'
Meanwhile, IBM said yesterday it was looking for a partner to collaborate in
the manufacture of 64-megabit D-Rams in Europe.
'At present we continue to plan for 64-megabit manufacture in Germany. We
are looking for new partners within the timeframe of roughly one year,' IBM
said.
The decision by Siemens does not mean it will pull out of the memory market
immediately.
It still manufactures 1-megabit, 4-megabit D-Rams and is collaborating with
IBM in 16-megabit production.
However, it does mean when those products are replaced in the latter half of
the decade by future generation products, Siemens is not likely to be a
participant in the D-Ram market.
Its decision stems from its view that longer-term demand for D-Rams will
decline, and since intense competition has led to sharp price falls and many
manufacturers of D-Rams are losing money, it does not make sense to continue
to invest in that product.
The worldwide market for D-Rams has been depressed over the past few years,
particularly in Europe, where manufacturers are willing to keep prices low
to increase market share, according to Mr Harding.
'There are too many D-Ram suppliers and companies who stay in D-Rams may
kill themselves,' said Mr Byron Harding at Dataquest, the high technology
consultancy.
Siemens had continued to manufacture memories, which were considered
technology drivers because it wanted to master the D-Ram manufacturing
process in order to move into more advanced technologies.
However, it no longer believes this is true. Instead it hopes to use skills
learned in the development of memories to manufacture more profitable
products, such as application-specific integrated circuits.
Siemens's decision to move away from memories raises questions over Europe's
ability to manufacture semiconductor memory chips, a market dominated by
manufacturers in Asia. The biggest memory manufacturers are Japanese.
Philips, Europe's largest semiconductor supplier, has already pulled out of
slow read-only memory chips (S-Rams) and has stopped selling erasable
programmable read-only memory (Eprom) chips while SGS-Thomson is not
participating in slow S-Rams and its profitability from Eprom sales has been
dwindling, according to Mr Harding.
Dell Computer saw its shares slump Dollars 5 3/8 to Dollars 15 3/4 at close
of trade in New York yesterday, after Dell's indication that it would match
price cuts by other computer-makers raised concerns among traders about
profits, writes Our Financial Staff.
The company held its annual meeting and an analysts' meeting yesterday.
Traders said some analysts may subsequently lower their earnings estimates.
More than 3m Dell shares were traded in New York yesterday.
Editorial comment, Page 16
