FT  03 FEB 92 / Arts: An artist inspired - Architecture
Ben Johnson is one of the few practising artists in the world who is
inspired by architecture. This is curious because there was a time when
artists were architects and architects were artists. They spoke the same
language and understood one another.
In his new exhibition, at Fischer Fine Art in London until March 5, the
precise observations of this excellent artist are revealed in two guises.
The smaller half of the show is a group of abstract analyses of geometric
problems; the larger element consists of powerful architectural studies of
recent and much older buildings.
The artist has called his exhibition Paintings and Diverse Objects, with
perhaps the most spectacular object being the remarkable table, which is
both a painting and a sculpture. The other intriguing three-dimensional
object is the maquette for the giant, colourful mobile for the London
headquarters of ITN.
The most rewarding paintings are those recently painted in Italy. Johnson is
best known for his celebration of the geometry of high-tech buildings and
these explorations of classicism represent a newer, calmer phase of work. He
has been working in the Palladian villas in and around the Veneto, and there
is a new, textural quality in paintings like the one in Fischer's window of
the Teatro Olimpico at Vicenza - a stunning picture. His interior views are
always formal and cool, but in these Italian subjects an interest in surface
decoration is now apparent. Coolness returns to the palette in the long
vistas of the corridors at the Cini Foundation in Venice. They suggest both
solid architecture and watery infinity.
In many of the paintings, light draws the eye in to more eternal realms than
those actually painted. Johnson has a sense of universal geometry. It is
something he could one day apply to an exploration of the nude figure which,
if added to his repertoire, would virtually complete his artistic
achievement. As it is, his paintings are resolved, calm and beautiful - and
in the present climate, may it be said, bargains for the serious collector
of contemporary representational works of art.
