FT  21 FEB 92 / Arts: Ornament down the centuries - The new exhibition at
the V&amp;A
In Henry Cole's day there would have been little need of a gallery examining
the use of European ornament at the Victoria and Albert Museum. Ornament was
an essential component of design, its vocabularly as familiar to the
educated man in the street as to the architect, craftsman or designer. With
the rise of Modernism and its emphasis on form rather than surface
decoration, that understanding all but disappeared. The word ornament lost
its association with state-of-the-art design and came to conjure up awful
images of knick-knacks on the mantelpiece.
Today, the language of ornament is deemed to be worth relearning. Next week,
the V&amp;A's Henry Cole Wing opens its doors on what is believed to be the
world's first gallery to focus on ornament in European design and
decoration. Such a gallery would have been almost inconceivable even in the
1970s, despite growing disillusion with the expressive poverty of Modernism.
The idea is a product of the last two decades - of nostalgic reverence for
the buildings and works of art of the past, and of the rediscovery of colour
and motif by Post-Modern architects and designers. The Modernists' adage was
'Less is more'. Robert Venturi's response was 'Less is a bore'.
The Post-Modernists' eclectic and whimsical use of decoration is a tongue in
cheek subversion of the grammar of ornament. They are not, however, the
first to break the rules. As the new gallery demonstrates so vividly,
ornament is in a constant state of flux.
From April, access to the gallery will be via James Wild's imposing
staircase, hitherto not used by the public but currently being arranged as
an additional picture gallery. Greeting the visitor outside is a decorative
overmantel panel painted by Rex Whistler in 1932 to match the Chinese
wallpaper in Samuel Courtauld's house in South Audley Street. Implausibly it
provided the surround for a Picasso. Inside is a set of car wheel trims.
In the 1860s the gallery was used by the School of Naval Architecture. Today
its central section resembles less an outpost of the Admiralty than an
extension of the Sir John Soane Museum. High terracotta walls are lined with
part of the museum's outstanding collection of ornamental prints, and with
row upon row of cornices and capitals, fragments of friezes, mouldings and
architectural models - a kind of three-dimensional encyclopaedia of the five
orders of classical architecture and its ornament. Articulating the space is
a handsome 1770s doorcase from a now demolished house in Kensington.
Objects are drawn from virtually all the museum departments and arranged
thematically according to motif. In a case devoted to geometric ornament,
say, we find a 16th-century Venetian marquetry box, an Eduardo Paolozzi
plate and a kipper tie. Elsewhere acanthus leaves adorn a workaday Norwegian
wooden butter tub, a fine Chelsea porcelain plate and a William Morris
wallpaper. Carved and gilded they are candle sconces.
What is unexpected is the effect of juxtaposing objects with the same
ornamental characteristics but of different materials, periods, cultures and
status. In a sense we are simply playing a multi-media game of Snap, but the
exercise encourages us to examine more thoroughly objects that we might
otherwise pass by, in or out of a museum case.
How many Concorde travellers have ever looked twice at their British Airways
crockery? A first inspection reveals a border decoration comprising a frieze
of upturned, snub-nosed Concordes. A second, that the pattern is also a
reworking of the classical Vitruvian scroll. We find it again on a handsome
Meissen breadbasket made two centuries before. Modern design is rarely as
divorced from the past as most people imagine. Even Concorde itself, here in
model form, is emblazoned with what is in effect an heraldic device. Planes,
cars and domestic appliances are shown to be no less significant bearers of
ornament in the 20th century than furniture, textiles and ceramics.
Classical architecture provided the Western world with its most enduring
design vocabularly. Its five orders and ornaments are thoroughly treated
here. Sections of non-architectural and non-European ornament are smaller
and offer not so much a visual dictionary as a glorious lucky dip of
comparisons, discoveries and insights. We see lyres and urns used as
ornament, for instance, but find that no other post-classical object has
achieved that distinction. A case devoted to ribbons and swags includes a
carved stone vase previously in store and catalogued as 16th-century
Venetian. Now it is proudly displayed as the work of Piranesi. Repeating
pattern is revealed to be an Islamic invention.
Throughout, the curators have used the museum's outstanding and diverse
resources, especially of prints and the great architectural textbooks, to
give us a sense of how ornament was able to travel through time and from
place to place - and how it was reinterpreted at each manifestation.
The European Ornament Gallery of Design and Decoration 1450-1991, opens at
the V&amp;A on February 26.
