FT  18 DEC 92 / Franc fort and Frankfurt in trial of strength: France's
'strong franc' policy may create tensions in the New Year between the
Bundesbank and the Bank of France
THE French government has for five months valiantly defended the 'franc
fort', the cornerstone of its economic policy, against intense currency
speculation, write James Blitz in London and Alice Rawsthorn in Paris.
Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the French prime minister, was in battledress again
yesterday, saying the existing parity against the D-Mark, on which so much
of his political capital has been expended, was inviolable.
'This government must keep its cool,' he said. 'I am absolutely against any
talk of devaluation or of floating the European currencies.'
But his words could not mask what one dealer called the franc's 'significant
loss of credibility' in recent weeks. Some analysts believe that a
devaluation of the French currency is a possibility next year. The move
would probably mark the end of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism, whose
cornerstone was the fixing of the D-Mark and franc parities in 1979. A
devaluation might even endanger the entire project of European Monetary
Union, of which the ERM is the foundation. In recent days, speculation
against the French currency has been comparatively restrained, because
currency operators are unwilling to risk the profits that they have made in
dealing earlier in the year.
But some are preparing for what could be a New Year of intense speculation
against the franc, now the weakest currency in the ERM.
Yesterday, the franc dipped to FFr3.4210 to the D-Mark, less than a centime
above its ERM floor of FFr3.4305.
The currency has also fallen this week through the critical level of minus
75 percentage points on the ERM's 'divergence indicator'. This measures a
currency's relative strength against the European Currency Unit (Ecu). Once
a currency has reached this level, it is presumed that its central bank
should defend it by intervention and by raising interest rates.
Currency pressure has also forced France's state-owned banks to raise base
rates by 0.55 percentage points in the wake of rises in money market rates.
'The French government is clearly concerned about industrial confidence and
would like to stimulate investment, so the base rate increase is a blow,'
says Mr Christopher Potts, chief economist of Banque Indosuez in Paris.
By any reasonable standard, a devaluation of the franc should not be on the
currency market's agenda at all. Measured by economic fundamentals, the
franc should actually be a candidate for revaluation against the D-Mark.
France's year-on-year consumer price inflation is 2.1 per cent, well below
western Germany's level of 3.7 per cent. France also enjoys a healthy
annualised trade balance of FFr4.71bn.
Germany, meanwhile, appears to be entering a serious recession: the Ifo
institute claimed this week that German GDP could fall by 0.5 per cent next
year. However, the franc is falling victim to the currency dealers'
admiration for the D-Mark as a currency that has never been devalued, a
respect that was at the heart of the September currency crisis.
'The German currency is being bought by dealers not because of the economic
fundamentals, but because of the belief that the German currency will never
be devalued,' says Mr Paul Chertkow, global currency strategist at UBS
Philips and Drew in London. Dealers believe there is no risk at all in
investing in D-Marks, which currently trade above 9 per cent. Compounding
the faith in the German currency is uncertainty whether Paris can go on
defending the franc's existing parity by raising interest rates. The
country's parliamentary elections, due in March, have also forced the
government's hand, while opposition leaders are threatening to break the
bipartisan agreement on a strong franc.
Miss Alison Cottrell, an economist at Midland Montagu Global Markets in
London, believes that the unwillingness to raise official interest rates may
create tensions between the Bundesbank and the Bank of France in the New
Year. She believes that the Bundesbank will support the franc through
intervention only if France plays by the ERM rules and tightens monetary
policy first.
Mr Chertkow, of UBS Philips and Drew, is more optimistic. He believes that
President Francois Mitterrand of France and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of
Germany have staked so much political capital on the ERM that they will do
whatever is necessary to defend the parity.
Yesterday, the Bundesbank president, Mr Helmut Schlesinger, said in
Frankfurt that he still saw no reason to change ERM parities involving the
French franc. 'I stay with what we said on September 21 (at a meeting of the
IMF and the World Bank) in Washington that, based on fundamental factors, we
see no reason to change the parities of the French franc.' However, Mr
Chertkow also believes that there is a 30-to-40 per cent chance that market
pressure will overwhelm the combined efforts of the Bundesbank and Bank of
France next year.
In this situation, he believes France and Germany will resort to temporarily
suspending the Exchange Rate Mechanism for a limited period.
'Devaluation would be the death-knell of the system,' he says. 'But a
suspension of the ERM would allow the market to determine what the fair
value for currencies is.' If the markets go by the economic fundamentals,
they would probably devalue the D-Mark and allow French rates to fall below
Germany's before the parities are fixed.
Editorial comment, Page 12
