FT  19 MAY 92 / London Stock Exchange: Thorn in technical retreat
ON A STRONG day in the London market, Thorn EMI attained the dubious honour
of being the worst performer in the FT-SE 100 Index in pence terms. The
shares retreated 13 to 870p, with technical factors blamed for the fall.
These included the ending on Friday of dealings in the company's partly-paid
shares. Dealers also pointed out that the second call on the rights issue
stock priced at 390p is due next week, coinciding with the release of the
group's annual figures.
The shares are on County NatWest's buy list, and the broker is predicting
full-year profits of Pounds 253.8m and earnings per share of 50.2p.
BP supported
US support appeared to be the main boost for turnover in British Petroleum,
the most heavily traded stock in London yesterday and which advanced 6 1/2
to 257p. Volume of more than 14m shares was particularly good considering
the low level of business in the general market. BP was also at the top of
the actives list in the London Traded Options Market.
The stock was drifting a couple of pence in the morning but received support
after Shearson Lehman Brothers bought 1.1m shares on behalf of a client.
Also, a 'mildly enthusiastic' note from Carr Kitcat &amp; Aitken landed on
clients' desks yesterday. Carr believes there is a chance that the dividend
will not be cut this year.
Courtaulds active
The market was attracted to Courtaulds, which is expected to have weathered
the recession and chemicals downturn sufficiently to report a near 7 per
cent rise in annual profits tomorrow. Profits for the year to the end of
March are forecast to come in at around Pounds 197m to Pounds 200m, against
a previous Pounds 186.3m, and the shares recovered 14 to 581p following a
period of slackness.
However, some securities houses decided that the stock had run too far.
Smith New Court was advising clients to take profits yesterday. Mr Richard
Henderson, Nomura's chemicals analyst, was reiterating his belief that the
stock is a sell. He said: 'There is nothing fundamentally wrong with the
company, but the stock does better in bear markets and should probably be on
a 10 to 15 per cent discount to the market.'
Brewer Whitbread bucked the market trend after the company reported annual
figures at the bottom end of market expectations. Profits dropped by 24 per
cent to Pounds 222.1m, the group's first fall in full-year figures in 16
years.
The shares rose initially in response to the company's comment in its
trading statement that it had seen a pick-up in business in the first two
months of the financial year. However, a more sombre analysts' meeting led
to a retreat in the stock, eventually a penny down on the day at 474p after
light turnover of 1.3m.
County NatWest left its current year forecast at Pounds 262m, and pencilled
in Pounds 284m for the following year.
Glaxo was marked down some 15p before the market opened, following a weekend
press report that rival drug group Astra had developed a new ulcer therapy.
The report said the therapy could seriously hurt sales of Glaxo's Zantac,
the world's best-selling drug. However, analysts decided that the report
covered no new ground and the shares opened 6 off and then recovered to
close just a penny down at 735p.
Merchant bank Kleinwort Benson picked up sharply on press reports that it is
about to negotiate for a link with Banque Nationale de Paris and Dresdner
Bank. The shares were ahead 24 at one stage, but slipped back to close 17 up
at 298p after Dresdner said it was not involved in co-operation talks.
Barclays responded to a Kleinwort Benson recommendation and the view that
Olympia &amp; York debt exposure worries have been overdone. The shares rose 7
to 387p.
Arjo Wiggins Appleton remained weak ahead of today's annual meeting,
declining 5 1/2 to 256p.
Market research company Addison Consultancy saw heavy turnover after a chunk
of the stock that had been left with underwriters following the recent
failed rights issue finally found a home.
The Pounds 16.3m cash call, priced at 12p a share, had been only 2.4 per
cent taken up after principal stakeholder MAI had decided not to take up its
rights. Yesterday, Peel Hunt, Addison's broker, sold 5.6m shares left with
the underwriters for 11 1/2 p apiece. The stock firmed a penny to 11 1/2 p
and turnover reached 13m shares.
Bid speculation surfaced around Croda International, pushing up the
chemicals company's stock 8 1/2 to 191p on turnover of 2m shares, compared
to the weekly average of 3m. The predator was said to be Wardle Storeys, but
the rumour did not appear to have much behind it and Wardle's rise of 23 to
428p was attributed to a stock shortage.
Fading bid hopes were said to have pushed foods group Dalepak down 20 to
393p. In March Dalepak announced it was in talks, but a month later the
talks foundered. It had been hoped that interest would spring from elsewhere
but so far it has not materialised.
Allied-Lyons hardened 8 to 660p ahead of today's results.
Weekend press reports of further connections between Lonrho and Libya saw
the shares down 7 at one stage. However, a firm denial of the reports by the
company helped the shares recover to finish unchanged at 97p.
Among transports, Eurotunnel stood out, the shares advancing 15 to 385p,
boosted by Friday's news that it would not need extra funds to complete the
tunnel, and a decision allowing the operator to use semi-open shuttle wagons
to carry goods, a decision which could save the company around Pounds 100m.
Automated Security Holdings was the market's best performer, the shares
jumping 10 to 18p on speculation that Tomkins could bid for the company.
Tomkins closed unchanged at 515p. Williams Holdings was also mentioned as a
possible suitor and finished 9 stronger at 354p, buoyed by a County NatWest
buy recommendation.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1992
NEW HIGHS (265).
BRITISH FUNDS (48) OTHER FIXED INTEREST (10) African Dev 11 1/8 pc '10,
Asian Dev 10 1/4 pc '09, B'ham 11 1/2 pc '12, Hydro Quebec 15pc '11, Intl-Am
Dev 12 1/2 pc '03, Do 9 3/4 pc '15, Leeds 13 1/2 pc '06, M'chester 11 1/2 pc
'07, N'wide Anglia 3 7/8 pc IL '21, Do 4 1/4 pc IL '04, BANKS (2) Bk
Scotland 9 1/4 pc Pf, Do 9 3/4 pc Pf, BREWERS (4) Boddingtons, Greenalls, Do
5.95pc Pf, Marston Thompson, BLDG MATLS (5) Chieftian, Epwin, Manders,
Needler, Wilshaw, BUSINESS SERVS (3) Capita, Salvesen, Sketchley, CHEMS (8)
Canning, Chemex, Croda, Doeflex, Evode 7p Pf, Halstead, Wardle Storeys,
Yorks, CONGLOMERATES (1) Goode Durrant, CONTG &amp; CONSTRCN (7) Boot, Jackson,
McAlpine, Melville, Smart, Tay Homes, Tilbury Douglas, ELECTRICALS (8) BICC,
Do 10 3/4 pc Cv '10, Ericsson, Jones Stroud, Menvier-Swain, Nokia Pfd,
Oxford Instrs, Scholes, ELECTRICITY (1) Bedford, ELECTRONICS (23) Admiral,
Blick, Bowthorpe, Cray, Druck, EIT, Electron Hse, Eurotherm, Ferranti,
Forward Tech, MTL Instrs, Micrelec, Misys, Multitone, Northamber, Polar,
Pressac, Prestwick, Real Time Cntrl, Standard Platform, Star Comupter,
Tunstall, Vistec, ENG AERO (2) AIM, Smiths Inds, ENG GEN (12) Carclo, Hay,
IMI, Metalrax, Powerscreen, Prospect, Siebe, Syltone, TT, Transfer Tech,
Wyko, FOOD MANUF (3) Nestle (Br), Sims, Unigate, FOOD RETAILING (4) Geest,
Greggs, Iceland, Sainsbury, HEALTH &amp; HSEHOLD (4) Crieghton Naturally,
Huntleigh Tech, Jeyes, Proteus, HOTELS &amp; LEIS (5) City Centre, First Leis,
Granada, Hi-Tec, Ramsden's, INSCE LIFE (1) Britannic, INV TRUSTS (32), MEDIA
(12) Border TV, CIA, Gold Greenlees, HTV, Harrington Kilbride, Johnston
Press, Metal Bulletin, Metro Radio, News Intl, Portsmth &amp; Sunderland,
Quarto, Utd News, MERCHANT BANKS (7) Barings 8pc Pf, Do 9 3/4 pc Pf,
Hambros, Kleinwort Benson, Schroders, Do N/V, Singer &amp; Friedlander, MTL &amp;
MTL FORMING (3) Castings, Cohen, Morris Ashby, MISC (8) Danka, Delaney, Gt
Southern, Le Cruset, McLeod Russel, Pentland, Pittard Garnar, Walker
Greenbank, MOTORS (10) ABI, Avon Rubber, Burndene, Dagenham, First Tech,
Jessups, Looker 8pc Pf, Mid-States, Pendragon, Quicks, OIL &amp; GAS (2)
Oceonics, Shell, OTHER FINCL (5) Baltic, Do 7pc Pf, Edinburgh Fd Mangrs,
First Natl, Provident Fincl, OTHER INDL MATLS (6) AAF, BTR Wts, Charter
Cons, Scapa, Servomex, Williams 8p Pf, PACKG, PAPER &amp; PRINTG (6) API,
Boxmore, Cropper, Dolphin Packg, Jarvis Porter, Kymmene, PROP (4) Mucklow,
Peel, Union Square, Warner Est, STORES (6) Brown, Colorvision, Kingfisher 8
1/2 pc Cv 2000, Lloyds Chems 7 1/2 pc Pf, Partridge, Wyevale, TEXTS (5)
House of Lerose, Jerome, Rexmore, Stoddard, Yorklyde, TRANSPORT (3)
Dawsongroup, Seacon, Transport Dev, WATER (3) East Surrey, Mid Kent, South
Staffs, MINES (2) Antofagasta, Melinga.
NEW LOWS (43).
AMERICANS (9) Amer Cyanamid, CPC, Campbell Soup, Dun &amp; Bradstreet, Gillette,
Merrill Lynch, Rockwell, Sun Co, Waste Mangmt, CANADIANS (4) BC Gas, BCE,
Royal Canada, Trans Can Pipe, BREWERS (1) Anheuser-Busch, CONTG &amp; CONSTRCN
(1) Nth Midland, ELECTRONICS (1) Borland, ENG GEN (1) Fenner, HEALTH &amp;
HSEHOLD (2) Huntingdon, Lilly, INSCE COMPOSITE (4) Aegon, Baltica, Hafnia,
Travelers, INV TRUSTS (4) Abtrust Prfd Inc, Siam Select Gwth, Singapore,
Thai Euro Ptg, MEDIA (2) Addison Consultancy, Thomson, OIL &amp; GAS (3)
Blackland, Crusader, Sceptre, OTHER FINCL (1) Mitsubishi, PROP (3) Aukett
Assocs, London Secs, Warnford, MINES (7) Blyvoor, Bougainville, Elandsrand,
North Broken Hill, Placer Pac, PosGold, Stilfontein.
