FT  25 NOV 92 / Amstrad meeting told 'I am your receiver' by Sugar
'I AM your receiver, I am your liquidator . . . I'm the one to shrink this
company down and give you an exit at 30p,' Mr Alan Sugar, founder and
chairman of Amstrad, told disgruntled shareholders yesterday.
The four-hour emotionally charged annual general meeting of the troubled
computer and consumer electronics company was dominated by individual
shareholders who focused their anger on Mr Sugar's buy-back plan to pay what
many argued was a meagre 30p per share for the 65 per cent of Amstrad he
does not already own.
Mr Sugar was forced repeatedly to justify his proposals, and to reassure his
critics that 'there is no trick in the cupboard' and no new 'blockbuster'
products 'in the bottom drawer'. He said he was 'pleased to be able to offer
30p' which provided a 'graceful exit', but warned that this was likely to be
'the best shareholders would get'.
He said his buy-back plans represented 'an organised receivership under my
control'. Mr Sugar reiterated his view of the gloomy prospects for Amstrad
and the need to cut overheads and shrink the business - something he
insisted would be easier to achieve in a private company.
But Mr Sugar warned that if shareholders rejected his proposals at an
extraordinary meeting next month it would still be necessary to scale down
the business.
He warned that the share price would probably fall sharply and added that
although he did not expect Amstrad to report a loss this year, 'it will
never be profitable enough to push the share price back up to Pounds 1'.
Several shareholders expressed unhappiness at the high emoluments they
believed Mr Sugar and the directors of Amstrad were receiving when
shareholders had been deprived of a final dividend.
'I can't see any reason why the final dividend was cancelled. Many people
rely on the dividend. Wouldn't it have been a nice gesture to announce the
dividend and forego your own?' one shareholder asked. Some shareholders
wanted Amstrad to pay a special dividend out of its 'core' cash reserves
which Mr Sugar acknowledged were about Pounds 60m.
Another of the 100 shareholders at the meeting demanded to know what each
director was paid and what they did to justify that payment. Mr Sugar did
promise that if his buy-back plan was rejected he would search for a
non-executive director to represent shareholders' interests on the board.
