FT  18 NOV 92 / Parliament and Politics: Major denies Iraq exports deception
MR JOHN Major sought yesterday to calm the storm over the export of
defence-related goods to Iraq by denying categorically that ministers had
misled the Commons.
As officials defended the government's decision to re-interpret and then to
relax the embargo on exports to Iraq after the Iran/Iraq war in 1988, Mr
Major said: 'The suggestion that ministers misled the House is a serious
charge, a scurrilous charge and it has no basis whatsoever in fact.'
His remarks came after Mr John Smith, Labour leader, seized on Downing
Street's confirmation that, after the 1988 Iran/Iraq war ceasefire,
ministers had re-interpreted guidelines on exports to Iraq, asking why
parliament had not been told.
The change in interpretation was made clear by the release of previously
classified Whitehall documents to the court during the unsuccessful Matrix
Churchill prosecution.
These included an April 1989 letter signed by the private secretary of Mr
William Waldegrave, then foreign office minister, stating: 'We agreed that
we should continue to interpret the guidelines more flexibly in respect of
Iraq, as we have done in practice since the end of last year, but that we
should revert to a stricter interpretation for Iran.' The letter was
addressed to Mr Alan Clark, then trade minister.
Mr Major said the terms of the inquiry under Lord Justice Scott were 'so
wide-ranging that they cover so many aspects, that there will be nothing
that will not be fully examined'. He accused Mr Smith of being 'extremely
silly' for asking whether the inquiry would decide if MPs had been misled.
Separately, Mr John Heppell, Labour MP for Nottingham East, asked why a
trade mission to Iraq by the Nottinghamshire Chamber of Commerce had been
allowed to go ahead in June 1990.
The guidelines on exports of lethal goods to Iraq were set out in 1984 by
Sir Geoffrey (now Lord) Howe, then foreign secretary. After 1988 they were
interpreted 'in the light of developments in the peace negotiations with
Iran' - a form of words used by Mrs Margaret (now Lady) Thatcher to MPs in
April 1989.
But Downing Street officials insisted there was a distinction between
changing the guidelines and re-interpreting them.
Downing Street also confirmed that a cabinet committee chaired by Mr Douglas
Hurd, foreign secretary, was preparing in July 1990 to relax the arms trade
restrictions. Its decision was not implemented because of the invasion of
Kuwait on August 2 1990.
