FT  23 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Drugs pricing
THE pharmaceutical industry and the British government are currently
renegotiating the scheme controlling profits on drug sales to the National
Health Service. The government's negotiators should drive a tough bargain.
There are arguments in favour of the existing agreement, known as the
Pharmaceutical Price Regulation Scheme. As a long-standing piece of
industrial policy, the scheme has proved singularly successful.
It has controlled NHS drugs spending while encouraging the British-based
pharmaceuticals sector. There are few high-growth technology industries
where the UK is among the world's leaders. Pharmaceuticals is one of them.
Four of the world's top 10 best-selling patented medicines were discovered
and developed in the UK. The industry will contribute a trade surplus of
more than Pounds 1.3bn to the UK economy this year.
The scheme also has the advantage of simplicity and practicality. By fixing
a return on capital and not the prices of individual drugs, administration
and bureaucracy is kept to a minimum. The system is widely admired in other
countries; at one time, the French government considered copying it.
Such achievements should not be tampered with lightly. But the real argument
concerns not the price-setting mechanism, but the prices themselves. The UK,
along with the rest of the world, is faced with the inexorable tendency of
healthcare costs to grow faster than the economy as a whole.
During the late 1980s the rapid expansion of UK pharmaceuticals groups'
earnings was relatively inconspicuous. During the early 1990s, it looks like
an anomaly. Glaxo made 38 per cent return on capital worldwide last year,
SmithKline Beecham 45 per cent. This remarkably high return was achieved
after research and development costs.
At a time of sharply rising budget deficits, expenditure on NHS drugs is
growing at 12 per cent a year. Although the increase is partly due to
government-inspired health programmes, expenditure growth on this scale jars
at a time of public expenditure constraint.
There is thus a strong prima facie case for adjusting the price control
mechanism applied by the NHS, perhaps by tightening up the return on capital
parameters - currently 17 to 20 per cent a year.
The industry will argue that lower returns will drive investment and
research overseas, as indeed happened in the mid-1980s, when the UK
government tried to curb drug expenditure.
This time, though, the impact is likely to be limited. The world is bleaker
for the drug companies and in restraining prices and limiting expenditure,
the UK government would only be following the example of most other
countries. In any case, the UK retains the powerful attraction of a pool of
cheap, inventive scientists. The government can afford to bargain hard.
