FT  13 JUL 92 / Britain targets EC spending
BRITAIN has invited its Community partners to go back to basics in assessing
the European Commission's proposed five-year budget plan.
Mr Norman Lamont, UK chancellor of the Exchequer, has sent his EC
counterparts a letter asking them to consider the Commission's package from
a strict financial perspective; to compare the one-third revenue increase
requested by Brussels with individual member states' growth forecasts.
In Brussels today Mr Lamont will chair the first meeting of finance
ministers under the British presidency of the EC. It will also be the first
time the 'Delors II' package of budget proposals has been discussed at this
level since EC leaders' inconclusive debate at last month's Lisbon summit.
Further discussion of binding rates of value added tax and excise duty - on
which finance ministers nearly reached agreement two weeks ago - has been
postponed until September, because some ministers cannot attend today.
In his letter, the chancellor has also asked ministers to consider whether
the cost-effectiveness of existing EC spending justifies a substantial
increase in future expenditure.
'As finance ministers they would no doubt expect a lot of attention to be
paid to the scope for offsetting savings from existing programmes,' said a
senior British official last week.
Budget debates in the first half of the year have already opened deep
divisions between rich member states - led by Britain and Germany - and
poorer countries, over the extent of 'cohesion' funding for the latter.
Britain, which will have to search for a compromise during its presidency,
wants to intensify the role of finance ministers in considering the budget
proposals. But at Lisbon, other leaders made clear to Mr John Major, UK
prime minister, that foreign ministers would take the lead in the budget
discussions.
Britain expects the period from July to the end of September will be spent
analysing 'Delors II'. The presidency has submitted an 85-point
questionnaire on the plan to senior national officials in Brussels to help
the discussion. According to British officials, the debate will become more
political at meetings of foreign and finance ministers in October and
November, in the hope of reaching an agreement at December's Edinburgh
summit.
