FT  18 JUL 92 / UK Company News: Tarmac to get Pounds 60m on sale of Briggs
Oil
TARMAC, the UK construction and building materials group, yesterday
announced the sale for Pounds 70m of Briggs Oil, its bitumen producing oil
refinery business, of which it will receive Pounds 60m.
The deal marks the latest in a series of disposals by troubled British
construction companies, seeking to reduce large borrowings raised to finance
the purchase of housing and commercial property development land during the
late 1980s.
Briggs is to be bought by AB Nynas Petroleum, based in Sweden. Tarmac will
receive about Pounds 60m after payments to Shell which operates a refinery
at Eastham, in a joint venture with Briggs.
The sale follows the disposal last month for Dollars 42.5m (Pounds 22.9m) of
Tarmac's Californian contracting and aggregate operations to Granite
Construction of the US.
Mr Neville Simms, chief executive of Tarmac, wants to raise Pounds
200m-Pounds 250m from sales of non-core businesses. He said yesterday the
group had raised almost Pounds 100m from sales since he took over earlier
this year.
At the end of last year Tarmac had net borrowings of Pounds 456.9m,
representing gearing of 51 per cent - Mr Simms wants to reduce this to 25
per cent. The group cut its final dividend from 8.25p to 2.5p last year
after profits collapsed from Pounds 190.7m to Pounds 21m.
Tarmac last month also put up for sale its UK waste disposal business,
Econowaste, which it expects to fetch Pounds 80m- Pounds 100m.
Waste Management International, which was floated on the London stock market
in April and is 80 per cent owned by Waste Management of Chicago, is one of
several groups interested in purchasing Econowaste.
In joint venture with Wessex Water of the UK it paid Pounds 105m to acquire
the waste management business of George Wimpey, another recession-hit
British construction company which has raised more than Pounds 300m during
the past 12 months from disposals.
Costain, the UK construction, property and mining group, las month announced
plans to float off part of its profitable Australian coal mining subsidiary
in a bid to raise cash to reduce borrowings.
