FT  10 NOV 92 / Business and the Law: UK judge explains Court's balancing
act - European Law
The European Court of Justice's annual All Saints vacation last week gave
the judges time to pause and reflect on what lies ahead. In particular they
were busy preparing for the celebrations to mark the ECJ's 40th anniversary.
On December 4, the president of the Court, Judge Ole Due, will host an
anniversary meeting attended by, among others, his counterparts from the
Commission and the Parliament and, as a representative of the UK presidency
of the Council, Lord Mackay, the Lord Chancellor.
States' rights
The UK judge, David Edward, speaking to the UK Association for European Law
in London on the subject of 'member states' rights', outlined how the Court
sees its current role against the backdrop of recent historical and
political developments in Europe.
He reminded his audience that the EC legal system is not static but responds
to the political and economic trends around it.
Until another institution undertook political responsibility for the
Community, the Court would continue to be criticised for its role, not
because it is a political court but because the issues which it deals with
are political, he said.
The economic and political dimension are relevant to the Court's
decision-making. The risk of legal incoherence would continue as long as it
was the ECJ which had to fill the political vacuum in the EC.
Relying on the flexible nature of the Rome treaty's constitutional charter,
the Court's approach to its task was increasingly expressed as a balancing
of the different economic and political interests represented by the
Community, the member states and individuals, Judge Edward said.
Coloroll pension trustees case
Judge Edward stressed the importance for international business of tracking
the development of this balancing exercise over the coming months, as
important cases in the fields of the internal market, competition, state
aids and state monopolies come before the Court.
Judge Edward referred, for example, to the Coloroll Pension Trustees case
(C-200/91) which follows on and seeks clarification of issues raised by the
Barber case. Even if the Maastricht treaty's protocol limits the application
of equal pay principles in the pensions context to after the Barber
decision, many complex questions about the practical effects of equal
pension rights remain to be answered.
The Court will hear the case at the end of January next year, along with
test cases from Germany and Holland which raise similar issues. The Court
will therefore have the opportunity to clarify in a pan-European context the
issues of retrospection and the use of sex-based mortality tables.
The Court must decide whether equality is required only for pension benefits
earned by service since May 17 1990, the date of the Barber judgment, or for
benefits which become payable after May 17 1990, whether they were earned by
service before or after that date. The difference in the cost of these
interpretations to British pension schemes has been estimated at Pounds
40bn.
The court will also have to decide whether the equal pay requirements of the
Rome treaty ban the use of mortality tables which reflect the differing life
expectancy of men and women. If they do, annuities, tax-free lump sums,
money purchase benefits and transfer values will all have to be calculated
on a unisex basis. This is a requirement of the Equal Rights Amendment in
the US, but is not usual in Europe.
As a measure of how important this case is to EC governments, the court will
hear submissions from the UK, Ireland, Holland, Germany and Denmark, as well
as the European Commission. The advocate general's opinion is expected by
April and the Court's judgment just before the start of the summer vacation
in July.
Sunday trading
Judge Edward also cited the Sunday trading cases as examples of the Court's
recognition of member states' rights, in the context of the Rome treaty's
free movement of goods rules, to maintain cultural and religious values,
subject to objective justification and proportionality. Judgment in the B&amp;Q
case (C-169/91) referred to the ECJ by the House of Lords is expected
shortly.
Another test case moving through the Court at the moment is the Vereniging
Veronica Omroep case (C-148/91). It concerns the compatibility with treaty
rules on free movement of capital, establishment and services, of the Dutch
television broadcasting authorisation rules. The Dutch law restricts the
business activities and investment freedom of licensed operators to achieve
pluralistic and cultural objectives. Advocate General Tesauro will deliver
his opinion to the Court on November 18.
In total there are more than 700 cases pending before the ECJ. These include
340 cases commenced in 1991 and more than 350 cases already filed in the
first nine months of 1992.
BRICK COURT CHAMBERS, BRUSSELS
