FT  21 APR 92 / The Queen's Awards 1992 (17): Taste of triumph once again -
Glaxo
GLAXO, the pharmaceuticals group and the UK's biggest company by market
capitalisation, has won its fifth award for technology with its antibiotic,
Zinnat.
Zinnat was developed because other drugs in its class needed to be injected
and were therefore of little use outside the hospital environment. In
addition, bacteria were building up resistance to existing antibiotics, such
as penicillin, which were proving increasingly less effective.
The challenge for Glaxo was to develop a drug that was:
pleasant to swallow. The active ingredient within Zinnat, Cefuroxime Axetil,
had an extremely unpleasant taste.
stable in water so that it retained its potency within the stomach and gut.
resistant to the enzymes in the gut but which could be ingested effectively
into the body.
quick acting once it had been taken into the blood-stream.
without any toxic by-products and therefore without serious side-effects.
able to resist Beta-lactamase, a substance excreted by bacteria which
prevents some antibiotics working effectively.
Glaxo believes it tested as many as 10,000 different formulations at its
Greenford research centre in north-west London over a period of about six
years before it discovered the right drug.
Its pharmacists also invented a new process to manufacture a wax coating
around the drug. The coating was not unpleasant to taste but dissolved when
required in the gut to release the active ingredients.
Since it was launched in 1987, more than 25m people have been treated with
the drug. Zinnat is used for a large number of infections, ranging from
upper respiratory infections such as tonsilitis and sinusitis, to urinary
tract infections and gonorrhoea.
Clinical trials showed that cure or improvement is achieved in more than 88
per cent of patients with lower respiratory infections and more than 90 per
cent of patients with gonorrhoea. Zinnat also has a low incidence of
side-effects.
More than Pounds 500m of sales have been generated by the drug since its
launch, which, according to Glaxo, makes its the second best-selling
antibiotic in its class.
Previous awards for technology were for Ventolin and Becotide, the asthma
drugs, Zantac, an ulcer treatment which is the world's best-selling
medicine, and Fortum, another antibiotic.
Glaxo has spent nearly Dollars 4bn on research and development over the last
10 years. In the last fiscal year alone, Glaxo spent Dollars 880m on
research and development and is expected by analysts to spend more than
Dollars 1bn - more than any other company. Its nearest rival is probably
Merck of the US.
