FT  02 MAY 92 / Violence in the US: Black leaders demand action from Bush
BLACK American civil rights leaders told President Bush yesterday that
failure to address the underlying conditions behind the Los Angeles riots
could mean years of trouble in the nation's inner cities.
Speaking after a White House meeting, Rev E V Hill, of the Mount Zion
Baptist Church in Los Angeles, said the president had been told there was no
problem in the world, including narcotics and aid to the Soviet Union, that
was bigger than the racial tension in America's cities.
Asked if he trusted the president to take the right action, Rev Joseph
Lowery, of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, acidly replied: 'He
is the only president we've got'. Quoting Rev Martin Luther King, he urged
Mr Bush not to be consumed 'by the paralysis of analysis'.
Rev Lowery, with others nodding agreement, called on Mr Bush to empower a
federal grand jury to investigate the beating of Rodney King. He said the
president had not ruled this out.
Benjamin Hooks, of the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured
People, said the question of police brutality could not be avoided. He
demanded that the attorney-general proceed immediately with a federal
prosecution of the King case.
John Jacobs, of the National Urban League, declared: 'This is not just an LA
thing'. Arthur Fletcher, of the Civil Rights Commission, said what was
happening 'touches every household in America'.
The message from all of them was that nothing less than a fully-fledged
action programme would suffice. Mr Hooks, saying it was 'encouraging we
could even have this meeting with the president,' declared this was 'a
defining moment in the history of the country'.
Absent from the meeting was probably the most political of all American
black civil rights leaders, the Rev Jesse Jackson, who said he had not been
invited. He was visiting riot-torn areas yesterday.
It was also noteworthy that Hispanic and Asian minorities, also much
affected by the riots, were not represented at the White House meeting, an
indication of the enduring influence of the black civil rights leaders in
Washington and of the extent to which, rightly or wrongly, what happened in
Los Angeles and elsewhere is seen principally as a black issue.
