FT  04 MAR 92 / Moslems ready to take on Serbs in Sarajevo: Ethnic rivals in
Bosnia-Hercegovina crisis talks
ARMED Moslems last night took to the streets of Sarajevo, the capital of the
Yugoslav republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina, to oppose Serbs reported to be
marching on the city.
The moves again heightened tension in the ethnically divided republic in the
wake of the weekend referendum vote in favour of independence.
At the same time, Moslem and Serb leaders went into crisis negotiations with
local commanders of the Yugoslav army in an attempt to defuse the crisis.
They agreed that joint army and police patrols should ask Moslem and Serb
militants to take down newly erected barricades.
Mr Alija Izetbegovic, the Moslem president of the republic, said on
television there had been a 'partial mobilisation' of Serbs in surrounding
villages and they were reported to be marching on the capital. He urged them
not to enter the city, but to return home.
He said he had asked Mr Radovan Karadzic, leader of the main Serbian party
in Bosnia, to order Serbs to pull back.
'Serbs can peacefully sleep. No-one is going to attack them,' he said. 'I
beg you to stay at home. Do not attack anyone.'
Mr Karadzic said earlier he had called on Serbs to be ready to defend
themselves if needed. 'They will not attack, but they are ready,' he said.
Hundreds of nervous armed Moslems took up positions on all main roads into
the Bosnian capital. Moslems put up barricades within the city, while Serb
militants blocked roads on the outskirts.
Earlier in the day, the immediate threat of civil war in the republic
appeared to have receded after armed Serb nationalists lifted barricades
they had hastily erected around Sarajevo, following concessions by the
Bosnian government.
The concessions would allow Moslems, Serbs and Croats, the republics' three
main ethnic groups, time to consider if and how the referendum on
independence can be implemented.
Moslems and Croats voted overwhelmingly for independence from the Yugoslav
federation, but Serbs - who make up 33 per cent of the 4.3m population -
boycotted the vote, vowing to remain in a Serb-dominated and smaller
Yugoslavia.
Western diplomats yesterday said the force and intimidation used by armed
Serbs on Monday clearly showed they were now in a much stronger position to
control the republic's political agenda.
In Brussels, the EC preferred to adopt a 'wait and see' approach towards
giving diplomatic recognition. No EC state is pushing for early recognition
of Bosnia, in the way that Germany did for the republics of Slovenia and
Croatia.
EC states feel themselves bound by the Badinter report, which recommended
the referendum in Bosnia. But EC diplomats pointed out that the Twelve had
said in January that the Badinter recommendations would be only one element
in their diplomatic stance towards the republics.
Recognition of Bosnia would have the awkward effect of highlighting the EC's
own impasse over recognising Macedonia under that name. Greece fears this
would stir 'Macedonian' nationalism in northern Greece.
