FT  11 MAY 92 / Survey of Lincolnshire and South Humberside (1): Upheaval on
the way - The region's strength is its diversity. Yet a variety of economic
experience in an area no longer a sleepy outpost has led to competing
interests, the harbinger of conflict. It would be a pity if this were to
deter private-sector investment
FROM THE Wash to the Humber, from Skegness to Scunthorpe, from Grantham to
Great Grimsby, two decades of change have created an economy of modest
robustness and set off a momentum of development.
This is not to argue that Lincolnshire and South Humberside have avoided the
recession. There have been rationalisations, redundancies and bankruptcies;
and there are areas of great need. But cores of strength do exist, some
traditional, some of more recent vintage, which offer the possibility of
expansion whenever the UK economy recovers.
These areas include: the Humber ports; the chemical and food industries of
Grimsby; the newly diversified Scunthorpe; the engineering of Lincoln; the
farming of Lincolnshire, notwithstanding the external pressures; and the
small-scale industry of the minor towns.
The region's strength - and to this extent Lincolnshire and South Humberside
are a mirror of the wider East Midlands region - is its diversity.
Yet this is also an uneven area. The major urban localities are Lincoln and
Grimsby, the first with a population of about 100,000 if its southern
suburbs outside the strict boundary are included, the second with half as
many people again.
There is a clutch of smaller but significant towns (Scunthorpe, Boston,
Grantham), then those that are smaller still (Louth, Skegness, Spalding,
Stamford, Gainsborough), after which the population spreads out.
Lincolnshire is one of the largest counties, popularly known for the
gentleness of its countryside.
The unevenness is evident not only geographically but also in the impact of
the recession. At 8.8 per cent, the average unemployment rate in
Lincolnshire in the early spring may have been nearly a point lower than the
national average, and during 1991 jobless levels may have risen at half the
national rate. The number of people out of work in Grimsby, the largest town
of South Humberside, may at the end of 1991 have been one percentage point
above the national rate, instead of three percentage points above at the
beginning of the year. But such averages hide sharp disparities.
In Lincolnshire, for example, there is talk of a north-south divide. Indeed,
in the south of the county, although unemployment has risen as the recession
has bitten, the percentage has been, in the case of the Sleaford area, more
than three points below the national average. In the city of Lincoln, the
rate is roughly the same as in the country as a whole. But over on the
coast, in and around Skegness, it climbed towards 19 per cent.
The explanations lie in the varied economic profiles of distinct areas, and
in the range of assistance which is available from central government and in
recent economic history.
Skegness and the coastal belt of Lincolnshire have been excessively
dependent on erratic seaside tourism; its industrial base is weak; it is on
an outer limb of the national communications system. But in farming,
Lincolnshire, designated as an area of rural development, there was
throughout the 1980s considerable building and occupation of small
factories, so that an industrial element has been welded on to the
traditional market activities of the small towns.
At the same time, in the south of the county, there has been private sector
investment as companies, in more prosperous times, sought expansion denied
them in East Anglia and the South of England by labour shortages and higher
land costs. The south, too, has become part of the London commuter belt - a
distant dormitory suburb creating its own demand for services.
Similarly, though for other reasons, development on Humberside has taken
different forms. The loss of Grimsby's deep-sea fishing fleet in the 1970s
found its compensation in the expansion of the chemical, food-processing and
storage industries. In spite of the decision of Findus to withdraw from food
processing, other companies have emerged gradually to offset the loss.
Yet Grimsby's economic diversification has been hindered by the competing
attraction of Scunthorpe. Here, designation as an assisted area and the
existence of an enterprise zone have meant that incoming companies have been
able to tap a range of subsidies unavailable on the coast. Even so, on the
coast, the emergence of Grimsby and of Immingham as the largest bulk cargo
port in the UK has created another pillar of economic resilience.
Such a variety of economic experience has helped to create competing
interests, which are the harbinger of conflict. There is a proposal that all
these communities should be pushed together into one administrative unit.
The Local Government Boundary Commission has recommended that South
Humberside should be absorbed in Lincolnshire.
The recommendation has been frozen while another commission established by
the government decides how, and with what boundaries, a system of unitary
local authorities might be introduced across the country by 1994.
Lincolnshire County Council would be delighted to see its boundaries
extended, and to have a territory running from the Humber to the Wash.
Humberside County Council opposes its own demise and deems the thought
wasteful.
The larger urban areas have no desire to be absorbed into a wider
Lincolnshire. Grimsby wants to be a county borough, as it was a generation
ago, and thinks that the level of service to the public would be lower as
part of Lincolnshire. At the same time, Lincoln city wants to be a unitary
authority in its own right, but with wider boundaries. Within all of this
there is scope for a political battle royal. At the minimum, there will be
some upheaval.
This would be a pity, especially if it diverted the public authorities from
encouraging solutions to deeper-seated problems - for example, the need to
foster training in the frequently low-skilled, low-waged urban areas; to
take education into the more isolated rural areas; to create a new
university and enlarge the industrial-academic nexus.
It would be a pity, too, if political squabbles deterred private-sector
investment. The area is no longer a sleepy outpost of the UK, bypassed by
the communications system. It is more like a bridge between north and south:
close enough to the south to siphon off companies looking for space; but,
with its ports, close enough to the industrial Midlands and north to act as
a conduit to continental Europe.
Lincolnshire, in fact, is likely to increase its population, which is moving
towards 600,000 after having grown by 10 per cent in each decade since the
second world war. Net immigration of 50,000 is expected by the end of the
century. Much of this is likely to come from south-east England, and implies
a steady economic expansion.
