FT  15 JUN 92 / Slovaks delay talks with Czechs: Impatience over
federation's future prompts call for interim government
SLOVAK nationalists yesterday postponed negotiations on the future of the
Czechoslovak federation with already impatient Czech partners, further
delaying chances that a federal government may soon be formed to head the
country.
Mr Vladimir Meciar, the newly-elected Slovak leader, is due to meet Mr
Vaclav Klaus, his Czech counterpart, for a third round of negotiation over
the fate of the contested federation in Prague on Wednesday.
Previous negotiations ended in a complete deadlock last week, with Mr Klaus
rejecting the demands of Slovaks for a 'economic and defence union of
sovereign states' which he termed 'the end of the common state'.
Mr Klaus has instead called for the quick formation of an interim federal
government to decide on the fate of the federation. The Czech leader has
insisted that a federal government be created before July 5, when President
Vaclav Havel is due to be re-elected in the federal parliament - which Mr
Meciar has pledged to block.
The Slovak leader's decision to delay the third round of negotiations
confirmed the attempts by Slovaks to gain time before the first meeting of
the federal parliament. Mr Klaus' Civic Democratic party, which won 30 per
cent of the vote of the Czech republic, will have a hard time there, as it
faces opposition by left-wing Czech parties willing to team up with Slovak
nationalists.
'We want a decision to be made as soon as possible and to know which way we
are going, but the Slovaks want a long erosion of the federation,' a member
of Mr Klaus' party said yesterday.
Mounting exasperation towards Slovak demands is increasingly dominating the
Czech mood. While Slovaks have in principle agreed on an interim federal
government, they insist that a referendum on a formal break-up be held in
Slovakia late this year.
But Mr Klaus retorted after the second round of negotiations in Prague on
Thursday that 'the Czechs cannot afford to wait so long'.
Meanwhile, Czechs angered by the Slovak opposition to re-electing Mr Havel
have started a petition in Prague calling for 'a federation or nothing'.
In Bratislava yesterday, however, 2,000 Slovak demonstrators started their
own petition in favour of a federation.
Current polls indicate that the bulk of the Slovak population would not
favour independence today, but the nationalists, who together won 45 per
cent of the Slovak vote, hope this attitude will change by the end of the
year, especially if they can manage to blame the impatience of the Czechs
for breaking up the federation.
