FT  25 MAR 92 / Business and the Environment: Lessons of the jungle
When Pauline Tomkins joined Rockware Glass, the UK glass manufacturer,
little did she know that part of her training as product manager would
involve counting birds, butterflies and plants in the pouring rain in
Majorca.
At British Coal, Jason Parker, a management trainee, was similarly puzzled
when his company told him he was going to Wales to plant saplings.
Both were taking part in what could well be the 1990s' version of the
outward bound course - research and conservation projects organised by
Earthwatch, the environmental charity.
Earthwatch sends 'volunteers' around the world on the equivalent of working
holidays - helping scientists with such projects as monitoring the mating
rituals of moths in Ecuador or excavating bison skeletons in Nebraska.
The difference from a normal working holiday is that 'volunteers' pay to
participate - anything up to Pounds 1,200 plus air fare for a two-week
project. The money that Earthwatch receives is used to finance the
scientists' work.
Earthwatch has sent 32,000 volunteers on projects since starting up in the
US 20 years ago. Now it is looking to increase links with business and
industry to raise more money for environmental science and help improve what
it calls the 'environmental literacy' of companies.
Earthwatch believes the projects are relevant to businesses because they can
teach their employees teamwork while enhancing specialist knowledge. Andrew
Mitchell, deputy director of Earthwatch Europe, which started up two years
ago, says: 'Many people sitting behind desks have skills they do not
immediately recognise as being useful to the environment - computer
analysts, surveyors and architects could all contribute.'
The itineraries are demanding. Volunteers might have to rise with the dawn,
work in all sorts of weather conditions, walk miles every day and all the
while get along with strangers.
Rockware was one of the first UK companies to sponsor employees on
Earthwatch projects. One of those chosen was Alastair Pike, the company's
marketing manager, who went to study the wetlands of Albufera in Majorca.
His experience made him more environmentally aware, says Pike. 'Plastics has
not got a good image environmentally and I almost felt I was acting against
my conscience by working for an industry that in the eyes of the outside
world could be causing the environment harm.'
On his return he increased the company's involvement in plastics recycling,
organising a presentation by Recoup, the non profit-making plastics
recycling organisation.
BAT, the tobacco group, also chose Earthwatch when deciding to increase its
environmental commitment. 'We looked at a whole series of environmental
initiatives and liked Earthwatch's personal involvement and commitment,'
says Helen McDonald, external affairs officer. The group ran an in-house
competition for four places on Earthwatch projects, and the winning
employees are expected to produce a report on their return.
Companies can also get involved by becoming members of the Earthwatch's
Corporate Environmental Responsibility Group; through one-off donations; and
by sponsoring project places for teachers or students. British Airways, for
example, is sending four teachers from local communities on projects. 'We
have a 'good neighbour' goal. It's one way of improving our interaction with
the community,' says Hugh Somerville, head of environment at BA.
