FT  08 JUL 92 / Power bills could be cut by Pounds 300m: Watchdog proposes
new price structure
ELECTRICITY BILLS in England and Wales may fall after Offer, the electricity
industry watchdog, yesterday made its most significant move since the
industry was privatised two years ago to tighten electricity regulation.
Savings for large industrial consumers might help the government head off
complaints from companies such as Imperial Chemical Industries that high
electricity bills make them uncompetitive overseas.
Offer yesterday proposed a new pricing formula that would result in a
substantial cut in the National Grid Company's charges - which are a
proportion of all electricity bills paid by consumers.
A total of Pounds 300m could be cut from the aggregate bill of all consumers
in England and Wales over the four years for which the new formula would be
set.
The present formula allows National Grid to increase prices with inflation,
but under Offer's proposed formula it would have to keep price rises to 3
percentage points below inflation.
Most domestic consumers will save a few pounds as a result of the change,
Offer said, but very large industrial consumers may save millions of pounds.
The new formula would provide National Grid with 'a tough but realistic
target', said Professor Stephen Littlechild, director-general of Offer.
Prof Littlechild said National Grid could afford to charge its customers
less by improving efficiency and by cutting costs by 5 per cent, rather than
the 3 per cent the company had proposed. Prof Littlechild said he also
believed that the company's cost of capital was significantly lower than it
claimed.
The new formula would not allow National Grid to increase charges if more
consumers used the network, as it previously could. Breaking the link
between more customers and higher revenues would help promote energy
efficiency by removing the incentive to boost demand, Offer said.
There is no sign yet whether National Grid, which said yesterday it was
considering Offer's statement, will accept the new formula. Some City
analysts believe the proposed formula could wipe Pounds 60m off the
company's profits. National Grid is expected to reply to Offer in about a
week.
If National Grid does not agree to the proposal, the case will be referred
to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
Shares in the 12 regional electricity companies that jointly own National
Grid rose yesterday, as the City had already discounted Offer's
announcement.
Offer's decision was viewed as a good omen for similar reviews of the
regional electricity companies, due in 1994. Analysts hope Offer, whose
proposed formula restricts National Grid's pricing rather than directly
limiting its profits, will take a similar approach to the regional
companies.
Offer also hinted that it would change the way their charges are linked to
inflation, as it did with National Grid yesterday. Instead of having to
predict inflation when they set their prices, the companies will be able to
use a historic inflation figure. That would make electricity prices more
predictable and stable, Prof Littlechild said.
Lex, Page 22
Seeboard profits up, Page 24
