FT  25 FEB 92 / First ladies address the plight of rural female poor
NEARLY 70 women drawn from royalty and the ranks of presidential or prime
ministerial consorts have descended on Geneva for a two-day summit intended
to ensure a better deal for the world's 565m rural female poor.
The aim is to persuade governments at the highest level to reorientate
development programmes in favour of women, to reflect their important role
in food production. Women produce more than half of all food grown in
developing countries, and an estimated 70 per cent in sub-Saharan Africa.
'If we could increase the productivity of rural women by 15 per cent, we
could wipe out the food deficit in Africa,' says Mr Idriss Jazairy,
president of the United Nations International Fund for Agricultural
Development (Ifad), which is organising the summit.
'Unless we can promote the role of women, the goal of eliminating hunger
cannot be achieved.' Increased food production and higher rural incomes
contribute in their turn to national growth.
Mr Jazairy sees the summit, which has been initiated by six Third World
'first ladies' under the patronage of Queen Fabiola of Belgium, as providing
a much-needed jolt to international awareness.
Mr Jazairy, a former Algerian diplomat, says Ifad projects have already
demonstrated the 'bankability' of aiding women in agricultural development.
But with projects worth Dollars 375m (Pounds 123m) a year scattered around
the world, the small Rome-based agency has little financial leverage to
persuade governments to change the emphasis of national development
programmes. However, by definition, 'first ladies' have influence at the
highest levels.
According to Ifad, women account for nearly 60 per cent of the Third World's
rural poor, and their numbers have jumped by half in the past 20 years.
In developing countries as a whole (excluding India and China) one in five
households has a female head, yet women are consistently denied access to
land, agricultural inputs and credit.
Population growth, environmental degradation and socio-economic pressures
will force increasing numbers of women into poverty in the coming years,
Ifad predicts, and the total could reach 700m by the end of the decade. To
stop things getting worse would cost as little as Dollars 750m a year, the
agency says.
This message should appeal to hard-headed donor countries. But few 'first
ladies' from the first world have come to Geneva. Mrs Norma Major is
represented by a low-ranking official in the UK's Geneva diplomatic mission.
