FT  25 MAR 92 / Champion of liberty and law: The work of the late Friedrich
von Hayek
Many would say that if Mrs Margaret Thatcher is a conviction politician, the
convictions are those of Friedrich von Hayek, who died on Monday at the age
of 92. Yet the conclusion would be unfair to both.
Although the former UK prime minister was a great admirer of the late
economic philosopher, Hayek mainly provided articulation and confirmation of
convictions Mrs Thatcher had already reached. The admiration was
reciprocated, yet there was much in his writings that some would see to be
at variance with Thatcherite practice.
Friedrich August von Hayek was born in Vienna on May 8 1899. His father was
a professor while the imperial city was enjoying its celebrated sunset.
Brahms had only recently died, and Freud had yet to publish his major works.
Hayek's own career began in the civil service, and after holding academic
posts in Vienna he came to the Lon-don School of Economics in 1931.
Recalling his arrival, Lionel Robbins subsequently wrote: 'I can still see
the door of my room opening to admit the tall, powerful, reserved figure
which announced itself quietly and firmly as 'Hayek' '. His lectures were so
successful that the school's director, William Beveridge, suggested that he
remain as Tooke Professor, a post he held until 1950. Hayek brought a whole
host of cosmopolitan contacts to the LSE. He was, for instance, instrumental
in the appointment of Sir Karl Popper, the philosopher and author of The
Open Society.
Although Hayek's later career took him first to Chicago and then back to
Austria and Germany (his last years were spent in Freiburg in Breisgau), he
retained his British nationality (acquired in 1938), and he remained a close
observer of the British scene. He was a joint winner of the Nobel Prize for
economics in 1974. He was twice married; he leaves a widow, Helene, and a
son and daughter.
Hayek's fortunes teach us a great deal about intellectual fashions. During
the 1930s he was mainly known for technical economic studies, which were at
the time overshadowed by the new Keynesian theories on unemployment and
economic policy. One conclusion from that period, recently disinterred, is
that market institutions could not just be grafted on to state socialism, as
mainstream economists long believed was possible.
Hayek's greatest intellectual regret for those years is that he never wrote
a full-scale critique of Keynes's The General Theory. He had previously
written a long review of the first volume of Keynes's earlier Treatise on
Money - only to be told by Keynes that the latter had changed his views.
This experience led Hayek to suppose that The General Theory was just
another 'tract for the times'.
In the 1940s Hayek became a hate figure to those on the political left
because of his onslaught on centralised economic planning and his insistence
on the links between political and economic freedom in his best-selling Road
to Serfdom: the book is said to have influenced Winston Churchill's
controversial 1945 election broadcast about the threat of a 'Gestapo' under
socialism. It is less well known that Keynes sent Hayek a letter expressing
his deeply felt agreement with at least some of the argument.
Hayek was not a charismatic public figure. His brief post-war notoriety was
followed by decades of neglect, during which his most important constructive
works on the foundations of a free society were written. Indeed, I was first
attracted to his writings by his concern, voiced in The Constitution of
Liberty (1960), 'for that condition of man in which coercion of some by
others is reduced as much as possible'.
Finally, following his Nobel prize in 1974, he emerged as a cult figure of
the radical right - which did neither side too much good. For there was far
more to Hayek than the demolition of socialism and the standard case for
free markets. In presenting him as a revered thinker with a complete system,
his followers may have made his work neater, simpler and less interesting
than it really was.
Although Hayek was far too shrewd to overrate the Nobel award, for one
reason or another the years following it witnessed a rejuvenation. Among
political theorists and sociologists critical of the new right, he was
studied more seriously than the more fashionable economic technicians. But
he took this adulation with a large pinch of salt and was no more a Hayekian
than Keynes was a Keynesian.
Hayek was unfashionable in the 1950s and 60s as much for academic as for
political reasons. At a time when most go-ahead economists were raring to
equip themselves with forecasting models and computer print-outs, Hayek - in
contrast to Milton Friedman - seemed an armchair thinker, preoccupied with
ideas such as the limitations of human knowledge and the problems that
economists would have if they tried to ape the natural scientist.
But in the longer haul the contrast did not necessarily tell against Hayek.
A disadvantage of recent methodological orthodoxy is that many economists
have acquired a vested interest in the existence of stable, discoverable
numerical relationships between phenomena such as income and consumption, or
short-run changes in the money supply and the price level. Hayek warned that
one could not guarantee the successful discovery of such relationships, but
that scientific method could still be applied to predict certain general
features of interacting systems - as it is, for instance, in biology and
linguistics.
His insistence that, while inflation is a monetary phenomenon, there is no
such thing as 'the quantity of money', and no sharp boundary between money
and other financial assets, has stood the test of time. The experience of
the British government, which has changed its view of monetary targets so
much and to so little avail, was much less puzzling to a Hayekian than to a
true monetarist believer. So, too, was the high unemployment cost of
reducing inflation, which Hayek insisted was inevitable while labour markets
were dominated by the collective bargaining mentality.
Hayek's defence of the market system was subtly different from that of many
economists. Whereas mainstream economists have been preoccupied with the
optimal allocation of resources in given conditions, Hayek was concerned
with the effect of the market system on the evolution and stability of
society. He was interested in markets as examples of human institutions,
like language or law, which have evolved 'as a result of human action, but
not of human intention'.
He insisted that wants, techniques and resources are not given, but are
constantly changing - in part because of the activities of entrepreneurs who
open up possibilities which people did not know existed before. (The dynamic
and entrepreneurial aspect was also emphasised by another economist of
Austrian origin, Joseph Schumpeter, thus providing a so-called 'Austrian'
critique of mainstream neo-classical economics, which overlaps with the
objections of 'radical' political economists.)
According to Hayek, a market system is a discovery technique. No computer
can predict the emergence of new knowledge, original ideas, or innovations -
and people's reactions to them.
His scepticism about the use of econometric relationships was based on a
wider epistemological view. For he insisted that the most important kind of
knowledge was not of propositions or theories, but of practical skills and
dispositions governed by rules which we may imperfectly discover afterwards,
but not formulate in advance.
For Hayek the cardinal sin of our times was something known by the ungainly
label of 'constructivism'. This was akin to what Michael Oakeshott called
'rationalism', and is the error of believing that any order we find in
society has been put there by a designing mind - and can be, accordingly,
redesigned from scratch.
Hayek was very far from believing the conventional bourgeois pieties. He
never imagined that there was anything just in market rewards. These
depended on an unpredictable mixture of effort, ability and luck.
Quite apart from the adverse economic consequences, it was not desirable
even to try to reward merit through public policy, which would involve some
authority deciding how much pain and effort a task had cost and how much of
a person's achievement was due to outside circumstances.
But, characteristically, Hayek spoiled a splendid and heretical contribution
by insisting that any public policy towards the distribution of income and
property (beyond the provision of a very basic social-security minimum)
involved political assessment of merit and was thus incompatible with a free
society and the rule of law.
However, Hayek did not in fact provide any easily recognisable criteria for
identifying state interventions of the harmful type. The free-market
arguments in The Road To Serfdom were based on the incompatibility of
central planning with personal liberty. In subsequent years Hayek approached
the issue indirectly. He argued, especially in The Constitution Of Liberty,
that the main condition for a free society is what he called 'the rule of
law'. By that he meant a presumption in favour of general rules and against
discretionary power. He attempted to derive from this conception not only
the fundamental political and legal basis, but also the economic policies,
of a free society.
Many writers of the most diverse political persuasion accepted that general
rules were an important protection - perhaps the most important single
protection - for freedom. But Hayek was criticised for suggesting that
general laws were a sufficient condition for a free society. Many policies
involving a high degree of coercion can be imposed by general rules - for
example, a ban on the teaching of evolution or on any literature or music
which flouts the principles of Marxist-Leninism. There is no one
philosopher's stone for minimising coercion in society.
Hayek's concern to restore a government of laws rather than men can be seen
from his later writings which warned of the degeneration of democracy into a
struggle for spoils among competing groups. He saw the source of
interest-group domination in what he called 'majoritarian' or unlimited
democracy. This is the belief that a government elected by a majority of
voters (usually a plurality) should be able to enact what it likes without
any check - a system which Lord Hailsham has termed an elective
dictatorship.
Some of Hayek's own constitutional proposals struck even his admirers as
far-fetched. But their underlying aim was important. It was to recover an
older idea of a state, which has no purposes of its own, but provides a
framework of rules and arrangements under which people can pursue their own
individual aims without getting in each other's way. This ideal - which is a
long way removed from the practice of any modern government, even of the
radical right - has been labelled by Oakeshott as a 'civil association', as
opposed to the more usual idea of the state as an 'enterprise association'
with its own aims and purposes. The close similarity of the later work of
both Hayek and Oakeshott, pursued in relative isolation, is a theme which
deserves a study of its own.
There were great ultimate differences between Hayek and others who shared a
similar outlook. Unlike most classical liberals, Hayek's espousal of liberty
turned out to be based neither on ultimate judgments, nor on considerations
of welfare, utility or happiness. He did not even accept the methodological
individualism of most mainstream economists. For him, the key to
institutions was natural selection among competing traditions.
This evolutionary approach remained in the background in the classic
politico-economic works of his middle period. But its roots went back to his
student days when he was as concerned with philosophy and biology as with
economics.
The evolutionary outlook landed Hayek with problems. For it made it
difficult to criticise any social order (eg Stalinist Russia) which was not
visibly dying out. Hayek's refuge in evolution was not just idiosyncratic,
but can be seen as a response to the failure of attempts to build deductive
systems of morality which will apply to specific cases. His own inability to
resolve the ultimate conundrums of human conduct should not obscure the
range of his achievements.
Hayek's writings have asserted the case for general rules over discretionary
authority. They have exposed the misleading identification of a liberal
democracy with the divine right of temporary majorities. They have
demonstrated the connection between economic and personal freedoms. They
have shown that the domination of both the political and economic
market-place by interest group struggles is a source of evil; and they have
explained why pecuniary rewards neither can nor should reflect merit. In all
these matters Hayek - like Keynes or Friedman or the American philosopher
John Rawls or other such seminal figures - is best treated as an
intellectual agent provocateur rather than a pundit with all the answers.
