FT  03 JUN 92 / Of mice, men and money: Legal action over patent disputes
threatens to stifle investment in biotechnology, write Clive Cookson and
Julie Clayton
The patent system, designed to nurture innovation, is in danger of
strangling the world's biotechnology companies just as they are set to
emerge from a long gestation period and grow into a multi-billion dollar
global industry.
While scientists discover new genes and create novel forms of life, rivalry
is intensifying over who should 'own' and profit from their achievements.
The explosive growth of biotechnology, combined with the multifaceted nature
of its new products, means that each one encompasses several recent
inventions. This makes it increasingly difficult to assess patent claims in
time to prevent conflict. And most biotech managers come from the
patent-dominated pharmaceutical business, so their instinct is to fight
tenaciously for any possible claims. As a result, biotechnology devotes
proportionally more time and money to patent protection than any other
industry.
To give one example, Celltech of the UK spends Pounds 600,000 a year on
filing and maintaining patents - compared with Pounds 10m on research and
development, the company's main activity. Total worldwide spending on
biotechnology patents probably exceeds Dollars 100m (Pounds 55.5m) a year.
At the same time, biotech patenting is raising a cloud of difficult social
and ethical issues, especially in Europe. Should anyone 'own' a piece of
natural genetic material? A new type of animal? Part of the human body?
This month the European Patent Office in Munich formally granted its first
patent for a transgenic animal, Harvard University's 'onco-mouse'. The
animal, designed for cancer research, is genetically engineered to develop
tumours under certain conditions.
The patent office justified the decision on the grounds that the fight
against cancer was 'of paramount importance for the welfare of mankind';
this outweighed the possible suffering of the mice. But opponents of the
decision plan to contest the patent and Dr Paul Braendli, European Patent
Office president, believes the case will not be resolved for some years.
At the same time the European Commission and European Parliament are
battling over a draft directive that will lay down the future rules for
biotechnology patents in the EC. They are being lobbied from one side by
Patent Concern, a coalition of environmental, development and animal welfare
groups, which is calling for a moratorium on patenting any form of life. On
the other side, the industry is pressing for clear guidelines that will
enable it to patent genetically engineered animals and plants.
Tomorrow the issue reaches the annual meeting of UK Women's Institutes,
which will debate a resolution calling for the EC draft directive to be
rejected.
Patent paranoia in the biotech industry has been heightened further by the
US National Institutes of Health, which recently filed almost 3,000 patent
applications for fragments of human genes, without knowing what they do in
the body. The NIH action - taken with the approval of the US government -
has been condemned by scientists worldwide. They say patents should be
reserved for individual genes the uses of which are specified.
The UK Medical Research Council joined in the chorus of criticism - and then
said it would reluctantly follow the example of its US counterpart, to
protect the UK position. So the MRC is preparing to file patents for almost
2,000 gene fragments of its own.
The biotechnology industry is praying that the US Patent Office will throw
out the NIH and MRC applications because they fail the 'utility' test. But
the US is so liberal in its interpretation of what makes a valid patent that
it would be unwise to count on the claims being rejected.
Dr David Owen, the MRC's industrial collaboration director, believes the
attempt to patent gene fragments highlights a wider crisis over intellectual
property. 'What concerns me is that we are moving into a world where more
and more marginal inventions are being patented. That devalues the currency
of patents - to the point where the patent system might become a
disincentive, an obstacle to progress.'
Companies wishing to sell new gene-based drugs have to negotiate with an
increasing number of other companies and research institutions. Each lays
claim to a piece of the intellectual property involved in the development. A
typical product launched in the mid-1990s could require royalty payments to
as many as a dozen licensees.
The chain would start with the master patent for recombinant DNA technology,
the technique underlying all genetic engineering, which earned Dollars 17m
in royalties for Stanford University and the University of California last
year. It might also encompass broad patents for other 'enabling
technologies' and very narrow patents for specific genes.
Each royalty claim might seem reasonable in isolation, says Dr Owen, 'but
taken together they can destroy a business opportunity'.
A severe backlog in the number of applications waiting to be processed is
adding to the confusion. In 1990, for example, 8,200 biotech applications
remained unexamined at the US Patent Office. Claims often overlap with each
other and they contain increasingly complex details. Most biotechnology
patents take three to five years to process - longer than any other type.
Companies suffer because they have to start marketing before patent disputes
are settled. Genetics Institute (GI), for example, faces heavy losses to
Amgen over the right to make and sell a blood-boosting drug called
erythropoietin (EPO).
The two companies developed different versions of EPO and applied for
patents. Both made licensing and marketing arrangements and their patents
were awarded in 1987. While Amgen received Food and Drug Administration
approval to use EPO to treat anaemia in 1989, April 1991 Amgen successfully
persuaded the US Court of Appeals that GI was guilty of patent infringement
and should be barred from the US market.
Amgen is now seeking more than Dollars 11m in damages. To rub salt into GI's
wound, EPO is now the world's best selling biotech product, having earned
Amgen an estimated Dollars 300m in 1990 alone.
A potent illustration of the nightmare facing the industry is conflict over
a powerful new technique for detecting genetic mutations, called the ligase
chain reaction. LCR promises to be an accurate, automated clinical test for
genetic diseases and cancer.
The first LCR-related patent was awarded in 1989 to Applied Biosystems Inc.
ABI will be targeting prenatal diagnosis and carrier screening, but it faces
tough opposition.
Abbott Laboratories and its sister company, Omnigene, have 'numerous pending
applications' for their own versions of LCR. They are planning a unified
assault on a range of problems in clinical diagnostics, agriculture, food
and the environment, according to Dr Keith Backman, senior scientist at
Omnigene. 'There's a lot of hoopla out there. Some of these people are going
to be very disappointed,' he warns.
Several other rivals have filed patent claims for LCR, including Beckman
Research Institute, Salk Institute and California Institute of Technology.
Some contenders are more optimistic than others that disaster can be averted
by arbitration. 'I'm sure we'll all figure out in the end how to get along,'
says Mr Joseph Smith, patent counsel for ABI. 'My guess is that this field
is big enough for lots of people.'
Most recently, Cornell University entered the arena with a 'multiplicity of
claims' for the work of Dr Francis Barany, associate professor of
microbiology. Last year he discovered the information needed to mass-produce
an essential component of LCR, a protein called ligase.
'The whole patenting process hurts industry and creates uncertainty. It
makes it difficult to make marketing plans,' says Mr Walter Haussler,
Cornell's lawyer. 'As if in a game of poker, the question is: who will be
left holding the cards at the end of the game?'
In case Cornell fails to win a full hand, the university negotiated product
licences with two companies which specify that ligase be sold 'for research
purposes only, not commercial diagnosis'. Then, as the remaining
responsibility for LCR diagnostic kits seemed too hot to handle, Cornell
passed 'the whole ball of wax' to ABI as an exclusive licensing agreement.
The growing patent jungle in the US 'is definitely acting as a disincentive
to proper investment in biotechnology by European companies', says Mr John
Savin of the Centre for Exploitation of Science and Technology in London,
who is studying the commercialisation of gene research for a group of
European companies. 'US companies tend to use patents as part of the game -
they invest first and sort it out later.'
US biotechnology companies raised more than Dollars 1bn in public share
offerings last year. That was largely on the strength of their patented
research, since very few of the companies have products on the market. With
so much money behind them - and investor expectations so high - individual
companies are bound to defend their own patents ferociously, even if their
collective action is self-defeating for the industry as a whole.
'Patents are central to the future of the company,' says Dr Peter Fellner,
Celltech chief executive. 'I don't think people in our industry will
voluntarily self-regulate their patenting activity. But litigation and
licensing deals will eventually lead to a framework dictated by precedents
in the courts.'
Governments can help, by smoothing out international discrepancies in the
way patents are treated. Under the US system, the patent goes to whoever can
prove he or she first made the invention. This is more prone to litigation
than the clear-cut principle followed elsewhere: that the patent goes to the
person who files for it first.
Now US patent officials say they would be prepared to move from 'first to
invent' to 'first to file', as part of an international patent treaty. In
exchange Europe and Japan would give inventors a 'grace period' during which
they could discuss their inventions without losing all patent rights.
But if the biotechnology industry is really to blossom into a Dollars
50bn-a-year industry by the next century, as its backers expect, it will
have to sort out its own patent problems. Negotiation and compromise must
replace aggressive litigation.
