FT  17 NOV 92 / Survey of Business Travel (11): Manners mean a good deal -
Roy Terry looks at etiquette and cultural differences in Europe
THE story is told of a fountain pen manufacturer with a product that was
guaranteed not to leak ink when clipped on a shirt or a suit pocket. In its
advertisements the company used the slogan 'Avoid embarrassment, use XYZ
pens.' It went down well in most countries but in Spain, to its own blushes,
the company discovered it was advertising a contraceptive - in Spanish the
word 'embarrassment' also means pregnant.
This is a good example of 'faux-amis,' as the French put it, or 'false
friends,' words which mean something different in another language.
Frederick Marsh1, an international marketing consultant, gives another
example in a paper on European Community countries prepared for a UN agency.
"A well-known British car manufacturer wanted to launch a car in Germany
with the name Silver Mist,' he says. However, it realised that in German the
word 'mist' means animal excrement or manure, and was forced to think again.
Something similar applied to an exporter of mist-producing curling irons
called Mist-Stick.
Language
These examples confirm the problems highlighted in a recent study of 2,000
companies by the Institute of Manpower Studies2 for the Department of
Employment. More than 60 per cent of the companies had dealings with foreign
executives, mainly French, German, Spanish and Italian speakers. All these
companies identified some language problems, and 23 per cent said lack of a
particular language created a barrier to business.
Cert3, a Nottinghamshire-based training consultancy, teaches executives
'foreigner-friendly English.' Marianne Aston, the architect of the course,
says the main difficulty is that when talking to people whose first language
is not English, British executives use words that are too complicated and
sentence structures that are too convoluted. She argues that if executives
follow a few simple rules communication will be easier.
For instance, if you want to say someone has a lot of money, say they are
rich. Avoid expressions such as 'well-off,' 'loaded' or 'well-heeled.' Even
people who speak no English will understand 'OK' but few will know what
'gobsmacked' means.
Idioms are open to misunderstanding. 'At the end of the day' could be
interpreted as meaning that something is wanted by 6pm, and 'pull your socks
up' could have foreigners reaching under the table.
Numbers are another source of confusion for the unwary and uninformed. In
French and English the number 21 is expressed with units of 10 spoken first
 -twenty one. In German and in Dutch it operates in reverse - one and
twenty. So it is wise to double-check that a telephone number, for instance,
has been noted down correctly.
Take care, too, in Austria or southern Germany where toilets in hotels and
other public buildings may be indicated with a double zero - 00. Also, it is
worth remembering that when a German makes an appointment for 'halb neun' or
'half nine' it indicates a meeting at 08.30 hours and not 09.30. The same
applies in Dutch. Such a misunderstanding could have unfortunate
consequences because punctuality in Germany and the Netherlands is vital.
Behaviour
Some companies in the Institute of Manpower study rated understanding of
foreign cultural and business behaviour above language ability. Mistakes of
this kind were thought to affect business relations greatly. Lack of
understanding local conditions could also increase stress on employees, the
study revealed.
One company described how an employee had arrived distraught at a meeting
because of a misunderstanding with a taxi driver. The employee had objected
to parting with a briefcase. The driver then tried to wrest the case from
him not to make off with it as the employee believed, but to place it in the
boot of the car, as the law required.
A good example of cultural differences is quoted by Mr Marsh. A Scandinavian
company wishing to sell baby clothes in Belgium discovered that the goods
were virtually unsaleable because in most regions clothes for baby girls are
trimmed with blue and those for baby boys with pink.
In some European countries such as Spain the custom of 'kissing' the hand of
a lady when being introduced is still practised. However, the term 'kissing'
is a misnomer because usually there is no physical contact between hand and
lips.
Greetings
On formal occasions in Germany the hands of women are raised to the lips and
kissed. In Italy, cheek kissing is sometimes practised by women. Again, this
does not actually involve kissing. The cheeks are merely rubbed, first one
side then the other, and a soft lip-smacking sound is made.
Shaking hands on meeting and on parting is common in Germany, Belgium,
France and Italy and ignoring this custom, especially in France, will cause
offence. In France, it is wise to try to shake hands with everyone in a
crowded room.
Observing the correct forms of address is vital. In Spain, the surname of
the host is likely to cause confusion because there are usually two family
names. Only the first should be used because the last one is the mother's
name. For instance, in the name Jose Lopez Garcia, the correct form of
address face to face or in correspondence is Senor Lopez.
Germans are very formal when speaking to each other and will address even
close colleagues as 'Herr Strauss' or 'Frau Schmidt.' Titles are used in
Germany, France and especially in Italy, where Dottore is the most common
form of address for Italians with university degrees. Other titles in use in
Italy are Ingegnere (engineer), Avvocato (lawyer or advocate) and Architetto
(architect). It is correct to use them on their own without a surname.
In Germany, it is customary to address professional people as, for example,
Herr Doktor or Frau Direktorin. It is bad manners not to use titles but
referring to someone as Herr Doktor when they are not is also frowned upon.
In France, the practice is less common although older people still welcome
being given a title. The head of a company will expect to be addressed as
'Madame (or Monsieur) le President.' It is a title which is borne for life.
Even after retirement it is customary to refer to an individual by the most
prestigious title acquired during a career.
The Continental equivalent of 'Miss' in English is now the form of address
for very young women only. In France, women are usually called Madame, even
if single; in Germany, 'Fraulein' is used only for young girls; and, in
Italy, 'Signora' (with or without a surname) is customary for all women,
married or single.
Germans answer a telephone by giving their surname but in Italy the
individual answering a call is likely to say 'pronto' - 'I am listening.'
Belgium has three official languages - Flemish, French and German. Choosing
the wrong language is very bad form and the mistake is not likely to be
easily forgiven.
Dining out
In France, especially, correct business etiquette is crucial. Marie-Helene
Descamps, attachee de presse for former President Valery Giscard d'Estaing,
is an authority on do's and don'ts at the lunch table.
She says there are two kinds of business lunch - building up relations
without expecting anything in return and to discuss a deal in the making, or
to celebrate a deal afterward. Deals should be concluded in the office never
over a lunch table, says Madame Descamps.
A successful business luncher in Paris must have a stock of business
anecdotes and subjects of conversation to last through the hors-d'oeuvres,
main course and cheese. When the cheese is out of the way, then business can
be discussed. The idea is encapsulated in the colloquial French expression
for a judiciously chosen moment: 'entre la poire et le fromage' although the
phrase is confusing because cheese actually precedes dessert in France.
In Germany, business meals are not as common as in the UK or in the US and
tend to be strictly social occasions. Foreigners are rarely invited to
dinner and such an invitation suggests a very advanced association.
The opposite applies in Italy where entertaining is an essential part of
business life. Dining in Italy is almost a ceremonial and deciding who pays
is a game which must be won by the person issuing the invitation. Guests
should offer to pay but in the end should defer to their Italian host.
In Tuscany, even the clumsiest effort to speak Italian over the lunch table
will bring enthusiastic praise. Do not discuss business because the Italian
lunch is a social event not an occasion for concluding a deal.
All this tends to illustrate that for the British, when they cross the
Channel there are perils around every corner. For too long the British have
expected almost everyone to understand English and tend to lose patience
with those who do not. The old imperialist attitude that the British way is
best and that everything foreign should be studiously ignored or, at best,
tolerated with mild amusement, is as outdated as a viceroy in India.
Today, the rule for British business people must increasingly be: 'When in
Rome, do as the Romans do.' Anything else is not only downright rude, but
bad for business.
1 Marsh Business Services (telephone 071 233 3123). 2 Cert (telephone 0777
860 835). 3 Foreign Language Needs of Business. Institute of Manpower
Studies, Mantell Building, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, Sussex
BN1 9RF. Pounds 30.
Further reading: The Economist Business Guides to France, Germany, Italy and
the UK.
