FT  20 MAY 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Opec can afford a touch of
manana - Mark Nicholson explains why a production agreement is likely to
defer hard choices
WHATEVER arguments reverberate around Vienna's hotel suites over the next
few days, ministers from the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries
gathered therein look likely to reach a production agreement for the third
quarter based on deferring for today hard choices which, with luck, may have
evaporated tomorrow.
The usual pre-summit posturing has made it clear that debate in the
ministerial meeting, opening today, will centre on whether Opec should raise
its production ceiling for the quarter by around 1m barrels a day to 24m b/d
from the second quarter limit agreed in February.
Saudi Arabia, Opec's predominant producer with a 34 per cent share of the
cartel's output, will enter the fray arguing that 24m b/d is the least the
cartel should pump for the third quarter to meet a rising appetite for crude
from nascent US and European recoveries and what Riyadh believes will be a
healthy stock build up over the quarter.
Venezuela has already signalled its approval of such a position and Saudi
delegates are said to be confident that their view will be the consensus
this week. Moreover, many in the oil market are already discounting a 1m b/d
rise, and analysts suggest this will not derail the recently firmer trend in
prices.
Mr Mehdi Varzi, oil analyst for Kleinwort Benson, says he sees Brent crude
reaching Dollars 21-Dollars 22 by the end of the third quarter even given an
Opec production rise. 'We've not seen the peak in prices yet,' he says.
In familiar opposition to the Saudi-led view, however, will be the
price-hawks Iran, Algeria and perhaps Libya and Nigeria. They will argue
with varying force that production should be held at the nominal, and
slightly exceeded, February ceiling of 22.98m b/d - or even cut slightly -
in the face of stiffening demand, to raise the price for the Opec basket of
crudes towards Opec's formal target price of Dollars 21 a barrel.
Should the Saudi view prevail, and it will do so only against shrill
opposition from Iran, it will be thanks largely to the steady, if
unspectacular, recent firming of crude prices, which last week saw the Opec
basket price rise to a high since November of Dollars 18.45 a barrel.
Many analysts believe this firming should continue in modest tandem with the
economic upturn, with prices underpinned by uncertainty over a possible oil
embargo against Libya - a factor which remains in the market despite few in
the oil industry believing such an embargo is politically feasible.
Some analysts estimate that demand for Opec crude in the third quarter could
top 24.5m b/d, rising to just below 25m
b/d for the fourth. The Saudis certainly believe that 24m b/d is the minimum
required for a balanced oil market in the next quarter - implying that Opec
discipline at that level could push prices slightly higher, and thus offer
Iran room to concede a higher overall ceiling in Vienna.
The medium-term outlook for prices is also supported by the growing
certainty that Iraq will not re-enter the oil market before next year at the
earliest. Mr Tariq Aziz, Iraq's deputy prime minister, earlier this month
rejected once again the United Nations formula for permitting an exceptional
sale of Iraqi crude to pay for humanitarian needs. The Saudis, meanwhile,
are privately confident that Iraq will export no oil while Mr Saddam Hussein
remains its president.
Without Opec having to face, for this and perhaps the next quarter, the hard
choices raised by a return of Iraqi crude to the market, a raised ceiling
could - if the Saudis have their way - see the Kingdom raise output to 8.2m
b/d from the present 8.02m b/d (thus retaining its 34 per cent Opec share)
with an eager Kuwait taking much of the additional slack.
Accommodating Kuwait's rapid resumption of output is something else Opec can
better weather in the present market climate. While analysts such as
Cambridge Energy Research Associates estimate that Kuwaiti claims to be
producing 900,000 b/d may be optimistic by 100,000 b/d, few doubt that the
emirate will be far off its target 1.5m b/d by the fourth quarter.
Mr Homoud al Rqobah, the Kuwait oil minister, is likely to stress once again
in Vienna that the emirate will not accept any Opec strictures on its oil
production - and thus its revenues. A report by the Kuwaiti Al-Shall
economic consultancy at the weekend suggesting that the emirate could end up
spending nearly a third of total oil revenues this year on servicing debt
from its reconstruction borrowing gives some idea why.
If Kuwait feels it has overwhelming economic cause to resist an Opec
straitjacket, it is not alone. Saudi Arabia, Venezuela, Iran, Nigeria, and
Algeria each have urgent economic and political reasons for maximising their
revenues - something which only the former pair can adequately manage at
present prices.
Iran, in particular, feels pressed. The continued domestic appeal of
President Hashemi Rafsanjani's 'moderate' policies, now backed by a strong
majority in the recently elected majilis, will depend upon his ability to
deliver a swift and tangible improvement in the economic lot of an
increasingly bitter and impoverished population.
The force of an Opec majority and somewhat improved prices should bring Iran
under the umbrella of a deal to raise production ceilings this weekend,
after perhaps three or four days bargaining. But for Tehran, as for
high-deficit Saudi Arabia, heavily borrowed Kuwait and politically troubled
Algeria and Nigeria, the real hope is for a substantial growth in oil demand
towards the end of this year and early next.
While analysts are predicting as much, and while Iraq continues to produce
only 500,000 b/d and purely for domestic use, Opec's ministers can afford a
touch of manana about their Viennese deliberations. Certainly any thoughts
about fourth-quarter ceilings appear likely to be deferred until a further
meeting in September.
