FT  29 FEB 92 / When Irish eyes smile: A possible coalition deal at
Westminster
Within 24 hours of election day, Mr John Major, the prime minister, may face
an anguished choice between telephoning Mr James Molyneaux, leader of the
Ulster Unionist party, or calling the removal men.
With opinion polls suggesting that neither the Tories nor Labour will win a
majority, a pact between the Conservatives and Unionist MPs is edging up the
scale of possible outcomes.
Although the Conservative party says an outright victory is its only aim,
senior members of the party have weighed the possible gains and losses of a
pact with Northern Ireland's unionists - the Ulster Unionist Party and the
Democratic Unionist Party - and have considered how the wooing might be
done. Mr Peter Brooke, Northern Ireland secretary, has acknowledged that a
deal is possible, while Mr Major has not ruled it out.
In the event of a hung parliament, such calculations would determine whether
a minority Tory government could survive or whether Labour would be given a
chance to form an administration. It could prevent an early second general
election.
The Ulster Unionist party is a likely first choice for Mr Major should he
search for a coalition partner. The Liberal Democrats, now with 22 MPs, have
strengthened their demands for electoral reform and would demand ministerial
posts. If the election result is tight, a deal with the nine Ulster Unionist
MPs (a number unlikely to change much in the election) may be enough for the
Conservatives to hold on to power.
Mr Molyneaux would probably seize a chance to influence the governance of
Northern Ireland, particularly if the alternative were a Labour government
and its policy of unification of Ireland by consent.
But it would be a marriage of convenience rather than shared aspirations.
Although the two parties have had close ties since the 19th century, a wedge
was driven between them by the 1972 imposition of 'direct rule' from
Westminster which ended Unionist control over government in the province.
Ulster Unionists no longer take the Conservative whip, and they sit on the
opposite side of the Commons chamber.
Personalities would also clash. The 71-year-old Mr Molyneaux is a canny,
old-school Westminster operator who dislikes undue media attention or
high-tension negotiations. His colleagues are similarly unambitious, unused
to the disciplines required to support a government with a fragile majority.
No more than a handful are at Westminster for more than a day or two a week.
Northern Ireland is their main concern. Views on other issues vary but are
usually conservative, sometimes more so than the Conservative party.
The Rev Ian Paisley, the voluble leader of the Democratic Unionist Party,
and the DUP's two other MPs may also be persuaded to support the
Conservatives. But Mr Paisley's rumbustious character makes any deal-making
an unenviable task.
In pursuing a pact, Mr Major's negotiating tactics might run something like
this. First, Ulster Unionists would be offered an opt-out clause for
Commons' votes affecting mainly the province but be expected to support the
Tories in other areas. There might be some fudges. On parliament's
endorsement of the Maastricht summit - an area where most Ulster Unionists
would want to express disquiet, a minority Tory government could perhaps
rely on sufficient votes from Liberal Democrat or Labour MPs.
Second, the prime minister would meet some of the Unionists' demands. Mr
Molyneaux wants a Commons select committee to scrutinise the administration
of Northern Ireland business - long blocked by the government pending
agreement on a devolved government in the province. Promises of fuller
debate of Northern Ireland legislation would follow and then, possibly, more
powers for local councils. The Unionists may ask for internment but could be
satisfied by assurances of tighter security in the province.
The Ulster Unionists would also push hard for a renegotiation of the 1985
Anglo-Irish Agreement which, they believe, gives the Irish government too
much say in the running of Northern Ireland. That would pose difficulties
for Mr Major. It is an internationally recognised treaty, at the centre of a
a government policy of bringing Unionist and nationalist leaders to the
negotiating table. Changes would have to be agreed with Dublin.
In practice, however, government policy on Northern Ireland would already
have been undermined. A Conservative-Ulster Unionist pact would end
government claims to be a neutral arbiter of talks. Because Mr Brooke has
championed such a neutral approach he would probably have to be replaced.
'Round-table' talks, involving all of the parties to the Northern Ireland
troubles would be hard to achieve. The government would be playing to Mr
Molyneaux's 'integrationist' instincts, ruling the province like any other
part of the UK.
Mr Major might find that prospect unpalatable. For many Tories, it would be
an unwelcome step back towards the Unionist hegemony in Northern Ireland
prior to 1972. It would also sour UK relations with the Irish government.
Improved relations with Dublin have been central to Mr Major's initiative
towards Northern Ireland. A pact with the Unionists would jeopardise that
stance. It would not provide a coherent alternative.
The result, given the lessons of two decades of 'troubles' in Northern
Ireland, would probably be a continuing political vacuum in the province.
Terrorism would not stop. Notwithstanding the gains for the Conservative
party, Mr Major would have to decide whether it was a price worth paying to
remain in Downing Street.
