FT  09 DEC 92 / Greek premier forced to endure party sniping
LIKE the chorus of furies in an ancient play, dissatisfied deputies in the
ruling New Democracy party are hounding Mr Constantine Mitsotakis, the Greek
prime minister. They want him to relax the government's commitment to
economic reform.
Mr Mitsotakis retaliated last week by sacking the entire cabinet, only to
recall most key ministers after failing to persuade his severest critic, Mr
Miltiades Evert, to rejoin the government. He also appointed 19 new junior
ministers in an attempt to defuse accusations that decision-making is
confined to a coterie around the prime minister's family.
However, Mr Stefanos Manos was left in charge at the economy and finance
ministries, underlining that reform is still on track. If applied with
sufficient rigour, Mr Manos's adjustment programme should reduce Greece's
swollen public sector deficit to manageable levels next year and bring
inflation below 10 per cent for the first time in two decades.
Nonetheless, Mr Mitsotakis can expect more trouble from his party in the
months ahead. Next spring marks the start of an election year, when the
government will come under increased pressure to abandon the stabilisation
programme.
New Democracy deputies are unashamedly demanding an end to wage restraints,
more patronage appointments and generous spending on public works in
marginal constituencies. They showed what they thought of Mr Manos's
policies by staying away from parliament when he presented an austerity
budget for 1993. Despite Mr Mitsotakis's efforts to reimpose his authority
on the party, the budget vote later this month will be a difficult test for
the government.
The main challenge comes from Mr Evert, who was fired from the cabinet a
year ago for trying to interfere in foreign policy when his brief was to
reform the civil service.
Since then Mr Evert has been positioning himself to succeed the 74-year-old
Mr Mitsotakis as party leader, choosing the economy as the issue on which he
can most easily embarrass the government. As recession continues, Mr Evert's
arguments in favour of promoting growth through increased spending and cuts
in interest rates find favour with a large section of the Greek business
community.
Mr Evert also seems to advocate a compromise on privatisation, which is
supposed to be the central plank in New Democracy's economic platform but
arouses fierce party opposition.
But if Mr Manos's aims of containing the deficit are to be achieved, it will
largely be due to the Dr330bn (Pounds 1bn) in privatisation revenues
projected for next year. Moreover, he is counting on about Dr300bn in extra
income from direct taxation. Part of this will come from another potentially
unpopular move: a crackdown on tax evasion.
