FT  03 FEB 92 / Arts: Identity crisis - Sponsorship
One of the main reasons why companies decide against sponsoring the arts, or
withdraw bruised after just one venture, is the poor media coverage given to
their commitments. Since the money often comes from the marketing budget, a
tangible positive PR return, measured by mentions in the media, is sought
and expected. When this fails to materialise there is disillusionment.
The Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts tried to do something
about this by lobbying the editors of the national newspapers. Its gentle
arm twisting seemed to produce results. A survey in December 1990 suggested
that 34 per cent of sponsored arts events that were reviewed in the quality
nationals carried a plug for the sponsor. By March 1991 this had risen to 44
per cent, and in June to a massive 71 per cent. This looked like an
aberration when the September figure was down to 49 per cent, but by January
1992 a very reasonable 61 per cent of reviews of sponsored events mentioned
the backer.
However, the coverage was unpredictable. In particular, the National Theatre
was upset when its production of Murmuring Judges last October garnered only
two mentions for the sponsor (Amerada Hess) out of 26 reviews: and this
after the NT had added a printed slip to the critics' programmes, bringing
the sponsor to their attention.
Stunned by the poor response, the NT conducted a survey of the critics to
discover why they had ignored the sponsor. The replies suggested that no
newspaper has a fixed policy on mentioning sponsors, at least not one that
filtered down to the critic. (It is the FT's policy to record the name of
any significant sponsor - but the best laid plans . . .) Given their
apparent freedom in the matter, most critics attributed 'lack of space' as
the reason for withholding the plug. Only one gave 'hatred' of sponsorship,
but some were opposed to 'free advertising'. Quite a few claimed that they
were unaware of the sponsorship.
The NT is pursuing the matter. It is contacting arts editors to ask them to
produce guidelines for critics, and for Night of the Iguana this week the
critics will be given help on identifying the sponsor when they collect
their tickets
Arts sponsorship needs more justification in a period of declining corporate
profits: media coverage may be a superficial way of measuring its value but
it is one that even the most philistine financial director understands.
*****
These are difficult times for the computer industry, but the leading
companies are showing their sophistication by continuing their links with
the arts, in particular the theatre. Data General is putting Pounds 75,000
behind The Night of the Iguana. It is also giving the NT a new computer
system to handle planning, pay roll, etc.
Meanwhile, IBM is the new sponsor of the English Shakespeare Company. In the
current climate, with labour forces being cut back, companies are reluctant
to publicise the exact size of their generosity, but the IBM backing must be
worth around Pounds 250,000. It will help finance the ESC tour of Macbeth
and Twelfth Night around the UK, and to Japan, Korea, and the US.
*****
The RPO has just completed the most challenging tour in its existence -
concerts in all 12 European Community capitals, plus Strasbourg, and Milan
(and Hastings) in less than three weeks. The trip was made possible partly
by the British Council, which put up Pounds 100,000 (a marked contrast to
the RPO's Arts Council subsidy of Pounds 400,000 for the year) but mainly
thanks to Cellnet, which contributed Pounds 250,000.
This was another imaginative partnership between the arts and international
marketing. Negotiations are well advanced to establish a pan-European
digital cellular radio system: at the moment mobile phones cannot work
across borders. The competition is intense to fix up deals between the many
national participants in this growth business. Cellnet was able to invite
the key executives from every EC country to the concerts.
It was also able to seal its relationship with Motorola, the manufacturer of
its equipment, which came along as a joint sponsor. In effect, the RPO tour
gave Cellnet a sophisticated entree to the continent. In the future it will
support the orchestra in the UK.
*****
The RPO-Cellnet tour was a good example of the new realism between companies
and arts sponsorship. When business was prosperous there was a trumpeting of
the philanthropic aspects of the connection, how companies should put
something worthwhile back into the community. Now the rationale is hard
headed - sponsorship makes good commercial sense.
This was the message that came across strongly at a recent seminar on
sponsorship in a time of recession, held at Nomura's London HQ. Geoff
Shingles, chief executive of Digital, which provides probably the best
sponsorship case study for business schools, related how for less than
Pounds 1m a year invested in sponsorship (and virtually nothing on
advertising) the company had already met and entertained, mainly at dance
events, 75 per cent of the executives in the UK who decide what computer
system their company should buy.
David Charlton relayed how Mobil, medium sized among the oil companies, had
built its corporate advertising, and a big reputation, around an annual
sponsorship budget of Pounds 750,000. Keith Clarke of Nomura mentioned how
his company's arrival in Czechoslovakia was helped by meeting its playwright
president Vaclav Havel at a dinner, only made possible by its sponsorship of
the National Theatre's visit to Prague last year.
*****
The view that any falling away by existing sponsors in 1992 will be made
good by new entrants received encouragement last month when Boddingtons, the
Manchester-based brewery, committed itself to investing Pounds 1.2m over the
next three years in the Manchester Festival of Arts &amp; Television. The
Festival is also supported by the City Council and Granada TV.
*****
Another brewer which constantly backs the arts, Becks, is putting Pounds
60,000 behind a retrospective of the German Expressionist artist Otto Dix,
which opens at the Tate on March 11. To help spread the news, 17m bottles of
Becks Bier will be imported from Bremen carrying information about the show.
