FT  01 APR 92 / World Stock Markets: Beware of Finns bearing gains and a
market rise - The recovery in Helsinki has been more apparent than real
The recovery in the Helsinki stock market this year has been more apparent
than real. The gains took place after a long period of decline and, for
foreign investors, they were almost wiped out by the devaluation of the
markka last November.
According to the FT-Actuaries World Index series, Finnish equities have
risen by 7.3 per cent in local currency terms so far this year, compared
with gains of 1.7 per cent for the Nordic bloc, 3.5 per cent for Europe and
a 5.3 per cent drop in the World Index itself.
However, as the broker James Capel points out in a recent Nordic market
review, Finland was the worst performer in Europe for the third successive
year, in ever decreasing volume. In local currency terms the fall was 13.7
per cent; in dollar terms, and reflecting the 12.3 per cent markka
devaluation, it widened to 24.4 per cent. This trend has continued this
year, with the stock market slipping 0.17 per cent in dollar terms.
Meanwhile, Capel's analysts, Mr Peter Lawrence and Mr Christian Diebitsch,
have been questioning the quality of the local currency gain. 'Finland has
once again started the year with a dramatic rise - the triumph of hope over
experience,' they remark, 'for the fourth year running?'
They also say that the corporate results season has resulted in a quick cold
shower for Helsinki equities and although, in nearly every instance, the
results have been no worse than expected, the domestic Hex index has now
come back (to 826.67 yesterday) by 11.7 per cent since its peak of 935.9 on
February 24.
In February and again this month, companies have been showing the effects of
a severe domestic recession, the collapse of trade with the former Soviet
Union, and the markka devaluation.
Loan loss provisions, above all, pushed Kansallis-Osake-Pankki (KOP),
Finland's largest commercial bank, FM1.61bn (Dollars 35.8m) into the red
before tax; Mr Pertti Voutilainen, KOP's new chief executive, said loan
write-offs jumped by 144 per cent to FM1.343bn.
In insurance, Vakuutusosakeyhtio Sampo swung from a FM29m profit to a FM229m
loss before provisions and taxes, but said that its decision to run down its
reinsurance business would lay the ground for better results in 1992.
Similarly, Kymmene, in forestry, said the devaluation of the markka would
significantly improve its earnings in 1992; unfortunately, that improvement
will have to follow a plunge from a FM394m profit to a FM1.3bn loss after
financial items in 1991.
Capel's analysts say that final 1991 figures are expected to show net
attributable losses totalling FM13bn for all Finnish listed companies, with
the most sizeable losses from the forestry groups, hit by poor pricing,
currency losses and crippling interest charges.
'Our forecasts point to further losses for 1992,' says the Capel team,
'although these should be at a somewhat reduced level as the benefits of the
devaluation are felt, coupled with lower interest rates. We will have to
await 1993 before seeing positive earnings.'
Economic indicators, too, reflect last year's wounds, with GNP falling by 6
per cent in 1991, unemployment hovering around 10 per cent and three-month
money market rates still around 12 per cent against nearly 15 per cent last
autumn. The comparison of what money costs, with an annual inflation rate
down to only 2.6 per cent in February, is a measure of the credibility gap
that Finland, and its equity market, still has to face.
'Interest rates will come down eventually,' says Mr Lawrence, 'but it will
take time. The devaluation last November underlined the risk of investing in
Finnish short- term paper; and, meanwhile, the sheer cost of money is going
to delay Finland's economic recovery.'
