FT  21 MAY 92 / International Company News: Court ruling angers Price
Waterhouse
PRICE WATERHOUSE, the New York based accountancy firm, has been angered by
an Arizona court decision calling upon it to pay Dollars 338m in damages to
Standard Chartered Bank of the UK. The ruling, late on Tuesday, relates to
negligence in past audits of a US bank acquired by Standard Chartered.
The jury decision, which blamed Price Waterhouse for negligence and breach
of fiduciary duty, is thought to be the biggest award ever levied against an
accountancy firm in the US.
The court finding stems from a lawsuit brought in 1988 by Standard
Chartered. The suit claimed Price Waterhouse had failed to identify and
report 'material deficiencies' in the loan portfolio and internal controls
system of United Bancorp, an Arizona bank bought by the UK bank in 1987.
Standard Chartered paid Dollars 335m for United, made heavy losses, and 18
months later sold it to Citicorp for Dollars 207m. The UK bank's lawsuit
claimed that Price Waterhouse was negligent in its 1985 and 1986 audits of
United Bancorp.
Price Waterhouse admitted yesterday its insurance coverage would cover an
amount of more than Dollars 100m in damages, but not the full Dollars 338m
awarded by the court. Ms Erica Baird, a Price Waterhouse executive in New
York, said, however, that 'our net worth is greatly in excess of the
difference'.
Ms Baird described the court decision as 'outrageous'. She said Price
Waterhouse had played no role in the 1987 acquisition by Standard Chartered.
'I am confident we will never pay this award,' she said.
In a memo to Price Waterhouse partners in the US, Mr Shaun O'Malley,
chairman, called the verdict 'unfair and unjustified'. He said Price
Waterhouse would move immediately for a new trial.
Price Waterhouse said it was heartened that the Arizona jury had not found
it guilty of violating the state's Civil Racketeering Act, which would have
permitted damages to be trebled to more than Dollars 1bn.
Mr O'Malley called the verdict 'completely contrary to the evidence' and
claimed that United Bancorp's 1985 and 1986 financial statements 'were
presented fairly even with the benefit of hindsight'.
The Price Waterhouse chairman also assured partners that 'knowing the risks
of a jury trial, we have been preparing for all contingencies and believe we
can have the judgment stayed, pending appeal'.
In London, the UK sister firm is facing a separate and unrelated charge of
negligent auditing, this one contained in a writ filed by the liquidators of
the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI).
Price Waterhouse has denied the charges contained in the BCCI-related writ,
which claims Price Waterhouse was negligent as an auditor of BCCI and failed
to spot serious irregularities in audits it performed before 1987.
