FT  25 JUN 92 / Glasgow (5): University challenge - Education is one of the
biggest employers
FURTHER education occupies an important place in Glasgow. Currently there
are two universities and eight colleges which between them have about 60,000
students. Some 12,000 people are directly employed by the colleges making
further education the single largest employer after government departments
including health organisations.
The universities include the University of Glasgow, the second most ancient
university in Scotland and one of the oldest and largest in the UK. It was
founded in 1451. Then there is the University of Strathclyde, founded in the
1960s.
At the other end of the scale Glasgow Polytechnic should in the next few
months, barring last minute hurdles, unite with Queen's College in the city
and become Queen's University with around 11,000 students. Similarly,
Paisley College, located in Paisley to the west of Glasgow, should soon be
designated Paisley University. This will give Glasgow four universities.
Whether the universities are ancient or newborn, all of them have been
encouraged in the past decade by the government to be more businesslike in
the way they run themselves and more entrepreneurial in finding new sources
of funding.
This can mean forging closer links with industry and the marketing of
research. It can also mean business schools selling market research and
information on contracts and contract law.
The University of Glasgow claims to be the largest science-based university
in the UK outside London and also has one of the largest medical schools. It
also has a veterinary medicine department. Its most oversubscribed
undergraduate course is film and theatre studies.
With its size and range - there are 21,000 students altogether - Glasgow
University is well placed to develop closer research and technology
crossovers with industry.
Mr Mike Brown, the press and information officer and Mr Richard Blackmore,
the intellectual property manager, outline some of the projects the
university has been involved in. The veterinary department has developed
Virol, a vaccine for cattle. The department of naval architecture is heavily
involved in research for platform safety on oil rigs in the North Sea.
The Glasgow University Archaeological Research Division (GUARD) of the
Department of Archaeology has been associated in research for upgrading the
A47 road to motorway standard.
The university's department of cardiology is involved with Siemens-Elema of
Stockholm to market software for the Computer Assisted Reporting of
Electrocardiograms (CARE). This has been called the software for heartbeats
programme.
In all, Mr Brown estimates that the university derives Pounds 14.5m from
sales of research, technology and other forms of liaison with industry. This
is distinct from funding by the government Research Council. Taken together
with other ancillary activities such as the visitor's centre and the museum
and art gallery, the sales of research and other services makes up more than
10 per cent of total revenue.
Sir William Kerr Fraser, the principal and vice chancellor, says: 'We attach
enormous importance to our links with industry and our research in science
and medicine. Given what Glasgow is trying to do in developing new
industries, we have an important role to play. We supply new graduates in a
wide range of disciplines. Our staff are available for consultancy and there
are areas such as health care, where our research can be important.'
The University of Strathclyde is similarly-business minded. The university
started life as the Royal College of Science and Technology in 1796. It
currently has 9,000 students in four departments and 3,000 staff.
Dr Hugh Thomson, the university's director of research and development,
says: 'We are highly collaborative with industry. When I last did the
calculation I estimated that between 14 and 15 per cent per cent of our
income came from research contracts or technological crossover.'
The crossover extends across a wide range of subjects. The faculty of
engineering worked with industry in developing aids for the disabled and in
the replacements of joints for sufferers from rheumatoid arthritis and
similar complaints.
The Faculty of Science is active in waste biotechnology. One research
project funded by Rhone-Poulenc aims to establish a bank of microbial
organisms which interact in the absence of oxygen. After testing to
establish the effects of environmental variables such as temperature and
moisture content the idea is that these microbial associations will then be
used to target specific waste streams, breaking down the waste and
controlling pollution.
Dr Thomson gives an example of where pure research has come to have a
valuable commercial application: the department of pharmacy within the
department of science developed a muscle relaxant drug called atracurium.
This is marketed by the Wellcome corporation in the US.
In the university's accounts for 1991-92 royalty income from atracurium was
Pounds 1.2m. 'Atracurium started life as a pretty academic exercise,' Dr
Thomson says.
Another example of entrepreneurial spirit is to be found in the Strathclyde
Business School, which
has just completed a new Pounds 11m centre. It is expected eventually to
become self-financing through the sale of contracts and other services.
Surprisingly, given the assumed success of science parks in England like
those at Cambridge and Warwick, the West of Scotland Science Park, in which
both Glasgow University and Strathclyde have an interest, is not deemed to
work too well - at least by Dr Thomson.
'It works perfectly well as a business park. But there has not been real
crossover with the universities. I don't know why exactly. I suppose if it
were not 20 minutes drive away things would be easier. But we are trying to
develop small incubator units here where companies involved in technology
can set up and avail themselves of research and expertise,' Dr Thomson says.
Dr Thomson says he would not advise people to read too much into what he
says about the science park. ' There is a lot of collaboration with
industry. Glasgow has become a dynamic place in recent years. There is a lot
of buzz, a lot of self confidence. The universities are very much part of
the revival.'
