FT  10 FEB 92 / Instrument fault is blow to Airbus
THE RELIABILITY of the technology on board the Airbus A320 was thrown into
doubt for the second time in a month yesterday when Air France told its
pilots not to use part of the aircraft's navigational system.
Airbus yesterday acknowledged that one instrument was behaving erratically.
The company is conducting tests to find the cause.
Both Air France and Air Inter, its subsidiary which flies on domestic
routes, imposed indefinite bans on landing their combined fleet of 46 A320s
using the VOR-DME navigational system. This followed an incident last
Wednesday when an Air Inter pilot reported a malfunction on a flight from
Lyons to Bordeaux.
The ban comes only a few weeks after 87 people died after an Air Inter A320
crashed into Mont Saint-Odile near Strasbourg when trying to land using the
VOR-DME system.
Airbus said yesterday that the two incidents were unrelated: at Strasbourg
the aircraft was at the wrong height while at Bordeaux it was off course.
However, Airbus conceded that Lufthansa, the German carrier, had quietly
imposed a similar ban on VOR-DME on A320s late last year after noting the
erratic behaviour of the same system.
'We have advised the airlines of this occasional misfunctioning of one
instrument,' said Airbus.
Modern aircraft, including the A320, are also fitted with the superior
Independent Landing System (ILS), although not all airports can handle
ILS-guided aircraft. British Airways, which has 10 A320s, said that its
pilots almost always used ILS and would not be issuing any advice on
VOR-DME.
The UK Civil Aviation Authority took a similar line to BA, saying: 'We would
expect to have been informed by the French authorities if it were especially
urgent.'
The French ban could prevent A320s landing at airports without ILS if fog or
low cloud prevented a manual approach.
VOR-DME (VHF omni range distance measuring equipment) is used in many types
of aircraft, although Air France has banned its use only on the A320. The
system works by picking up signals from a network of radio beacons on the
ground.
Airbus said the VOR-DME equipment on the affected aircraft was supplied by
two US manufacturers, Bendix and Collins Government Avionics.
The incident that triggered the French ban occurred last Wednesday when an
Air Inter pilot noticed that the instruments showed he was in line with
Bordeaux runway while the view from the cockpit showed this not to be so.
