FT  01 DEC 92 / Crewmen may be punished
SENIOR US navy officials have recommended that the captain of the US
aircraft carrier Saratoga and seven other crewmen be disciplined for the
missile firing on October 2 that killed five Turkish sailors, defence
officials said yesterday, Reuter reports from Washington.
They said any punishment in the accident would probably be short of a court
martial for the officers and enlisted men but could effectively end the
careers of the eight, including Captain James Drager, the ship's commander.
The navy will release its report today on the accident, in which the
Saratoga fired two Sea Sparrow missiles at the Turkish destroyer Muavenet,
killing the captain and four crewmen and injuring 18 others.
In Ankara, the Turkish navy blamed poor training and discipline on the
Saratoga for the accident. It said poorly trained crew on the Saratoga took
about 15 minutes to realise the aircraft carrier had fired missiles at the
Turkish destroyer.
A Turkish officer, intrepreting scenes from Saratoga's on-deck cameras, said
about four minutes passed before the carrier became aware it had launched
the missiles. Another 12 minutes went by, he said, before the US ship was
able to identify the Muavenet. The two vessels were about three nautical
miles apart.
The US defence officials said the incident in the Aegean Sea during a Nato
exercise resulted from confusion aboard the Saratoga and that several senior
officers were found to be responsible.
Pentagon sources said last Friday that the missiles were fired because some
of the Saratoga's crew, awakened at midnight for a drill, thought their ship
was under attack.
One defence official said Admiral Henry Mauz, commander of the Atlantic
Fleet, recommended that six of the Saratoga's senior officers and two
enlisted men face so-called non-judicial 'mast' hearings to determine their
punishment.
While such hearings often result only in formal letters of reprimand and no
reduction in rank or pay, those letters usually preclude promotion. Senior
officers often leave the service after receiving a letter of reprimand.
