FT  28 JAN 92 / Asean leaders fear effects of Soviet collapse
SOUTH-EAST Asian leaders, meeting at their first summit since 1987,
yesterday welcomed the end of the Cold War but expressed foreboding about
the probable economic consequences of the Soviet Union's collapse and
remained divided on how to ensure regional security.
Mr Goh Chok Tong, Singapore's prime minister, urged the summit of the
Association of South-east Asian Nations (Asean) to approve a proposed Asean
free trade area and so enable the dynamic economies of its six member
countries to compete with central Europe for investment as the European
Community expands.
Asean might have a population of more than 300m, he said, but its combined
gross national product amounted to only about Dollars 310bn (Pounds 170bn),
compared with more than Dollars 4,000bn for the EC and about Dollars 6,000bn
for the US, Canada and Mexico. The EC population's purchasing power was 15
times and North America's 20 times that of Asean.
'Unless Asean can match the other regions in attractiveness, both as a base
for investments as well as a market for their products, investments by
multinational companies are likely to flow away from our part of the world
to the single European market and Nafta (the North American Free Trade
Area),' he said.
A common theme running through the speeches of Mr Goh and the other five
leaders - from Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines and Brunei -
was a fear of protectionism in Asean's main export markets and of the
emergence of potentially protectionist regional trade blocs in America and
Europe.
Although the Asean leaders want to establish a free trade area within 15
years, some of them also emphasised the need to continue nurturing ties with
their main trading partners outside south-east Asia.
Mr Anand Panyarachun, the Thai prime minister, warned that proposed
intra-Asean tariff reductions would not be easy. Asean, he said, would have
to avoid the red tape and lack of determination which undermined previous
attempts.
'In the short run, it could result in initial losses of government revenue,'
he said. 'Inefficient sectors would become vulnerable to competition.'
In a speech characteristically critical of the west, Mr Mahathir Mohammed,
prime minister of Malaysia, urged industrialised countries to help fight
tropical forest fires and to combat piracy in the Straits of Malacca instead
of attacking the environmental policies of developing nations.
He said: 'More forests can be saved by preventing forest fires or putting
them out quickly than by boycotting the export of tropical timber or
advocating that forest dwellers remain in the forest, eating monkeys and
suffering from all kinds of tropical diseases.'
