FT  17 NOV 92 / Survey of Energy Efficiency (12): As free as the wind -
There's nothing quixotic about renewables
THE range of renewable energy sources potentially available to replace
fossil fuels and nuclear power is bewilderingly large.
Wind, hydro, tidal, wave, geothermal, solar, biomass and industrial and
municipal wastes all have passionate advocates - and one problem for
governments supporting research and development into alternative energy is
knowing how to allocate funds between different technologies.
A study carried out last year for the UK government by the Energy Technology
Support Unit (ETSU) at Harwell concluded that it would be technically
feasible to generate 25,000 MW - about half of the country's current
electricity requirement - from renewable sources by 2010. That would require
today's meagre renewable generating capacity to be increased 100-fold over
the next two decades.
In practice it will not be possible to build up alternative energy sources
as rapidly as that. The UK government's target for renewables is a modest 2
per cent of generating capacity by 2000; Greenpeace, the environmental
pressure group, says 10 per cent is a realistic target for then.
The main sources are:
WIND power, generally thought to have the best prospects in the UK, the most
consistently windy country in Europe. According to the ETSU report, its
technical potential is huge - 17,000 MW onshore and 12,000 MW offshore by
2010. The Greenpeace scenario would mean building 6,000 to 9,000 wind
turbines onshore and 500 to 1,500 offshore by the turn of the century. The
turbines vary in diameter from 25 metres up to 100 metre monsters.
California is leading the worldwide development of windpower; the state
already has 15,000 turbines, grouped in large 'wind farms' along mountain
ridges, with a total generating capacity of 1,500 MW. In Europe, Denmark is
ahead, with 320 MW of wind power installed.
Wind power may be clean but it is visually obtrusive. Planning applications
to build wind farms in the UK are already being opposed by people who see
them as potential blots on beautiful landscapes. Indeed planning problems
may eventually scupper many of the 58 wind projects proposed in the UK.
Offshore turbines would not meet such objections but they are more expensive
than onshore wind farms.
WAVE power was regarded in the 1970s as the most promising alternative
energy source - some enthusiasts went so far as to predict then that wave
energy would provide half of UK electricity demand in the next century. The
government's wave power R&amp;D programme investigated 300 devices. But the wide
range of wave heights encountered off the British coastline made the
engineering and anchoring of wave devices more difficult and expensive than
expected, and the programme was scaled down during the 1980s.
Now the UK R&amp;D programme focuses on small shore-based devices. A prototype
75 kilowatt (KW) device is being tested on the Scottish island of Islay. But
ETSU put the total potential capacity of wave power no higher than 130
megawatts (MW).
TIDAL power seems a more promising technology for harnessing the energy of
the oceans. Indeed a 240MW tidal barrage has been operating successfully on
the Rance estuary in France since 1967.
In the UK, the much-discussed Severn Barrage could generate up to 8,000MW of
electricity, as much as six large nuclear reactors and enough to satisfy 6
per cent of the country's power demand. The trouble is that it would cost an
estimated Pounds 9bn to build - more than the public or private sector could
be expected to put up under current circumstances. A smaller project which
has also been proposed is the 700MW Mersey Barrage, though this would
inevitably cause extensive environmental changes in the wetlands around the
Mersey estuary.
GEOTHERMAL energy - making use of heat within the earth - is another power
source which looked more promising in the 1970s than it does today in the
UK. But prospects are much brighter elsewhere in the world.
Geothermal plants in Europe are predicted to reach a total capacity of
1,500MW of power and 7,000MW of heat generation by 2000, but experts say the
future of geothermal energy lies in the Mediterranean basin rather than
northern Europe.
HYDRO-electricity cannot expand on a large scale in the UK without causing
unacceptable environmental damage. Even so, there is scope for adding
unobtrusive small-scale hydro generating equipment on some rivers. ETSU said
this could add up to a significant 500MW of capacity by 2010.
SOLAR energy has considerable potential even in the cool cloudy British
climate. The traditional means of exploiting the sun's energy is to use it
to heat up water or air. But recently scientists have been making rapid
progress in improving the efficiency of photovoltaic cells which convert
solar radiation directly into electricity.
The ETSU report put the potential capacity of photovoltaic electricity in
the UK at 7,000MW but concluded it would be too expensive for widespread
application. However, the latest research into photovoltaic cells suggests
that they could compete with other renewable energies.
BIOMASS energy, derived from growing plants and trees for fuel, is
attracting increasing funds for research and development throughout the
world. By 2010 the UK could be generating 3,000MW of electricity by burning
trees and straw, according to ETSU. Greenpeace believes 370MW is realistic
by 2,000 - equivalent to 300,000 tonnes per year of trees and straw.
The most promising biomass technique for the UK may be to grow willow or
poplar in a system known as arable coppice, in which cuttings are planted at
very high densities (10,000 trees per hectare) and harvested by machine
every three to five years. If all land used for over-producing food were
used for energy crops, the equivalent of 10m tonnes of coal could be
produced.
In summary, it seems today that the renewable energy sources with the
greatest potential under UK conditions are first of all wind power, followed
by solar, tidal and biomass. But all of them will need to be nurtured for
several years through some form of subsidy if they are to come at all close
to achieving their full potential.
