FT  29 AUG 92 / How To Spend It: The infernal cost of the Eternal City -
Robert Graham, the FT man about Rome, knows all about free spending
THE ETERNAL City is expensive. By expensive, I mean the rapid conversion
made when calculating the cost of a taxi ride, a drink in a cafe, a quick
lunch in a restaurant chosen at random because your feet are weary, or the
price of an item of clothing you are tempted to buy.
Curiously, though, while people tend to complain about prices they do not,
on the whole, challenge the value for money. Rome has to be seen in the
round, and you can get a lot free. So, let us start with what is free.
Above all, Rome is a walking city. Only by walking can you gain a sense of
its unique and omnipresent qualities of light, colour and architectural
harmony.
The golden light, especially in the early morning or evenings, is
unforgettable from the top of the Spanish Steps or the Campidoglio. The
ochres, the russets and the faded yellows of the buildings can be enjoyed in
any piazza or street (my favourites are Campo dei Fiori and Piazza Navona),
and do not forget the striking green of the firs and holm oaks in the parks
of the Villa Borghese and Doria Pamphili (which, incidentally, has an
unusual population of beavers around its lake).
Then there are the endless fountains, like those designed by Bernini in
Piazza Navona or the tiny 'tortoise' fountain in Piazza Mattei. Many still
have highly drinkable water, like Piazza di Spagna; and just off the Corso,
by the Gallery Pamphili, there is a little barrel with a dribbling tap where
you can still find Romans filling plastic bottles.
Free, too, is the world's finest selection of churches and basilicas - more
than 300. My favourites are the early basilicas on the Aventine, or those
with magnificent paintings like the Caravagios in St Maria del Popolo or San
Luigi dei Francesi.
And, if you do not want to pay for museums, there are the Colosseum, the
Pantheon and the Villa Borghese. I would also recommend entering the Palazzo
Borghese from Via Ripetta. This is now an auction house but you can see some
marvellous decorated ceilings (plus the antiques the Roman aristocracy is
off-loading).
Then, of course, there are the free shows of people at night in Piazza
Navona, by the Pantheon, in Campo dei Fiori, Santa Maria dei Trastevere, on
the Spanish Steps, Piazza del Popolo, or the Villa Borghese gardens on
Sunday afternoon.
Having savoured what is free, one is in a better mood to spend. But first, a
coffee in the Cafe Greco in Via Condotti, right in the heart of the shopping
area. The 18th century decor is forever suggestive, no matter how crowded,
and the espresso is hot. Alternatively, just off the Corso there is an
excellent cafe in the corner of Piazza San Lorenzo in Lucina; it serves the
best sandwiches in Rome, has tables outside and is not patronised by
tourists. If you want a drink, try the discreet decadence of the Plaza Hotel
bar on the Corso. If an ice cream or brioche (cornetto), make for D'Angelo
in Via della Croce.
All the big names for clothes, shoes, bags and jewellery (Armani, Bulgari,
Fendi, Gucci, Missone, Valentino, Versace etc) are in a small area between
Via Borgonona, Fratina, Condotti, Piazza de Spagna and Babuino. These names
speak for themselves but visitors may well find, to their chagrin, that
prices of these 'names' are sometimes cheaper at home and the designs
tailored to, say, London or New York.
It is also worth remembering that shops in Rome often cater for the local
tastes and climate. Compared with Milan, the colours of clothes are more
sensual, the weight lighter, the designs less adventurous and the stocks
smaller (quite often, and maddeningly, your size is not in stock). In the
case of men's suits, trousers, jackets and shirts, the cut also tends to be
tight-fitting.
With these caveats in mind, it is best to just to wander: the area you need
to cover is small enough to permit this without homing-in on any particular
shop.
In clothes, the best value for both men and women is in the upper end of the
market where a mixture of styling, quality materials and finish really tell.
You can get a good idea of this from Batistone (Via Condotti) or Caltrucco
(off Piazza San Silvestro). At the cheaper end, beware of the many
superficially good-looking imitations of 'names' which simply do not last or
can shrink when washed or dry-cleaned. The exceptions are shoes and leather
goods.
For women, Rome has a number of small shops with excellently-made cocktail
and evening dresses and suits in the L800,000 (Pounds 375) to L1.5m (Pounds
700) range that follow fashion rather than set it. These shops, in and
around Via Sistina, are filled with attentive, family-controlled staff,
often stock only one of each item in a limited range of sizes, and are
willing to make superb alterations or adapt old items once bought.
My favourite man's shop is Carlo Palazzi (Via Borgonona), where you walk in
intending to look for a tie and are seduced into buying a jacket (L1.2m)
after trying it for size in the 16th century fitting room upstairs.
My wife maintains that Rome excels in the selection, quality and good value
of shops selling gloves, stockings, tights, socks and underwear, extras for
the hair and bijouterie - again, all in the city centre. For my part, I
would add that socks, especially light summer socks, are a good buy.
If you are looking for something for the bedroom or bathroom, try Bellini
(Piazza di Spagna). This Florentine firm has a fine selection of linens and
cottons as well as sheets, bathrobes, nightshirts and gowns, as does Frette
in the Corso.
Of the more recondite items, Rome has a long tradition of candle-making and,
if nothing else, it is worth a visit to Pisoni (on the corner of
Rinascimento and the Corso Vittorio Emmanuelle). Antiques are pricy and
taste favours the large and the baroque, but do not deny yourself the
pleasure of browsing in Via dei Coronari, or along Via Babuino and Via
Marguta.
In Piazza Farnese, there is a decorator's paradise (Farnese) which makes
columns, mosaic tables and sundials, using ancient pieces to stunning
effect. I have my eye on a L10m marble table when the recession ends . . .
In these hard times, though, food could be the best bet. In the city centre,
in Via delle Croce, there are three good food shops and a superbly-decorated
wine shop (where you also can taste). I would buy some specially-bottled,
extra virgin olive oil (the Tuscans now have special controls on origin), a
chunk of parmesan cheese, some fresh pasta (which will keep for a couple of
days), a truffle (in season) and a whole salami.
If you are more adventurous, buy some Bottarga, a pressed row of fish (tuna
and a variety of others) which can be grated over pasta or served, sliced
thinly, with a squeeze of lemon. Delucchi, in Via della Croce, also sells an
extensive selection of crystallised and dried fruits as well as nuts (stock
up on those pine nuts for pesto sauce).
And now you deserve lunch. You cannot go wrong at Otello, in Via della
Croce, which has a closed courtyard (open in summer). At this time of year,
a light plate of parma ham (prosciutto crudo) on top of freshly-peeled green
figs, followed by vitello tonnato (a salad of rugetta and tomatoes) and
washed down with house Frascati and a cup of coffee, will cost two around
L80,000.
