FT  06 JAN 92 / Management: Fire-eaters and contortionists / A look at the
lengths direct writers go to - Insurance
A casual visitor to the Bristol offices of The Insurance Service would be
surprised. The company's 120 telephone sales staff are organised in teams
calling themselves the Reeboks, the Fire Eaters and the Contortionists.
Their motto is 'we bend over backwards to serve you', and they compete
fiercely both to sell motor policies and service claims quickly, producing a
buzz not usually associated with the insurance industry.
Yet the energy immediately detectable at TIS, Direct Line, Churchill or any
of the other half a dozen direct writers, is more than superficial.
Direct writers are a growing success story in an industry currently
suffering its worst ever losses. They use a combination of computerisation,
telesales and sophisticated mass media advertising to sell insurance. They
are building up a growing share of the UK's Pounds 5bn a year motor
insurance market and their innovative organisation and management techniques
are making waves in the staid world of UK insurance.
Direct Line, the longest established direct writer established by the Royal
Bank of Scotland in 1985, has already made a fortune for its founder  -
Peter Wood  - whose salary last year after bonuses amounted to Pounds 1.8m,
making him one of the best paid people in the country.
Direct Line's last reported profits of Pounds 10.5m stand out like a beacon
in an industry drowning in a sea of red ink and Direct Line's rivals  - in
particular Churchill, a subsidiary of Winterthur, the Swiss company, and
TIS, which is owned by Royal Insurance, appear set to emulate its
achievement.
Martin Long, managing director of Churchill, attributes the success of
direct writers to radical rethink of 'the way things were done' in the
insurance industry. 'We have taken an entirely different view of what
customers want', he says.
One of the most decisive moves has been the decision to sell direct to
customers rather than via the high street brokers who have historically
dominated insurance retailing. By paying less money in commission (brokerage
commission typically amounts to 10-15 per cent of premiums) direct writers
can offer more competitive rates to their customers at the expense of
insurance brokers who have traditionally dominated UK insurance retailing.
At the same time much of the duplication of paper work  - the despatch of a
cover note separate from an insurance certificate for example  - has been
eliminated.
But there is more to their success than cutting out the middleman. Within
their own organisations the direct writers have broken decisively with the
bureaucratic systems developed by the UK composites and are adopting flat
management structures and flexible work organisation which allow them to
reduce costs, improve quality and obtain better underwriting results than
rivals clinging to conventional methods.
In discussions with the managers of direct writers two themes emerge again
and again: control and quality of service.
Typically insurance companies employ large numbers of people who are
technically proficient often with a long professional training in skills
like underwriting (assessing a risk and deciding what premium should be
attached to it) and claims management.
By contrast, at the direct writers underwriting decisions are incorporated
in the computer software used by the telesales personnel when they sell the
policy. A caller is simply asked for his or her details (how old they are,
where they live, what car they drive, and so on) and this is keyed into the
software program which automatically produces a quotation.
As well as allowing very rapid response to customer inquiries and a good
quality of service, computerisation gives management a much greater degree
of control over their underwriting than in a typical insurance company.
While Direct Line often rejects risks that it thinks certain to produce
claims  - comprehensive cover for a young driver of fast car living in an
inner-city area for example  - companies selling policies through brokers
have much less control over the business they accept.
Direct writers can more quickly change the rating of risks that produce
losses. Prices can be adjusted much more frequently than a traditional
company. Richard Hill, managing director of The Insurance Service, says that
he can change prices within four days, up to a month in advance of his
rivals.
The management structures of direct writers are flat, with three or at the
most four layers of management compared with perhaps 10 in a typical
insurance company.
The managers like Long and Hill make much of their accessibility. 'I still
talk to the staff, and they still talk to me,' says Long. This more open and
fluid environment allows for quicker decision-making but also poses more
demands on both management and staff. In the non-hierarchical environment
managers have to earn status and position, says one manager. 'It's not given
to you.' Information flows are more fluid. 'It's simply not possible to use
information as part of a power game.'
Within this context the main skill required of the telesales operator - who
make up up to two thirds of a typical direct writer's staff  - is the soft
sell. 'We don't force products on people,' says one manager. Staff have to
attach equal importance to providing the right kind of policies and helping
customers to fill out application forms, for example. 'The customer has to
think that there is someone intelligent on the other end of the line,' says
one manager.
Martin Bateman, who spearheaded the Danish company Top UK's drive into the
UK motor market, says he looks to recruit telesales staff from Marks and
Spencer and Bodyshop. 'Up to two-thirds of our staff spend their time
talking to customers,' he says.
'I don't want anyone who's worked for an insurance company. We recruit 'up
people' . . . Exciting people. You can't teach people to smile,' says Long.
Most telesales staff at TIS are in their early 20s, with some older women
working part-time.
Whereas pay in insurance companies is tied to management grade and promotion
conditioned by time in the job as well as ability, pay in the direct writers
is more closely related to both individual performance.
Typically telesales staff might earn a basic wage of between Pounds 8,000
and Pounds 10,000 a year. This can be increased  - usually by between 20 and
30 per cent  - by a range of bonuses relating to things like the number of
calls answered and the number of quotes made. In one company as many as 10
per cent of staff are doubling their wages to Pounds 20,000 and one
high-flyer earns as much as Pounds 30,000 a year, although this involved
working substantial periods of overtime.
Supervisors  - who are in charge of a team of perhaps ten to twelve
telesales personnel  - earn more and earn up to half their pay in the form
of bonuses with the level reflecting the team's achievement.
Indeed the management of the direct writers has more in common with the
retail business than financial services, with a strong emphasis on quality
of service. Long compares the direct writers with fast-food outlets. 'I'm
running the company on industrial lines rather than insurance lines,' says
Long.
Flexibility is a major feature of work organisation, partially because
companies are still experimenting and refining advertising techniques
measuring the public's response to advertisement campaigns and adapting
systems quickly to respond. Extra staff are needed to respond to the extra
workload and great use is made of casual and part-time labour.
This is one of the main reasons why trades unions have not been invited to
represent any of the telesales staffs. According to Bateman: 'Union
representation would make it difficult to organise shift patterns. It would
involve very much more management time to do this in a more structured way.'
Long says unions are not needed and that his staff have made no demands. 'It
is a rewarding and demanding atmosphere. Most insurance companies are
neither demanding nor rewarding.'
