FT  17 JUL 92 / Israel and Egypt set to hold first summit for six years
ISRAEL and Egypt appear set to hold their first summit in six years
following the announcement in Tel Aviv yesterday that the newly elected
Labour government was temporarily freezing funds for settlements in the
occupied Arab territories.
The government yesterday blocked the signing of any new building contracts
for Jewish settlements in the occupied territories, prompting an immediate
response from Egypt, which said it cleared the way for a summit meeting
between president Hosni Mubarak and prime minister Yitzhak Rabin.
Officials said the two leaders may meet in Cairo next week, after Mr James
Baker, the US secretary of state, visits Israel at the start of a
five-nation regional trip to relaunch Middle East peace talks.
Egyptian and Israeli leaders last met in Alexandria in 1986 when Mr Mubarak
received Israeli prime minister Mr Shimon Peres to discuss faltering steps
towards Middle East peace.
Mr Mubarak refused to meet Mr Yitzhak Shamir, Mr Rabin's predecessor,
because he believed the Likud party leader was not seriously committed to
the peace process.
Mr Shamir rejected Arab and US demands for a freeze on settlements. Mr
Rabin, whose Labour party defeated Likud in last month's general election,
has refused to freeze all settlements, but is committed to significant curbs
on their expansion in the hope of winning US government loan guarantees and
facilitating peace negotiations.
Although warmly greeted by Egypt, yesterday's move was in effect an interim
step which will curry favour with the US ahead of Mr Baker's visit, but
which does not have the status of final policy. It will help buy time for Mr
Rabin to sound out how far Washington expects him to go as a condition for
the Dollars 10bn (Pounds 5.2bn) loan guarantee request blocked because of Mr
Shamir's stance.
Mr Binyamin Ben-Eliezer, the new housing minister, said he had frozen for a
week all pending contracts for new buildings while he and Mr Avraham
Shochat, the finance minister, reviewed overall housing policy and,
specifically, government spending in the occupied territories.
Mr Ben-Eliezer said the legal implications of stopping state-backed
settlement building already under way would also be examined, adding that
those who believed settlers' plans to double their numbers to 200,000 would
be allowed to occur 'do not understand the issue'.
Furious settlers accused Mr Ben-Eliezer of declaring war on the settlements.
'I am certainly not their enemy,' the former general responded. 'However, if
war is declared then I am good at it too.'
King Hussein of Jordan meanwhile travelled to Damascus yesterday for talks
with President Hafez al-Assad ahead of Mr Baker's arrival in the region.
Syria has expressed scepticism over Mr Rabin's peace overtures and is
concerned about his plans to concentrate on negotiations over the West Bank
and Gaza, ahead of Syria's demand to reclaim the Golan Heights it lost to
Israel in the 1967 Six Day war.
The Israeli army yesterday continued to lay siege to 3,000 Palestinians who
refused to leave an-Najah university campus in the West Bank town of Nablus
unless the troops dropped plans to vet the students for alleged gunmen. The
US called on both sides to resolve the three-day-old incident peacefully.
Boost for equities, Page 37
