FT  17 JUL 92 / Clinton reaches out to middle class: Democratic presidential
candidate sketches his vision to the convention
GOVERNOR Bill Clinton of Arkansas last night set out to reintroduce himself
to American voters as he accepted the Democratic party's nomination to be
its presidential candidate.
After a week in which the Democrats have tried to redefine themselves in the
public eye as a more moderate party that cares about and understands the
'forgotten middle class,' Mr Clinton's speech added an autobiographical
portrait designed to demonstrate a vision rooted in his life and upbringing,
rather than just a politician's promises.
In a draft of the acceptance speech he was due to deliver to the Democratic
convention in New York's Madison Square Garden last night, Mr Clinton told a
personal tale of growing up in the town of Hope, Arkansas; of the father who
died before he was born; of the mother who left him with her parents so she
could train to be a nurse; and of the grandfather who taught him 'to look up
to people other folks looked down on'.
'I am a product of America's middle class. And when I am president you will
be forgotten no more,' he said.
After a bruising primary campaign in which Mr Clinton's popular image came
to be dominated by doubts about his character, his marriage and veracity,
last night's acceptance speech - due to be broadcast live during peak
television viewing hours - offered him the chance to kick off the general
election campaign by painting a different picture of himself.
Clinton aides described the text as an optimistic speech, much of it 'just
basic biographical' information.
'You can't understand what it is he wants to do for America until you
understand where he has come from,' said Mr Paul Begala, one of the advisers
who helped Mr Clinton write the speech.
But Mr Clinton also sought to weave some of the more detailed policies he
has espoused - his economic growth plan, health care reform, fewer civil
servants and more policemen, parental leave legislation - into his broader
theme of a 'new covenant' offering opportunity to the American people and
demanding responsibility in return.
'Now that we have changed the world, it is time to change America. We have
got to go beyond the brain-dead politics of Washington and give our people
the kind of government they deserve: a government that works for them,' he
said.
The phrase 'new covenant' brought to mind John F. Kennedy's successful 1960
election call for a 'new frontier.' It was yet another example of how Mr
Clinton and his equally young running mate, Senator Al Gore, are trying to
pitch their ticket as offering a 'new generation of leadership' in the image
of JFK.
Openly appealing for the support of disgruntled voters turned loose
yesterday by Mr Ross Perot's decision not to enter the election as an
independent, the Democratic candidate acknowledged that his party, too, must
change.
'Because we are making those changes we are, in the words of Ross Perot, a
revitalised Democratic party. I am well aware that those who rallied to his
cause wanted to enlist in an army of patriots for change. We say to them:
join us - together we will revitalise America.'
Mr Clinton took aim at President George Bush, his opponent, as a man 'caught
in the grip of a failed economic theory' who had 'raised taxes on the people
who drive pick-up trucks and lowered taxes on people who ride in
limousines.'
He also criticised him for lacking any vision of a better future. 'Of all
the things George Bush has done that I disagree with, perhaps the thing that
bothers me most has been how he derides and degrades the American tradition
of seeing - and seeking - a better future. He mocks it as 'the vision
thing',' Mr Clinton complained.
'Right now I know how President Lincoln felt when General McClellan wouldn't
attack in the Civil War. He asked him: 'If you're not going to use your
army, may I borrow it?' George Bush, if you won't use your power to help
people, step aside.'
Mr Clinton's acceptance speech has been viewed by some political pundits as
the most important test of his career.
If he was not expected to outshine in eloquence the electrifying nomination
speech given on Wednesday night by Governor Mario Cuomo of New York, he was
certainly set to put behind him the ghost of his own dismal speech
nominating Governor Michael Dukakis at the 1988 convention.
The convention over, Mr Clinton is not going to draw breath to plot his
campaign strategy for the autumn. He and Senator Gore will embark today on
an eight-state bus tour taking them from Coatsville, Pennsylvania, to
Vandalia, Illinois.
Mr Clinton has emerged from this week's Democratic party convention with a
heartening boost to his standing in public opinion. But Democratic
candidates have surged before in the wake of their convention, and have
rarely been able to sustain the momentum.
The memory of Governor Dukakis is raw in Democrats' minds. The convention in
1988 helped boost Mr Dukakis by 6 percentage points, opening up a gap of 17
points over then vice-president George Bush. Party organisers are keen to
avoid repeating the strategic mistakes that then frittered away the lead.
'Dukakis made a mistake in taking a break. Bill Clinton and Al Gore are not
going to make that mistake. They are going to come out of this with a pop in
the polls, but then George Bush is going to get a pop from his convention,'
said Congressman Les Aspin.
Mr Ron Brown, party chairman, said his organisation was ready to move into
action behind Mr Clinton's candidacy. 'He is going to leave this convention
on the run. There is going to be no hiatus while he goes back to Arkansas to
plan the campaign.'
The bus tour is designed to keep the Democratic candidates in close touch
with the US heartland.
'The idea of the trip is that they are going to hit the ground running and
take the country back,' said Mr George Stephanopoulos, Mr Clinton's deputy
campaign manager.
On a whistle-stop tour by aircraft, he said, 'you don't get the feel for the
country'.
But Clinton advisers also expect to take their campaign to a broader
audience with an early wave of television advertising - a decision made
easier by the campaign's vastly improved finances.
After ending the primary season with a deficit, Mr Clinton has managed to
raise enough money to pay off debts and his staff salaries, and can begin
the general election campaign in good shape.
Farming's low profile on agenda, Commodities Page
