FT  03 JUL 92 / Letter: Alternative view of figures at BSkyB
Sir, Raymond Snoddy's passing remark about BSkyB in his article, 'BBC and
Sky talk on news service' (June 30), that BSkyB 'is now profitable, although
that has been achieved by writing off close to Pounds 1bn of excess costs'
cannot be allowed to go unchallenged. I find this new profitability
difficult to believe - unless, of course, you invent a new measure of
profitability that excludes the disagreeable bits, like interest.
The truth lies, as it should, in the published figures. According to the
accounts, BSkyB lost, excluding exceptional items, Pounds 294m in the 37
weeks to 30 June 1991, close to Pounds 8m a week. Its interest burden (which
cannot be written off or otherwise ignored) was Pounds 3m a week. BSkyB
appears certain to record another huge loss in the 52 weeks to June 30 1992,
which will further increase its Pounds 1.5bn cumulative deficit.
In addition, the accounts reveal a negative net worth of Pounds 1.3bn.
Future programme rights contracted (but not provided for in the accounts) of
Pounds 530m - increased since June 30 1991 by a further Pounds 420m to
Pounds 950m. It seems unlikely that these figures include the commitment to
pay the Premier League in excess of Pounds 200m during the next five years.
(Was the Premier League astute enough to ask for guarantees from BSkyB
shareholders?)
Additional shareholder financing available of Pounds 200m; all but Pounds
33m of this has already been drawn down, which suggests that cash has
continued to flow out at around Pounds 3m a week in the past 12 months.
Outstanding lawsuits pending or threatened by Tatung (UK), Ferguson, Oy
Nokia AB, Philips International and others, aggregating to a total of Pounds
100m. (These are not provided for in the accounts, and are being vigorously
resisted.)
Against this background, the directors' statement that 'the group will not
achieve significant net operating cash inflows or net operating profits
before 1994' seems entirely believable.
Christopher Bland,
chairman,
LWT,
London Weekend
Television Centre,
Upper Ground,
London SE1 9LT
