FT  21 OCT 92 / Letter: Economy that is in need of unorthodox remedies
Sir, I write out of increasing concern at the economic state of the country.
Day by day it seems clearer that the prospect before us is not economic
recovery, but indefinite, perhaps deepening, recession. So far the
government has hoped that the problem would go away, that recovery would
come of its own accord and that it would not itself be called on seriously
to act. But now, it seems, all of us - government and people  - face a new
situation. Increasing numbers face the debasement of forced idleness, the
hardship of relative poverty and sometimes, it needs to be recognised,
hunger. This trend can be, and should be, reversed.
It is possible that there will be further reductions of interest rates. But
that cannot, I think, prove to be enough. European interest rates are likely
to come down only slowly. That means we cannot go far without undermining
the exchange rate, and accelerating inflation to a prohibitive degree.
Second, low interest rates alone, as experience shows, are unable to revive
a demoralised economy.
I would therefore raise the question whether remedies now unorthodox and out
of fashion should be seriously considered. As examples of the kind of
measures I have in mind, temporary tax reliefs (to be reversed later) might
be made as an immediate step; and plans might be prepared for a large
increase in infrastructure investment, sufficient to add 1 or 2 per cent to
GDP. The mere announcement of such a policy would do good.
Many will call this approach 'jump-starting the economy' (which is what it
needs) or Keynesian (which is also true); and monetarists will deplore it.
(But where has that thinking got us?) The important question is whether it
would work. The arguments against it are untested and ideological; none is
enough to rule it out for use at times when most needed. Now, I suggest, is
one of them. There is no doubt that if we were to be involved in even a
moderate war, there would be full employment within a short while. I am not
of course saying that we want war. But there are many things we do want such
as better roads, better railways and better cities, where we are
progressively falling below European standards. This would equally create
employment.
I am well aware that there are questions about financing. I would advocate
doing everything to reduce the charge on the public budget by choosing mixed
public/private investment programmes, of which toll roads are one example.
Planning would be flexible, capable of maintaining, if needed, a large
expenditure for several years; or, if not, capable of being tapered off. As
and when the economy recovered, the public finances would benefit from a
restored tax base.
I cannot go into detail, but confine myself to urging the need for a new
approach, and for arguing its general practicality. I feel confident that,
undertaken boldly, such a plan - which is not out of line with what other
countries do - would be effective. I am confident, too, that if properly
presented, most of the electorate would welcome it with relief and
gratitude.
Christopher Dow,
The Reform Club,
London SW1
