FT  21 JAN 92 / Survey of Egypt (5): The medicine seems to be working -
Signs of vitality in the hard-pressed economy
EGYPT'S economy enters the new year in better shape than many can remember,
with an improved balance of payments and amid signs that IMF-inspired
monetary reforms are beginning to work their way through the system.
The IMF, in a review of progress towards implementing its May, 1991
programme, approved Egypt's reform efforts, and had no hesitation in
disbursing the second tranche of an SDR272m standby credit.
Fund officials focused particularly on Egypt's efforts to restrain its
budget deficit. Overspending has been the rock on which previous IMF reform
programmes have foundered, most notably the short-lived 1987 agreement which
barely lasted long enough for the ink to dry. A Fund spokesman said that
Egypt appeared to be making progress in its efforts to curb spending, and he
was relatively confident that it would hold its deficit more or less to the
target of 10.3 per cent of GDP for 1991-92.
This assessment surprised observers since it was assumed that teething
difficulties in collecting a new sales tax and also lower-than-expected tax
receipts due to the lingering recession would make it difficult for Egypt to
adhere to IMF budgetary targets. Egypt's much improved balance of payments -
the deficit this year is expected to drop below Dollars 1bn - is due largely
to the strong rebound in the tourism sector and to the forgiveness or
rescheduling of about half of its Dollars 50bn foreign debt following the
Gulf crisis (interest payments this year will be down to about Dollars
600m).
Other positive factors included cash transfers of aid from Gulf states in
recognition of Egypt's role in helping to mobilise Arab opposition to Iraq's
takeover of Kuwait, and stronger exports. Egypt's improved access to markets
in Libya and in the Gulf have been a factor in this.
Another pleasing development has been the pick-up in the construction sector
driven partly by the real estate boom. Construction had been in the
doldrums.
While representatives of international lending institutions and aid donors
accord Egypt high marks for the implementation of IMF reforms aimed at
curbing inflation, reducing the debt burden and stabilising the currency,
they are much less complimentary about efforts at structural reform, the
other key element of the reform programme.
Egyptian tardiness in complying with World Bank requirements that it raise
cotton prices to 60 per cent of the world market to encourage local
production, and delays in removing trade restrictions held up disbursement
of some Dollars 300m in structural adjustment loans.
Egypt has also made something of a mess of efforts to set in place the
necessary machinery to disburse up to Dollars 400m in a World Bank-sponsored
'social fund' to help soften the blow of structural adjustment that will
lead to the loss of jobs in some sectors. A danger for the IMF-World Bank
reforms is that the two halves - monetary reform and structural adjustment -
will get so far out of tandem that reform efforts, which rely on a balanced
programme of demand and supply side measures, will be dissipated.
Government fiddling and time-wasting are especially evident in the
implementation of reforms of Egypt's unwieldy public sector which accounts
for about 70 per cent of industrial output. A meaningful divestiture
programme is one of the principal demands of the World Bank and aid donors,
notably the US.
A new public sector law meant to facilitate privatisation is so hedged with
qualifications that opponents of divestiture should find it a useful asset
in their efforts to slow down the process. Divestiture thus far has been
largely restricted to the tourism sector where government-owned hotels are
beginning to be sold to private investors.
The authorities have commissioned the international accounting firm, Coopers
and Lybrand, to begin valuing public assets for possible sale, but there is
no sense of urgency. There are many candidates for divestiture in the
sprawling public sector. There is scarcely one sector of the economy,
heavily nationalised in the 1960s, that is free of government involvement -
from confectionery to heavy industry.
Unlike many of the countries of Eastern Europe, Egypt is adopting an
extremely cautious approach to 'de-nationalisation', and seems in danger of
repeating some of the mistakes of the past. One ominous development is the
new public sector law's provision for the establishment of
government-controlled 'holding companies', grouping similar industries, that
are meant to act as 'half-way houses' to divestiture.
Critics claim that this will create yet another level of bureaucracy and,
rather than facilitate privatisation, will make things much more
complicated. Government officials insist that the new law reflects a
commitment to liberalisation.
Another focus of World Bank concern is the run-down state of Egypt's capital
markets. The Bank has sponsored several studies into ways in which capital
markets might be enlivened, and new legislation reflecting these
recommendations is being drafted. Among factors slowing activity in stock
and bond markets are a serious lack of management sophistication, lack of
underwriting institutions and tax laws which discriminate against equities
in favour of tax-exempt bank deposits, interest income and returns on
government paper.
As last year drew to a close, it appeared that inflation was easing with
prospects that interest rates may begin to come down. The IMF believes that
inflation could be brought below 20 per cent for fiscal 1991-92, but
assessing the real rate of price rises in Egypt has always been difficult
since staple items continue to be subsidised. Unemployment continues to be
high, especially among urban youth (rates are said to exceed 20 per cent).
But the situation eased somewhat in the latter part of 1991. While tens of
thousands of Egyptian workers fled Iraq during the Gulf crisis, many have
found work in Libya and in the Gulf states. Kuwait and Saudi Arabia have
been replacing their Palestinian and Yemeni expatriate workers with
Egyptians. Improved ties between Cairo and Tripoli have opened the way for
many Egyptians to work in Libya.
Economically, Egypt is far from being out of the woods, but circumstances
are certainly more promising than they have been for several years. Foreign
currency reserves, according to latest BIS figures, stand at about Dollars
3bn and prospects are for a continuing healthy reserve position, provided
tourism holds up, oil prices remain at more or less present levels and aid
flows are sustained.
But few would deny that much work needs to be done to promote real economic
growth along with efforts to encourage non-traditional exports to reduce a
chronic trade imbalance. As an IMF official observed: 'The Egyptian
authorities need to work on the real sector of the economy. They have done
what they can on the monetary side.'
