FT  19 FEB 92 / World Stock Markets: Yugoslav ceasefire helps Vienna to
recover - But the peace dividend is offset by domestic economic concerns
Much to the relief of Austrian stockbrokers, bankers and the business
community, the ceasefire in neighbouring Yugoslavia is providing an
incentive for foreign investors to return to the Vienna stock exchange. But
international political initiatives are facing a counterweight, in domestic
economic concerns, as the stock market attempts to emerge from a
disappointing 1991.
According to the FT-Actuaries World Index series, Austria fell 14.2 per cent
last year, against a rise of 12.5 per cent for Europe, including the UK.
This year's recovery has been almost as remarkable: Vienna's 18-share ATX
index closed at 1,083.95 yesterday, down 10.34 points, but up 22.7 per cent
from the end of December, against an FT-Actuaries Europe rise of under 5 per
cent for the same period. But traders say the index is unlikely to improve
much further during the rest of this year.
Foreign institutions have also been responsible for an increase in volume.
Mostly from the US and the UK, they have been buying shares in the reliable
utilities sector and the construction industry. Turnover in January totalled
Sch14bn (Dollars 1.2bn), compared to Sch9bn in December and in January last
year.
Mr Christian Gutlederer, a senior official at the Vienna bourse, says:
'There are signs that a rebound is taking place. But any increase in the
index is still dependent on so many factors.'
One of these factors is the slowing down of the Austrian economy, which
traders hope will not dip into recession. Estimates for GDP, which grew by 4
per cent in 1990 and 3 per cent in 1991, have been revised down to 2.3 per
cent for 1992 - still relatively high compared with other OECD economies.
Inflation is only expected to rise by 0.3 of a percentage point to 3.6 per
cent, and unemployment should increase slightly, to 6 per cent.
The sluggish growth in GDP, however, is not the main reason for the decline
in corporate investment which, according to WIFO, the Vienna Institute for
Economic Forecasting, will decrease this year from 6 per cent to 3 per cent
of profits; nor is the latest round of wage-bargaining, which agreed to a
4.8 per cent rise. Rather, it is interest rates, and the uncertainty in the
former Soviet Union, which continue to dull confidence in the bourse.
Because the schilling is tied to the D-Mark, Austria has had to bear
correspondingly heavy interest rates. The recent dip of 0.3 points to 8.2
per cent in bond yields has had little effect on the bourse. 'Interest rates
are still too high,' says Mr Peter Szopa, a senior analyst at Vienna's
Girozentrale bank. 'Normal credit rates are about 13 per cent. This is too
expensive.' Any decline in German interest rates would be welcomed in
Vienna.
The disintegration of the Soviet Union has been a mixed blessing. Shares in
IGM, the computer parts manufacturer which supplied the Soviet market, have
fallen by over 50 per cent since last August.
However, the construction industry, particularly Wienerberger, Poor, and
Maculan, is thriving in eastern Europe and the former Soviet republics.
Maculan, for example, is being paid by the German government to build
housing for Soviet troops returning from eastern Europe. Order books in the
construction sector are up 22 per cent on a year ago, and earnings are
expected to grow by 3.5 per cent in real terms.
'I am cautiously optimistic. But I think we are between two phases,' says Mr
Szopa. 'On the one hand, the foreigners are returning, slowly. On the other,
we are waiting not only for new forecasts due at the end of March, but for
indications that the US, the UK, and other western economies will emerge
from the recession later this year. If not, we cannot expect any upswing in
the bourse.'
