FT  27 JUN 92 / UN gives Serbs 48 hours to end Sarajevo siege
THE United Nations last night gave Serb forces 48 hours to end their
offensive in the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo. The UN ultimatum came amid a
flurry of diplomatic activity aimed at launching a fresh Western initiative
to bring peace to the war-torn republic.
Earlier yesterday Mr Douglas Hurd, the UK foreign secretary, put forward a
five point peace plan at the EC summit in Lisbon, urging Community leaders
to set a July 3 deadline for Serbian forces to pull out completely from the
besieged city.
Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN secretary general, in a statement to the UN
Security Council, said the UN was considering withdrawing its peace-keeping
troops from Sarajevo and would have to consider alternative means of
bringing relief supplies into the city if Serb forces did not withdraw.
Whether this could involve the use of force remains unclear. The Security
Council is to meet on Monday and Mr Jean-Bernard Merimee, the French
ambassador, said nothing would be excluded from consideration.
Yesterday, the US appeared to rule out the use of military intervention to
secure the implementation of an international aid airlift to the capital's
starving population, though the Pentagon said US forces in Europe had been
put on alert as long as 10 days ago to transport food and medical supplies.
After Mr George Bush held a meeting of his top security advisers yesterday,
Mr Brent Scowcroft, the US national security adviser said intervention was
not imminent.
He said the US would act only in concert with the UN and only after a
ceasefire had been secured around the airport of Sarajevo.
Further indications the West may not be close to armed intervention came
with British attempts to deflect calls from some of its European partners,
such as Italy and Germany, for a commitment to using force in Sarajevo.
Germany in particular was adamant early this morning that the Community
should leave all options open, though Bonn appeared to accept the main
points of the British initiative.
Mr John Major warned his fellow EC leaders that, in the absence of a
cease-fire, it might take more than 100,000 troops to secure Sarajevo
airport to allow a humanitarian airlift.
The Western European Union (WEU) nine-nation defence body did however agree
yesterday to meet early next month to consider possible naval measures to
enforce a United Nations embargo of Yugoslavia.
The series of moves came as the latest ceasefire in Bosnia broke down when a
bitter street battle for the former Olympic village of Dobrinja erupted and
UN forces returned fire at snipers near Sarajevo's airport.
The British plan put forward five points: The Community should ostracise the
Serb-led rump Yugoslavia and press for its expulsion from international
organisations, including the Conference on Security and Co-operation in
Europe, unless Serbian forces pull back to allow the reopening of Sarajevo
airport by July 3.
All Community member states should pledge aircraft and personnel to help in
an airlift as soon as conditions are right, including a ceasefire around
Sarajevo airport.
The European Commission should assemble humanitarian goods at an airport
near Sarajevo.
The current EC president, Portuguese prime minister, Anibal Cavaco Silva,
should contact the leaders of Serbia, Bosnia and Croatia in a follow-up to
their unsuccessful meeting with EC mediator Lord Carrington in Strasbourg on
Thursday.
Mr Cavaco Silva should contact UN Secretary General Boutros Boutros Ghali to
see what further action could be taken to support the United Nations.
