FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: Streets paved with second-hand clothes - Fun
and bargains in street markets
IF SHOPPING as a sport has lost its thrall, if you are tired of
air-conditioned malls, of stores selling nice, predictable, sensible
clothes, of careful pedestrianised enclaves and conservation areas full of
manufactured charm - take heart, all is not lost, writes Lucia van der Post.
In the run-down corners of London, markets still flourish, chaos reigns and
the dead hand of the urban planner seems far away. Here, where the natural
vitality of the market-place is allowed to flourish, shopping becomes more
than just a serious search for life's necessities, it becomes a journey into
the heart of a local community.
Markets offer more fun, better value and, most magically of all, they offer
risk which does wonders for the adrenalin.
You could (easily) pay more than is sensible or wise for a dodgy vase or you
could find the perfect grubby picture that gives pleasure for the rest of
your life. You simply never know. That is what markets are all about.
They are a lucky dip, a chance to savour a bantering, more robust way of
doing commerce. They also offer some of the best free entertainment there
is. Listen to the barrow-boy trying to flog his flagging fuschias, take in
the whelk-man at his stall selling his wares, spare a thought for the old
woman trading cabbages just as she has done for the last 30 years.
There are markets of every sort - from the best-known, such as Portobello
(so big and famous that foreigners who can muster scarcely a word of
English, mutter it like a mantra as they pour into town) to small ones,
scarcely worth crossing town for, but a part of the lives of those who live
there.
Some, such as Berwick Street and Whitecross Street, Leather Lane, Lower
Marsh and Strutton Ground are really lunchtime markets, a boon to those who
live and work in those areas.
Others sell a broader range of goods and draw in customers from far and
wide. So if you feel that shopping is not what it used to be head for your
nearest market.
There are bargains to be found and fun to be had.
Portobello Market, Portobello Road, London W11.
Saturdays from 7 am to 5.30 pm. Okay, so everyone has heard of it, that does
not mean there are no bargains left. You do not have to buy a piece of
fragile porcelain at Pounds 800 - keep your eyes skinned and you are bound
to see something you like for a price you can afford.
According to a young fashion student friend it still has some of the best
secondhand clothes in London. Recently, she found someone selling the entire
contents of a fine 1920s wardrobe. Then there is Sold Out - one of the many
shops which are almost as much of a draw as the market itself - which not
only sells secondhand clothes but regenerates them, fashioning old things
into some new and wonderful.
There are lots of specialist shops selling everything from jewellery,
antique glass, antiquarian books and pictures to old kitchen equipment
textiles and toys. Still crowded, still great fun and, although more
expensive than Bermondsey, its traders, too, have been feeling the pinch and
so prices are more negotiable than ever.
New Caledonian Market, Bermondsey, SE1.
Fridays from 7 am to 5 pm. This is where the serious seeker of bargains in
furniture, ceramics, silver and other household items heads for. This is
mainly a dealers market and what you see there today may well appear
tomorrow in Fulham Road or Camden Passage.
You have to be serious because if you aim for a proper bargain you need to
be there well before light. Customers say (although I have never made it
myself) that serious trading starts from 3 am onwards. Anything before 6 am
is probably quite serious enough for most of us. After that some dealer has
probably seen it and discounted it.
Anyone wanting to furnish a house will probably find Bermondsey the cheapest
way to do it well but it requires persistence and a good eye as well as the
temperament to enjoy the chase and the bargaining.
Church Street, NW8.
Tuesdays to Saturdays, 9 am to 5 pm. One of my favourites this. Alfies
Antique market at 13-25 is where I go if in need of a special present -
jewellery of all sorts from Miriam Haskell and Schiaparelli to fantasy
pieces from the 1950s, old, proper leather and crocodile shoes and handbags,
old-fashioned luggage and other small pieces. Recently, prices have been
good. The rest of Church street has other antiques and a dealer specialising
in rugs and carpets. The Gallery of Antique Costumes and Textiles is one of
the best old textile shops in London - go for old curtains, pelmets, quilts,
embroideries and some wonderful old clothes. Camden Lock, Commercial Place,
off Camden High Street, NW1.
Saturday and Sunday 10 am to 6 pm. Although many surrounding shops are open
during the week, the place comes to life at weekends when most of London's
under-30s seems to be crammed together either to buy or to sell. The
Electric Ballroom is a covered market where on Sundays you will find lots of
little stalls manned by the young. They are often people who take a stall
once a week and sell what they have made during the week - anything from
jewellery to handmade candles, hand-knitted sweaters, kitschy candlesticks,
printed scarves or silverware. If you ever have it in mind to commission
something special, this is a good place to check out the work of a whole
host of craftspeople. No need to starve here - food stalls are everywhere
and eating seems to be a full-time occupation - if it is not samosas, it is
kebabs and if it is not kebabs it is quiche or hot soup.
The surrounding shops are mostly fun, too, although getting posher by the
day. Greenwich Market, corner of Greenwich High Road and Stockwell Street,
SE10.
9 am - 6 pm Saturday and Sunday. Nothing grand or posh (although the special
indoor market is filled with rather respectable things like pots of jam,
scented candles, pot-pourri) but lots of stalls filled with things like old
records, coins, bric-a-brac as well as smaller items of furniture.
A young fashion student at the Royal College of Art, tells me that this is
where she comes to buy the second-hand clothes she collects. 'You probably
won't find anything earlier than the 50s but I buy here a lot because I'm
basing my own collection on second-hand clothes. In the past few weeks I've
bought a Jackie Onassis-style day dress for about Pounds 8 and a blouse
probably originally put together in the 1970s from 1920s scarves for Pounds
4.' She thinks prices are definitely more reasonable than in the central
London markets.
Columbia Road, E2. Sundays from 8 am to 12.30 pm. Sundays are when this
normally unassuming little East End road comes to life. It is where you go
for anything and everything horticultural, from big bunches of daffs (I
bought 16 bunches for Pounds 2 last Sunday) to bedding plants, packets of
seeds, herbs and all manner of indoor and outdoor plants. It is so busy you
need to push your way through the crowds but it is all well worth the
effort. Prices are around 40 per cent less than you would find elsewhere and
it is a lot of fun.
The little shops on either side of the market are well worth exploring. They
are old-fashioned in the sense that they reflect the tastes and interests of
the individuals rather than the safe and sensible principles of some central
buying office.
They tend to verge on the quirky and unpredictable. Idonia van der Bijl at
122 sells an eclectic mix of goods that have caught her eye - anything from
Indonesian steel baskets to mirrors from Rajasthan and hand-painted pottery
from Devon. Next door at Ukwenza are hand-made steel model toys (windmills,
bicycles) typical of work from South African townships. Angela Flanders'
Aromatics at No. 96, sells fragrant burning oils, pot pourris and boxes of
plain creamy candles in every size.
On a horticutural theme again there are several shops, all within a stone's
throw of each other, selling inexpensive pots and cache-pots of every size
and colour - plain terracotta, plain glazed (13 in by 10 in for Pounds 14)
or elaborately hand-painted or decorated.
Nearby are Brick Lane and Petticoat Lane - which also seem to come alive
chiefly on Sundays. Brick Lane is the place for cheap t-shirts, clothes,
electrical appliances (do not expect a guarantee), tinned food, cheap
crockery and household goods. In spite of a huge infusion of Bengalis these
markets still retain something of an authentic down-at-heel working-class
market. Some of the things sold are so depressing you wonder that anybody
could need, let alone want, them.
But, even if you do not find a bargain, you can console yourself by feasting
for well under Pounds 5 at one of the many Bengali restaurants in the area.
Lots of gaudy Bengali sweet shops and even a Bel Phoori (South Indian)
restaurant. A few bits of bric-a-brac as well. Do not miss Beigel Bake, at
195 - 15 bagels for Pounds 2 and open 24 hours a day (except for Jewish
holidays). It is busy all night nourishing cabbies, disco kids and
late-night shift workers.
Leadenhall Market, off Gracechurch Street and Leadenhall Street, EC3.
Old-established it may be, cheap it is not. Here, surrounded by hot-shot
laywers, city slickers and affluent bankers, are sold fine salmon, trout,
mallard, grouse, oysters, crab, fruit and veg, in and out of season. They go
for the kind of price traders know they can get. At Ashby's ask for their
own sausages.
New Covent Garden, Nine Elms Lane, SW8.
Monday to Friday, 4 am to 11 am. Saturdays as well in summer. Modern, rather
like a vast warehouse and, in spite of the authentically rough and ready
traders, lacking real atmosphere. However, the flower halls when filled with
the sweet smells and bright colours of vast buckets and trestles of flowers
is heady stuff. Not as cheap as you would expect. You have to buy in bulk -
exhausting to visit often but well worth it for a wedding, a party or a
special occasion.
Brixton Market, Electric Avenue, Atlantic Road, Brixton Station Road, SW9.
Monday to Saturday, 8.30 to 5.30 pm (closed Wednesday afternoons). Very
colourful fruit, vegetable, fish and meat market. Well worth a visit for the
liveliness contributed by the West Indian community. To the sound of Bob
Marley records, they find the essentials that remind them of their Caribbean
roots. Foodies make the journey for fresh whole fish, sweet potatoes, yams,
green bananas and lots more.
Shepherds' Bush, between Uxbridge Road and Goldhawk Road, W12.
Open from 8.30 am to 6 pm, Tuesdays to Saturdays. Primarily a food market,
it is really worth visiting because of its exotica, one of the most
cosmopolitan of all the food markets in London. Jostling round the stalls
are Arabs, Indians, Cockneys, Africans, Jamaicans and Kensington yuppies
which means you can buy anything from a plantain to a piece of African
fabric, proper patna rice or a beaded Indian curtain.
