FT  26 NOV 92 / Self-drive electric cars for Coventry
COVENTRY City Council and Peugeot, the carmaker whose Ryton factory is on
the city's edge, are launching a joint effort to make Coventry the UK's
first area with a public network of electric cars.
Although the cars are not likely to be built at Ryton, Peugeot and Coventry
council expect that by 1996 the vehicles will be available on rental for
individual journeys, with hirers using a 'smart card' to pay at special car
parks controlled through a computer network.
The city's transportation and highways committee voted yesterday in favour
of the project, which aims to make the city one of four in Europe each
operating trial fleets of 200 Peugeot 106 and Citroen AX electric cars. The
council will use them to help assess the potential of electric cars for
reducing pollution, noise and congestion.
The French coastal city of La Rochelle has already started a pilot project
with 50 cars and Tours is ready to start a scheme. Similar schemes are
thought to have been planned in Milan and Barcelona, but that is on a
smaller scale, involving a fleet of 50 of the small Peugeots and Citroens.
Peugeot, which believes Europeans are likely to buy 200,000 electric cars a
year by the end of the decade, is co-ordinating the project under the EC
Commission's Thermie programme for promoting new energy technologies.
Next year the Thermie programme will enter a new phase in which it will
concentrate on technologies designed to reduce environmentally damaging
emissions of carbon dioxide and sulphur dioxide.
The commission will have a budget of Pounds 250m for such projects next year
and in 1994, and will be empowered to meet 40 per cent of the cost of
individual projects.
Peugeot is understood to be planning production of up to 50,000 electric
cars a year by as early as 1996 in the belief that pollution, noise and
congestion will lead to cars with petrol or diesel engines being
progressively banned from large city centres throughout Europe.
