FT  30 MAR 92 / The European Market: France seeks a cure for drug subsidies
 -The Glaxo controversy is an important test case
LIKE governments across Europe, the French administration is fighting to
curb the amount it spends every year on subsidising its citizens'
consumption of pills and potions.
In the latest round in this battle, Mr Jean-Louis Bianco, France's social
affairs minister, has just locked horns with Glaxo, one of Europe's largest
and most aggressive drugs companies.
Mr Bianco has asked an independent panel to report by mid-May on the
ethical, legal and medical acceptability of Glaxo's heavy promotion of
Imigran, a migraine treatment which has not yet got government approval for
sale in France. Glaxo says its negotiations with the government are also
stalled on price, where the UK company is insisting that it must be allowed
to charge the same in France as elsewhere in Europe.
This is an important test case, say officials. The results will signal to
other drug companies the government's thinking on how they market their new
products in one of Europe's fastest growing and highest volume markets,
despite the government's efforts to reduce its drugs bill.
Angered by the government's toughness, Glaxo insists that it is acting
properly and has already threatened to reconsider its French investments, as
has Merck, Sharpe and Dohme, the US pharmaceuticals giant.
Politically, Glaxo has taken on the government at the worst moment. Mr
Bianco is in no mood to compromise, just as the spring session of
parliament, which opens on April 2, is due to give the final reading to
wide-ranging reforms to cut drug companies' spending on promotion, in favour
of research and development, and to reduce needless consumption of
medicines. It is also an important part of the government's attempt to keep
its social security deficit under control, down to a forecast FFr2.2bn
(Pounds 226m) this year after a FFr15bn in 1991.
Imigran is a high priced drug, with a potential market of more than FFr1bn
in France alone and Dollars 10bn worldwide, say analysts. It has already won
approval in several other European markets, including Britain and the
Netherlands.
But Mr Bianco's experts are not convinced that Imigran is worth the money,
or that it is as effective as rival products. Accordingly, he is nettled at
what he sees as Glaxo's attempt to whip up patient demand before he has made
up his mind.
The outcome will be watched by the European pharmaceuticals industry
generally. Glaxo's prices have already run into trouble with the Danish
government, which has asked the European Commission to examine whether it is
illicitly abusing a dominant market position. Now its marketing methods are
under scrutiny too.
For Glaxo, the stakes are high. It needs to prove to investors that it has
successors to its Zantac ulcer drug, the world's best selling
pharmaceutical, which accounts for nearly half of Glaxo's sales but faces
slowing growth. It also needs to resist pressure to reduce prices for its
innovative drugs in France, so as to avoid the risk of having to compete
against cheap parallel imports to Britain.
The stakes are high for the industry. Drugs' companies across Europe face
the challenge of making enough profit to cover the rising research bills
needed to keep up with the fast pace of innovation. Accordingly, the prices
they are allowed to charge by governments, which - as in France - are often
also the drug companies' main customers, are crucial. So are the permitted
methods of promotion.
France is an especially sensitive case. For its citizens swallow more
medicine than most other Europeans; Dollars 136 worth per head annually as
against the average Briton's Dollars 65, according to a recent survey. It is
unlikely that they end up twice as healthy, One factor is the government's
traditional but changing policy of keeping prices relatively low, so that
spending on medicines is growing at 10 per cent annually.
Another may be the intense competition for patients in an overcrowded
medical profession. 'A popular doctor is one who is liberal with his
prescriptions, who knows all the latest drugs and gives large supplies of
them,' explains Mr Theodore Zeldin in his book The French. Many general
practitioners confess they do not know what ails three quarters of their
patients, but they prescribe lots of drugs to show they have something to
say, he argues. The armfuls of medicines showered on my own family bear him
out.
So the government has seized on what is as much an issue of national
behaviour as budget management. It is trying to curb needless spending on
medicines on two fronts.
Firstly, the bill before this coming parliamentary session will tighten up
the price fixing regime and could lead to higher prices for some products.
A new national medical agency will decide prices across the whole range of a
group's products, rather than by individual drug as before. Companies with
high research budgets - spent in France - will be allowed to charge more to
help recoup those costs.
The second front on which the government is acting is in its dealings with
individual companies. Here Glaxo is not the only one to have come under the
spotlight.
Lipha, the French arm of E. Merck of Germany, is smarting after having been
told by the government last week it must abandon a joint marketing agreement
with Pfizer of the US, for Amlodipine, a treatment for hypertension.
Foreign owned companies privately complain that the government is
discriminating in favour of French producers. But even the French
phramaceuticals industry association, Snip, is worried.
Mr Bernard Mesure, Snip's president, fears the pharmaceutical bill's attempt
to limit the growth of reimbursable drugs will hold back his industry's
development, as will the blockage on joint marketing. He warns: 'If
collaboration is prevented, we will have no chance of catching up our
foreign competitors and France could simply become an area for the
distribution of imported medicines.' The government appears to have decided
to put the nation's financial and physical health first.
