FT  10 APR 92 / From revolution to recovery: Radical zeal is ebbing as Iran
goes to the polls
The parliamentary elections which take place in Iran today may mark the end
of the country's international isolation if the moderate politicians who
seek to liberalise the economy and forge better relations with the world
outside strengthen their hold on power.
President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani has been moving Iran in a pragmatic
direction since he came to power after the death of Ayatollah Khomeini in
1989. He has been aided by the fact that, outside parliament, where the
influence of radical deputies has only recently been weakened, Iranians'
revolutionary zeal has ebbed in the past few years. The country has been
isolated in international arenas and is on the defensive; and it is short of
money. It is coming to terms with the loss of 13 years' potential economic
growth since the revolution of 1979, and realises its economic position is
far worse than it was a decade ago.
It suffered great material damage in the war with Iraq in 1980-88, when two
of its main towns, Abadan and Khorramshahr, were reduced to rubble, and an
international trade embargo caused its industry to run at a quarter of
capacity. Since the revolution, meanwhile, Iran's population has grown from
34m to some 55m-60m, one of the highest rates of increase in the world. This
boom will soon lead to the appearance of a large class of unemployed young
men. Every building in the country seems to need refurbishment. Most
vehicles and machines are worn out.
Government organisations and banks have lost touch with the conventions of
international business. Relatively little English is spoken. Credit cards
are unknown and travellers' cheques viewed with suspicion. Most of the
economy is run by big corporations of the old east European type, which have
functioned without the need to compete either in the domestic or global
arenas.
In its efforts to stimulate economic recovery, Iran can rely on oil revenues
running at about Dollars 15bn a year. It is trying to increase its oil
export capacity from 2.4m barrels a day to 3.8m b/d by the end of 1994, but
this target is optimistic and even if it can be achieved the investment in
production facilities will cost nearly a year's oil revenue.
Any of the annual Dollars 17bn in hard currency earned from exports that is
not being spent on the oil industry is going to subsidise basic foodstuffs,
mostly imported, at a cost of Dollars 4bn a year; to pay for a vigorous
re-armament programme, much of it involving the development and assembly of
weapons in co-operation with Pakistan and North Korea; to finance
reconstruction of the country's infrastructure and a few new projects; and
to get existing manufacturing industries back into production.
Fortunately, the government has little debt to service. At the end of last
year, its obligations on medium-term loans and 360-day letters of credit
were a combined total of Dollars 12bn. Although the state and private
business have repayment records described by a western banker in Tehran as
'exemplary' the build-up of official foreign debt from virtually nothing
three years ago has been fast enough to cause Britain's Export Credit
Guarantee Department to call a meeting of European export credit guarantee
agencies in London in February to review Iran's position.
Clearly, Iran's resources are being stretched and the government is having
to make some tough choices. Advised by the International Monetary Fund whose
influence is denied because officially the body is regarded as an instrument
of the hated Americans, it has started a programme of reform.
First, Iran is trying to reduce its foodstuffs subsidies and eliminate the
subsidies to some industries - both of which come in the form of
preferential exchange rates.
At present basic foodstuffs are sold on the fictitious basis of their having
been imported at 70 rials to the dollar, and some state corporations are
granted foreign exchange at a rate of 600 rials. But the 'real', free market
rate, used by the private sector, is 1,440 rials to the dollar. The
government has already eliminated a few items, such as chicken, from its
subsidised foods list and it aims to drop the rest - including rice, bread
and sugar - and amalgamate the three exchange rates by the spring of 1994 or
1995. It is being resolute in this action. As the minister of mines and
metals, Hussein Mahlouji, says: 'Whatever happens, we are not going to
borrow just to feed our people - that is sure.'
The plan is to drop food subsidies over this year and next, and at the same
time to increase the salaries of the poorer government employees. In theory
the government will only be switching the way in which it helps the poor
from one method to another, but given that the private sector is bound to
have to follow the wage rises, the effect will be inflationary.
Inflation is already running at more than 20 per cent annually. In
parliament recently the notorious 'hanging judge', Sadeq Khalkali, declared:
'God bless Hoveyda (the Shah's prime minister whom he had executed after the
revolution). Under him, a Bic biro stayed at five rials for 13 years. Now
the price of chicken is going up by the hour.'
The second arm of government reform policy is an attempt to stimulate growth
through the privatisation of companies seized after the revolution. In the
past two years, the government has floated shares in 70 companies and it has
recently decided to privatise 15 more, including the big vehicle assembly
businesses. Some smaller enterprises are simply being handed back to their
former private owners.
Iranians who are well informed and working outside the government are
sceptical about whether either of the government's major policies will be a
success. The relentless growth of population and the pressure this will put
on family incomes may force the government to keep its food subsidies in
place, because it will not want to alienate the poorest classes, who are its
main constituents. And privatisation may not generate sufficient growth to
provide the new masses with employment.
The failure of either policy would only increase people's disenchantment
with the government. Ever since the revolution, ordinary Iranians have felt
free to speak their minds on politics, and grumbling has been commonplace,
but recently their disillusionment has become deeper.
After the revolution, I returned from studying in Britain because I wanted
to help my country in the war,' says a taxi driver. 'I joined the Baseej
(the volunteer army used in the early mass attacks against Iraq) because I
believed that it doesn't matter what you do, if God wants you to stay alive
you will. But now everybody I know is disappointed with the revolution. We
attacked the Shah and America and Britain, and now we realise we were wrong
to do it - but it's too late.'
Rising prices and political disenchantment have led to a number of strikes
and other minor disturbances in the bazaars, in one or two of the
universities and in state-owned corporations. The government, remembering
how it came to power itself, has been anxious to suppress these
manifestations of unrest. In fact, for the time being there is little for
the government to fear because there is no plausible opposition to the basic
concept of Islamic government either in the country or among Iranians living
abroad. The traditional focus of opposition under the Qajar and Pahlavi
monarchies was the clergy, and the clergy is now in power.
The government's response to its problems is to increase the dose of
medicine it is already giving the economy to try to liberalise it faster. It
wants foreign investment, but so far, although there have been many
inquiries, hardly any companies have committed themselves. The concern is
not the ambiguity of the constitution on foreign investment, but worries
about political stability. 'Iran needs a sense of political acceptability if
it is to get investment,' said the ambassador of a neighbouring country. 'So
far not even the Japanese banks and government are signalling that Iran is
an area where Japanese companies (which do a lot of trade with Iran) should
go forward.'
The government is hampered in changing its image overseas in two ways.
First, it faces obstruction from within the ranks of the clergy. The
moderates who at present dominate the government favour a freer economy, a
bigger role for the private sector, better relations with the outside world,
and, possibly, a freer society and freer dress code in Iran. The radicals
want social and economic 'justice', they are anti-capitalist, against the
minor luxury imports of the private sector and anti western 'arrogance' and
'cultural aggression'. They fear a re-opening of a US embassy in Tehran, and
they want, or pretend to want, direct Iranian intervention in the fight
against Israel. The president, Mr Rafsanjani is moderately inclined, but he
normally tries to stay above politics.
Most Iranians of the middle and working classes seem to hope that the
radicals will be decisively beaten in today's elections, though the outcome
may be distorted in the radicals' favour because their supporters are more
committed to their cause and are thus more likely to vote.
If the radicals do badly it is feared that they may organise some
international outrage in order to frustrate the government's opening to the
outside world. There was great satisfaction in the radical press after
agents of a remaining radical clique in the government murdered the Shah's
last prime minister, Shahpour Bakhtiar, in Paris last summer.
The government cannot simply imprison the radicals because within certain
limits it believes in democracy. Internally Iran is much freer than most
westerners imagine.
The other difficulty the government faces is that it cannot abandon its
revolutionary Islamic rhetoric. The reality is that the revolution is nearly
dead - except in the radicals' support for organisations such as Islamic
Jihad, the armed revolutionary group, and other similar organisations abroad
 -but nobody in government can afford to say it. To do so would be to betray
the Imam Khomeini and the 400,000 young men who died in the war against
Iraq. Anyone visiting Iran is continually reminded of these 'martyrs'. The
country is one of new cemeteries and memorials, like France after the First
World War.
Maintaining a revolutionary image is still very important. When 100 Danish
MPs recently signed a letter asking Iran to cancel the sentence on Salman
Rushdie, the author condemned to death for writing the novel The Satanic
Verses, the government felt obliged in public to dismiss their idea. But the
newspaper Jomhuri Islami (Islamic Republic) explained the real government
position in an editorial: 'Given that the Imam's edict that Rushdie must be
killed is irrevocable, attempts such as this to exert pressure on the
Republic can only be considered attempts to keep the episode alive. This is
what international Zionism is desperately after.'
In other words, the mainstream of the Iranian government cannot overturn an
edict of the revered Ayatollah Khomeini and it wishes that westerners would
understand this fact and not embarrass it by referring to the sentence when,
it feels, they should know perfectly well that it is not doing anything to
carry it out. The truth is that the Iranian government wishes that the death
sentence on Rushdie, and some of the other embarrassing revolutionary
impediments it carries, would simply fade away. Its problem is that it
cannot say so in public.
If more moderate deputies are returned in the elections, this situation will
not change overnight. However, an increase in the number of moderate
deputies will free the government of some of its inhibitions - both about
being more friendly to the western world and about pursuing its economic
liberalisation policies.
