FT  14 MAY 92 / Investigator into BCCI is accused: MP names Abu Dhabi
official
AN ABU DHABI official actively involved in that country's investigation into
fraud at the collapsed Bank of Credit and Commerce International was named
in the Commons last night as having benefited from 'clearly fraudulent'
transactions in BCCI shares.
Mr Ghanem Faris Al Mazrui, who was the Abu Dhabi government's representative
on the board of BCCI, gained from 'no risk' deals, according to a report by
lawyers acting for BCCI creditors and disclosed by Mr Keith Vaz, Labour MP
for Leicester East.
Mr Vaz emphasised that he was convinced that Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan
al-Nahyan, the ruler of Abu Dhabi, knew nothing about the deals.
Similar accusations have been made in reports by Price Waterhouse, the
auditors to BCCI, but their emergence last night could undermine the
provisional agreement on a compensation deal for BCCI depositors which is
awaiting the approval of creditors.
The disclosure by Mr Vaz under parliamentary privilege of the report's
contents is likely to upset the Abu Dhabi government at a critical point. It
will also increase pressure on BCCI's liquidators.
Mr Mazrui is a senior adviser to Sheikh Zayed and is still involved in Abu
Dhabi's investigations into fraud at the bank. Mr Vaz called for Mr Mazrui
to make a statement, 'either to deny knowledge of what this report refers to
or to give an explanation of his actual involvement.'
The MP read extracts from a report compiled by Norton Rose, the firm of
solicitors commissioned by the BCCI interim creditors' committee to study
the proposed compensation package, which includes Dollars 1.7bn (Pounds
937m) injected by the Abu Dhabi government.
The leaked report said: 'Mr Al Mazrui, according to Price Waterhouse,
admitted that he had benefited from 'no risk' transactions in which he
purchased BCCI Group shares. Such transactions, including the manipulation
of the BCCI Group share price, were clearly fraudulent. Mr Al Mazrui
apparently informed other government officials of his involvement in April
1990.'
Another passage, read by Mr Vaz and referring to the majority shareholders
which included the Abu Dhabi government, said: 'We see no means by which Mr
Al Mazrui's knowledge (if any) can be imputed to the majority shareholders.'
Mr Vaz also protested about documents held in Abu Dhabi to which the
creditors' lawyers had not been allowed access. He called for the UK
government to intervene and also to provide more help for the 1,200 former
BCCI employees and 40,000 depositors. Mr Vaz said that if the government
'was to support the view of depositors and creditors that more money should
be made available, I believe the Abu Dhabi government would act positively.'
