FT  28 FEB 92 / Sharp fall in exports almost doubles deficit
BRITAIN'S exports, one of the few bright spots in the economy since the
recession began, fell sharply in January as world growth continued to
falter.
A 7.5 per cent monthly fall in the value of exports more than offset weaker
import figures, causing the current account deficit almost to double from
Pounds 409m in December to Pounds 794m in January, the largest increase for
a year.
The latest figures added to Tory jitters that the general election would be
fought against a dismal economic background. City analysts said the widening
trade gap at a time of recession pointed to serious structural problems in
the economy and that the fall in exports, if maintained, will further
depress economic growth this year.
Despite pressure from some backbenchers to delay the election until June,
the government looks set to fight an April 9 election after a tax-cutting
budget on March 10.
Yesterday ministers attempted to put a gloss on the figures which were much
worse than City expectations.
Mr David Mellor, chief Secretary to the Treasury, said the three-monthly
figures showed a rise in imports 'and a rise in imports may well in fact be
evidence of an increased level of activity'.
However, the rise was offset by the poor export figures. Stripping out oil
and 'erratic' items such as aircraft and precious stones, the figures showed
that the volume of UK imports exceeded exports in the three months to
January. Imports rose by 2 per cent compared with the previous three-month
period while exports rose by only 1 per cent.
'Import penetration remains very high and points to a sharp deterioration in
the trade balance once the UK economy starts to recover,' said Mr Gerard
Lyons, chief economist at DKB International.
Mr Gordon Brown, shadow trade and industry secretary, said the figures were
'a withering indictment of government policy'.
Exports in January were worth Pounds 8.3bn, compared with almost Pounds 9bn
in December. This was the lowest export figure since February last year.
The deficit in merchandise goods - the visible trade gap - worsened by
Pounds 385m to reach Pounds 1.1bn in January compared with Pounds 709m in
December. Imports in January were worth Pounds 9.4bn, a Pounds 300m fall.
The value of exports to the European Community - which account for more than
half of the UK's overall exports - dropped from Pounds 5.3bn in December to
Pounds 4.7bn in January.
Exports to rest of EC fall by Pounds 600m, Page 6
