FT  25 JUL 92 / Treasury fears tax fall-off will push up PSBR
SAGGING tax receipts from company profits are likely to push government
borrowing above official forecasts over the next few years, the Treasury has
indicated.
The admission comes in an article published today in the Treasury Bulletin.
It says corporation tax revenues will be depressed by special factors as
economic activity eventually picks up.
Since recovery has failed to occur in the way expected by the Treasury in
its latest published forecasts, the article adds up to a warning that the
Treasury's projections for the public sector borrowing requirement will
almost certainly be exceeded.
The warning about company taxes - which grew strongly in the late 1980s and
last year accounted for 11 per cent of all tax receipts - comes in the same
week as the Treasury announced tough controls on government spending in
order to rein in rises in the PSBR.
But even with the benefit of cuts in government programmes - likely to total
some Pounds 13bn between 1994 and 1996 - the PSBR is expected to climb above
forecast levels because of revenue shortfalls linked to the recession.
In the March Budget, the Treasury forecast a borrowing requirement of Pounds
28bn this year and Pounds 32bn in 1993-94. Some City economists estimate the
figures at Pounds 32bn and Pounds 41bn respectively.
The Treasury says in the bulletin that once the economy recovers from
recession 'the cyclical rise in receipts (from corporation taxes) will be
less vigorous than that seen in the period up to 1989-90'.
Special factors which the Treasury reckons will dampen growth in these taxes
once the economy recovers include the historically low rate of corporation
tax because of recent fiscal changes.
Companies will also be able to cut tax payments by claiming relief in areas
such debt payments, capital spending and previous financial losses.
Corporation tax receipts, which fell from Pounds 20.5bn in 1990-91 to Pounds
18.3bn last year, are now projected by the Treasury to total Pounds 15.9bn
in 1992-93. This figure is Pounds 0.9bn lower than the corresponding
forecast in the March Budget.
The Treasury's last published forecast in March projects a 'real rate of
return' for companies - a measure of profitability - of about 7 per cent
this year after 6 per cent last year.
But with the economy growing more slowly than the Treasury predicted, the
profits growth may be reined back, eating into the tax take.
Protectionist trade policies add up to a tax on consumers which cost Pounds
12bn in 1990, or Pounds 16 a week for a family of four, according to another
article in the bulletin.
The article says a successful conclusion to the Uruguay round of world trade
talks could bring these costs down.
Treasury Bulletin, Summer 1992. Published three times a year, Pounds 6.80,
available from HMSO.
