FT  28 OCT 92 / Foreign Affairs: Behind closed doors - Governments are
conspiring to restrict the right to political asylum in the EC
The speaker of the British House of Commons revealed on Monday that the
Maastricht treaty is not her fav-ourite bedside reading. She is 'only a
quarter of the way through'. That means, presumably, that she is still
wrestling with the bits about economic and monetary union.
Perhaps she should allow herself to skip, like Miss Prism in The Importance
of Being Earnest. ('You may omit the chapter on the rupee. It is altogether
too sensational.') The sexier bits of the Treaty on European Union are to be
found near the end.
I recommend especially Title VI, 'provisions on co-operation in the fields
of justice and home affairs'. This, along with Title V (on foreign and
security policy), is one of the two 'pillars' of the proposed union which
the British government is so pleased to have kept separate from the EC
proper: an inter-governmental affair, in which national sovereignty will be
preserved. That, indeed, is the main basis of Prime Minister John Major's
claim that the treaty marks a reversal of the EC's trend towards ever
greater centralisation. It means, in reality, that ministers reckon to
decide these matters among themselves, without the intrusion of public
scrutiny or debate.
But if Miss Boothroyd turns to Title VI, Article K6, she will find that, if
Maastricht ever comes into force, 'the Presidency and the Commission shall
regularly inform the European Parliament of discussions in the areas covered
by this Title'. Worse, the presidency is actually to 'consult' the
parliament, and even ensure that its views are 'taken into consideration'.
The parliament, moreover, will be allowed to put questions or make
recommendations to the Council of Ministers; and will be required to hold an
annual debate on the progress made.
Under Article K9 the council is empowered, if it unanimously so chooses, to
bring the whole caboodle under full EC procedures; and an appended
declaration says the council will at least 'consider' doing so in the case
of asylum policy - the first of the 'matters of common interest' covered in
Title VI - by the end of 1993.
These provisions will certainly constitute an improvement, in terms of
democracy, on the way the asylum issue is being handled now. Last week BBC
Radio 4 revealed a 'draft resolution on manifestly unfounded applications
for asylum', which the British presidency is proposing for adoption by the
Edinburgh summit in December. This document, prepared by the 'ad hoc group
immigration', is dated Brussels, July 1 1992 (the first day of the British
presidency) and marked confidential.
The ad hoc group is a purely inter-governmental body after Mr Major's own
heart, unsullied by any contact with the Commission, the European
Parliament, or indeed national parliaments, let alone the wretched media.
Meeting behind closed doors, it has - perhaps not surprisingly - drawn up a
policy for closing the doors of Europe on as many refugees as possible. The
draft resolution seeks to restrict the right of asylum to those covered by
the 1951 Geneva Convention on the status of refugees.
This defines a refugee as a person who 'owing to well-founded fear of being
persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a
particular social group, or political opinion, is outside the country of his
nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail
himself of the protection of that country'. It has generally been taken to
mean that each individual must demonstrate that he (or she) personally would
be targeted for persecution if he returned to his own country. Thus it
excludes the great mass of refugees in the common understanding of the term,
who are most often people driven from their homes by war.
According to immigration lawyers, even victims of torture or inhuman and
degrading treatment are not always held to qualify. Only 25 per cent of
asylum applicants in the UK in recent years have been held to fulfil the
Geneva criterion; yet only 15 per cent have had their applications rejected
outright. The remaining 60 per cent were allowed to remain on grounds other
than the Geneva Convention.
The draft resolution declares smugly that 'those who fear violations of
their human rights should if possible remain in their own countries, and
seek protection or redress from their own authorities or under regional
human rights' instruments'. It lays down that 'inter-continental movements
are seldom necessary for protection reasons alone'. Third-world refugees, in
other words, should no longer expect to find refuge in Europe. Let them stay
in countries neighbouring their own - such as Jordan, for instance, where no
fewer than one person in four is recognised as a refugee.
That may seem very callous in that it puts the greatest burden on the
poorest countries. But there is a sort of logic to it, in as much as
European countries, once they allow in a refugee, can hardly avoid giving
him or her the same level of social security as the rest of their
population, which in the case of many third-world refugees implies a much
higher standard of living than the one they enjoyed at home.
Harder to justify is the draft's insistence that refugees are entitled to
asylum only in the first 'safe' country they reach. This doctrine will often
prevent a refugee from reaching a country where he would be better able to
support himself, either because he has relatives there or because he speaks
the language.
Of course, the ad hoc group has not made such proposals out of malice.
European electorates expect their governments to maintain a tough
immigration policy, and that is very difficult to combine with a generous
asylum policy. Much is claimed about would-be 'economic' (that is,
voluntary) migrants who allegedly use asylum procedures to jump the
immigration queue. No doubt they exist, and there would be more of them if
asylum were made easier to obtain. But even bona fide fugitives can reach
unmanageable numbers, or at least numbers that exceed the compassion and
hospitality of the resident population.
In Germany that point has been reached, as Chancellor Helmut Kohl
acknowledged in his speech on Monday. With an estimated 60,000 asylum
seekers arriving this month alone, the time for emergency measures has
arrived.
Sadly, a tougher asylum policy is bound to be one of them, and it will have
to be a European policy if other EC members wish to retain free movement for
their own nationals in and out of the German market. But it should be
debated openly, not in hole-and-corner ad hoc groups; and in order to be
more generous - or less hard-hearted - west Europeans should be prepared to
share the burden equitably, rather than leave the countries closest to the
area of conflict to take all the refugees.
They should also recognise that the best place to deal with refugee problems
is at source. If they find the rise of xenophobia in Germany alarming, one
answer is to do more to stop the war and the systematic expulsions which are
forcing people in ex-Yugoslavia to flee their homes. Through the refugee
problem, war in the Balkans is gnawing away at west European security.
