FT  08 OCT 92 / Treasury chief plans to open up his 'praetorian guard':
Peter Marsh on the hard task facing Sir Terry Burns in his effort to make
officials change their secretive ways
A LEADING banker who is a member of an exclusive dining club which brings
together people from the City and Whitehall says of Treasury officials: 'I
have been talking to them for 10 years and find them decent individuals. But
my distinct impression is that they have closed minds.'
Comments such as this must have been echoing through the mind of Sir Terry
Burns, Treasury permanent secretary, as he addressed his top 70 officials in
an unusual meeting on Monday. The taciturn Sir Terry hired a conference room
at the Institution of Civil Engineers to tell some of Whitehall's leading
mandarins to change their ways.
He told the seminar how the 'new' Treasury might operate in devising tax and
monetary policy and controlling public spending. It would be less secretive,
more flexible and have fuller and more detailed contacts with the outside
world, particularly the City and industry.
Sir Terry took over as the Treasury's top official last year after being
chief economic adviser since 1980. The meeting was in response to criticism
of the department.
The Treasury has been attacked by politicians and industrialists for failing
to judge the path of Britain's longest recession for 50 years and for making
over-optimistic forecasts. Its tactics last month in trying to defend the
pound ahead of the dramatic exit from the exchange rate mechanism were
widely disparaged in the City for lacking foresight and imagination.
According to some critics, many of the Treasury's problems stem from an
introverted management style which provides too few opportunities for top
officials to glean insights and ideas from outside Whitehall.
Most of the top cadre at the Treasury are Oxbridge educated, have been in
Whitehall or similar administrative environments all their working lives and
have little experience of commerce. People who know the Treasury talk of it
as a priesthood, or a 'praetorian guard'. Much of this talk is fostered by
top officials, some of whom are keen to portray themselves as rather
special.
At least one senior Treasury official thinks that the complexities of the
department's job in the centre of policymaking require it to keep its
distance from outsiders. If it became too close to the City or companies,
the department could be accused of being swayed in its judgments by
lobbying, for instance over financial legislation or tax policy.
Another view is that the Treasury has taken the concept of aloofness too
far. Mr Tim Parker, a former Treasury economist who is chief executive of
Kenwood, a kitchen-equipment maker, says Treasury officials do not know
enough about 'the process of wealth creation in industry' to do their jobs
adequately.
Some critics believe that top Treasury officials have become too closely
identified with Tory ministers. They say this is nothing to do with the
political beliefs of the Treasury's upper echelons but stems from a lack of
internal debate.
Sir Douglas Wass, Treasury permanent secretary from 1974 to 1983, says:
'Among today's top Treasury advisers, there is no one who has views about
the economy which differ substantially from those of ministers.'
This closing of ranks within the Treasury - about matters such as the lack
of need for an industrial policy and the role of the exchange rate as
opposed to the money supply in determining inflationary pressures - may have
been acceptable when the economy was booming as it was during the late
1980s.
Now that Britain is stuck in a long recession - and has lost its central
plank of economic policy in the shape of ERM membership - it seems
appropriate for the department to want to put out more feelers as to how it
should adapt in the 1990s.
As Sir Terry tries to flesh out his plans - which lack detail and are being
presented as a 'green paper' for internal discussion - he and his 1,500
colleagues in the Treasury's policy divisions face several headaches.
One is that Sir Terry - as the great survivor in the government's most
important department over the past decade - may find his own credibility
damaged by the recent policymaking catastrophes.
It will also remain difficult for the Treasury to attract top people from
commerce and finance when civil servants' salaries are often half that on
offer in private industry.
And the desire spelled out by Sir Terry for more openness in the Treasury's
work may sit uneasily with ministers' wish for secrecy, for example over
sensitive areas such as Treasury economic forecasts.
Finally, he and his colleagues still have to sort out the most pressing
issue facing the Treasury, in the shape of how to formulate a viable
post-ERM economic strategy.
Sir Terry - who is said to believe the Treasury culture is 'two thirds
satisfactory' but the rest needs a lot of work - faces some knotty problems
ahead.
