FT  26 JUN 92 / London Stock Exchange: BP news too late to affect share
prices
SHARE prices on the London stock market yesterday recovered most of the
losses of the previous session, helped along by a further rally in tobacco
issues and buying orders from marketmakers needing stock ahead of the close
today of the equity market trading account.
But the shock announcement, after market hours, that the British Petroleum
chairman had resigned set the stage for a difficult opening for the stock
market this morning.
Earlier, the corporate news background had been brighter than in some recent
sessions. Confirmation of details of the share placing by Wellcome brought
no unexpected surprises, with the Pounds 3bn total in line with
expectations. Shares in Midland Bank moved ahead strongly in line with the
performance of Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation as its bid for the
UK clearer drew to its close yesterday. The return to profits at TSB was
also helpful but not exciting for the stock market.
With Tokyo and New York again in better form overnight, London opened
sharply better and, with only a brief check, the market moved ahead
steadily. Wall Street advanced early in its new session but stumbled a
little to leave a rise of 8 Dow points in UK hours, and gains were trimmed a
little in London in late dealings.
The final reading put the FT-SE Index at 2,557.3 for a gain of 24.7, almost
a complete reversal of the fall of the previous day. Several programme
trades were reported but dealers said these had little effect on the market.
Seaq-reported turnover remained relatively high, with 461.6m shares traded
against 582.1m on Wednesday. Stock Exchange statistics disclosed that
retail, or customer, business on Wednesday totalled Pounds 1.2bn, confirming
that the big institutions had been sellers of stock on a day when the
Footsie fell 28 points.
Once again, trading was stock specific yesterday. ICI gained ground but
recorded turnover barely above the 500,000-share mark. Glaxo, on the other
hand, made little move but was traded briskly.
The strongest recoveries came yesterday in stocks which had been hardest hit
in Wednesday's selling bout. Prominent among them were the tobacco issues,
where BAT Industries and Rothmans International stood out. The latter
benefited from trading figures but traders stressed that it was the
reappraisal of the US Supreme Court ruling on health liability that
sustained the shares. British Aerospace staged a significant rally from the
weakness of the earlier part of this week.
While the two-week trading account has seen share prices relinquishing some
of the gains achieved in the weeks following the UK general election in
April, it has been a highly erratic performance.
Marketmaking firms were hard at work yesterday picking up stock to meet
selling agreements entered into earlier in the week. As often in current
markets, the stock index futures sector dominated much of the proceedings.
The September contract on the FT-SE Index attracted support, and the
expanding premium gave sustenance to the underlying blue chip stocks.
