FT  18 MAR 92 / Portugal may have crucial lessons to learn after revolt in
the classrooms: The crisis that led to the departure of the Portuguese
education minister
MR DIAMANTINO Durao, Portugal's education minister who was sacked on Monday,
paid the political price for failing to stem growing discontent among
students, teachers, and parents over an enduring crisis in Portuguese
education.
The reason for the minister's dismissal - officially described as a
resignation - was the recent wave of student protests against the PGA, an
unpopular and idiosyncratic exam allowing entry into higher education. The
scale of the protests, with large demonstrations up and down the country,
took the government by surprise. Widespread public sympathy for the
students, made it imperative for the social democratic administration of the
prime minister, Mr Anibal Cavaco Silva, to respond.
By replacing the embattled and unpopular Mr Durao, who had spent only 138
days as minister, the government hopes to dampen the protests and give a new
impetus to educational reforms. His replacement is Mr Antonio Couto dos
Santos, 42, a former deputy minister for youth, who has played a discreet
but politically important role as parliamentary affairs minister.
He inherits one of the government's most politically sensitive jobs. He
faces three pressing challenges:
What to do with the PGA.
How to modernise the educational system with insufficient resources, while
winning public acceptance for a substantial rise in university fees.
How to implement structural reforms to improve efficiency and cut back on an
unwieldy bureaucracy.
For decades, Portuguese education has suffered from lack of resources - a
legacy of former dictator Antonio Salazar who thought too much education
gave people the wrong ideas. After the 1974 revolution, the pendulum swung
180 degrees under popular pressure for equal education for all, putting
immense strains on resources.
Despite government efforts, Portuguese education, except in a few
universities, remains the poor relation among its European partners, and
lags 20 years behind the European average, according to officials.
Pre-school education reaches only 40 per cent of children. The schooling
record is bleak with failures or drop-out rates of above 40 per cent.
Illiteracy is among the highest in Europe, at around 20 per cent, reaching
close to 40 per cent of the population in some rural areas. Illegal child
labour contributes to low school attendances. Officials say around 15,000
children are engaged in work, but international organisations and trade
unions say the figure is four or six times higher.
The use of child labour is most widespread in the north in textile
factories, but it is evident in other parts of the country. Children can be
seen working on building sites, in the service industry and on farms. Most
work only part-time or outside school hours, but many give up school
altogether.
The government has tried to clamp down on unscrupulous employers by imposing
fines and banning guilty employers from state contract. The practice
nevertheless endures, partly helped by the complicity of financially pressed
parents, tradition, and a lack of child supervision.
The government has made education a priority, but the task is immense. This
year, it raised its budget for education by 19 per cent compared with 1991
to Esc643.9bn (Pounds 2.9bn), and it receives aid from EC programmes worth
some Esc200bn for 1990-93. Money alone, however, will not solve all
problems, though it should help to improve working conditions, provide
better facilities and equipment and raise the low pay levels of teachers,
making teaching more attractive.
But more reforms are urgently needed. The PGA, which focuses on broad
cultural questions rather than specific school subjects, is regarded as
favouring better-off students. Mr Couto dos Santos will have to decide soon
whether to replace it. His predecessor said dissatisfied students could sit
it again in May, but this does not meet demands for its abolition.
The government wants to raise state university fees from the paltry Esc1,200
a year - which dates back to the 1940s - to a more viable level. The
outgoing minister planned to raise fees to Esc60,000. This will be
unpopular. Reform of career structures and cutting back on the estimated
400,000 people employed by the Education Ministry, is likely to meet
resistance. No one mourned Mr Durao's departure save parents who appreciated
his commitment to improve deteriorating security in and around schools. The
new minister will have his work cut out if he is even to attempt to deal
with the rest of Portugal's education headache.
