FT  16 OCT 92 / Cumbria (6): Cheap costs, high living - Carlisle, the
Cumbrian capital
CARLISLE, THE county headquarters of Cumbria, was an important staging post
for the Romans and the Normans, and then a strategic pawn in the wars
between Scotland and England before Edward I finally won it back for England
in the 13th century. It was from Market Cross, which still stands in the
city centre, that Bonnie Prince Charlie proclaimed his father King of
England in 1745.
Despite its pivotal and turbulent history, its geographical position has
told against it in recent times. It sits in the middle of a sparsely
populated hinterland and roads of varying quality put it a long way in terms
of time from Barrow, Cumbria's second largest urban concentration.
In the past decade, however, Carlisle has flourished and grown as a regional
centre. During the 1980s there was a small but steady increase in population
to the present 107,000. A population of 500,000 lies within 60 minutes
driving.
Throughout the 1980s unemployment ran below the national average and at 8
per cent currently, remains so. In 1989 Henley Centre for Forecasting
predicted growth in the 1990s, although recession will not have helped the
city achieve it.
Mr Roger Bodden spokesman for the Carlisle City Council says: 'Carlisle
comes as a surprise to many visiting businessmen. They arrive expecting to
find the mythical north, a land of industrial decay, an unemployment
blackspot with all the attendant problems. What they find is a buoyant
economy in an attractive historic city.'
The reasons are twofold. First, there is a diversity of manufacturing which
has largely survived the two recessions of the past decade, albeit
contracting in some cases. Second, Carlisle has developed service
industries, particularly retailing and tourism.
The two largest private sector companies are in food processing. Cavaghan
and Gray is best known for supplying quiche and recipe dishes to Marks and
Spencer. United Biscuits Carlisle palnt is famous for Carr's water biscuits
among other things.
Cavaghan and Gray has reduced the numbers it employs to around 1,700, but Mr
Howard Sims, the chief executive, says this is because of productivity
gains. Other large employers include Pirelli and CMB Promotional Packaging,
formerly Metal Box.
There is also Eddie Stobart, a large private distribution company. These
companies provide a diverse, reasonably safe, employment base in
manufacturing. Employment in manufacturing is just below 24 per cent of the
workforce, about the national average.
The service sector has seen most employment growth. The city council has
promoted retailing, supporting development of the Lanes shopping precinct in
1985 and the refurbishment of the Victorian covered market in 1991. The
sector now employs 10 per cent of the workforce.
By 1990 Carlisle had just under 2m sq ft of retailing space, much of it
built in the late 1970s and 1980s. Of this, nearly 900,000 sq ft is devoted
to consumer durables and 509,000 sq ft to convenience goods.
The amount devoted to consumer goods is significant, since shoppers would
otherwise have to go to Newcastle. As a retail centre for Cumbria and the
Scottish borders, Carlisle benefits from the M6 extension nearly into the
city in the 1970s. It also helps that people generally in the region have
lower mortgage commitments than in the south of England?
A city council survey found Carlisle the 20th cheapest place in which to
live of 110 UK towns. It also found that an average Cumbrian family can
maintain the same standard of living for less than two thirds of the cost of
living in the south-east.
Tourism has also grown quickly. Carlisle estimates that between 1987 and
1989 jobs in the tourism industry increased by 80 per cent and now account
for 9.5 per cent of the workforce.
To encourage growth, the council recently spent Pounds 5m on the Tullie
House Museum, which portrays the turbulent history of the borders region.
The cathedral and the Norman castle are also being promoted. Outside the
city, Hadrian's Wall is nearby and the Lake District is close. The policy
seems to be working: Carlisle's number of visitors has risen from tens of
thousands in the early 1980s to 300,000 a year now, spending about Pounds
30m.
A new development is the establishment by the University of Northumberland,
formerly Newcastle Polytechnic, of a Carlisle campus in the heart of the
historic city. The first 80 students are now arriving and numbers will rise
to 250 next year.
Mr David Beaty of the city planning department expects the campus to bring
all kinds of spin-offs. 'We will have a student population with purchasing
power. Eventually we would hope to keep some graduates in Carlisle,' he
adds.
There are already a number of large solicitors and accountants in the town
and in recent years building societies and banks have established regional
or at least sub-regional offices.
To attract more inward investment, the council has identified 64 acres of
land for industrial use. The perceived peripherality of Carlisle is an
admitted problem and there are worries that there will be no direct rail
link with the channel tunnel.
But these weaknesses are offset by the cheapness of the area, in terms of
wages and the cost of land.
