FT  04 JAN 92 / Dr Criminale, I presume?: The final instalment of Malcolm
Bradbury's new novel
Journalist Francis Jay, who is researching a film with the working title
'Great Thinkers of the Age of Glasnost,' is now posing as a Russian.
Accompanied by the mysterious Hungarian woman Ildiko Hazy, he is still on
the trail of the enigmatic philosopher Dr Bazlo Criminale as he treks from
conference to conference. Their paths finally cross on a Swiss lake steamer,
which is playing host to the exotic delegates of an international congress
on eroticism in photography. Dr Criminale, who is in the company of the
beautiful Miss Belli, is one of the speakers. In this second extract from
Malcolm Bradbury's new novel, Jay enjoys his first real meeting with the
Gatsby-esque Criminale . . .
I WAS beginning to learn quite a good deal about congresses and conferences,
as anyone would whose task was to follow in the footsteps of Doctor Bazlo
Criminale. I had certain half-formed thoughts on the subject which might in
fact have made quite a good paper, if they ever decided to hold a conference
on the topic of conferences (and I have no doubt that sooner or later they
will).
In one sense all congresses are like each other: they all have lapel badges
and briefcases, banquets, trips, announcements, lectures in the congress
hall, intimate liaisons in the bar. In another sense every congress, like
every love affair (and the two are often closely connected), is different.
There is a new mix of people, a new surge of emotion, a new state of the
state of the art, a new set of ideas and chic philosophies, a changed order
of things. There are congresses of pleasure, congresses of reason and
congresses of emotion.
In this simple scale of things, the Lausanne International Congress on
Erotics in Postmodern Photography - which, standing in the entrance of the
ship's saloon, I began, Ildiko beside me, to inspect - was pretty clearly a
congress of art, pleasure, and emotion. The photographers of Lausanne, who
numbered about eighty strong and had come from everywhere, were clearly a
group of ego-fondling extroverts. Writers are sometimes inclined to let
their work do the talking; photographers have to let their talking do the
work.
Yes, they were a flamboyant crowd. One woman was barebreasted. One man wore
a Napoleonic uniform. Many had cross-dressed: several of the men had on what
looked like chiffon bedroom wear, and several of the women were clad in
ties, tweeds or dress shirts and dinner jackets. They had a band on board,
so they began to dance. There was a bar on board, so they began to drink.
There was finer food on board, so they began to snack. There were
celebrities on board, so they started celebrating. There were evidently
illegal substances on board, so they began to dream. There were lips and
breasts and buttocks on board, so they began to neck and fondle and nuzzle
and suck. They were beautiful people, and they knew they were, so they
started to do beautiful and outrageous and infinitely photographable things.
They also photographed themselves doing them, making their circle of
unreality complete.
But amid all this glitzy excitement there was one small pool of calm, sanity
and metaphysical reason. It surrounded, of course, Bazlo Criminale.
We wandered round the ship and at first we could not find him. Then there he
was, sitting at a table in a corner of the rear saloon. He wore a Ralph
Lauren sport shirt under his fine suit, and his hairstyle had been slicked
down in the style of a Thirties seducer. Belli, beside him in her bright
orange dress, chattered, flirted, and constantly touched him on the arm. And
in a crowd of flamboyant celebrities, he seemed somehow to be the true
celebrity, as perhaps the constant flash of cameras insisted. I saw now how
Criminale and People magazine could somehow go together.
But he was still the hardy philosopher. A crowd had gathered round,
listening to what he was saying. I stood on the fringes and caught some of
it. 'I read in the newspaper today a very interesting thing,' he was
remarking. 'Always first in the morning when he wakes he reads the
newspapers,' explained Miss Belli. 'I see the Japanese have now invented a
special new toilet, the Happy Stool,' said Criminale. 'It takes what you
drop in the bowl each morning and at once makes a medical diagnosis of it.'
'Bazlo, caro, you are disgusting,' said Belli. 'In goes your effluent, out
from a slot in the wall comes your health report,' said Criminale ignoring
this. 'Too much vodka last night, sonny, now look what you have done with
your cholesterol. Maybe even a needle comes into your rump and puts the
matter right.'
'Bazlo caro, eat something,' said Miss Belli, pushing forward a tray of
canapes. 'All this blasted lovely food and you don't take any]' 'After I
read this, how can I eat something?' asked Criminale, 'You see what it
means, there is no secret anywhere any more.'
I was still out there on the cold deck, watching the Swiss lights flicker on
the shore, when someone came and leaned on the rail beside me. I turned, and
there was a neat young man with a small beard, with a congress briefcase
tucked under his arm. There then followed a familiar conference ritual,
which resembles that of dogs sniffing each other; I checked his lapel badge,
he checked mine. I saw that he was Hans de Graef, from Ghent, somewhere in
Belgium.
He began addressing me in Russian; I had to explain that since my departure
from wherever I lived I had perfected my English so effectively that I had
now lost touch with my Russian. He seemed, I thought, a little suspicious,
but began talking to me about the day's congress proceedings, especially the
intense discussion of the Feminist Non-Erotic Nude in Scandinavia, which had
provoked such fury right after lunch. I must have acquitted myself quite
well on this, though, because he switched to more general conference gossip,
which provided me with a good deal of useful information.
I shifted the talk, or maybe he did, to Bazlo Criminale. Had he, I enquired,
been a sudden new addition to the congress programme? No, he said, glancing
at me in obvious surprise; he had been in the congress information from the
very beginning. In fact that was why he, de Graef, had chosen himself to
come. He was, after all, the leading thinker in the field. I nodded,
explaining that I myself had been a very late enroller. But his news came as
a considerable surprise. Criminale had not, as I had been supposing,
suddenly descended at whim on the conference, like some god from heaven
deciding to lower his golden car.
It now began to occur to me that, having totally failed to understand
Ildiko, I had also totally failed to understand Bazlo Criminale as well. In
fact from that moment onward, the things I thought I had understood began to
grow ever more obscure.
Just behind the two of us, in the saloon, the band was going through its
eclectic repertoire, which seemed to range from 'Mirabelle, Ma Belle' to the
latest Madonna hits. The decks of the vessel bounced; the erotic
photographers were clearly in the best of spirits. Then, glancing through
the port, I suddenly caught another, momentary glimpse of Bazlo Criminale.
He was twirling and turning in a stiff and stately waltz: rather
surprisingly, since the band was playing something entirely different. I
couldn't from this angle, see his dancing companion, though the dress in his
arms was clearly not the bright orange garb of Miss Belli. And there was a
moment, though it made no sense to me at all, when I actually thought the
partner in his arms was him.
But just then we were both interrupted by a very physical-looking young
Frenchwoman - she was strapping, entirely bald, and wearing what seemed to
be a bathing dress; in fact in every detail except the grease she appeared
indistinguishable from an Olympic swimmer - who came over to us, seized
young de Graef and demanded he come to the dance floor.
He smiled at me apologetically - I rather gathered that this was exactly
what he had come out on to the deck to get away from - and then I was left
alone again, leaning over the rail, seeing the lighted streets and towers of
a reasonably-sized lakeside town come out of the darkness ahead. Then a
moment later, someone else joined me by the rail, puffing somewhat, wiping
his brow with a handkerchief. I turned, and saw, to my complete surprise,
that it was Bazlo Criminale . . .
To this day, I have no idea whether - as we stood there on the cold deck of
the steamer on Lake Geneva, leaning over the side like two passengers on a
transatlantic liner, very probably doomed - Bazlo Criminale recognised me,
or whether I was some obscure grey figure in the darkness to whom he by
chance began to talk. If he had some idea who I was, he certainly showed no
surprise at seeing me there.
Perhaps, given that he lived in the higher realm of thought, to him one
congress was so like another, one congress face so like another, maybe even
one congress lover just like another, and every situation merged into one.
Maybe his reaction was somewhere between the two; he knew me, and he didn't
know me; I was both satisfyingly familiar and totally obscure. He was the
elephant, I was the flea - that very convenient thing, the quiet young man
who was interested in him but in no way represented a rival or a threat. At
any rate, there I was, and he began to talk.
'You don't dance, I see,' he said, wiping his sweating brow. 'Perhaps I
should admit myself I am too old for this kind of thing.' 'Oh, surely,' I
said. 'You know, when I was young, sex was such a wonderful discovery,' he
said. 'My young friend, I will tell you something important, but it will
take you a long time to believe it. When you reach a certain age these
things cease to be a great discovery and turn into a bad habit.'
'Is that possible?' I asked. 'These people there talk all day about the
erotic,' said Criminale, waving his hand back toward the dancing
photographers. 'They are like chefs who spend all their time thinking about
food but have forgotten what it is like to eat it. But believe me, when you
are over fifty, and I am quite a long way past it, sex is like meat, only
worth taking if there is a certain sauce with it.' 'What kind of sauce?' I
asked. 'In my case it is power,' said Criminale. 'The erotic for me has
always something to do with power. A woman to please me must always have a
certain grip on power.'
I found this bewildering. Did the bewitching Miss Belli have a certain grip
on power? She didn't seem the Jackie Kennedy or Joan Collins type to me.
'No, sex is not so amazing,' Criminale went on. 'It is what we confuse
ourselves with on the way to something better. It misdirects us and empties
us. It is our unfortunate necessity, our incontinence, our error, our folly.
Now the women don't want it anyway.' 'That's very depressing,' I said,
thinking that if this was his current state of mind it must be still more
depressing for Miss Belli.
I suppose fame is erotic,' I said. 'But let me warn you, the love life of
celebrities, which fills up all the newspapers, is never quite what it
seems,' said Criminale. 'The image is a deception. The description is
nothing like the reality. Celebrity is a public delusion for which the world
will make you pay. And now where in the world have we got to?'
'Where in the world?' I asked. I thought at first he was posing me some
philosophical question, but he waved his hand grandly at the lake in front
of us. 'Oh, on the lake,' I said, 'I think those lights must be Vevey.' 'Ah,
yes, Vevey,' said Criminale, 'Once the exile home of a very great man.' 'Oh
yes?' I asked. 'Charlie Chaplin,' he said, 'Do you know Adolf Hitler's men
had strict orders that the Fuhrer must never watch his movies, for the fear
that he might think the fool he was watching up there on the screen was
himself?' 'No, I didn't,' I said. 'Those two were born in the same year,
1889, by the way,' he said. 'Think of it, Hitler and Chaplin, the Fascist
and the clown . . . '
And so we stood there, two friendly passenger, our cigar ends glowing,
staring out over the rail as the lights of Vevey and then Montreux slipped
brightly by. 'You know, I like this lake,' he said after a moment. 'Yes it
is very pleasant,' I said. 'The lake of exiles,' said Criminale. 'The people
who loved it most were mostly exiles, like myself. All came looking for what
you can never find. Rousseau came, looking for human innocence. It was not
here. Byron came seeking political liberty. Not here. Eliot came wanting a
relief from the madness of the modern. No good. Nabokov came and thought he
would find Russia again. He found Swiss hotels.' He wasn't the only one, I
thought.
I looked at him sideways. One thing, I realised, was certain: whatever
erotic delights this famous and fortunate man was enjoying - or perhaps not
enjoying - in the warm arms of Miss Belli, they had not diminished by one
jot his teacher's unquenchable desire to instruct and explain. I was full of
questions; I wanted to ask him things, to ask him everything - about his
childhood, his politics, his philosophy, his experience under Karl Marx, his
life, his loves.
But I settled for listening, and why not? That was what you did with Bazlo
Criminale. After all, in the middle of an egotistical world, very short on
dignity (the photographers behind us were now turning the party raucous), he
had the gift for deepening and dignifying any occasion, for adding presence
and value to any thought. I found that I liked the sound of his talking
voice, the slow ironic tone of his ideas. I liked his seriousness, his human
flavour, his sense of history. He came out of confusion, but he brought a
sort of order. At moments like this I knew there was nothing wrong with
Bazlo Criminale . . .
Malcolm Bradbury's new novel, Dr Criminale, will be published by Secker and
Warburg in September 1992.
