FT  20 JUL 92 / Portillo joins attack on economy plans
THE CHOICE of Mr John Smith as leader has compounded Labour's difficulties,
not resolved them, Mr Michael Portillo, chief secretary to the Treasury,
argues in a pamphlet published today.
The 25-page critique of the Labour leader's record as shadow chancellor says
his economic policies disclose an anachronistic attitude to wealth, the
individual and the state that contradicts Mr Neil Kinnock's goal of making
the market economy function better than under the Tories.
Accusing Mr Smith of being the Labour figure most associated with high
taxation, Mr Portillo says the former shadow chancellor 'perpetuated the
contradictions and gave voice to the misunderstandings' about how the
economy functions.
His attack is the latest in a sustained Tory assault on the new Labour
leadership as the Conservatives' economic record is itself receiving
wide-ranging criticism.
The Conservative Political Centre pamphlet, entitled The Economics of Mr
John Smith, says the Smith 'shadow Budget' would have deepened the
recession, damaged the housing market and sapped consumer confidence by
affecting those on incomes barely double the national average.
It also challenges the extent to which Labour has embraced an economic
strategy led by market forces, claiming that Mr Smith's 'supply-side'
policies amounted to outdated interventionism by a different name.
The new Labour leader is accused of being 'inconsistent and unreliable' in
his anti-inflation policies by not being sufficiently rigorous on
maintaining interest rates and appearing weak in his support for the
exchange rate mechanism. Mr Portillo says Mr Smith abandoned his commitment
to sterling's DM2.95 central rate in the ERM 'to avoid being outflanked' by
the pro-devaluation Mr Bryan Gould, his rival in the leadership race.
The bulk of Mr Portillo's attack is aimed at the 'shadow Budget' that opened
Labour's election campaign. Claiming that the plan represented a Pounds
6.7bn tax rise in a full year - the largest proposed since the Second World
War - the chief secretary argues that the policy was a tactical blunder.
