FT  05 FEB 92 / International Company News: American Express to back insurer
AMERICAN Express and its Shearson Lehman investment banking subsidiary have
agreed to inject Dollars 50m in First Capital Life Insurance (FCL), the
ailing life company seized last May by state insurance regulators. They have
also agreed to underpin the value of policyholders' contracts.
The aim is to rehabilitate the insurer, whose troubles stemmed largely from
its heavy junk bond exposure and a significant policyholder run last year.
As part of the deal with the California regulators, American Express and
Shearson will take over management of FCL - earning a 'modest' but
undisclosed fee - while selling down a portion of the junk bond portfolio.
During a five-year rehabilitation programme and for a short period after
this, they will also have an option to acquire 100 per cent of First
Capital's assets and liabilities at 20 per cent of their
actuarial-determined value. At end-1991, First Capital had around Dollars
4bn in assets, 190,000 policyholders and 60,000 annuitants.
The involvement of American Express and Shearson with First Capital dates
back to the 1980s. In November 1988, Robert Weingarten, who had built the
fast-growing company partly by acquisitions and partly by selling highly
competitive policies backed by a high-yielding portfolio of junk bonds, sold
his family stake in the insurer's parent company to Shearson.
Shearson, meanwhile, sold a large number of First Capital policies to its
own clients between 1986 and 1991.
When the junk bond market collapsed and the troubles at neighbouring
Executive Life, another junk bond-ridden California insurer, hit the
headlines, many First Capital policyholders sought to cash in their
policies. Around 36,000 contracts were surrendered between January 1991 and
May, when the regulators stepped in.
Last spring, Mr John Garamendi, the California insurance commissioner, had
sought a capital infusion from American Express/Shearson - which holds a 28
per cent stake in First Capital Holdings, the bankrupt parent company - but
he met resistance. Asked yesterday why this solution had taken so long to
arrange, he said only that it was 'a very complex business'.
