FT  20 JUN 92 / Cricket: Sussex seek spin success
SUSSEX have never won the county championship. Back in the days before the
championship as we know it, Sussex were declared 'champions of the south' by
the senior cricket year books, Wisden and Cricketers' Companion. That was in
1871, when Sussex were already established as one of the 'celebrated
counties', along with Surrey, Kent, Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire.
But celebration has never led Sussex quite as far as first place. Not in the
county championship, anyway, although Sussex sometimes do better in one-day
contests. They did not distinguish themselves in one-day last year, but they
look back cheerfully to the way they won the first one-day contest ever held
in Britain, the 1963 Gillette Cup, against all expectations.
Sussex have always been a county of surprises. They are a quixotic crew.
Only with Sussex could CB Fry, world record long-jumper, England cricket
captain, footballer, wit and scholar, man who was offered the throne of
Albania, have blossomed in all his eccentric splendour. The county retains
its capacity for the unexpected and when Paul Parker was relieved of the
captaincy and signed for Durham last season, after 17 happy years with
Sussex, he generously declared that he expected Sussex to win a trophy
within two years.
It is possible. Breakthroughs are permanently possible at Sussex. It is
greatly to the county's credit that they appointed a youth development
officer last November, to organise local talent into a breakthrough squad
for years to come. 'It was expensive but it was worth it,' said the Sussex
coach, Norman Gifford, placidly watching his team being pulverised by
Leicestershire last Friday and Saturday (Sussex 171 and 103; Leics. 251 and
24 for 0), before beating Leicestershire easily in the Sunday game. 'We're
investing in the future and the future lies in producing your own players.'
A noble policy, consistent with Sussex's recent hard work on their second
XI, a good number of whom are Sussex born and bred. While the first XI got
the wooden spoon in 1990, the second XI were top of the Rapid Cricketline
second XI championship. They fell to seventh place last year, partly because
some of their best young players, such as Bradleigh Donelan, an off-spinner
with a fast, flat and most effective arm action, became regulars in the
first team. They must mature on the job. 'It takes time. You have to allow
time for these young players to find their feet and get used to first class
matches.'
Gifford spoke between puffs on his pipe, thoughtfully and certainly. He
positively oozes patience and encouragement for the up-and-coming players in
whom he places his trust; whether he has the hard edge to push them past
their problems must be doubtful, but he recognises that problems exist.
'We've played better. We must do better than this, we can and I think we
will.'
The keys to Gifford's hopes of success are: Martin Speight, batsman (1991:
batting average of 39); Peter Moores, wicket-keeper and batsman (1991: 56
catches and six stumpings); Ian Salisbury, leg-spinner (1991: 48 wickets);
Donelan, off-spinner (1991: 34 wickets and batting average of 35).
These last two make that most rare and dangerous of bowling forces, a
partnership in complementary spin, hungry for blood. The emancipation of
spin bowling has been one of the delights of this summer's cricket and
Sussex, under Gifford's benign patronage, are in the forefront.
For those of us brought up on the glamorous batting of Ted Dexter, the Nawab
of Pataudi and Imran Khan, it is strange to find Sussex's weakness today
seeming to be with bat rather than ball. Although they pulled themselves up
from last to 11th place last year, none of their batsmen, except Alan Wells,
did himself justice.
The Wells family are one of the family dynasties that have long been a
feature of Sussex cricket and Alan, a native of Newhaven, was helped by
strong local support in his difficult task of taking over the captaincy from
Parker before the end of the season. His batting blossomed and he managed
calmly and well. Neil Lenham, a member of the old Lenham dynasty from
Worthing, also batted well. With David Smith, he made a good but not
inspired opening pair. Alan Wells' all-rounder brother, Colin, was hampered
by injury; Jamie Hall and Speight were slightly disappointing; and Franklyn
Stephenson, this year's newly-acquired all-rounder from Nottinghamshire,
owes Sussex a few runs.
Stephenson was a brave choice because Sussex had to get rid of Tony
Dodemaide, the Australian all-rounder who had served them well for three
years, to make room. They have an unhappy reputation for getting rid of all
their best players, but they were clear about their reason for removing
Dodemaide: they wanted a strike bowler to rip out wickets, not a good,
steady bowler who takes wickets without terrifying the opposition.
Success is always unpredictable at Sussex, which is a county of individuals,
of hit-and-miss achievements. They have made themselves fast and furious
fielders, but that is not enough and they are in danger of remaining always
on the brink of doing well without ever doing it.
Their more experienced contingent needs to work more closely with the young
players and Gifford believes Wells's leadership and Salisbury's move into
Test match circles will help this happen. 'It inspires the young players to
see one of them making his way up through the system like Salisbury. They
start to believe everything is possible. We'll miss him but it's a lovely
thing for us.'
Lovely things have been thin on the ground at Sussex in the last few years,
but the club's members are 'a loyal lot' who seem to be finding this year's
mixed fortunes entertaining. Whatever else it is, cricket at Sussex is
seldom dull. It is talented, needing only organisation and confidence before
it comes into its own.
Sussex no longer play on the windswept old racecourse ground at Hastings,
'beautifully embosomed with hills' (The Field, August 1859), but Hove and
Eastbourne remain capitals of the county's seaside cricket and the enjoyment
that has always graced it.
There can be no better way of describing the modern county cricket ideal
than Gifford's: 'What we want in Sussex is the happy medium between
hungriness to win, such as Essex and Middlesex have, and the love of club
traditions.'
