FT  30 OCT 92 / Peace prize puts Guatemala on spot: Nobel award is just one
more problem for President Serrano
THE award this month of the Nobel Peace Prize to one of the most vociferous
opponents of the Guatemalan government has added to an array of problems
faced by President Jorge Serrano.
The government has been sharply criticised for its handling of the award to
Ms Rigoberta Menchu, a human rights activist and an energetic critic of
successive Guatemalan governments since she fled to Mexico in 1981,
following the death of her father, mother, and brother at the hands of the
armed forces.
The government, seemed tobe caught unprepared, and was quickly forced into
an embarrassing U-turn. Days after several prominent government officials
publicly stated their opposition to the award, President Serrano scrambled
to invite her for a meeting in the National Palace, minutes before she left
for Mexico where President Carlos Salinas had organised an official
celebration.
This is the latest in a series of difficulties for Mr Serrano, which has
left his government isolated and has pushed him closer to the powerful armed
forces.
Twenty-one months into his term, the president has failed to deliver the
peace he promised in his election campaign: to end 32 years of armed
conflict. Negotiations between the government and the left-wing National
Guatemalan Revolutionary Unity guerrillas (URNG) have stalled on the issue
of human rights, the first point of an 11-point agenda agreed in Oslo 18
months ago.
The president's initiative to recognise Belize, which the Guatemalan
constitution states is part of Guatemala, continues to be blocked pending a
Supreme Court decision on whether his action was constitutional.
While most Guatemalans have little interest in the Belize issue, most
leading newspapers have attacked the government for its handling of the
matter.
Two weeks earlier the human rights performance of the armed forces had been
criticised by a United Nations expert on Guatemala. A German professor,
Christian Tomushcat said that the presidential staff was 'totally
discredited' over its stance on the killing of Guatemalan anthropologist, Ms
Myrna Mack, whose death has become Guatemala's most prominent human rights
case. Ms Mack's sister has called for a case to be opened against General
Edgar Augusto Godoy, chief of presidential staff at the time of her sister's
death two years ago.
Mr Serrano has turned increasingly to the army for support, as an antidote
to an unreliable congress, and a coalition cabinet which has lost the
semblance of unity.
The influence of the army grew significantly after it took over security in
Guatemala City following a widespread bombing campaign in April and May,
believed to be the work of right-wing extremists and drug traffickers.
The Nobel prize is being seen by some as a chance to elicit change in the
attitude of a political and economic establishment which has largely
marginalised and repressed Guatemala's majority indigenous tribal
population.
'It was a shock to the upper crust of our society . . . which was needed for
people to finally realise some realities of this country,' Mr Edmond Mulet,
congress president, said.
For the indigenous population Ms Menchu's victory is being seen as a chance
for greater political participation and recognition of their culture.
