FT  17 OCT 92 / Italian men do it in style . . .: Avril Groom on UK dress
inhibitions
THERE USED to be rules, mainly recognised by men of a certain social class,
about town and country clothes. 'Never wear brown in town' was the flip
aphorism that covered a multitude of regulations so rigid that a Victorian
gentleman would not dream of leaving his rural seat far London in a city
suit.
Instead, he travelled in his country colours straight to his club, where he
donned a sober frockcoat for business, then perhaps a new-fangled suit for
social calling and finally evening clothes for dinner. But this monochrome
ritual never crossed the Channel: Continentals and Americans were not so
inhibited in their dress and this, coupled with a large pinch of jingoism,
made the man in the brown suit a model of untrustworthiness.
There is still a hangover from this attitude. Upmarket menswear companies
which sell both In the UK and in Europe find the proportions of suits to
smart sports jackets they sell reversed between London and Milan. Italian
boardrooms are full of men in subtly-checked sport coats worn with crisply
cufflinked shirts and smart loafers, and they feel themselves the equal of
any dour grey suit. Woman also have their own image of what constitutes the
working wardrobe: brown is OK, but it is never as chic as black or grey.
It all goes back, says Robert Gieves, whose family firm Gieves and Hawkes
have dressed officers and gentlemen for 200 years, to Beau Brummell in the
late 18th century. 'He is thought of as a dandy but in fact he advocated
very sober, rigorous dress,' says Gieves.
'Perfect cutting and the best fabrics were set off by very simple designs in
dark colours. It was a reaction among courtiers in the UK to the foppish
dress of the French court, disgraced after the Revolution.'
So it was Britain which first established the basic principles of good
fashion design and then, sadly, lost them in a welter of petty Victorian
restrictions. Now the more cheerful European view is rubbing off on the UK.
Firms such as Gieves and Hawkes, Burberry and, for woman, Austin Reed
International or Ballantyne, whose first priority is the export trade, find
the rich palette of autumnal shades which we think of as countrified now
sells well in slightly more formal guise in the UK, too.
Not yet in the boardroom but certainly for smart town weekends, the colours
which tone with that continental favourite, loden, are in the ascendant,
though you should choose with care. The khaki/brown/beige spectrum and the
hacking jacket really need the country, and look as out of place in town as
the yuppie cliche of a wax jacket over a city suit. The secret is to build
up simple, toning layers in warm shades which might have come from a spice
rack - curry, saffron, mustard, cinnamon and sage. Woman can add a dash of
paler coral, mint or duck egg.
Anyone can go down a notch or two in formality by adding a little denim,
suede or rugged backwoods checks for the faintly American 'call of the wild'
look that ironically seems now to have invaded most casual urban fashion.
This practical, comfortable, warm autumn style can be put together from any
level of the market, but for a lesson in how to do it, take a look at Hermes
or Gucci. From their lofty European peak, they have decades of experience in
effortlessly seaming town with country clothes. And you really cannot see
the join.
