FT  06 JUL 92 / Slovak ire seals Havel's fate
THE failure of President Vaclav Havel - one of the last advocates of a
unified Czech and Slovak Federation - to be re-elected to the presidency has
put another nail in the coffin of the fragile 74-year-old federation.
In a casual atmosphere, members of the federal parliament took just one hour
on Friday to remove Mr Havel from office. On the Slovak side of the
parliament, a handful of MPs managed to block the re-election of a man whose
popularity and international prestige are the envy of many world statesmen.
Mr Havel's position was compromised by the June 5 elections which brought
Slovak nationalists to power in the smaller Slovak republic.
Mr Vladimir Meciar, the leader of the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia and
the current Slovak premier, then pledged to oust the man who called on
voters not to support 'demagoguery', a thinly veiled reference to Mr
Meciar's populist campaign.
In the wake of the collapse of communism, Slovaks slowly began asserting
their identity and increased their calls on the federal authorities in
Prague for greater economic and political autonomy. By removing Mr Havel
from office, Slovak nationalists vented their frustrations at the man who
became the symbol of Prague's inability to respond to their demands.
Mr Havel continued to believe in consensus. A moralist who wanted to remain
above daily politics, he saw his beliefs dashed by the growing antagonism
between Czechs and Slovaks.
Limited by a 1968 constitution which gives little power to the presidency,
he warned well ahead of other politicians of a political development which
he was unable to influence and which today threatens to split his country.
There may be another Czechoslovak president, as the federal parliament will
vote on yet unknown candidates in the next three months.
If he is not replaced by October 5, Mr Havel is due to hand over his powers
to the parliament and the federal government.
But the new federal president, if there is one, might be only a ceremonial
figure with little political impact, unlike Mr Havel, who still enjoys wide
popularity in the Czech republic.
