FT  28 JUL 92 / Egypt attacked on human rights
THE New York-based Middle East Watch yesterday released a scathing report of
Egyptian human rights violations, including widespread torture, long
detention without trial and arbitrary arrest.
The report, 'Behind Closed Doors: Torture and Detention in Egypt', alleges a
'sub-culture of violence' among Egyptians officers employed by the Interior
Ministry to deal with political threats to Egypt's stability.
Singling out an organisation known as the State Security Investigation (SSI)
within the Interior Ministry for criticism, Middle East Watch claimed that
the 'detailed testimony of torture victims (indicates) that the methods of
torture in Egypt are rigorous, yet predictable, indicating that a system
appears to be in place to train SSI personnel in torture techniques. . . '
'Among the Egyptians who have suffered torturers' blindfolds, beatings,
hangings, electric shocks and other abuses are lawyers who defend
politically unpopular clients, journalists affiliated with Islamist
publications. . . and individual citizens targeted because they are thought
to possess valued information.'
Middle East Watch, which is affiliated to the respected Human Rights Watch
organisation, charged that physical and psychological mistreatment is
'facilitated and protected by a state-sanctioned system of incommunicado
detention'.
Among typical torture methods claimed by the human rights group were beating
and kicking of a blindfolded victim; suspension by the wrists for long
periods; beatings on the soles of feet; degrading treatment, including
threats against relatives; and the use of electric shocks administered to
various parts of the body.
Middle East Watch also strongly criticised the Egyptian authorities for
failing to investigate complaints about torture, or to take concrete steps
to end the practice.
The organisation also condemned the failure of Egypt's western aid donors,
including Washington, to press the issue of human rights abuses.
'The US Congress has been equally derelict' the report added.
