FT  30 JUN 92 / Double blow to whaling moratorium
ATTEMPTS to extend the moratorium on commercial whaling suffered a double
blow yesterday when Norway announced that it would resume whaling next year
and Iceland left the International Whaling Commission.
Norway's decision to resume killing the minke whale - the smallest of the
great whale species - was announced by Mrs Gro Harlem Brundtland, the
Norwegian prime minister, in Oslo, as the IWC was holding its annual meeting
in Glasgow.
The move was immediately criticised by Mr John Gummer, the British
agriculture secretary, as well as by environmentalists and conference
delegates.
According to some delegates, Russia has also signalled that it might want to
resume whale hunting. They said Russia, which ceased commercial whaling in
the 1980s, had asked the IWC for a 'scientific allocation' of whales which
it would be allowed to hunt for research.
Commercial whaling was outlawed in 1986 by the IWC, but a legal loophole
enables Japan and others to hunt for 'scientific research'.
Over the past few years the IWC, to which 37 countries belong, has developed
a system for managing and monitoring a resumed commercial whaling programme,
known as the revised management procedure (RPM). The whaling nations hope
that this week's conference will adopt the RPM, and thus sanction the
hunting of minke whales whose stocks are considered to have recovered in the
Antarctic and north-east Altantic.
But Norway, which adhered to the moratorium in 1987 after threats by the US
to ban imports of Norwegian fish, said that if the IWC did not adopt the RPM
it would devise its own quota for minke whales for 1993.
That would be consistent with proposals of the IWC scientific committee
which assesses the minke whale population in the north-east Atlantic at
86,700 animals.
In his address, Mr Gummer said the world would not 'allow us to risk a
return to the barbarity of the past. Whales are an international - not a
national - resource. A million or more have been killed this century in
Antarctica alone. In a bloody and systematic way, nearly all of the great
whale stocks have been hunted down to depleted, or even seriously endangered
levels.'
He added: 'No country that is party to international agreements can act
unilaterally.'
Conservation groups and countries opposed to whaling fear Norway's decision
will be followed by Japan and Iceland.
