FT  30 JUL 92 / CBI and IoD attack corporate governance reform plan
PROPOSALS TO improve the way companies are run were yesterday opposed by two
of UK industry's main federations.
The Confederation of British Industry said it supported in principle a code
of best practice on corporate governance, but rejected plans for its
enforcement.
The Institute of Directors, meanwhile, opposed moves to give non-executive
directors a special function within boards.
The proposals, contained in a recent report by a committee chaired by Sir
Adrian Cadbury, were aimed at strengthening the role of non-executive
directors and improving the quality of financial accounts. The committee has
been criticised by institutional shareholders for failing to include
sufficient enforcement mechanisms in its proposals.
Sir Michael Angus, CBI president, speaking at a press conference yesterday,
said shareholders were best placed to enforce a voluntary code on corporate
governance and needed no help from auditors, the Stock Exchange or
non-executive directors.
Although a CBI official served on the Cadbury committee - officially known
as the Committee on the Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance  - he did
not necessarily represent all confederation members' views, Sir Michael
said. In particular, members objected to a suggestion that non-executive
directors had an obligation to police the activities of executive directors.
'Members believe that the concept of the UK unitary board rests on all
directors working as a team, with equal legal duties and obligations. That
will not happen if some board members are cast in the role of policemen,'
Sir Michael said.
Among other things, the report recommends that non-executive directors be
allowed to seek outside professional advice at company expense, where
appropriate, and that they alone should constitute audit committees.
CBI members are also concerned about an enforcement provision - a proposed
Stock Exchange listing requirement for all companies to disclose the extent
to which they comply with the code of best practice.
The Cadbury committee, set up by the Stock Exchange, the Financial Reporting
Council and the accountancy profession, suggested that each company's
auditors be responsible for certifying the extent of compliance. While
companies would not be de-listed for failing to comply, their non-compliance
would be more visible to shareholders.
