FT  29 JAN 92 / Sea safety warning as losses rise
SAFETY AT sea has seriously declined, according to figures released
yesterday by the Institute of London Underwriters, an association
representing marine and aviation insurance companies.
It described the upward trend in shipping casualties as 'ominous and
disconcerting' and said the number of ships of more than 500 tonnes gross
weight lost at sea was 182 last year - 30 per cent more than in 1990.
The loss of 1,708,464 tonnes of shipping - an increase of more than 30 per
cent on 1990 and the highest total for more than 10 years - cost insurers
Pounds 750m. Insurers are worried by the decline in the safety of tankers
and particularly of bulk carriers which carry commodities such as iron ore.
The institute said: 'The losses of bulk carriers, often in unexplained
circumstances and with considerable loss of life, continued in an alarming
manner; increasingly the evidence is pointing to structural failure as the
main culprit.'
The institute blamed the losses on the ageing of the world's fleet and
declining standards of maintenance as a result of cost-cutting.
Mr Roger Nixon, a member of institute's committee, said: 'Ships are getting
older, and the older they get the more easily they succumb to bad weather.'
He also pointed to changes in ownership patterns as adversely affecting
safety standards. The number of family-owned shipping companies has fallen
and ties between shipowners and captains have weakened.
Ships registered in 'flags of convenience' territories such as Panama, where
safety standards are more relaxed, were also more vulnerable. Panama and
Cyprus together lost about a quarter of the total in terms of both tonnage
and numbers.
Claims (including reinsurance claims) paid by the ILU's member insurance
companies - all of which specialise in marine and aviation business -
amounted to Pounds 4.069bn in 1991, 49 per cent more than the Pounds 2.729bn
recorded last year.
Premiums (including reinsurance) paid increased by only 32 per cent from
Pounds 1.67bn to Pounds 12.21bn.
MEASURES to reduce the risk of ferry disasters such as the capsizing of the
Herald of Free Enterprise in 1987 are taking too long to implement, the
National Audit Office says in a report published today, Richard Tomkins
writes. Its investigation of ship safety says recent Department of Transport
ferry inspections have found that on-board evacuation announcements are
often inaudible, fire doors are unmarked or will not shut, emergency signs
are unclear and insufficient lifejackets are provided at muster stations.
Ship Safety, National Audit Office, Commons Paper 186. HMSO. Pounds 7.10.
