FT  17 AUG 92 / Ukraine's bank chief seeks return to rouble
UKRAINE needs a 'tactical retreat' from the coupon, the republic's faltering
quasi-currency, and re-introduction of the Russian rouble, according to Mr
Vadim Hetman, chairman of the Ukraine National Bank.
The National Bank of Ukraine is emerging as the strongest proponent of
tougher economic policies for the republic, but fears its belt-tightening
measures will be opposed by Mr Vitold Fokin, the prime minister.
The showdown could come in September, when Mr Hetman plans to present a
tough stabilisation programme to parliament. The struggle will pit the
technocrats at the National Bank, who are itching to become members of good
standing in the international banking community, against Mr Fokin's insular,
Communist-dominated cabinet of ministers, which is struggling to preserve a
command economy.
First introduced in January as a stop-gap solution to Ukraine's severe
shortage of roubles, the coupon now accounts for 97 per cent of official
cash transactions in Ukraine.
However the government's ballooning budget deficit and lax credit policies
have rapidly eroded the value of the coupon from an initial two or three
roubles to the current rate of between 60 and 65 kopeks.
'The state of the coupon is a national tragedy,' Mr Hetman said at an
emotional press conference over the weekend closed to foreign journalists.
'We took a series of provocative acts against the coupon which no currency
in the world could endorse and which no other government in the world could
countenance.'
Mr Hetman, a hard-headed manager who ran Ukraine's largest commercial bank
before moving to the National Bank this spring, outlined a two-part strategy
to rescue the coupon.
In the short-term, Mr Hetman said: 'We must arrange a temporary marriage
with the rouble. This is a tactical retreat.'
In a move piloted in Crimea last week, Mr Hetman would like to re-introduce
the rouble as a parallel currency in mainland Ukraine, where state stores
only accept coupons.
In the long term, Mr Hetman wants to restrict the issuing of coupons by
putting a ceiling on wages and severely cutting credits to inefficient state
enterprises.
However, discussions of these proposals late on Friday with Mr Fokin did not
encourage him. 'The prime minister does not want us to take these steps but
wants us to stick with the old policy,' he said.
Mr Hetman blamed Mr Fokin's government and the parliament for Ukraine's
runaway inflation.
'The parliament and the government continue to print money and to endorse
increasingly costly programmes, despite the repeated protests of the
National Bank,' he said.
Mr Hetman warned that, if the introduction of Ukraine's long-awaited
separate currency, the hryvnia, was to be successful, 'these 'stabilisation'
measures must be implemented by the end of the year.' The final decision on
when to introduce the hryvnia would be taken in September.
The manner in which several CIS members are tinkering with the rouble is
causing growing alarm to the monetary authorities in Moscow, writes John
Thornhill in Moscow.
On Saturday, Azerbaijan announced it was to print a new currency, the manat,
to supplement a shortage of roubles circulating in the trans-Caucasian
state. Workers will now receive 20 per cent of their pay in manats. The
Azeri central bank said it would issue three different denominations of
manat bank notes. One manat would be equivalent to 10 roubles.
Other former Soviet republics have also issued parallel currencies, although
only Estonia has completely abandoned the rouble-introducing its own kroon.
Many western economists and bankers have argued that a proliferation of
national currencies among the republics of the former Soviet Union will only
hamper trade within the region.
