FT  21 JUL 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Private eyes need a nose
for snooping - Want to start out in a new line of business? Thomas Slemen
begins a series which offers advice on some unusual openings
Anyone can become a private detective. There is no need for a licence, nor
for membership of a professional body, although a little knowledge of the
law will help. About half the private detectives in Britain are former
policemen who have either retired or left the Force early, but you do not
have to be an ex-policeman to become a competent private investigator.
The right person should be observant, persistent, have a good memory, and
possess the stamina to work unsociable hours.
They must be inconspicuous when following a subject and have a basic
knowledge of psychology to fathom a motive or persuade an interviewee to
part with secret information.
The profession of the private detective does not have an official status and
is not recognised by the police, so private investigators are not subject to
supervision and they do not have to abide by a code of practice.
There are a number of detective agencies advertised in the Yellow Pages
which may take on trainee private eyes.
After a two-year training period with an agency, the trainee can apply to
become a member of the ABI (Association of British Investigators) by taking
the ABI examination.
The other main association is the IPI (Institute of Professional
Investigators) which is based in Preston.
Both the ABI and the IPI offer thorough training and may give the
prospective detective a stamp of credibility.
Gumshoeing can be a very lucrative business when the private investigator is
employed by a large company, perhaps looking into fraudulent goings-on among
its employees, or maybe delving into a suspected case of industrial
espionage.
The fee will depend on the size of the corporation; it is not unusual for a
fairly large company to pay a reputable PI with a good track record between
Pounds 800 and Pounds 2,000 a week.
Even more can be earned by the PI who specialises in a particular area of
the commercial sector, such as accounting procedure or computer operations.
Other private detectives who serve the general public - perhaps tracking
down a debtor, tracing a long-lost sweetheart, or ferreting out evidence for
a legal case - may end up less well off.
The fees quoted by these private investigators vary considerably. Some
demand a preliminary payment of about Pounds 150 and have an hourly rate of
around Pounds 20, plus travelling expenses of 30p a mile.
Others are prepared to work on a case for around Pounds 35 a day without a
retainer or without additional charges for transport costs and expenses.
Useful contacts: General Secretary, Association of British Investigators, 10
Banner Hill Road, Kingston-upon-Thames, Surrey KT1 3EP. Institute of
Professional Investigators, 31a Wellington Street, St John's, Blackburn BB1
8AF
