FT  19 OCT 92 / Iraq appealed for BNL help '10 years ago'
AIDES to Iraq's President Saddam Hussein first approached Banca Nazionale
del Lavoro (BNL) in Italy seeking help to finance arms procurement as early
as a decade ago, according to a highly placed US intelligence official.
Until now the only role BNL is known to have played in helping Baghdad to
fund its military build-up was by way of Dollars 5bn (Pounds 2.9bn) of
illegal Iraqi loans extended by the bank's Atlanta branch between 1985 and
1989.
A confidential 1991 cable sent from US officials in Rome to the Washington
headquarters of the Defence Intelligence Agency (DIA), reported that a BNL
branch in the northern Italian city of Brescia was used by Iraq to pay for
the shipment to Iraq of 9m land mines worth Dollars 225m. A copy of the DIA
report has been obtained by the Financial Times.
In Rome, a senior BNL executive said on Friday that a review of the bank's
archives revealed that between 1981 and 1984 Baghdad asked BNL to open three
letters of credit totalling Dollars 155.3m at the BNL Brescia branch.
However, he said these were never confirmed and therefore never utilised by
Iraq.
BNL's top management was changed in 1989 in the wake of the Atlanta scandal.
The BNL letters of credit were understood to be in favour of Valsella
Meccanotecnica, which is 50 per cent owned by the Fiat group.
Last year several executives of Valsella were convicted and sentenced to
jail for illegally selling anti-personnel and anti-tank mines to Iraq during
the 1980s. The executives were then pardoned as part of an Italian amnesty.
The disclosure that Iraq tried to use BNL in Italy for arms purchases a full
four years before the illegal Atlanta loans began to flow is certain to
complicate the Bush administration's contention that BNL's head office in
Rome never knew of the US branch's Iraqi dealings.
In recent days officials of the CIA and Department of Justice have admitted
in closed Senate hearings that they deliberately concealed reports on Rome's
involvement in the BNL scandal from Atlanta prosecutors and a federal court
judge.
Senator Al Gore, the Democratic vice-presidential candidate, charged last
week that the BNL affair, dubbed 'Iraqgate' in the US media, was part of an
administration cover-up larger than the Watergate scandal.
On Friday Mr William Barr, the US attorney-general, rejected calls for a
special prosecutor in the BNL affair and appointed a retired judge from New
Jersey to investigate possible criminal wrongdoing by administration
officials handling the BNL case.
In the face of strong congressional criticism Mr Barr said a new BNL
task-force would also investigate 'the possible complicity of persons in
BNL-Rome'.
The DIA report, dated February 15 1991, was one of a series sent from Rome
to Washington concerning the illegal sale of land mines to Iraq, according
to the US intelligence official. The report stated that the Valsella mines
were sent to Iraq 'through circuitous routes involving Singapore,
Switzerland and BNL office in Brescia, Italy.'
The DIA document, which said the last shipment was as late as 1987, noted
that among the mines shipped to Iraq were VS-1.6 and VS-2.2 anti-tank mines
and VS-50 and Valmara 69 anti-personnel mines. Valsella stopped producing
these mines last year.
Mr Gualberto Ranieri, a Fiat spokesman, said the Turin-based group did not
wish to comment except to stress that it never had 'management control of
Valsella'.
