FT  18 SEP 92 / Survey of Pakistan (18): Take a mobile phone - Tips for the
business visitor
Pakistan offers significant opportunities for foreign companies seeking to
export, import, or invest. Here are a few tips for visitors.
Pakistan is a Moslem country, and visitors should dress and act
appropriately. Alcohol is banned, though drinking does take place illegally
in private homes. An exception is made for non-Moslem visitors, who are
allowed to order drink from room service in their hotels. They must sign
several forms - including one swearing that the alcohol is for medical
purposes - and must not offer it to Moslems.
If you are arriving or travelling by air in Pakistan, try not to do so when
a very very important person is doing the same thing. 'VVIP Movement' closes
airports and delays all flights for the rest of the day.
Reservations on all flights need to be confirmed and re-confirmed. Take
nothing for granted and be at the airport by the required check-in time, as
flights are crowded and there is constant jockeying for places. This is
partly because Pakistan has a Brazil-like triangle of cities. Karachi in the
south is the business and industrial centre, Lahore is the largest city and
capital of Punjab province, and Islamabad in the north is the federal
capital, built in the 1960s in the suburbs of nearby Rawalpindi.
Most business travellers will want to fly rather than take trains which are
slow and, in the south, may not be safe. Avoid road travel in Sindh province
away from Karachi - though the recent army crackdown has, at least for the
time being, considerably reduced the risk from dacoits, or highway robbers,
who go in, among other things, for kidnapping and extortion.
Telephone lines are unreliable and of poor quality. In Karachi, it can take
hours to make a successful connection on a local call. Numbers are
frequently changed without notice. This creates problems in setting up
appointments and underlines the need for reliable local help in fixing up
meetings before you arrive in Pakistan.
A relatively cheap aid is a cellular phone, which can be rented for
Rs1,500-1,800 a week, with a charge of Rs4 per minute for airtime plus the
regular phone bill. Though this does not bypass the telephone network, it
does enable you to make calls between appointments.
However, the waiting time for installing new telephone lines has dropped
sharply - it used to be three to five years - and contracts with foreign
suppliers are likely to hasten the process.
Economic reform has already made doing business much easier. At least in
theory, investments and most other business decisions no longer need
official sanction. However, it is still useful to do homework on which
bureaucrats you need to see in which ministry. It is also advisable, if
considering an investment, to make a full check on the relevant
infrastructure, such as power, water and roads.
Health hazards are those common to most Asian countries. Avoid tap water,
ice and salads. Before ordering seafood in the north, consider the distance
it must travel to get there. Consult your doctor about inoculations. If you
plan to travel in the far north, remember the altitude.
Pakistan offers beautiful scenery, especially in the north, and tremendous
opportunities for trekking, climbing, or just plain walking. Flights are
available from Islamabad to Gilgit, or you can try the Karakoram Highway. A
short, easy car trip from Islamabad into the hills would take in the former
hill station of Murree, and Bhurban, where a new luxury Pearl Continental
hotel has just opened. From there you can see mountains stretching away to
the horizon and be back in Islamabad by lunchtime. Taxila, an important
archaeological site dating back at least to the 6th century BC, is also
close by.
If you want a taste of the north-west frontier, go to Peshawar, a bustling
city where just about anything is traded. Before attempting more adventurous
travel, remember the unstable situation in Afghanistan and the high tension
in Kashmir - it is not possible to cross the line of control into
Indian-held Kashmir.
The main hotels are important centres of social life for the elite: the
Holiday Inn in Islamabad and Karachi (both soon to become the Marriott);
also in Karachi, the Sheraton, Pearl Continental and Awari Towers; the Awari
and Pearl Continental in Lahore.
Superb carpets, especially from Afghanistan, are by far the best items for
the acquisitive visitor to target. Leather and cotton goods are also of good
quality.
