FT  17 FEB 92 / Survey of Portable Computers (14): From palmtops, notebooks
and lapbooks .. to notepads, pen-based systems and laptops - For the buyer,
there is a daunting array of portable computers on offer. A look at a
selection of machines in each catergory, from top-of-the-range to budget
models
WITH a flood of new portable computers coming on to the market, the
competition will become even hotter during 1992 as the players fight for
market share. However, while you - as buyer - win because prices become
keener by the day, you could lose if you buy the wrong machine.
Continual improvements in technology mean the life-cycle of a portable PC
today is about nine months at best. You could easily find that, by the time
you have signed on the dotted line for the machine of your choice, it has
already been superseded by a more powerful, lower priced version.
What is the answer if increased performance is anticipated? Accept the fact
that you might want to change your portable every year or look for a machine
that can be upgraded, ie the working memory can be expanded from the initial
1Mb or 2Mb to 8-10Mb or more; the display screen can be changed from, say, a
mono to a colour; and there are expansion facilities for adding additional
storage facilities, modems, printers and so on.
Unless you are a first-time user wanting to cut your teeth on a basic
portable PC or simply need a portable for occasional personal use at home or
away, beware being tempted to buy a unit simply because it is dirt cheap. It
will be a total waste of money if it is based on old technology that cannot
support the applications you want to run.
There are, quite literally, hundreds of portable machines to choose from
ranging in price from Pounds 199 for an A5 size palmtop PC to Pounds 10,000
for a power-breaker transportable based on the 80486 processor.
There are many variations in between and, with increased competition from
Korea and Taiwan, there will be many hundreds of models to choose from over
the coming months.
A survey commissioned by portable computer suppliers AST found that 75 per
cent of users make their own decision on which portable PC to buy. Even
among corporate buyers, 53 per cent is down to personal preference.
So what do they look for? The most important criteria in the selection
process were screen quality, keyboard, hard disk drive, processor power and
RAM.
Of secondary importance were weight/portability, battery life, design,
price, manufacturer's reputation and service support; although the last two
were higher up the scale for corporate purchases. The choice of machine will
depend, essentially however, on what you want to do with it.
To give an example, a palmtop will be more than adequate if you need a
pocketable unit that can handle spreadsheets, diary and address book
organisation, basic text processing, data capture (eg stock control) and
database enquiries.
If you are a graphics designer or engineer wanting to run sophisticated
applications such as desktop publishing and computer-aided design software,
you will need a power portable boasting a fast processing speed, large RAM
(working memory), high resolution colour screen and high capacity hard disk
storage, with each graphics image taking up the space of four pages of text
on average.
The most popular applications, according to AST, are based on Windows 3.0.
Wise buyers will look carefully at software licences. Until recently, you
had to buy a separate software package for your portable PC or de-install
your desktop version to avoid falling foul of the copyright laws.
WordPerfect took a lead by allowing users to make a copy of WordPerfect for
Windows, providing only one version of the software is being run at any one
time.
A point to bear in mind is that Windows requires at least 2Mb of RAM, ipso
facto you are going to need a more powerful portable, perhaps one with a
colour screen, the quality depending on whether it is simply for personally
viewing, for business presentations or for detailed graphic design
applications, (see page four for article on software).
Another point to bear in mind is that there are a number of different
display technologies, some of which are very difficult to view at the best
of times, (see page 6 for article on screen technology) is the amount of
detail you wish to see.
For the latest in mono displays, look for the VGA (video graphics adapter)
standard, with 32 grey-scale levels.
Weight will be important if you intend to carry your portable around in a
briefcase for any length of time.
A notebook PC may only weigh 5 lbs, but add an extra rechargeable battery
pack, mains adapter and external floppy disk drive and the weight could well
match that of a power portable.
Incidentally, if you intend to use your portable overseas, watch out for
mains power adapters that plug straight into the socket.
When plugged into an intermediate international power converter, they tend
to slip out because of the weight. (For more details about battery power,
see page four).
Other points to bear is mind include compatibility with your desktop PC,
particularly if you want the convenience of being able to use the same
disks; expandability, with extra sockets important if you want to add a
modem, printer, and fax card; data integrity, with solid state disks being
less vulnerable to damage than rotating magnetic media; and storage
capacity, particularly if you are an information hoarder who hates to delete
files.
PALMTOPS - PERSONAL ORGANISER OR PC COMPANION
Palmtop PCs are small and light enough to carry in an overcoat pocket; they
use little power to provide several days of red-light use per battery
charge; can exchange files with a desktop PC; and are affordable, being
priced between Pounds 199 to just over Pounds 1,000.
For those on a budget who do not need to run standard PC applications but do
need a personal organiser, diary scheduler, calculator, basic text editor
and address book, units to look at include the Sharp IQ and the Microwriter
AgendA, which offer PC communications, ie provide you with the ability to
upload/download information in ASCII text format, as opposed to fully
formatted documents.
If you need MS DOS compatibility, ie want to run standard PC applications,
in a machine no bigger than a video cassette, the palmtops to consider
include the Poqet PC and the various units designed with the help of DIP,
the British pocket computer experts.
They include the DIP Pocket PC, Atari Portfolio, Hewlett Packard HX 95LX,
Sharp PC-3000 and Telematica Leo.
DIP is convinced that the best seller in 1992 will be the Sharp PC-3000.
Priced at Pounds 749 plus Vat, it features 2MB of system memory; 77-key
Qwerty keyboard; 640 x 200 resolution black and white LCD screen; inbuilt
software which includes diary, phone book, calculator and text editor; and
optional external 3.5in floppy disk.
Most interesting of all, it is PCMCIA (Personal Computer Memory Card
International Association) compatible, which means it can take solid state
memory cards which offer low power consumption, greater storage capacity and
increased reliability, (see page 6).
Backed by such leading industry players as Intel, IBM, Microsoft, Lotus and
WordPerfect, PCMCIA is set to become the pocket computer standard, enabling
users to plug in and go with all the popular PC-compatible software.
The Poqet PC (Pounds 999) also takes PCMCIA-compatible slot-in memory and
application cards, provides 100 hours of use on standard AA-size alkaline
batteries and features a full 80-character by 25 line display. Touch typists
will particularly like the newly designed 77-keyboard with its more positive
action and separation of cursor keys from the shift key.
PC software available includes Lotus 1-2- 3, Lotus Agenda and Lotus Works,
WordPerfect 5.1.
PALMTOPS - FOR TECHNOPHOBES OR ACTION MEN
Though to some afficiandos, the Psion MC range is still one of the more
innovative around, its potential hampered only by the lack of long promised
peripherals, Psion believes that its computer saviour will be the handheld
Series 3, which has won a number of awards since its launch last Autumn,
including the Best International Product award at Comdex/Fall exhibition in
Las Vegas.
Priced from Pounds 199.95 inclusive of Vat, it is MS DOS compatible and
supplied with built-in applications software which includes a fully-featured
word processor and database.
Using the same SSDs (solid state disks) as the MC range, it features a very
clear screen, 16-bit processing power, multi-tasking operating system and
graphical user interface. Thus, even technophobes should not suffer a long
learning curve.
If you are looking for a handheld computer that will stand up to a hard
life, the Husky 16 is worth considering. It comes in a tough, knock and
water-resistant sealed case, making it ideal for service engineers, local
government data collection, quality control, surveying, time recording and
warehousing as well as applications in public utilities and the armed
forces.
The most recent addition to the Husky ruggedised range of portables is the
FS/2 which features a backlit LCD screen, weighs in at 26 oz and provides
over 30 hours of battery run time. A 512Kb budget model is priced at Pounds
1,249, a 4Mb version Pounds 2,649.
NOTEBOOKS - STATE-OF-THE-ART OR BUDGET PRICED ?
If you are constantly on the move and work mainly from vehicles or hotel
rooms, a notebook is an ideal solution.
Small and light enough to be carried in a briefcase, able to run off a
battery, car cigar-lighter system or mains power, there are budget priced
models or power versions capable of handling most applications.
A drawback may be lack of expansion slots, which means you get only what you
see, with no upgrade path. Notebooks like the TI TravelMate 2000 and Sharp
PC-6220 which do not have an integral floppy disk drive will be a bonus to
large organisations not only because cost will be lower but data security is
enhanced since users will not be able to insert disks from unauthorised
sources that may contain viruses.
Epitomising notebook PCs with integral 1.44Mb 3.5in floppy disk drive is the
new Bondwell B330SX which weighs in at 8.4 lbs; uses a 25MHz processor to
provide a processing speed up to 95 per cent faster than a conventional
16MHz machine; and features rechargeable NiCad batteries and advanced power
management system to give up to 4 hours of red-light use.
Priced from Pounds 2,499 list, it also has 2Mb RAM as standard, a 60Mb
capacity hard disk, 1.44Mb 3.5 ins floppy disk drive, triple supertwist VGA
screen and a PC alarm to guard against both physical removal and
unauthorised access to data.
If you want to run your portable all day on battery power, then the state of
the art is the Zenith MastersPORT 386SL notebook (see page one). It uses the
Intel 386SL processor which has been designed specifically for portable PCs
to prevent mid-day battery failure or data loss.
The machine gives up to eight hours' use from one battery charge and, to
conserve power further, features the Premier Management Systems with Rest
Resume mode, which freezes your work at any point and saves it for up to 30
days.
Priced at Pounds 2,995, it is one of many portables PCs available at low
prices from the mail order company Action Computer Supplies.
The new Compaq LTE Lite/25 and Lite/20 386SL-based notebooks are based on
the same processor with the most notable features being hardware and
software security, enhanced battery-life control, improved keyboard layout
and stand-by and hibernation modes.
Action prices are Pounds 1,859 and Pounds 2,149 respectively. Also
386SL-based, the new Toshiba T3300SL notebook features a 64Kb cache memory
which is claimed to make the 25 MHZ processor operate over 50 per cent
faster than Intel's 20MHz 386SX chip; six hours of battery life; and
PC-to-mainframe communications capability.
For those on a budget, keep your eyes peeled for the numerous special deals
advertised in the national and computer press. As an example of the drop in
prices, the Tandy 1100FD notebook is now some Pounds 300 lower at around
Pounds 425. It may only have a single 720K floppy disk drive, which could be
inconvenient if you use an AT-compatible desktop PC but, on the plus side,
it runs for 4.5 hours on a rechargeable battery, is supplied with DOS and
applications software which includes a text processor, has a full-size
84-key keyboard, parallel and serial interfaces, modem port and optional 1Mb
expanded memory card.
Notebooks now priced around the Pounds 850 mark that do incorporate the
higher capacity 1.44Mb floppy drive include the Panasonic CF-170. With 640K
memory, 20MB hard disk, 9 ins easy-viewing backlit supertwist LCD screen and
parallel/serial interfaces, it offers four hours of battery life.
But if you need more power at your elbow, expect to pay Pounds 2,251 for the
386SX-based Panasonic CF-370. Another example of lowering prices in the
power end of the Notebook market is the 20MHz 386SX-based TravelMate 3000
from Texas Instruments which was priced at Pounds 3,395 when launched a year
ago. Now priced at Pounds 1,795, it is A4 size, no more than 46mm thick and
weighs in at 2.5Kg, which include a 20Mb hard disk, integral 1.44Mb 3.5in
floppy disk, 2Mb memory expandable to 6Mb, 10 ins sidelit supertwist LCD
display with 32 grey levels, full function well- designed keyboard and
LapLink file transfer software.
NOTEPAD COMPUTERS AND PEN-BASED PCS
A variation on the notebook in terms of size and, indeed, processing power,
the notepad is different in that it has no keyboard; you write on it with a
cordless pen. There are a number of systems poised to enter the market, held
back mainly by the lack of software - although over 250 software developers
are doing their best.
Ideal for collecting data in the field, typical applications include retail
stocktaking, surveying and data-logging at industrial sites. The first
pen-based PC was launched by GRiD Computer systems, now part of Victor
Technologies, which supplies a broad range of portable PCs, see page seven.
The GRiDPad pen-based unit incorporates a blue reflective display which
makes it ideal for use by anyone who works at night or in adverse lighting
conditions, eg truck drivers, repair crews and the police. Customers include
Commercial Union, Equity &amp; Law, Ford, LandRover, the Armed Forces and
Audatex, the vehicle damage assessment company.
The latest version is the GRiDPad/HD which incorporates a hard disk drive
and is priced at Pounds 2,549. The new GRiDPad/RC is priced at Pounds 2,049
and uses PCMCIA-compatible static RAM cards. The most recent package to be
launched is PenForms which enables any user to design custom screen layouts
for any kind of electronic form-filling in the field.
The other main contender in this market is NCR. Said to be the first to
understand everyday handwriting, the pen-based NCR 3125 has the potential,
say the company, to have as dramatic an effect on working life as the
introduction of the photocopier or personal computer.
Based on the Intel 80386SL processor and priced at Pounds 2,995, it is able
to recognise and record upper case, lower case and annotations and is
designed to provide a cost-effective solution for users who find a keyboard
an impediment to data input or who are struggling with time-consuming
paper-bound procedures.
LAPTOPS - FOR FINANCE AND SALES
IBM is targeting the financial services sector with its PS/2 L40SX laptop
which provides full support for client service and sales management. Priced
at around Pounds 2,800, it is based on the 20 MHz 80386 microprocessor for
fast execution of advanced business programs, including those designed for
IBM OS/2 and Microsoft Windows, it is supplied with a 60Mb hard drive, super
slim 1.44Mb, 3.5 ins floppy drive. Plus-points include an 85-key keyboard
with full-sized keys; 10 in supertwist nematic VGA LCD display with 32
levels of greyscale; and an optional autosensing AC adapter which adjusts
for local power conditions in any country.
Expansion facilities allow instant connection of external VGA, serial,
parallel and keyboard pointing devices as well as the IBM desktop expansion
unit. It uses an advanced NiCad battery with battery backup and advanced
power management systems, with optional quick charger and car adapter.
You may expect to see a whole series of portable PCs from IBM in 1992. At
the budget end of the power laptops is the Lapbook SX from AEG Olympia which
is slightly larger than an A4 notebook size PC and less than half the weight
of a laptop (3.6 kgs).
Based on the 80386SX processor running at 20MHz, it incorporates a fast
access 40Mb hard disk drive, 1.44Mb 3.5in floppy drive and 1Mb of memory
which is expandable to 5Mb. It also has a low power page white backlit LCD
display and uses batteries giving 3 hours of use. List price is Pounds
1,699, which includes free on-line telephone support.
COLOUR - FOR PRESENTATIONS AND COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN
An example of state-of-the-art in portables offering business
presentation-quality colour screens is the Sharp PC-8501 which is based on
active-matrix TFT (thin film transistor) backlit LCD technology which
supports 256 displayed colours simultaneously out of a total palette of
262,144 colours and offers a high contrast and definition regardless of
viewing angle.
It has a 2Mb memory (ideal for Windows applications) and features a 100MB
hard disk drive, a capacity designed to support disk space hungry graphics
applications.
The drawbacks? It is mains-powered only and the list price is Pounds 5,995,
down from the launch price of Pounds 8,000; although available through
Action Computer Supplies at Pounds 4,195.
Those on a budget can still get access to Sharp's high performance colour
display capability, but on the new ACL-386SX 20MHz laptop from Amstrad, the
UK market leader in terms of portable PC sales. Expected to become the
company's best seller for 1992, the list price is Pounds 3,999 plus Vat and
it incorporates 4Mb of main memory and a 120Mb removable fast access hard
drive for high capacity storage and data security.
A bonus is that it runs off a removable rechargeable battery pack with
built-in charger and internal auto-switching mains power supply and utilises
a 20MHz microprocessor.
DUAL PURPOSE - FROM PORTABLE TO DESKTOP
Anyone having to work to tight business budget, has limited desk space
available or wants the convenience of a two-in-one computer, then a
dual-purpose portable-cum-desktop unit is really worth considering.
Typifying the genre is the Walkstation range of notebooks and laptops,
designed, developed and manufactured in Germany by Triumph-Adler, part of
the Olivetti Group.
Innovations include zero-pressure connection to a desktop 'docking' station
and docking printer; a detachable clip-on mono screen which can be replaced
with a colour display at a later date - making it virtually 'future-proof.'
It also has an integral mouse and, for the foreign traveller, an intelligent
power unit that can work across many voltages and frequencies and the
ability to interface to a range of peripherals including CD-ROM drives.
The current promotional price of the top of the range 386/33 60Mb version is
priced at Pounds 2,999, (normally Pounds 4,199).
At the top end of the dual-purpose portables is the 386-based Unisys
PowerPort DX1 which comes with 120MB drive, 3.5 ins 1.44Mb floppy drive and
4MB RAM expandable to 16MB. Priced at Pounds 3,530, it is mains powered
only; with the battery operated, less powerful SX1 priced at Pounds 2,520.
Both are supplied with DOS and Microsoft Windows 3.0, with SCO Unix and
Microsoft OS/2 available as options.
Good points include full-sized 85-key keyboard with 12 function keys in
standard arrangement and full travel keystroke; and magnesium casing, which
is lighter and tougher than plastic cases and, being porous metal, breathes,
dissipating heat faster than plastic and eliminating the need for a noisy
fan. For graphics: a VGA screen with up to 32 shade of grey, double the
norm, which can be unclipped and exchanged for a desktop VGA monitor.
Each system comes with two telephone jacks; optionals include a modem/fax
board. The active docking station supports industry-standard AT circuits
cards enabling it to be linked to major LANs such as Novell and IBM
Token-Ring.
DESKTOP COMPATIBILITY - FROM DESKTOP TO PORTABLE
Graphic designers and other dedicated Apple Macintosh users will want to
look no further than the notebook-sized PowerBooks which are based on
Motorola's 68030 microprocessor and are priced from Pounds 1,375 for the
smallest and lightest model 100 which comes with 2MB of memory and 20 MB
internal hard drive, to Pounds 2,975 for the top-of-the-range model 170,
pictured left. This features a fast 25MHz processing speed, a backlit
active-matrix LCD display that provides supper screen performance in all
lighting conditions, 4MB of working memory, a 40MB internal hard drive and a
1.4MB IBM-compatible SuperDrive.
An optional extra is an internal fax/modem card which can be used in any
country to transfer data, log-on to remote information systems or for
electronic mail.
UPGRADEABLES - START SMALL, GROW BIGGER
The main advantage with Toshiba portable PCs, which range from low- priced
notebooks to high performance colour portables, is that there are a number
of third party developments which not only upgrade performance but provide
additional capabilities.
For example, the Wonunder Cradle from Gravatom is an expansion chassis,
priced at Pounds 299, which takes the Datavoice ISDN PC card enabling
Toshiba notebooks to be connected to Integrated Services Digital Network to
provide access to remote computers; fast file transfer at 128 kbps; or
logging on to local area networks.
Another development is the MicroQuin-NT from Kerridge Network Systems, the
first internal modem to provide Toshiba notebooks with reliable data and fax
communications over cellular networks. As well as supporting PC-to-PC,
PC-to-LAN, PC-to-Unix; and PC-to-DEC connectivity, it enables users to
access Viewdata and Telecom Gold.
POWER PORTABLES - STATE-OF-THE-ART MODELS FOR 1992
The most advanced this year in terms of power will be portables based on the
Intel 80486 processor, with prices ranging from around Pounds 4,500 to over
Pounds 10,000 and many contenders with products in the wings. Those already
in this 'go faster' race are Compaq, IBM, NEC, Toshiba, Zenith.
As examples, the new Toshiba 486-based T6400DX runs at 33MHz and has a gas
plasma display (Pounds 3,419 from Action) while the T6400SX is a 25MHz TFT
colour portable (priced to be advised, but should be under the list price of
Pounds 6,499).
The Compaq Portable 486C is based on the i486 processor running at 33MHz and
supported by 4Mb of RAM which expandable to 32Mb. It has either a 120 or
210Mb hard disk drive, features an a high quality active matrix TFT LCD
display and will be list-priced at around Pounds 7,000.
SUPPORT AND MAINTENANCE
A final point worth mentioning when it comes to buying portable computers
is: mobile maintenance. Most machines are sold with 12-month return to (UK)
supplier warranty, which will not be much good if you are away from base
with an urgent report to complete.
In terms of warranty length, Sanyo is showing the way by supplying its brand
new range of four notebook PCs with a three-year warranty to cover parts and
labour throughout all EC countries. Mobile maintenance for UK-based users of
Vortec Laptec notebooks means, we are assured, a first-year, free-of-charge,
no-quibble guarantee, whereby an engineer will be on-site to repair a faulty
machine within eight working hours.
Should the problem turn out to be a major one, the engineer will transfer
all your hard disk data - or the hard disk itself - to an identical
replacement machine.
In the corporate arena, organisations needing pan-European support for large
field sales forces and mobile executives will welcome the Siemens Nixdorf
initiative. This allows advanced notebook PCs to be purchased in packs of
ten at a substantial discount. If a machine needs servicing anywhere in
Europe, the user simply contacts the nearest service centre where they will
be provided with immediate fault diagnosis and a replacement notebook within
two hours if needed.
The scheme applies to the PCD-3nx/16, a 16MHz unit with 1Mb memory and 40Mb
hard disk which is offered at Pounds 14,990 for ten, compared with the
single unit price of Pounds 2,795; and the PCD-3Nsx/20 which has a 20MHz
clock speed, 2Mb memory and 60Mb hard disk which costs Pounds 17,990 for
ten, compared with Pounds 3,195 for one.
