FT  27 OCT 92 / Leading Article: Britain and Maastricht
IN THE increasingly tense run-up to next week's debate in the House of
Commons, the future of the Maastricht treaty is starting to become confused
with the survival of Mr John Major, or even with the future of his
government. This is to miss the main point: the Maastricht treaty must be
ratified by Parliament because it is in the interests of Britain that it
should be ratified.
It is obvious that this treaty is not perfect; and it is easy to cavil at
particular ingredients. But the whole menu is a broadly based programme of
further integration in a wide range of policy fields, which represents the
best political compromise the 12 governments were able to reach at their
Maastricht summit 10 months ago.
Some parts of the treaty now look rather over-ambitious; others may seem
over-cautious or plain inadequate. Last month's currency crisis in the
exchange rate mechanism has cast a cloud over the feasibility of the
programme for Economic and Monetary Union; it now seems uncertain when or if
weaker member states will be in a position to join in moves towards monetary
union, and unlikely that even the strong currencies can reach monetary union
before the end of the decade. Conversely, it is clear that the treaty
provisions for developing a common foreign and security policy rest much
more on rhetoric than substance; this political lacuna has been underlined
in practice by the meagreness of the European response to the Yugoslav
crisis.
Coherent action
But the Community needs to develop. The logic of the single market dictates
closer economic integration; the geopolitics of Europe requires effective,
coherent action from the western part of the continent. Agreeing effective
mechanisms in response to these needs is a complex matter involving much
compromise. Maastricht was just such a compromise: not a series of final
solutions, but an inescapable agenda.
No one can pretend that the treaty as a document is simple, lucid or
elegant; some people pretend that it is unintelligible. But its general
objectives are clear, large and unmistakable: to carry the process of
European integration a large stride forward, without unnecessary
centralisation of powers, and to extend it on a broad front into new fields
such as foreign policy, perhaps defence one day, justice, immigration and
social welfare. On immigration, for example, member states naturally wish to
preserve a high degree of autonomy, but only the foolish pretend that
national responses alone can deal with the scale of potential migratory
pressures bearing down on the Community from all sides. Maastricht or no
Maastricht, common action is needed.
Common interests
This extension of the process of European integration does not derive from
some dogmatic and abstract federalist ambition. It is in Britain's interests
to take part in the process of European integration, because Britain and its
European partners have increasingly broad interests in common, and share
more and more problems which they can better tackle together.
The British government has resisted any binding commitment to take part in a
single currency, and the British political establishment may not think in
Community terms as instinctively as some of its continental counterparts;
but the central reality is that Britain is a European country with European
interests and European problems, and it needs European policies which can be
developed with its European partners.
That is the function of the European Community: to enable the member
governments jointly to develop common policies. The most misconceived and
misleading ingredient in the Maastricht treaty, was the attempt to pretend
that Emu would be an automatic mechanism leading unstoppably to a single
currency. Nothing in the Community has ever been or can ever be that
automatic; this is a Community of sovereign governments which are
permanently engaged in negotiation and decision-making. And in such a
Community, Britain has everything to gain; the only thing it need fear is
that it may mistakenly exclude itself, by retreating to some anachronistic
isolation.
This was the platform on which all three political parties fought the
general election in April. Now they must deliver.
