FT  29 APR 92 / Management: A case of mind over matter
Companies striving to improve their performance and prosper in the recession
should pay attention to how their employees think.
Research in America reveals that companies which test employees' thinking
styles and preferences can put together teams of workers who complement each
other.
By finding out whether individuals think with the left side of the brain -
logically and rationally - or with their right side - laterally - companies
can build competition-beating 'whole brained' teams.
They can further identify 'cerebral' people - logicians or visionaries  -
and 'limbic' people - organisers or co-operators.
According to CSC Index*, a consultancy which advises companies on thinking
analysis, individuals' preferences are strikingly consistent. Information
technology professionals - 'cerebral left' thinkers - have a strong
preference for analysing issues but a distinct lack of co-operative traits.
So they will present a well-argued case for introducing a new system but
will lose interest when it comes to teaching anyone how to use it.
Entrepreneurs - 'cerebral right' people - are off the scale when it comes to
'seeing the big picture' and 'tolerating ambiguity' but are lamentably short
on maintaining standards and developing detailed plans.
Herein lies the problem. Achieving the ideal 'whole brained' state means
putting opposites together. As people generally prefer to work with those
who share their approach, it involves a great deal of adjustment on all
sides.
But results from America are encouraging: one company reported that after
carrying out a thinking analysis, it promoted three executives to senior
jobs, for which they would not previously have been considered.
Of course, it would be even better if individuals could adopt a
'whole-brained' approach themselves. But perfection brings its own problems
 -apparently the rare 2 or 3 per cent of those tested who achieve a 'whole
brained' state are crippled by indecision.
*CSC Index, Tel 071 831-0101.
