FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (3): A difficult balancing act - German
foreign policy faces sensitive issues
THE dramatic resignation of Mr Hans-Dietrich Genscher as German foreign
minister after 18 years in office, announced last April and carried out in
May, was more than the end of a personal era.
It symbolised a watershed in German foreign policy.
Only weeks before, Mr Gerhard Stoltenberg was forced to quit involuntarily
as minister of defence, because of a row over arms shipments to Turkey.
Almost at one blow, the two longest-serving members of the Kohl coalition
vanished from the scene, making way for a younger generation, just at the
moment when Germany's foreign and security policy is undergoing a
fundamental reassessment.
Today a new team is in office in the German foreign ministry, headed by Mr
Klaus Kinkel as minister, matched by a new team on the other side of Bonn,
in the defence ministry, headed by Mr Volker Ruhe. Both are energetic and
ambitious politicians, and their new style has rapidly become apparent: the
question is whether it will also mean a new content to external policy.
Mr Kinkel could scarcely have been more hand-picked for his job: he was a
young civil servant plucked from obscurity to head the private office of Mr
Genscher back in the early 1970s, before becoming head of the ministry's
planning staff. He remained a civil servant, including a brief stint as head
of the BND, the German secret service, until January, 1991, when he was
suddenly promoted to be minister of justice, and joined Mr Genscher's party,
the Free Democrats (FDP).
AS for Mr Ruhe, he is a politician to his finger-tips, and makes little
secret of his ultimate ambition to succeed Mr Helmut Kohl as German
Chancellor. He was secretary-general of the Christian Democrats (CDU) before
Mr Stoltenberg quit, and he was suddenly thrust into the Cabinet. Within
weeks he had launched a string of new initiatives, all-but-axed the
controversial European Fighter Aircraft (EFA) project - much to British fury
 -and shaken up his entire sleepy organisation.
Both, therefore, have a vested interest in a high-profile, successful new
German foreign policy. Yet both have also an urgent need to reassure
Germany's partners that they are not dealing with a changed regime in the
wake of unification, one which could become a re-assertive, heavy-handed
would-be superpower. So their emphasis is equally on continuity.
Mr Kinkel, in his most recent restatement of German foreign policy,
deliberately used the phrase coined by Mr Genscher, his mentor, to sum it
up: 'The politics of responsibility.'
In essence, that means that Germany renounces any hint of nationalism or
power politics, grim reminders of its hegemonistic past, in favour of
whole-hearted integration in international organisations: the European
Community, Nato, the United Nations, and the Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe (CSCE). It is a policy which has, if anything, been
reinforced by the instability and upheavals going on in central and eastern
Europe, after the collapse of the Soviet empire.
'There is a general trend of centrifugal forces right across Europe,'
according to one very senior German diplomat. 'Everything that had been kept
together more or less by outside pressure is no longer under that pressure.
'At the same time, it is not only a united Germany that is looking for a new
place in the new order. There are many others who are uncertain of their
place. Indeed, none of the major players knows its place. The consequence is
that we have to foster and support every movement towards integration, be it
in the EC, the Western European Union (WEU), Nato, the Nato co-operation
council (with eastern Europe), and the CSCE.
'If we want to regain our stability, and we have to, we have to foster these
developments towards integration. Integration is our best insurance against
domination.'
Mr Kinkel puts it also in terms of external perceptions - 'since
unification, the world sees us with different eyes,' he warned a recent
meeting of newspaper publishers. 'In this changed environment, the unified,
bigger and sovereign Germany must now achieve what it has twice before
failed to do: it must find a role in the world which corresponds both to the
wealth and wishes of our own population, and which is also acceptable to our
neighbours and partners.'
That is the difficult balancing act the two new Ministers are seeking to
perform.
There is no question but that the European Community, and Chancellor Kohl's
driving ambition towards greater integration in a European Union, remains at
the heart of German foreign policy.
The storm of debate over the Maastricht treaty, which would introduce a
single currency, and - eventually - a common foreign and security policy -
has left German commentators doggedly restating their belief: that there is
'no alternative.'
In spite of his awareness that a large majority of Germans are deeply
unhappy with the idea of giving up their hard Deutsche Mark for a future
European currency of uncertain stability, Mr Kohl is adamant that he will
press ahead regardless.
He would add to that another priority: that of 'normalisation.' That means
Germany taking up its responsibilities in international relations, put on
ice ever since the Second World War.
Mr Ruhe has begun a policy of attrition, despatching military doctors to
Cambodia, military transport planes to Bosnia-Herzegovina, and naval ships
to the Adriatic, as well as military members on a CSCE mission to Georgia,
in the former Soviet Union. Mr Kinkel puts the theory: 'We Germans cannot
have UN membership a la carte,' he says.
'Normalisation . . . means the Bundeswehr undertaking worldwide
peace-keeping roles under the auspices of the UN, and with the approval of
the Bundestag.
'We cannot expect to go on sitting in the spectators' seats at the world
stage.'
Another sensitive question is whether Germany should apply to become a
permanent member of the UN Security Council. Mr Kinkel says: 'We are not
pushing ourselves forward, but if the question arose of a corresponding
reform in the UN charter, and others like Japan, Brazil, Nigeria and India,
put in a claim, then we will also express our wish for a permanent seat.'
Furthermore, after last summer's skinhead riots in Rostock and arson attacks
on a Jewish memorial at the Sachsenhausen concentration camp, the foreign
minister said Germany could squander 'the chance of achieving normality as
good Europeans if we allow our image abroad to be marred by terrorism and
hatred of foreigners . . . we must do everything in our power to bury this
ghost.'
See also page 9: the immigration issue.
