FT  15 JUN 92 / Arts: Leave it to the sheep - Architecture
What can be done about Stonehenge? It is always described as 'the most
important prehistoric monument in Europe' and visiting it on the Wiltshire
plain was once a romantic and moving adventure. Today it is very different.
Almost a million people a year from all over the world make the pilgrimage
to ponder on the meaning of the stones and they usually have a pretty
horrible experience.
The ghastly visitors' facility is situated away from the monument and
necessitates a squalid walk through a concrete tunnel under the road. This
may save a few lives but ruins any romance or mystery for the visitor.
Things are worse when you get to the monument, which is viewed through a
wire fence as though it were in a concentration camp.
English Heritage is responsible for the monument - it is one of the few
ancient sites that produces a large profit, about half a million pounds a
year. The stones are listed as part of a World Heritage Site, as designated
by Unesco, which includes Avebury. The National Trust owns some 1,600 acres
of land around the monument.
These two bodies, the National Trust and English Heritage, have combined
forces to improve matters and in May 1991 they submitted an application for
outline planning permission to the local council at Salisbury. Their
proposals suggested the removal of the A344 road and the existing visitor
facilities and the re-routing of a byway and its downgrading to a footpath.
A car park and new visitor facilities were proposed for a site some
three-quarters of a mile north of the stones at Larkhill. Visible garrison
buildings (the army is always a lurking presence on the plain) were to be
shielded and plantations created of indigenous trees. Much of the historic
landscape is proposed to be restored to chalk downland grazing. English
Heritage and the National Trust have produced 'The Stonehenge Conservation
and Management Project' and are planning a Conservation Trust to manage the
whole site in the future.
Many of these proposals seem sensible. The application is backed by a
government report supporting the idea of a new road and accessibility to the
Stonehenge estate, which is full of other ancient archaeological features.
Last December, however, Salisbury District Council refused to grant outline
planning permission and the problem is now to be aired at a public inquiry.
To counter local objections and to persuade the world that these proposals
are purely dedicated to the overdue enhancement of the monument, English
Heritage and the National Trust have just announced an international
architectural competition to choose a designer for the new visitors' centre.
An appeal against the refusal of planning permission was lodged with the
Secretary of State for the Environment in June. Three new detailed planning
applications will be submitted that will include visitor access, landscape
restoration and improvements to an adjoining farm.
The local objections to granting approval for this scheme have been voiced
in colourful language. English Heritage has been accused of turning
Stonehenge into a 'thundering great theme park'. More particularly, the
objections are (as phrased in planning jargon) 'contrary to the countryside
policy C2A of the South Wiltshire structure plan' and the proposed western
access route is seen as having a deleterious effect upon the archaeological
landscape. The local council also opposes the closure of the A344 road.
The saga has been running for a long time. Proposals to improve the setting
and the tourist facilities have been on the drawing board for the last eight
years at English Heritage. Mr Jocelyn Stevens, the new chairman, has a
reputation for sorting things out quickly. He will face the challenge with
the help of the new minister for National Heritage, Mr David Mellor.
There is no doubt that the plan, which in effect creates an archaeological
park, is an enormous improvement. But is it necessary to do so much?
Certainly the road closures and the new access route will considerably
improve both the setting and the atmosphere. But I am anxious about the
competition for an architect (he could be a landscape architect) for the
visitors' centre. I question the value of an interpretation centre,
lavatories, mother and baby rooms, children's play areas and the inevitable
cafe. The jury for the competition is chaired by the establishment architect
Michael Hopkins and I would like to offer him a scrap of advice.
How about making Stonehenge one of the few places of archaeological interest
in the world where you do not have a shop, do not have a cafe, do not have
all the hideous trappings of the tourist trade? Make it a place that is
completely unlike anywhere else - emphasising only its mystery and beauty.
All the time and money that is going to be wasted on a huge and pointless
competition should be spent on removing as much of the modern world as far
away as possible from Stonehenge - leave it to the real sheep, and leave it
unexplained and inspirational. Let it be free from the imposition of
'heritage'.
