FT  24 FEB 92 / BA-KLM talks reach critical stage
MERGER talks between British Airways and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines have
reached a critical stage after nearly breaking down last week over the
shareholder structure of the proposed new company.
BA said last night, however, that talks were continuing to try to break the
deadlock over price and the new ownership structure.
On Saturday KLM's supervisory board held an unscheduled meeting in Amsterdam
after the long-running talks apparentlyran into insurmountable difficulties.
The KLM chairman said in his airline's staff magazine last week that the
talks continued to be bogged down on some difficult problems.
Neither side appears to have set a deadline for an agreement which would
form a formidable force in international aviation.
The negotiations are blocked by KLM's insistence on holding a 40 per cent
stake in the enlarged airline operation confining BA to 60 per cent. BA had
sought 80 per cent with KLM holding 20 per cent, but is understood to be
prepared to settle for 70 per cent with KLM holding the 30 per cent balance.
The UK airline has made it clear it regards a 60-40 split as unacceptable.
BA last week reported a five-fold increase in third-quarter profits to
Pounds 100m and is concerned that its overall size and profits potential is
adequately reflected in the new shareholding structure. The Dutch are
equally concerned not to give up control of the national flag carrier at a
price that airline analysts would describe as a 'sell-out' to BA.
Failure to reach agreement on the merger would be a blow for both airlines
and their effort to forge a global alliance.
KLM would provide BA with a new European hub in Amsterdam as well as an
equity interest in Northwest Airlines of the US. Partnership with BA would
enhance KLM's competitiveness against other bigger continental European
carriers like Lufthansa and Air France.
Failure would also come at a time of consolidation among other European
airlines with Belgian authorities expected soon to approve Sabena's proposed
link with Air France.
BA originally attempted to negotiate a partnership with Sabena of Belgium,
but the talks collapsed. Air France plans to invest in a large minority
stake in the Belgian carrier.
