FT  12 SEP 92 / Finance &amp; the Family: Investor protection - Expatriates
mainly through the Financial Services Act 1986 (FSA) - to protect investors
from losses caused by the collapse of UK advisers and money managers of all
kinds.
Not only are such firms subject to regulation but schemes have been set up
to compensate investors should they fail. However, only the investment firms
are covered. So, if you lose money because your broker becomes insolvent, or
because the UK unit trust or insurance company in which he or she invested
for you fails, you will be compensated. But, if the investment was in, say,
Coloroll shares, no compensation will be payable.
Unfortunately, the large number of compensation schemes confuses the
picture. And, as usual, the position is far more complicated for expatriates
than resident Britons.
The core of these arrangements is the Investors' Compensation Scheme (ICS).
This was set up by the Securities and Investments Board (SIB) and provides
compensation for losses brought about by the collapse of any organisation,
authorised under the FSA, in relation to any investment business which it
regulates.
'Investment business' encompasses such things as dealing in, or advising on,
life assurance, unit trusts, investment linked pensions, stocks and shares,
commodities, financial futures and options. It does not cover general
insurance, bank and building society deposits or investments in such things
as houses, land or gold coins.
The maximum compensation available under the scheme is 100 per cent of the
first Pounds 30,000 and 90 per cent of the next Pounds 20,000 - ie a maximum
of Pounds 48,000 for any one default. If, exceptionally, claims in any one
year exceed Pounds 100m, they will all be scaled down.
Some regulatory bodies, for example the Law Society, Institute of Chartered
Accountants and Insurance Brokers Registration Council have equivalent
schemes. The Law Society's scheme covers the full amount of any loss up to
Pounds 1m.
Whether compensation is available to overseas investors dealing with UK
firms, depends on the extent of the 'foreign' element in the transaction.
Transactions involving overseas residents and overseas-based advisers are
not covered. But if business is arranged between a UK intermediary and an
individual abroad - whether by correspondence or in the course of a meeting
overseas, following which the adviser takes the signed application papers
and payment back to the UK - compensation will be available. But should the
adviser send those papers direct from the overseas location to an investment
organisation outside the UK, the position is open to doubt.
If the foreign element in any business is sufficient to exclude it from the
cover of the ICS, you will not only lose the right to compensation on the
failure of the intermediary, but also of any UK product company - for
example, an authorised unit trust, into which the investment concerned is
made.
Such considerations aside, investor losses caused by the failure of a UK
unit trust would give rise to a claim. The treatment of investment trust
insolvency is, however, rather more complex. Losses in connection with a
savings scheme, would be covered. But failure of the trust itself would not.
Losses arising from the failure of overseas unit trusts and the like are not
covered by the ICS. However, a number of countries - Bermuda, Guernsey, Isle
of Man and Jersey - have equivalent compensation schemes of their own.
Canada, Eire, Luxembourg and Switzerland have SIB- recognised local
regulation. But there are no compensation schemes in those countries.
Compensation for the failure of UK insurance companies, under the 1975
Policyholders Protection Act, is different again. The Act provides for
compensation of up to 90 per cent of the policy value without any upper
limit. However, since this scheme did not cover business failure resulting
from bad marketing or bad advice, these risks are covered by the Lautro
indemnity scheme, subject to the same maximum as the ICS - Pounds 48,000 per
claim.
As in the case of unit trusts, offshore policies are not covered, but some
overseas territories have arrangements of their own.
Bank and building society deposits are not 'investments' in terms of the
FSA, and are not covered by the ICS. They are separate UK deposit schemes,
but the maximum compensation is 75 per cent of the first Pounds 20,000 for
banks and 90 per cent of the first Pounds 20,000 for building societies.
Outside the UK, the Isle of Man, alone of the three main offshore islands,
has provisions covering bank deposits. These too mirror mainland
arrangements, although participation by foreign banks is voluntary. Offshore
subsidiaries of UK building societies need no special arrangements, since
the Building Societies Act 1986 requires parent societies to carry
responsibility for all of their liabilities.
All of which is rather complex. But it ensures that expatriates have greater
protection when dealing with UK firms than they would by investing in an
unregulated environment.
Donald Elkin is a director of Wilfred T Fry Ltd, of Worthing, West Sussex.
