FT  16 SEP 92 / World Stock Markets: Frankfurt picks over the weekend
package - Andrew Fisher sounds a judicious note of cheer
It was just what the German market needed. After optimism at the start of
the year had been replaced by gloom about international economic and
currency trends, this week's interest rate cuts by the Bundesbank and the
European exchange rate realignment brought a note of cheer back to dealing
rooms.
The mood is not exactly euphoric. The Frankfurt stock market, as measured by
the DAX index, put on 4.4 per cent on Monday. Yesterday the index declined
by 0.5 per cent to 1,587.55, leaving it well below a high of 1,811.57 seen
at the end of May.
Mr Heinrich Ackermann, of Bank in Liechtenstein's Frankfurt office, says:
'Things have not changed in the real economy. We are going to get further
poor figures for things like new orders, production and so on.' He feels,
however, that the reduction of the central bank's key rates has removed the
risk of a further escalation in rates, giving the market a more solid basis.
Meanwhile, this weekend's French referendum on the Maastricht treaty is
still to come. Until this is resolved and fears of further European currency
turbulence removed, stock markets, for the time being at least, will still
be somewhat hesitant. Also, it could be some time until the Bundesbank feels
able to cut rates again; exchange rate tensions forced its hand before it
was really happy about trends on the inflation and money supply fronts.
When announcing the interest rate cuts, Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the
Bundesbank president, alluded to the weakness in the economy - not a
recession, he said - and signs of more moderation in the next wage round by
saying that the Bundesbank's moves were in line with these developments.
But the central bank would not have acted without being put under extreme
pressure by the size of the intervention needed to support the lira last
week. This threatened to overturn its monetary stance by inflating money
supply. Hence the decision urged upon the Bonn government for a realignment,
accompanied by the earlier than expected rates cut.
The size of the reductions, most eyes being on the significant Lombard rate,
caused disappointment in some markets. But as Mr Schlesinger emphasised, the
Bundesbank is also pushing money market rates down by 1/2 percentage point
to 9.2 per cent by conducting this week's securities repurchase operation at
a fixed rate.
Even so, it will take far deeper interest rate cuts than these to help
propel western European economies out of their present slackness, especially
in the hard-hit UK and Nordic regions. 'The whole of Europe needs much lower
interest rates, not just the little we have seen,' says Mr Werner Wanke, a
partner at Metzler, the Frankfurt private bank. For Europe to be given a
real stimulus, he believes two or three percentage points need to come off
rates across Europe.
Since Europe's interest rate levels depend basically on the Bundesbank,
investors will be waiting to see when it feels like delivering further cuts.
They may have to wait some time. Mrs Katrin Kandel at the London office of
Sal. Oppenheim, another German private bank, says: 'I do not think the basic
policy of the Bundesbank has changed at all. I do not think rates are going
to come down faster now.'
Her strategy continues to centre on companies with strong cash flow, above
average earnings growth, and worthwhile assets. There are plenty of those
around in Germany, even though the country's export performance has
obviously been braked by the slow US recovery and weakness in European
markets.
Many German companies are now trying hard to cut costs, especially in the
motor industry where competition is increasing from the Japanese, who have
set up plants in the UK and elsewhere. Companies in the vital mechanical
engineering sector are suffering from the steep downturn in orders and are
keen not only to become more competitive on the cost front but also to
produce more abroad.
It is the intensity of the cost pressures which have concentrated minds in
government and industry and led to the latest call by Chancellor Helmut Kohl
for a solidarity pact which would include moderate pay deals. Such a pact
has yet to be worked out, but a healthy sign is the agreement won by
Lufthansa, the hard-pressed German airline, for a pay freeze and other
far-reaching concessions from its unions.
Lufthansa may be a special case with its heavy losses and severe cost
disadvantages against leaner rivals such as British Airways, but other
German companies are also uncomfortably aware that they need to slim down.
Volkswagen is shedding labour and has also been investing heavily in
lower-cost sites in Spain, Mexico, China and Czechoslovakia.
In other important German industrial sectors, the chemical companies have
been feeling the chill of world economic weakness and are suffering in
various degrees from low prices at a time of tougher competition. With many
German concerns heavily dependent on foreign sales, it is clear that it will
take more than the events of the past few days to engender a lasting return
of confidence to German bourses.
