FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of Courier and Express Services (11): Fleets take on
a greener shade - Janina Walker looks at the impact of environmental issues
on operators
BEING green was once the prerogative of people who wore flowers in their
hair - now it is a powerful, emotive issue which has become a crucial factor
for express and courier operators.
London's controversial red-route scheme to cut traffic congestion has raised
fears that it would affect deliveries if repeated nationwide.
Tougher environmental legislation has made carriers look at 'greening' their
fleets and increased public pressure against night-time activities at
airports has become a problem for some operators.
Lynx - a National Freight Consortium company, which handles more than 25m
parcels annually - was particularly vocal in their fears last year that the
red-route would hamper operations.
The scheme is in operation on an eight-mile stretch of road between north
and east London. Parking is banned at any time on double red lines, with
time restrictions on single red lines and designated loading and unloading
bays.
Mr Alan Soper, managing director of Lynx, said: 'The general view at the
moment is that it has not caused as many problems as expected because it is
in such a limited area.
'However, if it were the norm then it would certainly have an effect on our
deliveries and begin to have an impact on the cost.
'Really, this is about a whole host of issues and a balance has to be struck
between several competing interests. I think it is untenable that a road
should be separated from its shops.
'The real skill is to make a good, balanced decision taking pollution, the
free flow of traffic, business, and what people really want into
consideration.'
Noise pollution from jets has come under increasing fire from environmental
pressure groups - in Holland, Maastricht airport has been one of the main
targets for campaigners and the Dutch department of transport has recently
banned all night flights for the time being.
In March, express freight company Emery Worldwide finally pulled the plug on
their Maastricht hub and moved to Brussels airport following a deal with DHL
to share space on transatlantic and inter-European flights.
Mr Chutta Ratnathicam, Emery vice-president International, cited
increasingly restrictive night flight curfews as one of the crucial factors
in the decision to discontinue operations at Maastricht.
The company now operates from the DHL hub in Brussels and the DC8s which
were used at Maastricht are being deployed elsewhere.
XP Express Parcels Systems, who pulled out of Maastricht two years ago after
being acquired by TNT, also experienced problems with the green lobby.
Mr David Burton, general manager XP International, said: 'There was talk of
imposing a night flying ban which for an express parcel company is
tantamount to disaster.
'At the time we were using F27s and to get the fleet up to environmental
scratch would have been a significant investment by KLM who owned us at the
time and I think it was one of the reasons XP was put on the market.'
XP now operate from TNT's hub at Cologne airport using the BAe Quiet Trader
aircraft which represent a Dollars 400m investment in greening by the
company.
TNT's 20-strong fleet of BAe Qt 146s - known in the industry as the quiet
profit-makers - are said to be the quietest in the world and serve 17
European countries and 31 cities and converge at the Cologne hub every
night.
Mr Burton said there had been various attempts to lobby for at least an
examination of night-time activity at Cologne which is also used by leading
operator UPS.
Global express carrier UPS does not intend to be caught out over
environmental legislation and, according to company spokesman Mr Ken
Sternad, are making Dollars 4bn investment to ensure their aircraft meet
what he described as any regulations anywhere in the world.
Their DC8 fleet - some of which are used in Europe - have all been fitted
with new environmentally sound engines at the cost of Dollars 400m.
Mr Sternad said: 'It makes good business sense to have an engine on an
aircraft that is environmentally sound, fuel efficient and that will give a
tremendous new level of maintenance and reliability which is critical in our
industry.
'There is a growing awareness about the environment not only among
legislators and the general public but also among our customers who use it
in making a decision on their choice of carrier.'
In the UK, green policies are high on the agenda at the Royal Mail - by far
the largest domestic carrier. The Royal Mail has a 28,500-strong road fleet
with an annual mileage of 460m miles a year.
On May 14 three new vehicles which could be the prototypes for the next
generation of cleaner, greener transport fleets, were unveiled.
The vehicles, developed by the Royal Mail and Leyland DAF, use less fuel,
have equipment to cut out black exhaust fumes, make minimal noise and carry
the latest computer technology.
They will be road-tested this month and it is likely their must successful
features will be included in all new Royal Mail vehicles.
Mr Ray Bayfield, head of road transport at Royal Mail,believes that it is
important to do what they can to make the world a greener place.
The Royal Mail is no stranger to greening - they have already completed a
six-year programme of converting their vehicle fleet to unleaded fuel and
are still testing two 17-tonne 'green' trucks.
Express parcel carrier City Link have this month added the sixth
environmentally-friendly vehicle to their fleet.
The two-tier, 38-tonne trailer, can carry the load equivalent of almost two
conventional articulated lorries and has an engine which meets EC
regulations, including lower noise and exhaust and emission levels.
Mr Duncan Brazier, City Link national transport development manager, said:
'With any company today there is an across-the-board perception of the need
to be environmentally friendly. On a publicity basis, if nothing else, we
all accept that if we are going to operate effectively we must look at what
we can do to lessen our impact on the environment.
'It is not very often that you can reduce operating costs and be
ecologically friendly but we have been able to do just that with this new
vehicle.'
Mr Brazier added that City Link could possibly add more of the special
vehicles to their fleet in the future if volumes merited the need for them.
