FT  13 MAY 92 / Business and the Environment: Passion in the forest /
Describing how a Japanese colony in the Amazon offers a lesson in
sustainable development
The last thing one might expect to find in a remote town deep in the Amazon
jungle is a karaoke bar full of Japanese singing 'My Way' in broken English.
But the song at least is peculiarly appropriate. Tome-Acu, the oldest
Japanese colony in Amazonia, is being studied increasingly as a possible
model for the sustainable development of the world's largest rainforest.
In the closing weeks of the rainy season the small muddy town of Tome-Acu,
seven hours by dirt road from the nearest port, looks an unlikely success
story. Initially, all that marks it out is a preponderance of banks and the
Japanese faces behind the wheels of mud-splattered Beetles hurtling between
potholes.
But Tome-Acu has shown that through flexibility and good management it is
possible to progress from subsistence farming to commercial agriculture in
the Amazon without mass deforestation.
Established in 1929 with the arrival of 43 families from Japan, the colony
has seen numerous highs and lows as prices of its cash crops fluctuate on
world markets. But it has survived through continuous adaptation and crop
diversity.
Its beginning was hardly auspicious. Sponsored by a Japanese textile company
as part of a wave of immigration to relieve population pressure at home and
provide needed agricultural labour in Brazil, attempts of the first arrivals
to establish a cacao plantation were thwarted by inexperience and lack of
capital.
Instead of making money and returning to Japan as they had planned, they
resorted to subsistence farming of rice and beans.
A co-operative was formed to try to market products brought from Japan such
as tomatoes, cucumbers and peppers which were not known in Brazilian
households.
Over the next decade another 325 families and 128 single men arrived, but
many left because of economic crises or fell victim to malaria. By 1942 only
98 households remained.
The community was on the verge of bankruptcy when it discovered its miracle
crop - black pepper brought from Singapore. As the Second World War
disrupted pepper production in Asia, prices rocketed. By 1961 the small
colony was responsible for more than 5 per cent of total world production.
Tome-Acu's prosperity was brought to a sudden end in the late 1960s by a
combination of declining world pepper prices and a fungus which attacked
pepper plants.
Many people left and those that stayed had learnt an important lesson. 'We
have never again depended on a single crop,' says Kozabura Mineshita,
director general of the co-operative.
Although the community did not abandon pepper it began introducing other
crops such as passion fruit, rubber, melon and oilpalm.
Today, the 180 farms of the co-operative produce around 40 crops. Jorge Ito
is typical, growing seven crops on his 200-hectare farm in a mosaic of crop
systems, native forest and secondary forest regeneration.
Ito interplants short-lived plants such as papaya and passion fruit which
take only two years to grow with longer-life crops such as pepper. Rubber
and cacao grow together, the rubber trees providing necessary shade for the
cacao. He has started growing berries for natural colour dyes, acerola, a
fast-growing, cherry-like fruit, and kale for cattle feed. 'This way we
spread our risk,' explains Ito.
However such a system - involving heavy use of nutrients to prevent soil
exhaustion - requires considerable capital investment and management
techniques which may make it difficult to copy.
The co-operative set-up has facilitated access to credit, machinery and
techniques, employing two agronomists. There is considerable interchange of
information with working groups for each crop.
The current low pepper price of only Dollars 850 a tonne with no short-term
prospect of improvement means passion fruit has now taken over as the
colony's main crop, producing 1,285 tonnes last year.
With a Dollars 900,000 loan from the Amazonia Bank last year the
co-operative set up a factory to process tropical fruit into pulp and then
freeze it to be used for juices and ice creams on both the domestic and
export markets. 'We decided that the only solution was to stop being a
producer of primary materials which will keep us forever backward. Rather
than supplying industry we must begin processing ourselves,' says Mineshita.
They are focusing on three fruit: passion, acerola and cupuacu. Passion
fruit was chosen because it already has a market in the US and Europe,
although the co-operative's only contract is with a fruit juice company in
Sao Paulo because it does not yet have sufficient production for export.
Acerola is native to Brazil and its high vitamin C content (around 50 times
that of an orange) has made it popular in Japan. The co-operative is hoping
to develop a market in Europe and is currently negotiating with a French
company as well as in Korea, Portugal, South Africa and the US.
Cupuacu is a hard, coconut-like fruit with a coating of brown dust on the
outside and an interior of fleshy white fruit with a strong aroma. The fruit
is unknown outside Brazil but Mineshita is hoping this will change through a
deal recently struck with American non-profit organisation Cultural Survival
International.
'It is crucial for these communities to get control over production. In
studying agriculture in the Amazon there has been over-emphasis on technical
roadblocks and under-emphasis on capital, marketing and processing which is
where the game is really won or lost,' says Christopher Uhl, a biologist at
Penn State University who has been studying the colony.
The co-operative is now concentrating on increasing production and testing
other fruits such as baricuri and graviola. The stress is always on quality
through continuous testing and selection of the best plants.
According to Evandro Kikuchu, deputy factory supervisor: 'The risk is, if we
develop markets for these fruits, that other people will begin to produce
and saturate the market causing the price to fall. We know the survivor will
be he who produces best quality.'
The focus on native Amazonian fruits may win points from ecologists but the
real motive is economic. 'We know we cannot compete with the south where
they have advanced technology and access to market, so it is better to
concentrate on native fruits,' says Mineshita.
'If we fail our only option will be to use our land for pasture or
woodcutting which will destroy the forest.'
