FT  02 APR 92 / Election 1992: Where words could fail the politicians -
Wales is divided both politically and socially by its language
POLITICALLY and so-cially, Wales is a country divided by the one thing that
should unite it: the Welsh language.
'The problem in Wales,' says the senior executive with a company in Newport,
south Wales, 'is that the language divides us. Those who speak Welsh don't
believe the rest of us, whether born or just living here, are full citizens.
'It's not like that in Scotland. Nationalism there is part of the culture.
Everyone is equal. Here in Wales, because of the language, there are two
peoples, two cultures. And the fanatics will burn down your cottage whether
you're English or Welsh.'
That feeling, widely held outside the deeply Welsh areas of Gwynedd in the
north-west and neighbouring Ceredigion in the west, means that support for
the nationalist cause in Wales is severely limited.
The result is that support for Plaid Cymru, the Welsh nationalist party, is
largely confined to those areas where Welsh is an important part of everyday
life. Plaid is engaged in an unavailing and unsuccessful struggle to break
out of its language ghetto.
Election results substantiate this. The three seats won by Plaid Cymru in
1987 were all in Gwynedd, the one part of Wales where Welsh is the everyday
language. In the three constituencies of Ynys Mon, Caernarfon and
Meirionnydd Nant Conwy the nationalists gained 36.1 per cent of the votes,
comfortably ahead of the Conservatives' 30.9 and Labour's 18.1 per cent.
Elsewhere, the picture was very different. Throughout Wales, Plaid Cymru
gained no more than 7.3 per cent of the vote, a figure which has been
steadily declining since as recently as 1974, when it was 10.8 per cent.
There are only two other seats in Wales where Plaid Cymru is a credible
political force in vote-winning terms. At the last election the party took
23 per cent of the vote in Carmarthen, Dyfed, and 16.2 per cent in
Ceredigion and North Pembroke. Both are parts of the country where the Welsh
language is an integral part of the fabric of society.
By contrast, in south Wales the nationalist vote diminishes to
insignificance. In Monmouth the candidate won just 363 votes in 1987, 458 in
next-door Newport East, 377 in Newport West and 535 in Cardiff Central. In
three constituencies Plaid Cymru is so weak it is fielding a candidate
jointly with the Green party.
Nevertheless, in a hung parliament every vote could count. Plaid is hardly
likely to throw in its lot with the Conservatives since devolution does not
figure on their agenda. In any case, Plaid Cymru sees itself as a radical
party, on the left of the political spectrum.
The party's stance is unequivocal: it wants a parliament for Wales. Whether
it would support a Labour government, or a Lab/Lib-Dem coalition that
offered something less, such as an assembly with limited powers, is not
clear and would be part of the horse trading that would occur.
Even though there is some evidence that support for an assembly - a
centrepiece of nationalist demands - is gaining ground in Wales, it is
doubtful if even half the population would vote for such a body in a
referendum.
When the referendum was held in 1978 just 18 per cent voted for a Welsh
assembly. The opposition to it then was led by Mr Neil Kinnock. Now Mr
Kinnock leads a party that is promising a Welsh assembly within the lifetime
of a first Labour government.
While there are undoubtedly people in the Welsh Labour party who are close
to the nationalist cause, there are senior figures who are appalled at the
assembly commitment. They believe Labour in Wales is being swept along on
the tide of Scottish nationalism.
'The Scottish Labour party has been captured by the nationalists',' one
politician said. 'Their mad policies have infiltrated the Welsh party and
are pushing it in a direction and at a rate that the people of Wales do not
altogether want.'
Conservatives are adamantly opposed to any form of devolution. Mr David
Hunt, Welsh secretary, has time and again reiterated party policy that a
strong Welsh Office, with a cabinet minister, produces the best results for
Wales.
While this view is shared by almost the whole party, slight chinks have
appeared. Mr Jonathan Evans, candidate at Brecon and Radnor, has said that
though he personally opposes devolution perhaps the matter should be put to
the people.
Most business people, a voting class closely allied with the Conservatives
politically, certainly oppose devolution. They see all their links going
east, to London. 'We do not fear either London or the English,' said one.
'We work very happily with them and have no desire to cut those ties.'
OF THE 38 seats in Wales, 26 are being defended by Labour, six by the
Conservatives and three each by the Liberal Democrats and the nationalist
Plaid Cymru. The principality holds out the prospect of a number of close
contests, and many seats could go one of three ways. For example, at Brecon
and Radnor in mid-Wales Mr Richard Livsey for the LIberal Democrats is
defending a 56-vote majority - the smallest in Britain. The Tories were
second at the last election, with Labour a close third. Conwy in the north,
Cardiff Central and Monmouth in the south and even Pembroke in west Wales
could also go to any one of three parties.
