FT  21 JAN 92 / Stores ring up a retail-sales riddle for analysts:
Patchiness of the sectors is reflected in figures for December
RETAIL sales figures yesterday were not only gloomy but more than usually
puzzling.
Conflicting stories from different retail sectors combine with a distortion
in Central Statistical Office figures to obscure the detailed picture.
According to the CSO the volume of retail sales in December was 1 per cent
down on November. But the figures carry little weight with some retail
analysts who complain they are often revised upwards or downwards.
Many suggest that the weekly figures published in the staff gazette of John
Lewis Partnership, which owns department stores and the Waitrose supermarket
chain, provide a more useful indication of retail sales.
The John Lewis figures showed that there had been a 5.5 per cent increase in
total sales in the 24 weeks to January 11 compared with the previous year.
However, these figures also reflect the effects of the addition of new sales
space within stores and the increase in value added tax.
Mr Mark Husson, retail analyst at Warburg Securities, said: 'The John Lewis
figures have been saying that sales volumes have been flat or very slightly
down over Christmas but extremely strong in the sales period.'
The John Lewis figures may themselves have been 'distorted' because unlike
many other retailers it did not discount goods in the run-up to Christmas.
This may have had the net effect of depressing December sales and
accentuating those in January.
Part of the confusion over the apparently conflicting retail sales figures
may be explained by different sectors of the market performing in markedly
different ways.
Dixons, the electrical goods retailer, this month said it had produced a
year-on-year sales increase in the 'mid-teens' over the Christmas trading
period. And the bullish Mr Stanley Kalms, its chairman, said there was more
confidence in the high street - especially outside London - than many people
imagined.
In contrast Ratners Group, the jewellery chain, experienced a dismal
December with sales falling by 15 per cent in spite of a substantial
pre-Christmas discounting campaign. Jewellery has been one of the
hardest-hit retail sectors after recording rela-tively strong sales in 1990.
Sears, which runs the Selfridges department store, said there had been a
very good but disappointingly short spurt of sales in response to its winter
sales. And House of Fraser, which runs more than 60 department stores, tells
much the same story. It said sales were strongly ahead compared with last
year's abnormally depressed figures. But it added that there was a trading
'black hole' within the M25 orbital motorway.
There is also uncertainty about the election, which has particularly hit the
upper end of the market. 'Uncertainty is always bad for Joe Public,
resulting in a rise in the savings ratio and a drop in birth rates,' said Mr
Husson.
Another reason for the confusion surrounding the December figure stems from
a statistical quirk. The CSO measures its retail sales figures in periods of
four to five weeks. In order to keep them synchronised with the month being
measured, every five or six years it pushes the trading year six days ahead.
Thus January last year began with a five-week trading period.
This caused the period measuring November to spill over into December,
artificially inflating the November figure. While a seasonal adjustment is
made for this in December and January (when the effect is most significant)
in November no such adjustment was made. As a result the CSO said the
November figure of a 1.3 per cent rise on the month was probably inflated by
half a percentage point. Allowing for this the December drop on November
looks significantly less drastic.
There is the possibility of a further distortion in the failure of
December's figures to capture the true extent of pre-Christmas discounting.
Mr Simon Briscoe, UK economist at Midland Montagu, said the recession
persuaded retailers to bring forward their January sales to December.
The retail sales volume figures come from the total amount of cash spending
in shops, deflated by the appropriate parts of the retail price index. Mr
Briscoe believes that the RPI does not fully capture this discounting, thus
leading to an understatement of sales and possibly masking a sense of 'feel
good' by those who have been able to benefit from the heavy discounting.
