FT  07 MAR 92 / Gardening: Count on pig-power to spring some surprises - For
horticultural health and strength, Robin Lane Fox takes delivery of a load
of his favourite old-fashioned manure
THE crocuses are spectacular in the sunshine; the catkins on my Italian
alders are dropping pools of yellow pollen wherever I put them as cut
flowers. It is not for this reason that I know spring is round the corner: I
know it because the pig manure has come.
So, I fear, do quite a few others. On Friday the electricity board sent its
man to read the meter; he was duly impounded by the man who had already
settled in upstairs to test the burglar alarm; both of them then set off the
alarm without realising it. The police arrived and took them by storm.
No sooner had the police parked their car than the usual young man arrived
with his annual tractor-load of urine-free pig manure, which he dropped with
his usual care in its usual place - which happens to be directly behind the
police car's parking space. It has been hard to persuade the boys in blue
that I do not have serious unidentified enemies; people, perhaps, for whom
the Unauthorised Version has set alarm bells ringing, considering it all a
load of, well, peat-free, shredded high-nitrogen soil conditioner.
Horticulturally, this particular soil-conditioner seems to work like
explosive. It is much too strong for legumes, beans, young seedlings and
sweet peas. It is not too strong for roses, which seem to love it, and it
adds a new depth of colour to the cheeks of a hosta with fleshy leaves.
I look with amusement at the polythene packs of 'compost' - nearly 10 times
as much each - from garden shops. My treated manure is peat-free and
pre-crumbled, but it costs only Pounds 50 for a big load and lasts for a
season.
It adds both texture and tang to shrubs, hedging plants and anything for
which you need to break up the sub-soil with compost before planting. It
never becomes wet or soggy, and you might even mistake it for lightly-mixed
chocolate cake unless you approached it down-wind before the first ardour
had cooled.
This weekend, the last thing that ardent planters should be doing is to cool
off. Whether or not they live near a pig farm, they have a great chance to
plant bare-rooted stocks before garden centres pot them up into big litre
pots of peat and sell them as if they were twice their real size and worth
twice the money.
My routine for bare root planting is simple: a fork, a crowbar, a bucket of
water and a barrow of vintage cochon, '91. It has all the nose and ability
to open on the scenting-buds which Edmund Penning-Rowsell, Weekend FT's
wines expert, admires in the finer chateaux. It will be admirable for my
remaining old-fashioned roses and the named delphiniums which have been
sitting around since the dry summer.
The crowbar is necessary because of my eccentric soil. In the post-glacial
era, my soil acquired a layer of round stones at a depth of only a few
inches. If punctured, this lateral beach gives way to a light, open subsoil
which drains quickly and mixes wonderfully with manure. The matter of
planting, however, involves tenacious thumping with a crowbar in most of the
garden in order to break through the earth's crust.
Fork, water and manure are of more general value. The fork will break up the
lower soil: if you are planting a tree or shrub, you must dig a larger hole
down than the roots require and, even then, break it up and mix in some
manure. In due course the roots will run downwards into an unexpected
heaven. The water allows you to soak the bare roots of everything for an
hour or so before you plant it. Recently, spring has been extremely dry;
from now on, I would not plant bare-rooted stock directly from a carrier's
package.
It is on hedging that I most notice piggish influence. Box and yew appear to
revel in it; so does my particular favourite, the evergreen Osmanthus.
Osmanthus Burkwoodi is now a correct name for the old Osmarea: if you space
plants about three feet apart it makes a thick hedge of olive green leaves
to a height of about six feet, with as much of a girth as you allow. The
colour is almost Mediterranean, and a heavy dressing of pig manure helps it
to shine.
Next month it will be covered with white tubular flowers of quite a
different scent: to enjoy them, you must prune it only in the week or two
after flowering. Longer growths may tempt you this weekend, but if you cut
at the wrong time, you will lose the flowers.
Under hostas, pig-power is unmistakable. I would urge everyone to try a bag
because it works such wonders on leaves. The blue and yellow-leaved forms
are all very pretty, but there is one variety which is in a special class
for careful gardeners. Hosta plantaginea has sweet white scented flowers
above plain green leaves in August. Edwardian gardeners used to plant it on
the shaded side of a house where they could enjoy the scent in high summer.
I will be copying them, adding manure for special effect.
In five months time, it is hard to imagine that gardens will be looking
tired after a hard summer. I am anticipating hostas with a sweet, fresh
scent, but only because I will have packed them this weekend with a pungent,
throaty layer from the pigsty.
