FT  30 DEC 92 / Moi says west has backed Kenyan opposition
KENYAN president Daniel arap Moi launched an unprecedented attack on western
governments yesterday, accusing them of supporting his political opponents,
promoting tribalism and bringing the country to the brink of civil war by
forcing the pace of transition to a multi-party system.
The president was speaking shortly after casting his vote in the country's
first multi-party poll for 26 years. The day saw a heavy turnout of voters,
some queueing for several hours. Sporadic incidents of violence were
reported in some parts of the country.
Last night the national election commission said widespread irregularities
in polling had been reported in mainly opposition areas and that reports of
rigging were being investigated.
At his retreat in Kabernet, in the Rift Valley, the 68-year-old president
said the west had 'starved us for the past 12 months', referring to cuts in
aid flows.
He accused western governments of keeping silent about opposition threats of
post-election violence. 'They are partisan,' he said. 'They are supporting
the opposition so if there is civil war in Kenya they will be supporting
that also.'
Mr Moi's attack will strain further an already deteriorating relationship
with the west, alienate donors and deepen the country's economic crisis. A
positive verdict by international observers that the elections had been fair
is essential to a resumption of aid, frozen a year ago when donors applied
pressure for political and economic reform.
Mr Moi lifted the ban on opposition parties in November, paving the way for
yesterday's general and presidential election.
His outburst suggests that he expects that the observers will conclude that
the election has been critically flawed by government election abuses, and
that he has little to lose by venting his anger.
Most analysts expect the ruling Kanu party to retain power.
The observers were investigating reports that polling booths in the
stronghold of Mr Oginga Odinga, leader of the opposition Ford-Kenya party,
had remained closed for at least five hours after polling was due to start.
One international observer, however, attributed the problems to 'utter
confusion' rather than electoral malpractice.
Moi resentful, Page 2
Letter, Page 9
