FT  17 JUL 92 / Blue Arrow convictions fall in new blow to SFO
THE Serious Fraud Office yes-terday suffered the most severe blow yet to its
reputation when four City advisers found guilty of fraud over the Blue Arrow
affair had their convictions quashed by the Court of Appeal.
Mr Jonathan Cohen, Mr David Reed and Mr Nicholas Wells, all former
executives of National Westminster's merchant banking arm County NatWest,
and Mr Martin Gibbs, a former director of Phillips &amp; Drew, the stockbroker,
had their convictions overturned after a three-day hearing.
The appeal court decision prompted fresh calls for a review of City
regulation and the handling of alleged fraud cases by the courts.
The judges, Lord Justice Mann, Mr Justice Ognall and Mr Justice Buckley,
delayed giving the reasons for their decision.
The four men, cleared of conspiracy to mislead the markets by secretly
buying shares in the 1987 Blue Arrow rights issue, expressed their delight
at the appeal court decision.
Their lawyers had argued that the convictions were unsafe because of the
length and complexity of the trial and because of the cutting down at a late
stage of the indictment.
The failure of the prosecution provoked criticism in the City and at
Westminster. Sir Andrew Hugh Smith, chairman of the London Stock Exchange,
said the case had proved an 'appalling waste of money and resources'.
He said: 'Something that is as long-drawn-out as this is inherently
undesirable. It does not seem to offer justice to the accused, or to
society.'
Ms Marjorie Mowlam, who speaks on City matters for the Labour party, said:
'Either the law is unviable or the Serious Fraud Office's ability to
inter-pret it is defective.'
As a result of the latest judgment, the costs of the trial - estimated at
Pounds 35m - are now almost certain to be met from public funds, and not
from the defendants' employers.
The SFO would only say that an urgent review of the case was under way
following the court's judgment.
Two other Blue Arrow trials are still pending. Mr Charles Villiers and Ms
Elizabeth Brimelow, both former County NatWest directors, and Mr Paul
Smallwood and Mr Tim Brown, both Phillips &amp; Drew executives, are still
charged with conspiracy to defraud over their roles in the Blue Arrow issue.
It is widely expected that yesterday's decision will force the Serious Fraud
office to drop these charges.
Background and reaction, Page 6
Editorial Comment, Page 16
