FT  28 APR 92 / The other Pennsylvania primary: A political race that is
capturing the imagination
THERE really is a presidential primary in the fifth largest state of the
union today, but you would need sharp eyes and ears to know it. For
Pennsylvania has somebody else on its electoral mind and the name is not
George Bush, or Bill Clinton or Ross Perot but a 50-year-old woman who has
never run for political office before called Lynn Yeakel.
Last November the state elected as its senator a previously unregarded
Democrat by the name of Mr Harris Wofford, who defeated Mr Richard
Thornburgh, the former US attorney-general, two-time governor and
presidential intimate.
If this November it returns Ms Yeakel at the expense of another senior
Republican incumbent, then something quite remarkable will have happened.
And the effects will be felt far beyond the boundaries of the state.
Interest in Ms Yeakel's fate in the Democratic senate primary election today
far outstrips the concurrent presidential contests, which have been mundane
affairs with predictable outcomes. President Bush will win all the
Republican delegates and Governor Clinton more Democrats than anyone else.
Mr Jerry Brown, his only active opponent, seems suddenly to have lost steam.
This has left Mr Clinton free to raise his sights against Mr Bush and even
Mr Perot, the prospective independent candidate, but it has also meant he
has been unable to generate the sort of enthusiasm he will need in the
autumn to win back a state which has voted Republican in the last three
presidential elections. Anything less than a very easy victory today will
reinforce all the aired doubts about his electability.
Ms Yeakel had been thinking about getting elected to something for some time
but her mind was instantly made up six months ago when she watched Mr Arlen
Specter, the Pennsylvania Republican senator, grilling Professor Anita Hill
in the course of the hearings to confirm Judge Clarence Thomas to the
Supreme Court. So insulted was she by the nature of Mr Specter's attack on
Ms Hill's integrity and character that she took it on herself to get him out
of office.
Ms Yeakel is not without a reputation in the state as the head of Women's
Way, a group which promotes women's self-help in education, housing and the
social services. But this initially appeared to count for little since her
principal opponent in the Democratic primary was Lieutenant Governor Mark
Singel, the overwhelming party favourite son to take on Mr Specter.
But, on the eve of the primary, she seems to have come from nowhere in a
bitter and often vicious campaign to be running level with Mr Singel. She
has done this in part by borrowing from the Wofford manual, portraying
herself as the outsider versus the insider and placing great emphasis on
education, health and welfare problems, of which Pennsylvania has more than
its share.
But, in a year when women's issues may be a potent political factor, she has
done it mostly by playing the women's card. This has already turned up one
trump last month in Illinois, when Ms Carol Mosely Braun defeated the
incumbent Democratic Senator Alan Dixon as much as anything else on the
strength of the opposition of blacks and white women to Mr Dixon's vote to
confirm Judge Thomas to the Supreme Court.
Working against Ms Yeakel, both against Mr Singel today and, hypothetically,
against Mr Specter in November, is the fact that Pennsylvania rarely elects
women to state-wide office. Until Mr Wofford's victory last year, it had not
sent a Democratic senator to Washington in 30 years.
On the other hand, there is a growing national sense that there ought to be
more women in the US Senate (there are at present only two, Ms Barbara
Mikulski, the Democrat from Maryland, and Ms Nancy Kassebaum, the Republican
from Kansas) and in higher office generally. Ms Anne Richards, the current
governor of Texas, may even be on Mr Clinton's short-list of
vice-presidential candidates.
Thus, a Specter-Yeakel race, if it materialises, would be seen as a classic
confrontation between an experienced (and male) old hand and a woman with a
message. With most primaries for state office still to be held across the
country, a Yeakel victory today might well boost the cause of women
candidates elsewhere. This prospect engages Pennsylvania far more than
anything on the presidential front.
