FT  11 SEP 92 / Owen and Vance shocked by Sarajevo's devastation
MR CYRUS VANCE and Lord Owen, the Yugoslav peace mediators, had five hours
of talks in the battered Bosnian capital of Sarajevo yesterday, but warned
of further obstacles ahead in international efforts to end the ethnic
conflict in the Balkans.
After making a hazardous 190-mile overland journey from the Croatian port of
Split, the two envoys set out for more talks in Belgrade, capital of Serbia
and of the rump Yugoslav federation.
Although both sounded a cautious note, France later announced that they had
gained agreement for a provisional ceasefire in Sarajevo, which has been
under siege by Serbs for five months. But previous ceasefires have been
broken.
Reflecting international frustration at repeated peace initiatives in the
former Yugoslavia, Lord Owen, the European Community's mediator, said he
could hold out little hope of an early end to the siege of Sarajevo.
Mr Vance, the United Nations special envoy, said: 'It has been a somewhat
successful day but there are a lot of pitfalls ahead.'
The two negotiators, wearing blue flak jackets and helmets, first met
Bosnia's Moslem President Alija Izetbegovic and then went to a Serb garrison
to meet Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic.
Lord Owen appeared shaken by Sarajevo's devastation. 'You see the whole
wanton destruction, tower blocks shot to smithereens, and you realise so
much of it has come from the top and not from street fighting,' he said.
In New York, Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN secretary-general, recommended an
enlarged peacekeeping force to escort relief convoys in Bosnia. He gave no
precise numbers, but said the 1,500-strong force in Sarajevo could increase
as much as fivefold.
Mr Milan Panic, Yugoslavia's prime minister, will today ask the UN and the
EC to send international observers to monitor air bases in Serbia and
Montenegro, the two republics which form the new Yugoslav federation. He
wants them to be able to prove that Yugoslavia is not supplying back-up to
Serb forces in Bosnia.
Mr Panic, who is anxious to establish his control and authority over the
federation, will today meet Mr Vance and Lord Owen.
Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic accused Moslems of shooting down the
Italian relief aircraft that crashed last weekend, claiming they used a
US-made Stinger missile originally supplied to US-backed Afghan rebels,
Reuter reports.
