FT  04 APR 92 / Books: Thoughts from an open mind
EXPLETIVES DELETED by Angela Carter Chatto &amp; Windus Pounds 15.99, 228 pages
'A DAY without an argument is like an egg without salt', writes Angela
Carter in the introduction to what she surely knew was likely to be a
posthumous collection of her essays.
That savoury uncomplicated prose, always bristling for a fight yet just as
ready to praise and celebrate, could turn its attention to anything from
sociology to Salinger, Fielding to fetishes. The mind was always open, so
unblinking and unafraid.
A decade ago Virago published Nothing Sacred, an anthology of Carter's
journalism drawn largely from her columns for New Society. Book reviews
occupied a relatively minor place in that scheme; they dominate Expletives
Deleted.
Each of its five sections is triggered by books, by no means all of them
novels, leading off into discursions upon food, London, Amerika (the
Kafkaesque k is obligatory) and gender, out of which comes a torrent of
ideas and images, all jostling for intellectual space.
The cultural range is bracingly wide, and the juxtapositions it generates
sometimes startling. So Milorad Pavic's Dictionary of the Khazars is 'In
culinary terms neither tofuburger nor Big Mac, but a Chinese banquet, a
multiplicity of short narrative and prose fragments . . . In other words it
is not like a novel by Penelope Lively.'
Pavic's singular achievement is extolled by Carter as 'a novel without any
sense of closure, the product of a vast generosity of the imagination', and
it crystallises one of the main themes in her writing on fiction - how
writers at the end of the 20th century are to come to terms with the
problems of narrative continuity and open up the form to modes of writing
that are neither linear nor self-contained.
Hence, on one level, Carter's fascination with the folk tradition (in this
collection she takes in both Irish folk tales and the German legends of the
brothers Grimm); hence too her admiration for John Berger and William
Burroughs, even Christina Stead, and her unalloyed delight in the
realisation that with Empire of the Sun J. G. Ballard was likely to (and
did) receive the popular acclaim he had already richly earned in his less
vaunted science fiction writings.
But her sympathies could be engaged by so many other qualities: by
extravagance or formal elegance, surreal fantasy or stark realism. She
abhorred snobbery and (particularly male) pretension; there is here a
double-pronged attack on Elizabeth David and a savage dismissal of Paul
Theroux's My Secret History, alongside extravagant (to me) praise of Michael
Moorcock and of Grace Paley, which cannot avoid a glancing piece of
unashamed malice - 'I love to think how Joan Didion would hate Grace Paley'.
She is wonderfully, truthfully ambivalent too about the US. 'I think of the
United States with awe and sadness, that the country has never, ever quite
reneged on the beautiful promise inscribed on the Statue of Liberty . . .
and yet has fucked so much up'. Her transatlantic tour takes in Robert
Coover, Louis Erdrich and Edmund White, together with Hollywood and comic
strips; it constitutes, she suggests, the richest repository of contemporary
myths, of tangled dreams and disappointments.
Expletives Deleted ends with a piece of reportage - Carter's impressions of
James Joyce's Dublin 78 years on, chosen as an envoi because 'for any writer
in the English language the twentieth century starts on 16 June 1904,
Bloomsday, and shows no sign of ending yet'.
It has ended, alas, for Angela Carter, who died on February 16. We will miss
her most for her fiction, a loss sharpened by the knowledge that her final
novel Wise Children was one of her best. But also, as this collection
demonstrates, we should cherish what we have of her piercing honesty, lack
of pretension and sheer bloody-mindedness.
