FT  21 JUL 92 / Leading Article: The price is wrong
VIEWED FROM across the Atlantic, the US resembles a vast summer sale, where
prices of many internationally traded products are currently two-thirds of
those ruling in Europe. However, European visitors to the US should contain
their elation. The question they should be asking is why the prices they pay
at home are so high.
US price levels are not some short-lived freak occurrence. Only a small part
of the difference with, say, Britain is due to the recent weakness of the
dollar. Even with the pound at Dollars 1.50, the pre-tax price of many items
in the US would look like a bargain to a British tourist. In reality, a wide
range of goods has long been cheaper in the US than in Europe. Computer
buyers, for instance, have for many years paid the same number of pounds in
Britain as US buyers paid in dollars - almost irrespective of the prevailing
exchange rate. Though this anomaly has recently narrowed, it remains
perplexingly large.
One explanation is that some manufacturers have segmented world markets in
ways which enable them to charge higher prices in Europe than in the US.
Such practices have certainly been encouraged by the European Community,
which has sought to protect uncompetitive indigenous industries such as
electronics by bringing anti-dumping cases against a wide range of Japanese
exports. Since exporters frequently settle such cases by agreeing to raise
prices, they receive windfall profits which they can use to subsidise
cut-price competition elsewhere.
Wide discrepancies
Yet there are also wide transatlantic price discrepancies for many
manufactured products in which trade is not distorted by anti-dumping
actions, high tariffs or quotas. The puzzle is why these differentials are
not undermined by competition from cheaper 'grey' imports. Within the EC,
such cross-border arbitrage is explicitly blessed by Brussels, on the
grounds that that it speeds economic integration. However, the impact in
Europe of 'grey' imports from the US is still marginal.
Part of the reason lies in differences in technical specifications for
products such as cars and consumer electronics. Some stem from genuine
variations in national standards, but others are artificial barriers erected
by manufacturers. For instance, Japanese-made Nintendo video game machines
sold in Europe are programmed not to accept the software which Nintendo
sells in the US for half the price in Europe. Another obstacle is that many
manufacturers restrict the validity of extended guarantees to the country
where goods were purchased.
However, these limitations do not apply to products for which there is a
world standard and which require no after-sales service. Compact discs are a
classic example. A year's US output of CDs could be flown in a few jumbo jet
freighters from New York to London in seven hours. Yet European CDs are
still dearer than in the US.
Entry barriers
The reasons - in this and other cases - may have to do with the structure of
European retailing, where barriers to entry are generally higher than in the
US. Above all in Britain, where much of the trade is handled by relatively
few national chains. UK planning rules also favour incumbent operators by
severely limiting the amount of land available for retailing. As a result,
it tends to command premium prices, which have to be recouped through high
margins.
Furthermore, relations between retailers and manufacturers are far more
opaque in Europe than in the US. For instance, detailed trade prices of new
cars are freely available in the US. In Britain, it took a Monopolies and
Mergers Investigation to ferret them out.
While reliable information remains so sparse, it is hard to be sure of the
exact reasons for international price differentials. Their persistence in
supposedly global markets calls for searching investigation by EC and
national competition authorities. European consumers are entitled to clear
answers - not least because their readiness to spend their way out of
recession will be much reduced if they are compelled to pay through the
nose.
