FT  14 OCT 92 / Survey of Devon (3): Some confusion in the air - Road and
rail services steadily improve
DEVON has suffered in the past from a perception that it is relatively
isolated within the UK transport network; too inaccessible from London, the
south east and the midlands.
This certainly used to be true, but the county's successful start in
diversifying its economy has been largely because of great improvement in
its links with other parts of the UK and the rest of Europe. Many more need
to be forged, but the main task now is to get this message across.
In general, the principal centres are within two to four hours drive, via
the M5 and the motorway network, of nearly all the larger cities of England
and Wales.
'Communications have often been a handicap in the past, but they have been
greatly improved . . .we must carry on pushing for the remaining handicaps
to be resolved,' says Mr Eric Dancer, chairman of the Devon and Cornwall
Training and Enterprise Council.
Drawbacks to road communications that clearly remain are the lack of a
motorway across the county into Cornwall, and the poor links from north to
south. Two specific improvements most sorely needed are the Barnstaple
downstream bridge to relieve traffic congestion and improve north-south
access, and the Kingskerswell bypass to relieve congestion in and around
Torbay.
Exeter, the county capital and a growing financial services centre, is well
positioned at the end of the M5, with journey times of just over an hour to
Bristol, three hours to Birmingham and three hours to London. But
termination of the motorway at Exeter means that while the east of the
county is well served, other areas still await improvements. The A38, which
continues as a dual or triple carriageway from Exeter to Plymouth, is a high
quality trunk route, but there are increasing demands for it to be upgraded
to full motorway status.
Again, it is a matter of perception. 'The blue line on the map stops at
Exeter and this looks bad to overseas companies considering investing in the
south of the county,' says Mr Ken Martin, chief executive of the Devon and
Cornwall Investment Bureau, which is responsible for attracting overseas
companies to the county.
Within Devon, recent completion of the north Devon link road has greatly
improved internal communications, linking the northern centres of Barnstaple
and Bideford with Exeter and the motorway network.
The main road project still under way is upgrading the A30 trunk road as the
principal access route from southern England. When completed, in 1994-95, it
will be an alternative to the M5/M4 route to London, the M25 and the channel
tunnel and ports, and it will give better access to and from Cornwall in the
west.
Improvements in British Rail's InterCity services have brought Exeter within
two hours of London's Paddington station, and there are frequent trains
throughout the day, including early morning business expresses.
Here again, Plymouth, the county's big industrial and commercial centre,
gets a poorer deal. The city has a disproportionately longer rail journey
time of over three hours, and there is no train arrival from London before
mid-morning. Plymouth would benefit from a more limited stopping service, to
give faster access to Paddington.
Exeter has another rail link to London through east Devon, Dorset and
Salisbury to Waterloo. This line will never rival the Paddington service,
however, as the journey takes almost twice as long.
The big increase in traffic on the line could lead to improvements, but at
present it is seen mostly as a local community service between Exeter and
Salisbury, and as a commuting service from southern Hampshire into London.
It could increase in importance when the Channel tunnel rail terminal opens
at Waterloo.
There are two airports operating in the county, at Exeter and Plymouth. Each
has sought to become the region's premier airport, and a cohesive approach
to the needs of air passengers has suffered from the rivalry between them.
Exeter, owned by the county council, has a turnover of over Pounds 1m; it
runs scheduled services to London's City airport, Belfast, the Channel
Islands, Paris, Dinard and Toronto. Among its big advantages are an
excellent weather record and a long runway which can take the biggest
aircraft.
However, most of its recent growth has been in holiday charter flights. The
three biggest tour operators, Thomson, Airtours and Owners Abroad all use
the airport and, in addition to Spain, Portugal and the Balearics, new
destinations planned for next year include Cyprus and Crete.
Plymouth, Brymon Airways' base, concentrates more on scheduled services to
London Heathrow, Dublin, the Channel Islands and Paris. (Bristol airport is
used as a hub for other on-going flights to the continent and the rest of
the UK.) Its big drawback is that it has a short runway and can only operate
with short take-off aircraft. There is much talk of upgrading Plymouth so
that it can take bigger short-haul jets and turning it a real regional
airport, but this must be a long way off.
A number of recent studies have stressed that air services serving the
region require improvement if Devon is to compete effectively at a European
level. Local business leaders in Plymouth point out that the region is
unique on the UK mainland in having so few scheduled international services
within acceptable driving distance of its main industrial centre.
Fast and easy access to Europe by sea is available by the roll on-roll off
(ro-ro) freight and passenger ferries from Plymouth to Roscoff in Brittany
and Santander in northern Spain. Brittany Ferries operates seven-hour
crossings to Roscoff daily, and 25-hour sailings to Santander two or three
times a week. Over Pounds 7m has been spent in recent years on improving
port facilities.
The opening of the Channel tunnel next year is seen as a probable boost to
trade rather than a threat. The belief is that not only will it be cheaper
for regionally-based businesses to send goods direct to France and Spain,
but that congestion on the roads leading to the tunnel will increase
business from the Midlands and the north.
