FT  11 AUG 92 / Economic reforms 'hinge on arrears'
THE survival of Russian economic reforms depends on the outcome of a dispute
on how to deal with Rbs2-3 trillion (million million) in arrears between
state enterprises, Mr Sergei Ignatiev, a deputy chairman of the central
bank, said yesterday.
Mr Ignatiev, responsible for credit policy, said that contrary to reports
last week, there had been no final decision on the release of large-scale
credits to state enterprises. He also revealed deep divisions within the
central bank and with the government since Mr Viktor Gerashchenko was
appointed central bank chairman.
He defended the record of the radical reformers in the bank and the
government, and said, for instance, that a shortage of banknotes which was
the main source of popular discontent was now virtually solved.
Mr Ignatiev said: 'It is not so much ordinary people but enterprise
directors and various lobbies who have different reasons for wanting to
remove Yegor Timurovich (Mr Gaidar, the acting prime minister and a leading
proponent of radical reform).'
He added that he was not sure whether he himself would be kept on by Mr
Gerashchenko, who had appointed a host of new deputies from his old days as
Soviet central bank chief.
At issue was whether the government would be able to pursue its original
plans for dealing with enterprises that have continued to trade with each
other without demanding payment. 'It's enterprises' fault if they don't have
any money. We need to impose discipline so that creditors act responsibly
and don't send goods to enterprises which cannot pay for them. Otherwise
enterprises will behave like before and non-payments will grow again.'
Mr Gerashchenko had last Thursday withdrawn instructions which countered a
presidential decree in June by President Boris Yeltsin on how to handle the
debt crisis. The decree stipulated that net creditors would be repaid, if it
all, from the liquidation of assets or the sale of debts of other
enterprises.
An agency for managing enterprise debts would effectively decide the fate of
enterprises on a case by case basis.
Prof Yevgeny Yasin, the godfather of the government's medium-term economic
programme, explained that a differentiated approach was required because net
debtors were not necessarily more 'guilty' than the net creditors.
The instructions issued and then cancelled by Mr Gerashchenko would have
automatically compensated enterprises that emerged as net creditors, a move
which according to Mr Ignatiev would have cost anywhere between Rbs500bn and
Rbs1.5 trillion in inflationary financing.
