FT  05 AUG 92 / US index falls to two-year low: Loss of momentum indicated
at end of second quarter
THE US OFFICIAL index of coincident indicators - a broad measure of the
economy's current health - fell sharply in June to reach its lowest level
since the US recession began in July 1990, the Commerce Department reported
yesterday.
The index - based on movements in non-farm employment, industrial
production, personal incomes, and in manufacturing and trade sales - fell
0.6 per cent, taking it below the previous trough that was reached last
January.
The department also reported the first fall in six months of the index of
leading indicators, which is designed to predict turning-points in the
economy. The leading index fell 0.2 per cent, after increases of 0.3 per
cent and 0.6 per cent in April and May.
The sharp drop in the coincident index highlights the economy's loss of
momentum at the end of the second quarter. 'It shows the recession has not
ended yet,' said Mr Robert Brusca, chief economist at Nikko Securities in
New York.
Most economists believe the economy is still growing slowly, but a spate of
poor statistics, including a sharp drop in consumer confidence in July and
slower than expected growth in the second quarter, have raised fresh doubts
about the durability of the recovery.
The index of leading indicators was pulled down by declines in six of its 11
components. The weakest components were real money supply, the average
working week and unemployment insurance claims. Falls in share prices,
building permits and consumer confidence, however, also signalled economic
contraction.
Four of the 11 rose, the largest positive contribution coming from higher
orders for plant and equipment.
Forecasters are now eagerly awaiting the release on Friday of employment
figures for July. Most expect a modest rebound, after sharp falls in June.
Governor Bill Clinton has widened his lead over President George Bush in the
race for the White House, according to the latest national opinion poll
released here, reports Jurek Martin, US Editor, in Washington.
The survey, of 1,001 adults, done last weekend for CNN by Gallup, put the
Democratic nominee 57:32 per cent ahead, a larger lead than the 56:34
advantage the same poll found immediately after the Democratic convention
last month.
This suggests, for the moment, that Mr Clinton's big lead is not simply the
product of convention lift.
Mr Bush's approval rating fell to a new nadir, 29 per cent, from 32 per cent
in the previous survey. Only three US presidents had ever fallen so low,
Gallup noted.
