FT  30 NOV 92 / Management: Low marks for training / A look at why many
managers are dissatisfied with the courses they attend
Most big organisations attempt to provide some sort of training for their
managers, either in-house or bought-in. Always done with good intention, it
can be both extremely expensive and conspicuously ineffective.
Very frequently, the people who plan or pay for the training are
disappointed because the results are not what they expected. Is this because
their expectations are inappropriate, the training methods are flawed, or
their managers are untrainable?
The first problem lies in determining the goals of management training.
These may be general or specific; implicit or explicit; realistic or
unrealistic; achievable or impossible; measurable or simply determined by
gut-feel; trackable or not.
Most management training is about the acquisition of some skill - technical
or interpersonal - though it could also be about insight and increasing
sensitivity. As such, the training is often, but certainly not always,
modestly successful. The question, however, remains why the skill is not
retained between the classroom and the office.
Apart from skill acquisition, management training can offer other benefits.
Courses allow people from different parts of the organisation to network, to
compare and contrast and to establish lateral links. It may be an expensive
way of bringing people together but it can be very effective, particularly
if trainees are required to operate in competitive teams or undergo
outward-bound-type dangers.
Courses can also help to change the culture of an organisation, either
deliberately or not. Taught similar skills, or even concepts and terms,
employees develop into a more homogenous body who, despite the fact that
they have different functions and expertise, seek a common language.
Some courses may also be perceived as a perk for those attending, not
because it is time away from the daily grind, but rather because they
acquire some valuable and transportable skills. In this sense, management
training facilitates career development and may be seen by employees as
positive.
But most organisations have a training department, or bring in consultants,
to make their staff more efficient and effective. A laudable aim but
frequently unfulfilled. Why? The following are some of the reasons why many
management training courses fail to deliver enough bang for the (frequently
large) bucks.
The goals of the course are unattainable. Some skills are easier to train
than others; many are not acquired easily; most take lots of practice. What
can one realistically expect from a three-, five- or even 14-day course?
Consider how long it takes to master a language or to become fully computer
literate. Short, sharp shock courses may get one started, but need extensive
post-course back-up, if skills are to be retained.
The teaching method is inappropriate. Not all skills can or should be taught
in the same way. There should be a balance between instruction, practice and
feedback. Not everybody likes to be taught in the same way. The preferred
pace of instructions is also important. Most people who attend like to be
entertained by a jovial, story-telling consultant. But do they learn
anything?
The skills are not practised. However steep the learning curve, unless the
newly-acquired skills are continually practised they decline substantially
afterwards.
The skills are not necessary and inappropriate. Though the insight, language
and skills acquired may be interesting, they are not strictly relevant to
the trainee's job.
The corporate culture discourages the use of skills. Although the
organisation may be eager for employees to use a particular skill or way of
behaving, the strong corporate norms inhibit or even punish it. The skills
learned, then, are never used and it is the course that takes the blame. The
skills were never really acquired on the course. True skill acquisition take
effort and can be hard work. Some trainers prefer a rather old-fashioned
chalk-and-talk routine where they are in control. Things can look easy from
the participants' point of view and they may bluff themselves that they have
accepted the skills, but in reality they have not.
The skills are not easily transferable. The atmosphere and context within
which one acquires a skill may be very different from that in which it is
supposed to be practised. This makes skill transfer less probable and
certainly less easy, and may account for the course 'failure'.
The training tasks and situations are unlike the 'real world' situation. The
more similar the practice and the real situation the better the transfer of
skills and vice versa. Are plush country hotels or well-equipped training
centres similar to office environment or not?
Using high-trust, low-threat 'learning environments', many middle-management
courses focus on personal renewal and the development of skills. These
courses play an important (even life-changing) role in their participants'
personal and professional lives.
Then a typical scenario emerges. After the course the change participants
return to their organisation. Because no one else from the organisation was
on the course the ex-participant gets little reward for their experience.
Any notions about change and new ideas are knocked out of their minds by
daily tasks and problems. As a result many participants report that
frustration with their inability to affect their organisations any more than
they were before they attended the course.
Training courses work in the sense that learning occurs and is retained
under specific conditions. People must want to learn and attend the course:
one volunteer is worth 10 conscripts.
People need reinforcement and rewards for skill acquisition, not being
ignored, despised or punished. Practice of skills is imperative and needs to
be distributed over time.
Personnel magazines are full of residential training course advertisements.
They promise the earth and a fully changed individual - motivated, full of
insight, skilled and enthusiastic.
Often the persona who returns after a training course is exhausted, over-fed
and a bit bewildered. Training courses can change peoples' lives but not in
ways always anticipated by those well- meaning employers who send them on
the course.
The author is Professor of Psychology at University College London.
