FT  10 APR 92 / World Trade News: EC asks Japan to cut exports of cars by
100,000
THE European Commission has asked Japan to export 100,000 fewer cars this
year than the 1.26m vehicles it shipped to the Community last year, because
of the downturn in EC, particularly German, demand.
But EC-Japanese talks in Brussels this week ended inconclusively, with
Japanese officials declining to accept the Commission's estimate of reduced
demand.
Further discussions are expected, perhaps in the margin of the visit that Mr
Frans Andriessen, the external affairs commissioner, is due to make on
business connected with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to Tokyo
in late April.
Last year's EC-Japan agreement on freeing the Community car market over the
1993-99 period sets no ceiling on Japanese imports into the EC for 1991, or
indeed any year in the transition period, except its very end. The agreement
simply 'forecasts' that Japanese exports to the EC in 1999 will be 1.23m,
assuming total Community demand in the previous year of 15.1m cars.
The Commission is not on very strong ground in seeking a cut in Japanese
imports for this year.
In Tokyo, Japan's ministry of international trade and industry (Miti) said
that another round of discussions with EC representatives was likely early
next month, and that the outstanding problem was an agreement on an EC
estimate of likely car sales within the Community this year.
A senior Miti official said the 'monitoring' agreement with the EC was
unlike the self-imposed ceiling set in 1981 for car exports to the US. That
ceiling was lowered from 2.3m vehicles to 1.65m for the fiscal year
beginning this month, as a response to increasing criticism from the US car
industry.
'In the case of the US, there is a government limit, but there is no
specific obligation in the case of the EC. We have agreed to monitor those
exports, but there is no legal requirement. What we do is consult with our
industry,' the Miti official said.
'We haven't stopped negotiating with the EC. They feel that car sales will
fall this year, and that the export level should be less than last year's
1.26m vehicles. But it seems that they are not sure how much car sales will
fall.'
