FT  21 NOV 92 / Pequot turn tables on their conquerors: David Spanier tells
the tale of the Pequot tribe, almost wiped out in by the English 350 years
ago and whose very name came to symbolise doomed hope. Now 250 survivors
have regrouped and exploited their special legal status to build the most
profitable casino in the US on their reservation
IN 1637, English soldiers acting in the name of Charles I attacked the tribe
of Pequot Indians on the east coast of America, burned their fort and
massacred everyone they could find.
An Englishman who saw the slaughter wrote: ' . . . the fire burnt their very
bowstrings . . . down fell men, women and children . . . great and doleful
was the bloody sight.' After expressing Christian remorse, he concluded: 'We
had sufficient light from the word of God for our proceedings.'
Now, more than three and a half centuries later, a small group descended
from survivors of the Pequot massacre are taking a spectacular economic
revenge.
They have exploited their status as a 'defeated nation' under the US
constitution to avoid the puritan traditions - and laws - which restrict
gambling in Connecticut. A casino on their reservation is making huge
profits for the Pequots who are using the money to reclaim land they lost so
many years ago.
This extraordinary renaissance of tribal fortune is based on the Pequots'
ancestral love for their land which they never forgot and never lost hope of
regaining.
This land, rising in gentle slopes of forest from the coast, east of the
Connecticut River, has been inhabited for 10,000 years by the distant
forebears of the present tribe before the Pequots were almost wiped out.
Herman Melville chose the name Pequod - 'now extinct as the ancient Medes,'
so he wrote - for his doomed ship in Moby Dick.
Even now the tribe numbers barely 250 people living on the Mashantucket
Pequot Indian Reservation in the backwoods of Connecticut, a few miles from
the town of Mystic.
This is no dusty, dispiriting stretch of empty land, like so many Indian
reservations out west. Mashantucket means wooded land. And here, in the
colonial heartland, an entrance sign, in red and green on a stone pillar,
proclaims: Foxwoods High Stakes Bingo &amp; Casino.
Overnight, Foxwoods has become the most profitable casino in the US. It is
likely to make the tribe a profit this year of around a Dollars 100m. Every
day, in the nine months since the casino opened, 10,000-12,000 people have
poured in. They come from Boston, two hours away, and Rhode Island and all
the little towns around with English names such as Oxford and Norwich and
they love to gamble. Foxwoods is coining money faster than any casino in Las
Vegas, even though it is not at all like Vegas. First, there are no slot
machines. Secondly there is no neon.
A long low building, with outstretched wings, in brown and grey brick,
curving round in welcome, greets the visitor. The surface is lightly
decorated with Indian motifs. Beyond the acres of car parking, trees ring
the horizon.
In the entrance, a fountain splashes down over a rocky outcrop. The casino
floor is vast. Under glass roofs, it stretches into the distance.
The players are buzzing with youthful exuberance. The atmosphere is noisy,
friendly and unthreatening (no security men with guns and handcuffs). The
casino is run by American staff, 3,300 strong. The Indian presence is
reflected in touches of green and red colour and ornament.
The Pequot logo - on gaming chips and table mats and match books - is
everywhere. It contains a bare branched tree, a white fox beneath it looks
out over a dark curving hill, whose centre displays the mysterious mark of a
former tribal leader.
The main games played are roulette and blackjack, with a non-stop poker
parlour on a lower floor. There are over 200 tables in play, which exceeds
by far any US or European casino. Bingo is catered for in a separate wing.
Bingo has long been a staple of Indian reservations. At Foxwoods it attracts
upwards of 2,500 people a night. It is the casino gambling which is new,
made possible by the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act, passed by Congress in
1988.
Indian tribes are not generally subject to state laws: they have the status
of defeated nations, recognised by Washington as sovereign authorities in
their own lands. It took a series of court actions in Connecticut,
culminating in a ruling by the US Supreme Court, before the Mashantucket
Pequot's right to regulate gaming was upheld: and the tribe set to it with a
will, starting in February this year.
In the centre of the reservation is a cedar swamp, which was the Indians'
refuge and hiding place, called the owl's nest. A unique species of
rhododendron, with a blood-red centre in a white flower, said to represent
the blood of the Pequot, blooms there.
By the 1950s there were only two old women living on the reservation, then
reduced to 250 acres. One of them was Elizabeth George who vowed: 'Hold on
to your land.'
'For 350 years, there was no Pequot life and no Pequot history,' says Terry
Bell, a grand-daughter of George, and tribal affairs co-ordinator. 'There
was nothing here.'
In 1983, a few surviving Pequots, who had been scattered over New England,
secured federal recognition and a grant big enough to build half a dozen
houses. An effort to find local employment led to the opening of a bingo
hall.
It was only a small beginning but the Pequots were back on their land once
more. They now own just under 2,000 acres. The band of survivors
re-organised themselves and elected Richard 'Skip' Hayward, a grandson of
Elizabeth George, as leader of their tribal council. He had formerly been
employed as a fitter in a local shipyard; but he has shown sound commercial
judgment.
Permission for a casino was secured only after a long wrangle with the State
of Connecticut, which on the whole disapproves of gambling. Now the state
gains substantial taxes and must screen and licence gaming staff and
suppliers, to prevent criminal infiltration - a danger common to all US
gaming.
The casino proved an immediate success. Not simply because it was the first
in the region - there are about 30 casinos on Indian reservations, mostly in
the mid-West - but in the Pequots' style of management. After all, how could
a tribal council, gathered together from humdrum occupations in inner
cities, with no experience in business find the expertise to run a modern
casino? The explanation seems to be that the tribal council had the
imagination to recruit good people and, even more important, the maturity to
allow them to run the place on professional lines.
'Of course it's based on trust. We meet every week and we argue things out,'
says Foxwood's chief operating officer, Al Luciani. 'Sometimes they are very
conservative in their decisions. But we thrash things out together.'
Luciani, 47, is an experienced manager: he has worked both in Atlantic City
and Nevada and was one of the drafters of the New Jersey casino legislation.
Most recently, a decision by Luciani to resign his job, after a difference
of opinion with the tribe, suggests that problems of control may prove
serious.
Like the Pequots themselves the senior staff, who were persuaded to come out
to Connecticut, are making a new life, which explains perhaps why Foxwoods
seems so country fresh - 'gaming in its natural state', is its motto.
How much money Foxwoods is making is a secret. The original estimate for the
first year was high, a 20 per cent 'hold' (money won) on a 'drop' (money
gambled) of Dollars 500m. Results to date suggest the latter figure was too
low. The drop is likely to be around Dollars 1bn in the first year. If so,
the Pequots can look forward to a net profit this year, after running
expenses (Dollars 350,000 a day), approaching Dollars 100m.
So what will a tribe of 250 Indians do with such a huge sum? The Pequots
have no doubt. Not for them the extravagances of the consumer society. The
score or so houses on the reservation, dotted round the hill behind the
casino, are simple two or three-bedroom structures, the cars on the
driveways family saloons. A community centre is being built, tennis courts
are being asphalted. There are child and medical care and scholarships.
The aim of the Pequots is first and foremost to replant themselves on their
land. There are possibly another couple of hundred tribal members scattered
around the country, if they can be traced and persuaded to come home.
The casino is the means to continuing economic self-sufficiency. But Hayward
has a more ambitious aim. A Native American Museum is planned, at a cost of
Dollars 65m, to promote Indian studies and research. It will also be a
popular attraction. The Pequot land is to become a focus for Indian life and
culture.
Work has started on a Dollars 142m entertainment complex, including a second
casino. (If Connecticut ever approves slot machines, which the US public
finds irresistible, Foxwoods' turnover will double, or even treble.) The
expansion includes a 300-room hotel, three theatres and a performance
centre, a shopping concourse and a huge underground car park. All this will
be completed by the summer of 1993.
A second phase of expansion will include still more gaming space, a
convention centre and another hotel off the reservation. Employment at the
casino will rise to over 5,000. 'We are trying to create an overall
destination resort as part of our economic base,' says Hayward.
Hardly surprising that Foxwoods, so unlike Vegas but on a Vegas-type of
roll, has attracted the notice of other casino operators. Steve Wynn,
president of Mirage Resorts in Las Vegas, has been eyeing the prospects of
opening a casino in downtown Hartford. Other Indians may try their luck. The
attractions of the area, drawing on a regional population of some 25m, are
obvious: the Pequots' intention is to be firmly established before any
rivals follow suit.
The Mashantucket Pequots are rebuilding their tribal life with the gambling
losses of the descendants of the colonists who dispossessed them. There is a
Pequot saying: in everything you do, think of the seventh generation ahead.
