FT  04 JAN 92 / Arts: Nostalgic about Communism - Radio
THE TEMPTATION to mark New Year's Eve by recalling all that happened in the
year was resisted by all the BBC networks except Radio 1, who gave us a Top
40 of the Year. To mark New Year's Day with forecasts for the coming year
was a privilege given only to the Prime Minister, interviewed by James
Naughtie, though the previous day BBC correspondents, chaired by Gordon
Clough, gave their own conceptions.
Surely one of the more important events of 1991 was the demise of the
Communist Party. I belonged as a boy to the British bit until I made a
change into the Junior Imperial League; and I could not like anyone who,
when young, did not find something generous about the idea of communism.
Many good names were remembered in Radio 4's Damn, Damn, Damn, the Communist
Party Man on Sunday.
Intellectuals were recalled rather than such folk as 'Red Ken' at Morris
Motors; and many changed their minds. C. Day Lewis felt 'kind of romantic'
and (less attractively) thought that 'officer-class minds' could direct the
workers. No one minded his becoming Poet Laureate in due course. Stephen
Spender 'wasn't really at heart a communist', and he was later knighted. The
Spanish civil war was a focus for sentiment as well as politics; from it
grew, tortuously, Penguin New Writing. The Unity Theatre was an influential
fringe house, and many good people worked there, including Roger Woddis, my
personal Poet Laureate. Graham Greene had communist friends, but was not
himself a party member. The programme was sympathetic rather than seductive,
and did not keep Sir Michael Checkland's name out of the Prime Minister's
list on Tuesday.
My favourite programmes over the year's end were From Guitry to Godard,
concerts of French popular songs that Richard Mayne presented from Saturday
to Friday (not Sunday). Each covered a decade, and the songs were taken only
from films - the sole possible excuse for not including Jean Sablon. On
Saturday we had the 1920s; there was no sound on the movies then, but apt
songs could always be found - Edith Piaf grinding out 'Ca ira', for
instance, or Yvonne Printemps fully operatic in an aria.
In the 1920s we had Chevalier in 'Valentine' and Danielle Darrieux, very
sad, in 'Deja'. But the 1930s had songs still often enough heard to keep
them vaguely familiar. Here were Patachou in the programme's theme-song,
'Sous le Ciel de Paris'; Josephine Baker singing 'C'est lui'; Darrieux
again, as a Russian princess challenging the weather, 'Il peut neiger';
Fernandel longing to be tutoye; Yvonne Printemps, not a day older, singing
'Je ne sais pas ce que l'on pense'; and the discovery of the season, Charles
Trenet, in 'Je chante' and 'il pleut dans ma chambre'. There were also such
treasures as Yves Montand, Zizi Jeanmaire, Brigitte Bardot, Charles
Aznavour, Jane Birkin (once banned by the BBC]). Never mind about
understanding French; the songs and the singers were, and are, enchanting.
Radios 3 and 4 both had continuing 'Consequences' games over the holiday.
They were joined by Radio 5 in Chain Reaction from Tuesday onward. The idea
was that on Day 1, A interviews B; on Day 2, B interviews C; on Day 3 - get
it? But they picked the wrong names. On Tuesday, Ralph Steadman interviews
John Cleese. Steadman once drew a great dust-cover for a book of mine; but
he is no interviewer, and Cleese kept interrupting him. Cleese interviewed
American novelist William Goldman, who wrote the scripts of such films as
Marathon Man and Butch Cassidy; but he was seldom made to sound interesting.
Then Goldman interviewed Sir Ian McKellen, and he in his turn Glenys
Kinnock; but I wasn't listening by then.
Two errors in my summary last week. One, the genes programme didn't go out
on Christmas Day; two, Mind the Gap was not transferred from Radio 1 to
Radio 4 but the other way round.
