FT  01 JUL 92 / Arts: Tabloid times - Television
Normally at this time of the year British television consists of little but
thwok, thwok, 'Thirtay-fortay'; and 'Just a single there from a thick edge,
nicely fielded by Lewis'. It is, no doubt, yet another indication of the
intensification of the battle for ratings that this year there seem to be
nearly as many new series opening in early summer as we would normally
expect in early autumn. Even more significant is the type of material. We
have already seen the start of such tabloid telly series as Crime Limited on
BBC1 and Michael Winner's True Crimes on ITV and now we are getting a lot
more of the same sort of chatty human interest journalism.
Regular readers will know that the concern expressed here has never been
that such series should not exist but that popular journalism should still
be good journalism, and that the increase in 'tabloid' content should be
accompanied by a proportionate increase in more demanding matter. The fear
has always been that if you force desperate competition upon broadcasters,
Gresham's Law will ensure that bad drives out good, and even though the
total quantity of television goes up, not only does the proportion of more
intelligent material fail to go up with it, but the quantity may actually go
down. It is difficult to be sure, programme quality being such a subjective
matter, but my impression is that that is precisely what is happening now.
In fairness it should also be said that much of the tabloid material is
better than what you find being aimed at the same audience by today's print
medium. For example the opening episode of BBC1's 999, a British version of
the American series 911, turned out - contrary to the fears I expressed
beforehand - not to contain the sort of sickeningly intrusive footage in
which the American programme specialises. You can never be sure until you
have seen three or four episodes, but judging solely from the first, 999 is
more reminiscent of the stuff which used to appear in boys' magazines such
as Adventure and True Stories 35 years ago.
The first programme opened with a reconstruction of a rescue by firemen and
doctors of a woman buried under a collapsed house, and went on to an amazing
story about a man making his first freefall parachute jump, clipped to his
instructor who, unknown to the jumper, blacked out shortly after leaving the
aircraft, a fact observed by a following cameraman who 'swam' down to the
couple and released their parachutes. There was also a reconstruction of a
bizarre incident in which a teenage girl fell out of a water-ski tow boat,
was mown down by the driverless craft, and only saved from death by the
prompt action of teenage brothers messing about in a speed boat. It was hard
to avoid the queasy feeling that, however much the programme emphasised the
courage of the rescuers, we were all being invited to enjoy someone else's
misfortune.
The same could be said of A Class Of Their Own, an ITV series about gifted
children which opened on Monday with an account of Katharine Merry's
progress, as she hopes, towards an Olympic gold medal. Having run the
fastest 100 metres ever recorded by a 14-year-old she is now, at 16, under
intense training. This was a perfectly amiable, competent bit of programme
making, on the sort of subject which would once have provided a five minute
item for Nationwide.
Another new lightweight series from BBC1 is Fighting Back, which might be
sub-titled This Is Your Ghastly Life. From a studio chair Lynn Redgrave
interviews someone who has suffered a terrible setback but overcome it and
soldiered on. Programme 1 told us about Mike Nolan, a singer with a pop
group, who survived a bad road accident but now suffers from epilepsy.
Programme 2 tonight features former Wimbledon champion Arthur Ashe who
contracted Aids from a blood transfusion necessitated by open heart surgery:
more individual misfortune. Still, those who enjoy This Is Your Life and
find it comforting to hear about people worse off than themselves will
presumably like this series. But up to now British television journalism has
had ambitions far beyond this.
No doubt television executives will claim that it still has and point to
other new series such as CIA on BBC1, The Crescent And The Star on BBC2, and
Seven Up on ITV, though this last title is already familiar to us; all that
is new is the idea of extending the septennial sequence of documentaries to
children in Germany and Japan.
As for CIA, it is part of a flash flood of spy programmes which seem to have
been brought about by the collapse of communism in eastern Europe and the
end of the cold war. Suddenly people are admitting what some of us suspected
all along: that most of the 'secrets' were not worth guarding in the first
place and that most of the spies were double or treble agents or had been
turned so many times that they had forgotten which side they were meant to
be working for.
CIA began with a pre-credit sequence which suggested we were in for a
comedy: Nazis straight out of ''Allo 'Allo' crept into the woods saying 'Ve
buried zese wery waluable microfilms'. They proceeded to dig a hole and bury
what appeared to be half a dozen copies of 'Gone With The Wind' in film cans
the size of wagon wheels. Goodness knows what the producers imagine
microfilm looks like. Matters went downhill from there with too many old
spooks talking to camera, too many topics launched and then abandoned, and
far too little semblance of a coherent programme plan.
By far the best of the new factual series starting last week was Charles
Bruce's The Crescent And The Star which promises to record 'the resurgence
of Islam in the former Soviet states of central Asia'. Episode 1 showed us
what is happening in Turkmenistan. Out on the steppe mosques are being
built, the muezzin is calling the faithful to prayer, and civil servants
have stopped quoting Karl Marx and started quoting Adam Smith. It is as
though communism was just one more brief tale in the unending story of the
Arabian nights.
Clearly the British have not lost the art of making broadsheet television
programmes. However, it is worth remembering that whereas there are just
four programmes in The Crescent And The Star, a series such as Fighting Back
can run for years or even decades judging by This Is Your Life. Similarly
Seven Up is by its nature a very occasional series, while 999 could run and
run. It may all prove to be paranoia, but it looks as though ITV and the BBC
are building up for a ratings war at the tabloid end of the current affairs
business, with precious little effort being put into expanding the opposite
end.
