FT  23 JAN 92 / International Company News: Employees to gain control of
Algoma
EMPLOYEES of loss-making Algoma Steel will end up controlling Canada's third
biggest steelmaker under restructuring proposals filed in an Ontario court
yesterday.
The innovative rescue plan, which still requires approval of all parties,
provides for Algoma to be restructured in a new corporate entity in which 60
per cent of the common shares will be issued to employees over five years.
Workers and senior management will also have eight of the 13 seats on the
company's board of directors.
The remaining 40 per cent of the equity will be held by creditors and
preferred shareholders.
The plan requires concessions from all participants in the rescue. The
workforce will be cut by 1,600 people, over one quarter of the total.
Remaining employees will forego CDollars 200m (USDollars 172.4m) in
compensation and benefits over five years.
Algoma is a subsidiary of Dofasco, Canada's biggest steelmaker, which bought
it in 1988 from Canadian Pacific. The company has been bedevilled by
problems, ranging from the remote location of its plant in Sault Ste-Marie,
at the eastern edge of Lake Superior, to high labour costs and a
debilitating strike in 1990.
Dofasco wrote off its entire investment in 1990. Algoma suffered a CDollars
9.4m loss in the first nine months of last year, following a CDollars 702m
loss, including large writedowns, in 1990. It has debts of about CDollars
800m, and has been operating under court protection for the past year.
Under the restructuring plan, Dofasco will receive preferred shares in
exchange for debentures it holds, but will forego any common shares to which
it may be entitled. It has pledged a capital injection of CDollars 40m in
exchange for CDollars 300m of tax losses.
The Ontario government will provide a CDollars 75m loan guarantee. The
Ontario and Canadian governments will also guarantee part of a CDollars 40m
operating credit to be provided by Royal Bank of Canada.
Mr Earl Joudrie, recently appointed chairman, said the proposals are a
compromise which should resolve Algoma's immediate cash requirements,
restore long-term financial stability, establish a realistic capital
structure and improve the company's competitive position.
