FT  23 OCT 92 / Cold fusion hopes revived by work in Japan
THE DEBATE over 'cold fusion', once hailed as a source of limitless energy
and then dismissed as a deception by many scientists, is likely to revive
following an announcement yesterday that Japanese researchers have got
reproducible evidence for the phenomenon.
The scientists from Nippon Telegraph and Telephone will present their full
results tomorrow at the third international cold fusion conference in
Nagoya. Other research groups from the US and Japan are also reporting
evidence for cold fusion - heat production or nuclear fusion products or
both - but the NTT work will be particularly influential as it comes from
one of the world's leading industrial laboratories.
Mr Eiichi Yamaguchi, senior NTT scientist, said it was too early to draw
firm conclusions about cold fusion as a practical source of energy. But he
said: 'Now I believe we can use this in real energy generation, sometime.'
Cold fusion releases energy by joining together light atoms such as
deuterium at relatively low temperatures, in contrast to hot fusion research
which attempts to harness the process in large and expensive reactors
operating at millions of degrees centigrade.
The NTT experiments appear to answer a serious criticism of the original
cold fusion discovery, announced by Professors Martin Fleischmann and
Stanley Pons in 1989 - that positive results could not be distinguished
clearly from background effects and could not be repeated in a predictable
way.
Unlike the Fleischmann-Pons fusion cell, which had a palladium electrode
immersed in heavy water, the NTT experiments were conducted in a vacuum,
thus eliminating most background effects.
Mr Yamaguchi used a plate of palladium, which was saturated with deuterium
gas, placed in a vacuum and heated to 100 deg C. After several hours the
temperature rose to 200 deg C and helium-4, which was not previously
present, appeared in the vacuum chamber.
The helium-4 could only have been produced by the fusion of deuterium atoms,
the researchers said. They believe the reaction occurs as the deuterium
atoms collect beneath the surface of the plate before they are drawn out
into the vacuum.
But there are still many questions to be answered. The heat released (one
kilojoule) was 100,000 times less than expected - and less than the heat
output claimed by other cold fusion experimenters, including Profs
Fleischmann and Pons, who are now working in a private laboratory in France
with Japanese funding.
According to Prof Fleischmann, several hundred researchers around the world
are working on cold fusion. Unlike many others, Mr Yamaguchi has been able
to repeat the procedure five times with identical results.
If laboratories elsewhere can repeat his experiment, some of the doubts
about cold fusion may start to disappear. A lot more evidence will be needed
to convince mainstream scientists that cold fusion not only exists but is a
practical energy source for the future.
