FT  21 JAN 92 / Kohl urges crackdown on insider trading: Chancellor pledges
to champion Frankfurt as European financial centre
CHANCELLOR Helmut Kohl of Germany yesterday called on the banks and traders
on the Frankfurt stock exchange to crack down on insider trading in an
effort to strengthen their claim to become the financial centre of Europe,
writes Quentin Peel.
At the same time he pledged the support of his government in drawing up the
new legislation needed to make the German capital markets more flexible and
more attractive to would-be investors.
He also promised a determined campaign to make Frankfurt the headquarters
for the future European central bank, the institution which will control the
single European currency.
His blunt appeal was launched at the annual opening of the Frankfurt stock
exchange and German futures and options market.
It was not enough for the government to pass enabling legislation allowing
the stock markets to co-ordinate their activities, launch a futures market
and introduce new technologies, he said. The markets must put their own
house in order.
'It is just as important for the supervision of stock exchanges and
securities transactions, above all in the area of insider trading, to meet
modern requirements.
'It will not do for a few individuals to jeopardise international trust in
the German financial market. The current insider regulations - based on
voluntary codes of conduct - are clearly not enough to prevent irresponsible
behaviour.'
He spelt out a series of measures planned or already undertaken by the
German government, including the package unveiled last week by Mr Theo
Waigel, the finance minister, to strengthen the German capital markets. They
included the amendment of the stock exchange law, enabling the establishment
of the futures and options market, and the introduction of new technology in
stock market transactions.
Mr Waigel's package also proposes making insider trading punishable with up
to two years in prison and calls for greater transparency in company share
registers.
Mr Bjorn Engholm, the German Social Democrat leader, attempted yesterday to
end a damaging split in the opposition party by saying he was prepared to be
the SPD candidate to challenge Chancellor Kohl in Germany's 1994 election,
Reuter reports from Bonn.
