FT  08 APR 92 / UN envoy in 'frank' talks with Gadaffi
A UNITED NATIONS envoy had 'frank' talks with Libyan leader Colonel Muammer
Gadaffi in Tripoli yesterday on the UN intention to impose sanctions unless
Libya hands over the two suspected Lockerbie bombers.
The meeting came after noisy demonstrators blocked the UN envoy's motorcade
and assailed him in his hotel. One of the demonstrators died from injuries
received in a clash with police firing tear gas, according to the official
Libyan newsagency, Jana.
The envoy, Mr Vladimir Petrovsky, undersecretary-general for political
affairs, declined to give details of his meeting with Col Gadaffi. 'The
talks were frank, serious and businesslike,' the envoy told reporters.
He said he would report to Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN
secretary-general in Geneva today.
The demonstrations did not augur well for renewed attempts being made by
Arab League foreign ministers in Cairo last night to find a compromise to
end Libya's bitter dispute with the world community.
The special committee of seven ministers from Egypt, Algeria, Tunisia,
Syria, Libya, Mauritania and Morocco was formed several weeks ago to defuse
the Libyan crisis, but it has been ineffectual.
Mr Amr Moussa, Egypt's foreign minister, told reporters after a morning's
informal talks there were 'many proposals' on the table. But privately Arab
League officials are pessimistic about a successful outcome to their latest
mediation efforts.
'The aim of the committee is to contain the situation, confirm the Arab
position opposing terrorism, solve the problem in the framework of
international sovereignty and provide a solution which all parties will
agree to,' Mr Moussa added.
One proposal is for Libya to hand over the two accused men to the Arab
League, which would act as conduit for their eventual surrender to UK or US
authorities for trial. The UN secretary-general would also be involved in
such a transfer.
But in Tripoli at the weekend, Col Gadaffi was adamant that unless the men
voluntarily gave themselves up, he would not hand them over. Libya would
never surrender its 'sons', he declared.
The UN Security Council last week decided to impose an air and arms embargo
on Libya from April 15 unless it extradites the two men blamed for the
bombing of the Pan Am jet over Lockerbie in Scotland in 1988.
