FT  22 JAN 92 / International Company News: Sansui loss estimate almost
doubled
SANSUI Electric, the Japanese audio specialist caught up in the collapse of
the Polly Peck group, has nearly doubled its estimate of losses for last
year. The group has also announced a voluntary redundancy programme aimed at
cutting its workforce by one-third, to about 300 employees.
Redundancy programmes of any kind are extremely unusual for any established
Japanese company, where employment is usually a lifetime obligation on both
sides. Iwatsu Electric, a traditional supplier of telephone equipment to
Nippon Telephone and Telegraph, also this week said it would cut its
workforce of 2,361 employees by 640.
The redundancies at the two electronics companies are symptomatic of broader
troubles facing the industry. The last wave of similar redundancies was
about five years ago, when the steep appreciation of the yen prompted many
manufacturing companies to relocate facilities overseas.
Sansui said it expected little growth in the mature market for audio
equipment, while price competition would be intense. As a result, it needed
to cut fixed costs sharply by reducing the size of the workforce. It would
not say what its plans were, should sufficient employees fail to volunteer
for the programme by the deadline of February 28.
Sansui last year said it expected to move into the red because of a decision
to take provisions on part of the Y67.8bn (Dollars 533.85m) in loans to
Capetronic, a Taiwanese subsidiary which Sansui acquired when it was
purchased by Polly Peck.
However, the company has now increased its estimates of after-tax losses,
from Y18.6bn to Y36bn, because of the continuing weak demand for audio
equipment and video tape recorders in Europe and the US. Sales are expected
to decline to Y20.5bn, amounting to only 57 per cent of losses expected.
Sansui, which is in the process of being sold to Grande Holdings of Hong
Kong, expected a modest recovery this year, with sales climbing to Y24,000
and net profits reaching Y500.
Iwatsu said it was forced to reduce its workforce after revised estimates
suggested it would incur a Y3bn after-tax loss on sales of Y59.4bn, down
from Y63.2bn last year.
The redundancies are part of a broader restructuring programme aimed at
integrating or liquidating affiliated companies while concentrating on sales
of digital private branch exchanges and measuring instruments for
telecommunications. Iwatsu also plans to raise money through the sale of
property.
Iwatsu has been struggling to stay in the black following the privatisation
of NTT in 1985. NTT's own performance has been under pressure because of
increased competition.
