FT  02 NOV 92 / Economics Notebook: Deficits cast a shadow over growth
The economic prospects for Mexico and Argentina, the second and third
largest economies in Latin America after Brazil, have been transformed in
the past five years. But amid the good news - economic growth, higher
investment and lower inflation - there is an economic indicator causing
concern: both countries face growing current account deficits of a size that
compares with those they were running before the onset of the debt crisis in
1982.
Mexico's deficit is expected to come close to Dollars 20bn (Pounds 12.2bn)
this year, 6.2 per cent of gross domestic product and a higher proportion of
gdp than during its 1977-82 borrowing spurt. Argentina's deficit is expected
to exceed Dollars 6bn, more than 4 per cent of gdp and the highest level on
record in nominal terms.
Until recently, both governments affected unconcern. The Mexican government
argued in the first place that its current account deficit was caused by
large inflows of capital into Mexico, not the other way round. Second, it
made the point that since the government was running a budget surplus, the
current account deficit was a private sector phenomenon - a function of the
lending and spending decisions by private sector actors at home and abroad -
of no concern of the government.
To British readers, the argument will be familiar as one used during Mr
Nigel Lawson's tenure of 11 Downing Street in those long-past days when the
UK government was running a budget surplus. According to this hypothesis,
the only current account deficit that should be of concern to policy-makers
was one that stemmed from a budget deficit.
If the argument holds water, both Mexico and Argentina should have no need
to worry. Mexico is expected this year to run a public sector surplus of
around 2 per cent of gdp - in sharp contrast with the budget near deficit in
1981 of 12.4 per cent of gdp - and Argentina a surplus of around 0.6 per
cent.
It is mathematically correct that a country's current account deficit is
identical to the capital account surplus, adjusted for changes in foreign
exchange reserves.
It is true, too, that because the governments are not enlarging their
borrowings and above all they are not borrowing at floating rates from
foreign banks, there is no replay in sight of the 1982 debt crisis.
However, it is also true all current account deficits are not created equal.
The issues are, first, the ability to sustain capital inflows that back the
deficit and, second, the constitution of imports. In both countries, capital
goods imports have grown considerably, suggesting a pick-up in investment
that should increase the economies' productive capacities. On the financing,
though, a significant proportion of the capital inflows are potentially
volatile, short-term funds.
As Mr Paul Luke of Morgan Grenfell says in research published last month,
worries about the levels of borrowing needed to finance the deficits can
force up the interest rates Mexican and Argentine entities must pay to
borrow abroad, and force governments to raise domestic interest rates to
attract investment, thereby slowing growth.
Developments over the past two weeks suggest that - in spite of ample
foreign exchange reserves - neither government takes a sanguine view of its
deficit. Looked at another way, they are worried about what the process of
self-correction might entail for economic growth and for their
anti-inflation strategies.
In Mexico, the government has announced a gradual widening of the target
band for the peso by doubling the maximum daily devaluation. Furthermore -
and government officials admit this is no coincidence - Mexican importers
have been meeting unusual difficulties in trying to get goods into the
country as customs are insistent on compliance with new documentation
requirements. Along similar lines, President Carlos Salinas yesterday
promised effective action against unfair trade practices.
Mr Jonathan Heath, chief economist at Macro Asesoria Economica, an economic
forecasting group in Mexico City, said: 'This is a strong indication that
the government is very worried about the current account deficit.'
The Argentine government last week also announced measures to increase
incentives for exporters - for example, they will be refunded the 18 per
cent value added tax on inputs used in products to be sold abroad - and
increased taxes on imported goods. Such actions partly reverse the
aggressive economic deregulation pursued by the government.
An important common factor between the two economies is that both
governments have been using exchange rate policy as a central plank of their
anti-inflation strategy. Argentina's peso is fixed against the dollar;
Mexico's slides on a preannounced crawling peg. The result has been, in the
view of many economists, overvalued domestic currencies in both countries
and a loss of competitiveness. Both governments therefore have to resolve a
severe dilemma of how to keep their successful anti-inflation policies on
track, while preventing a further erosion of competitiveness.
Mr Heath believes the faster devaluation of the Mexican peso should stop
erosion of Mexican competitiveness. The annual peso devaluation of 4.6 per
cent is sufficient to keep pace with the difference between expected US
inflation and that which he forecasts for Mexico over the next 12 months,
7.6 per cent. This leaves future increases in Mexican productivity to do the
job of reducing the overvaluation.
In Argentina, the government has less room for manoeuvre with its fixed
exchange rate and the measures should give its exporters a breathing space.
Furthermore, much of its current account deterioration has been caused by a
powerful neighbour pursuing an opposite exchange rate policy. While
Argentina has fixed its nominal exchange rate, Brazil has been pursuing a
policy of devaluing the cruzeiro at a rate slightly faster than inflation,
depreciating the real exchange rate. Brazilian goods have flooded into
Argentina.
