FT  25 FEB 92 / Scotland the grave
Scotland will devour the energies and perhaps the spirit of the next British
government. This is the privately-expressed fear of many Westminster
politicians, more than a handful of whom are members of Mr John Major's
cabinet. I hope they are right. The United Kingdom is ill-served by the
historic complacency of the English. If the Scots oblige the infuriating
tribe south of the border to think afresh about how we run our polity they
will benefit everyone. If they puncture the illusion of grandeur that -
nearly half a century after the end of the Second World War - still haunts
the English, we can only cheer.
Mr Major disagrees. Like every prime minister before him, he has begun to
reflect upon the historic greatness of his office. It happens to them all.
Becoming the temporary tied tenant of Number 10 Downing Street is a rush of
Ecstasy to the head. You are host to Gorbachev, Yeltsin, Reagan, Bush. You
take your turn as chairman of the UN Security Council, the Group of 7, the
EC, or appear as first among equals at meetings of heads of Commonwealth
governments. This sense of being in the control room of the civilised
universe is given an electric charge by the thrill of being assured that you
are doing some good. For you are supported by highly competent officials. On
most days, you can reasonably claim, Britain's influence in international
forums is beneficial.
Back on earth, the prime minister's speech in Glasgow on Saturday could be
read as an intimation to the Scots that if they choose separation from the
United Kingdom they will no longer be part of all this. This is to make them
face up to the consequences to themselves of putting the union in jeopardy.
It could, however, be interpreted as a warning that if the Scots go, so
might the Welsh and Northern Irish. That would leave little England exposed
as a small offshore country, deserving of relegation.
The second interpretation is consonant with Mr Major's statement that the
debate on Scotland's future is 'a matter that transcends the election'. A
sense of playing a leading part in world affairs also explains his
passionate affirmation that 'England and Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland together are far, far greater than the sum of their parts'.
The same argument gives verisimilitude to the claim that Conservative
support for the union is disinterested. Floating Scotland free would detach
Labour's majority from Westminster, ensuring Tory rule until kingdom come.
'And yet,' said Mr Major, 'it is our party that supports the union. Not
because it's always been good for us, but because it's always seemed right
to us.'
The Glasgow speech was not all passionate declaration. It set out lines for
Conservative participation in the debate on Scotland's future. The
government may be wrong about Scotland, but at last the prime minister is
taking the argument seriously. Mr Major proclaimed himself The Major choice:
a modified status quo or separation for Scotland
a unionist because, he insists, the true choice is between a possibly
modified status quo and outright separation of Scotland. He rejected a third
option, devolution of powers to a Scottish parliament, as unworkable,
expensive, and likely to lead to separation.
Yet there is nothing in his speech that would prevent a Conservative
government elected on April 9 from turning around on April 10 and accepting
that devolution is on the agenda. The conventional wisdom is that it would
have to do so, since on most calculations there would be a mere taxicab full
of Scottish Tories left in the House. This is not so. As prime minister of a
minority or low-majority government, Mr Major would have at least three
choices.
First, he could attempt to tough it out, and appoint English ministers to
run the Scottish office, following past examples in Wales and Northern
Ireland. Second, he could try to do a de Klerk and challenge the Scottish
Nationalists to a referendum. If the offer was separation or nothing, the
Nationalists might lose. The status quo would be maintained, give or take a
few mollifying gestures in the shape of modifications to the operations of
the Scottish office. His remaining option would be to accept that many
Scottish Conservatives want to revert to its pre-Thatcher pro-devolution
stance.
If he proves happier with the first two of the above options than the third
it will be because of a genuine fear of an unravelling of the United
Kingdom. I believe this to be misplaced. The worst and most unlikely outcome
of devolution would be the eventual choice of Baltic-style independence by
all three Celtic states. That would leave England, with 83 per cent of the
population of the UK, well able to struggle along in the best 54 per cent of
its land area. Within the EC, there would be no frontier checks unless they
were imposed by England in a fit of pique. If Treasury figures about the
cost to English taxpayers of maintaining their burdensome peripheral cousins
are correct, Mr Major could reduce the standard rate of income tax to below
20p at a stroke.
This takes the argument to extremes. The prime minister rightly charged that
Labour's proposals for devolution are financially unconvincing. There is
also the thorny question of Scottish representatives at Westminster voting,
or not voting, on devolved matters. It needs an answer, even if that is no
more than a reduction of the number of Scottish MPs and a restructuring of
the committee system. Labour squirms around this. For Mr Major to say so
serves the politics of the moment, but that is all. The Tories should look
for a satisfactory framework for devolution, including consequential changes
at Westminster. All that is being sought is a regional assembly, or
entrenched local self-government. This is something Spain knows much about
and France is wrestling with. Only England, whose elective dictatorship
deprives its rulers of an understanding of shared power, recoils.
