FT  15 JAN 92 / EC to recognise Yugoslav republics: Hurd says 10,000 United
Nations troops could be sent in the next four weeks
THE FIRST United Nations peace observers arrived in Yugoslavia yesterday as
the European Community prepared to recognise the breakaway republics of
Croatia and Slovenia from today.
In Lisbon, Mr Joao de Deus Pinheiro, foreign minister of Portugal, current
holder of the EC presidency, confirmed that all 12 Community members were
expected to meet today's deadline for recognising the two republics.
However, EC differences were underlined when Greece started a diplomatic
campaign to prevent Community recognition of a third Yugoslav republic,
Macedonia, until it drops an implied territorial claim in northern Greece.
Both Mr Deus Pinheiro and Mr Douglas Hurd, the UK foreign secretary, who was
speaking in London, cautioned against exaggerating hopes of a breakthrough
for peace.
In Yugoslavia, hardline statements from both sides echoed this message. In
Zagreb, Mr Franjo Tudjman, Croatia's president, vowed to recover all
territory lost to Serbia during the last six months of the war.
He said a full-scale UN peace-keeping force, which could be dispatched to
the area next month, should help ensure that Croatia won back its territory.
The UN peace plan sponsored by Mr Cyrus Vance, the former US secretary of
state, calls for the withdrawal of the Serb-dominated federal army from
Croatia and the disarming of paramilitary forces.
Mr Hurd told the House of Commons foreign affairs committee that 10,000 UN
troops could be sent to the region in three to four weeks' time. The
50-member unarmed United Nations advance team which arrived yesterday will
be based in Belgrade and Zagreb and will liaise between Croatia and the
federal army and help observe the latest ceasefire.
In spite of official approval from Mr Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian
president, Serb leaders from Croatia have rejected the UN plan.
Mr Milan Babic, the leader of the self-proclaimed Serbian republic of
Krajina in southern Croatia, said: 'The UN troops will be deployed to stop
bloodshed' but added that they would not disarm Serbs in Krajina.
