FT  14 FEB 92 / Arts: Self Portrait - Orange Tree Theatre, Richmond
Gwen John was the sister of Augustus, perhaps the best known British painter
of his time around the First World War; she was attracted to women, but was
also a mistress and inspiration of the sculptor, Rodin. Born in Wales and
disliking London, she spent most of her adult life in France. She became a
Catholic in 1912, was remarkably attached to cats, some of which feature in
her paintings and drawings. She died in 1939, a strange and haunting woman.
Her brother remarked presciently that her work would be remembered long
after his own fame had declined. Augustus was right: it is Gwen John's
painting, not his, that is prominent in the major galleries today, though it
took an American patron, John Quinn, to persuade her that her work was worth
buying.
Even oversimplified like that, this is a big and complex story, perhaps too
much so to be put successfully on stage. But it certainly has its
attractions, especially to women. The main question is whether it can be
adapted in a way comprehensible to people unfamiliar with the background.
Sheila Yeger has had a shot at it, encouraged by the director Annie
Castledine.
The first performance was in 1987 at Theatr Clwyd, which commissioned it.
The production at the excellent Orange Tree Theatre in Richmond is new, but
is again directed by Ms Castledine. Undoubtedly it has its charms. The
conventional criticism of Gwen John's work when she was alive was that the
scale was too small. Here a score or so of her canvasses are shown from the
ceiling; others appear periodically on slides. There can be few questions
now about the quality: it is outstanding.
Rather than simply try to tell the Gwen John story, however, Ms Yeger has
sought to draw a moral. The setting is a contemporary exhibition of her
work. The gallery is run, and the private view attended, by some pretty
stock characters: all-purpose arts journalist; neurotic female trying to
write a novel; and a TV arts producer. Their quarrels alternate with Gwen
John's drama, her scenes with Rodin and so on, enacted on the gallery floor.
The moral is that unhappy women today can draw encouragement from her
example.
That seems to be pushing it a bit. Gwen John was an extraordinary character
by any standards; the contemporary characters in Ms Yeger's play are made
out of cardboard. Thus there is no parallel between past and present. The
complexity of the plot is also made hard to follow by multi-part playing.
Richard Howard plays the TV producer, Edwin John - Gwen's father; Augustus
John; and Rodin. He is at his best as Rodin.
Barbara Marten plays only Gwen John and at times does it remarkably well,
never more so than when she is modelling for Rodin. This is a splendid part
slightly bogged down in more mundane material. The gallery where the action
takes place is designed with some flair by Steven Richardson. But in the end
it is an intriguing rather than a compelling evening.
