FT  31 OCT 92 / Finance and the Family: Pension fears increase nearly
threefold - Scheherazade Daneshkhu considers the rise in queries to Opas
PENSION worries in the wake of Robert Maxwell's fraud have helped to push up
the level of inquiries to the Occupational Pensions Advisory Service nearly
threefold in the year to March.
Opas, which offers free advice to those with problems about their pension
said inquiries had risen from 7,240 last year (March 1990-March 1991) to
20,034 in the year to March 1992.
Apart from the Maxwell effect, Opas attributed the rise to the establishment
of the Pensions Ombudsman in April 1991. The Pensions Ombudsman refers cases
to Opas first.
In its annual report, Opas said the largest increase in inquiries this year
related to difficulties following the wind-up of pension schemes. These
queries accounted for 4 per cent of the overall number last year but
increased to 14 per cent this year.
'Much of this is due to the many employer insolvencies during the recession
but some resulted from employers choosing to discontinue their final salary
pension schemes,' said Opas. Some wind-ups involved instances of clear
malpractice.
One deferred pensioner contacted Opas after his pension, already nine months
overdue, had not been paid. Opas discovered that his employer had gone into
liquidation and the trustees had wound up the scheme. It then emerged that a
large proportion of the money from the pension fund had been invested in the
employer company and other ventures, when these were already in financial
difficulties.
Opas said the prospect of the employee receiving his pension was not good,
since the remaining assets of the fund were unlikely to be adequate even to
meet the existing pensions payment.
Margaret Grainger, president of Opas, said that for the individuals
involved, such cases were 'just as disastrous as for a Maxwell employee.'
Opas will be submitting recommendations to an independent review of
occupational pension schemes headed by Professor Roy Goode in the aftermath
of the Maxwell affair, but Grainger said: 'No amount of regulation will ever
stop the rogues.' She said Opas would not welcome over-regulation which
would increase the burden of costs on honest trustees, while failing to stop
the crooks.
The largest numbers of inquiries, this year as last, was about transfer
values and the level of benefits on leaving service. Many complaints were
about delays in the payment of transfer values.
In one case, an employee who left his public sector job in 1988 did not get
receive his transfer payment until 1990, when it was Pounds 3,000 below the
amount quoted to him when he left. After intervention by Opas, the scheme
authority agreed to improve the transfer value by over Pounds 3,000.
However, Grainger said many of the inquiries Opas hadreceived arose because
employees became worried after the scheme authorities failed to respond to
letters from them.
Don Hall, Opas chief executive, said that in the vast majority of cases,
complaints to Opas were made from people who did not understand their
pension policy.
For example, some complaints were from those who had been sold a policy
requiring annual premiums but thought they had bought a single premium
policy. The report emphasised the 'need for better communication so that
scheme members more readily understand benefits and how they are
calculated.'
