FT  06 AUG 92 / Congressional Primaries: Women succeed as incumbents slide
WOMEN did well and incumbents poorly in the latest round of state primary
elections for Congress on Tuesday, confirming trends apparent all year.
Victories by two Democrats, Gloria O'Dell and Geri Rothman-Serot in Kansas
and Missouri respectively, bring to nine the number of women, eight of them
Democrats, who will be contesting Senate races in November. This is already
close to a record, with many states still to hold primaries.
At present the Senate has only two women members, Barbara Mikulski, the
Democrat from Maryland, who is heavily favoured to win re-election, and
Nancy Kassebaum, the Republican from Kansas whose seat is not up this year.
Two House members - the Republicans Mr Guy vander Jagt in Michigan, a
13-term veteran, and Mr Dick Nichols in Kansas - lost on Tuesday, bringing
to 15 the number of sitting representatives beaten in primaries. The number
of seats that incumbents will not be defending rises to well over 60 when
retirements are included. Total changeover in the House could exceed 100.
Ms O'Dell and Ms Rothman-Serot will do well even to threaten the Republican
incumbents in November. Senators Robert Dole in Kansas and Christopher Bond
in Missouri won their primaries easily and start heavy favourites.
But other women Senate candidates are faring much better. Latest polls in
Illinois give Carol Mosely Braun a 30-plus point lead over a lacklustre
Republican nominee, while in California Barbara Boxer and Dianne Feinstein,
both Democrats, are ahead by 15-20 points. Lynn Yeakel is given a real
chance in Pennsylvania.
Mr Bill Clinton, the Democratic presidential nominee, has had no hesitation
in hitching himself to the women's bandwagon, which is motoring along on two
major causes; freedom of reproductive choice and opposition to sexual
harassment.
Mr Clinton left Arkansas yesterday with Senator Al Gore, his running mate,
on another bus tour. In three of the six midwestern states on the itinerary
 -Illinois, Missouri and Iowa - his party is fielding women Senate
candidates.
Mr Bush also took to the road yesterday, but to more conventional campaign
events in New York and Nevada in front of Catholic and military veterans'
associations. His appeal to women voters is mostly based on his call for the
restoration of traditional family values.
President Bush's approval rating has dropped to 33 per cent, the lowest of
his presidency, according to an ABC News-Washington Post poll released
yesterday.
Over 90 per cent of Americans approved of him after the Gulf War, but his
rating has plummeted 57 points over 17 months. No president with such a low
rating has won re-election since political polling began in the 1940s.
