FT  08 SEP 92 / Thai election campaign promises more of the same: Democratic
idealists find little support against patronage politics in the provinces
THE 30-year-old Thai peasant woman sitting on the concrete floor of her
house in the village of Nong Nok Kwak is the kind of voter who brings
pro-democracy activists in the faraway capital, Bangkok, to the brink of
despair.
At the last general election in March, Somjai gave her vote to a local
politician in exchange for 20 baht in cash (less than a dollar) and a
special 3,000-baht meal for the local schoolchildren financed by the
candidate.
On Sunday there is another general election and she is ready to sell her
vote again. She does not have much choice.
It has all been arranged at a meeting between the candidate and the village
headman, and the headman will be at the polling booth to ensure that she
puts her mark in the right place.
Somjai has never seen her candidate but she knows a bit about politics from
the black and white television in her living room, and she knows that there
was a fight between soldiers and protesters on the streets of Bangkok in May
in which people were killed.
She knows that the soldiers are good people, because when the dry season
comes in April or May, the troops will bring water to the village in tankers
on the orders of the King. She has no piped water in or near her house.
She knows that the leader of the Bangkok demonstrators, Mr Chamlong
Srimuang, is a bad man, because she heard from the television news that he
led people to their deaths. What she does not know is that the television
stations she watches are controlled by the army.
Asked what she would like from her member of parliament, Somjai - not her
real name - responds immediately: new and improved crop varieties to
increase her harvests of rice and cassava, and running water.
Somjai's views are typical of Thailand's rural north-east, a region known as
Isarn. The soil is often stricken with drought and salinity. The inhabitants
are poor, and many migrate to Bangkok to find work. Those who stay are
likely to end up owing money to the state agricultural bank or to local
middlemen; some have forfeited their land. National politics and the
struggle for democracy are not a priority.
Forgotten for much of the time by the increasingly wealthy inhabitants of
Bangkok, Isarn suddenly springs to prominence during election campaigns.
The region is heavily populated, and the voters in its 17 provinces elect
128 MPs, more than a third of the total. Isarn MPs are a vital source of
support for any party leader who fancies himself as a national figure.
It was not surprising, therefore, that Mr Chavalit Yongchaiyudh, a former
army commander who heads the New Aspiration Party, was greeted by Mr Sia
Leng, an influential ethnic Chinese 'godfather,' when he arrived at Khon
Kaen airport to campaign in the north east the other day.
'I am a merchant,' said Mr Sia Leng, a deceptively insignificant-looking
businessman with an Adidas jacket and a passion for gambling. 'I have many
subordinates to support Chavalit.' Mr Chavalit said he wanted to fight
poverty and do his job for the people. Asked what the job was, he replied:
'To make them happy.'
Such is Thai politics. The powerful local warlords and businessmen -
laughingly labelled as 'traditional politicians' by the Thai liberal press -
know how to woo the Isarn electorate, and they are wooed in turn by the
various parties.
First the candidates seek to strike a deal with the local middlemen and
village headmen to bring in bloc votes.
Second, they promise to help farmers, by building a bridge or bringing water
to a village, a tactic which is particularly effective if they have inside
knowledge that the central government is already planning to build the
bridge or bring the water anyway.
Third, they buy votes, and if this becomes too obvious they distribute
'travel allowances' to supposed party workers or pay villagers to 'look
after campaign posters' stuck on the walls of their homes.
Successful candidates will hope to participate in a coalition government and
use their influence to divert funds to their constituency - and perhaps to
their own pockets.
Ranged against these unscrupulous practitioners of old-fashioned patronage
politics are Thailand's democratic idealists. Increasing in numbers, mainly
urban, educated and middle class, they have been galvanised into action by
their victory in May over the armed forces and traditional politicians who
supported the military.
After troops shot dead at least 50 pro-democracy demonstrators, Gen Suchinda
Kraprayoon, former coup leader and army commander, was forced to resign, and
the coalition government of traditional politicians was dissolved, paving
the way for Sunday's elections.
A typical young liberal is likely to support the Democrat Party or Mr
Chamlong's Palang Dharma, and might want to help Pollwatch, the independent
organisation charged with monitoring the election and educating people in
the democratic ways.
There are signs that the liberal parties, already powerful in Bangkok, are
beginning to increase their strength in provincial towns and may even win
enough seats in the election to lead a coalition. But the transformation of
village politics in the north-east is expected to be slow.
A Thai aid worker in the area around Somjai's home described a recent
attempt to show an anti-military video of the May shootings in another
village.
'The headman said 'Stop] or I will shoot the TV',' the aid worker said.
Somjai may be selling her vote in a few more elections yet.
Uneasy peace reigns at Thailand's national airline, Page 30
