FT  29 SEP 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (31): The cost of pain - and
pleasure
NOTHING PERSONAL: THE BUSINESS OF SEX by Donald McRae Mainstream Pounds
14.99, 304 pages
BUTTERFLIES OF THE NIGHT by Lisa Louis Weatherhill Pounds 12.99, 214 pages
HAVE YOU ever wanted to see your financial adviser given a stern talking to?
Then soundly thrashed? And made to pay for it at three times the rate he
charges for his own professional services? If you think he would not enjoy
it too much, send him to Madame M, a woman in full possession of her
destiny, along with a cupboard of whips, ten clients a week, a Jersey
account and Pounds 70,000 a year.
Madame M, or Mandy, features in Donald McRae's informing, alarming and sad
book about the sex industry in England, Nothing Personal. She comes from a
wealthy family, has a couple of university degrees in philosophy, and at 30
embarked on a five-year mission to boldly give what no man has had before
and accrue a tidy sum as a purveyor of sado-masochistic (S &amp; M) fantasy to
the rich.
In the fantasy chamber, she introduces McRae to one of her clients for a
confidential chat: his name is Robert and he works as a market analyst. He
appears in a black leather cat-suit with an all-covering hood, and McRae
conducts a bizarre interview with the muffled city slicker which would be
high comedy if it were not such a sorry spectacle.
'Of course it's gonna seem strange to you at first', Mandy tells McRae, 'S &amp;
M goes to the root of people's darkest fears and desires. It's about
domination and submission, about control and abandonment, about pleasure and
pain.' It's also about Pounds 1,500 a week. So much for Mandy, but try to
avoid her friend, the penta-lingual Simone, who works in the basement with
needles and branding irons. She has Edward Munch's The Scream on the wall,
probably to take her clients' minds off her Pounds 1,000 hourly rate.
Pounds 1,000 in King's Cross would cover a year's weekly diversion of some
form. McRae writes on the range of sex for sale available on the street, via
telephone booths, in Soho bedsits and dingy peepshows. And it is not all
male clients. McRae includes a couple of edgy interviews with Rachel and
Arlene who speak out on the taboo of women paying men for sex.
But at last McRae meets Sara Dale, late of Shiny Housewife International,
peddling therapeutic sex and sympathy; then onward to a dreadful Soho pimp
and a pathetic Chinatown prostitute who supports her boyfriend's Pounds 100
a day heroin habit. Only once does McRae confront the fact that his
'anthropological' interest is bound to a darker voyeurism. But his humanity
persists in his humour: in the riotous assault by a big black woman who
thinks he might like and pay for it, in the absurdity of writing an
Afrikaans message to a Dutch 'peep show' stripper, and in the suburban
strangeness of sexual healing in Surbiton.
The message of Nothing Personal is that the sooner prostitution is
decriminalised the better, perhaps along the lines of Sara Dale's 'Career
Prostitution' charter for safe working conditions along with respect and
confidentiality with accompanying protection from disease, harassment and
non-payment.
In Japan, as Lisa Louis' Butterflies of the Night rightly suggests, matters
are more open and less hypocritical than in England, but every bit as sad.
Louis' approach is less implicated than McRae's. She enters the Kyoto mizu
shobai, the night life of Japan's bars, clubs and sex emporia, to interview
Geishas, Mama-sans and hostesses. She talks to waitresses in the noo pan
kissa (no-panty coffee shop) and soapers at the Sopurando or 'Soapland', a
modernised version of the old Toruku (Turkish bath), in which the girl uses
herself as a human sponge to massage the client. That might make Madam
Butterfly the world's first soap opera star.
