FT  20 OCT 92 / Survey of World Car Industry (18): A motorway over the Rio
Grande - Mexico's labour force becomes a strategic asset for the US auto
industry
MEXICO'S car market has emerged from the tortuous North American free trade
negotiations well placed to strengthen its position as a low-cost
manufacturing base for the big three US car companies.
Under the terms of the agreement, the US has agreed to remove all tariffs on
Mexican cars and car parts within 10 years, and let Mexico be considered
North American for purposes of meeting US Corporate Average Fuel Economy
(Cafe) standards. In turn, Mexico will abolish restrictions on foreign
investment in car part makers, and gradually relax all restrictions on
imports.
While this latter Mexican concession has raised fears of a flood of American
imports, the booming domestic market should provide room for all five
domestic producers. From January to July this year domestic car sales
reached 417,887 units, up 11.2 per cent on the same period in 1991. Sales
this year will be around 730,000 units, nearly 100,000 more than last year,
and three times sales in 1987.
While this year's 10 per cent growth is half last year's, this is largely a
result of a slowing economy. When the economy picks up in the second half of
next year, growth should return to previous levels. The privatisation of
Mexico's banks has greatly expanded access to credit, making it easier for
middle-class Mexicans to finance their car purchases. Domestic sales should
reach 1m by 1995 on current projections.
Exports have shrugged off the weakening US market, and in the first seven
months were 235,000 units, 27 per cent up on the same period last year.
Exports on current trends should be about 400,000 cars this year, nearly
seven times more than in 1986.
The big three US car companies account for the lion's share of exports, with
Chrysler exporting Ram Chargers, Ford Tracers and Escorts, and General
Motors Cavaliers and Cutlasses. These car companies have invested heavily in
export plants in Mexico recently, because of Mexico's low costs, relatively
high productivity of employees, and proximity to the US market.
The average Mexican car worker makes Dollars 4-Dollars 5 a day, a fifth of
his US counterpart. But productivity at Mexico's custom-built export plants
in Northern and central Mexico is as high or higher than in many US plants,
thanks in part to malleable labour unions. Ford's Hermosillo plant has been
widely regarded as one of the most efficient in the world, and was hailed as
such by MIT researchers in the book The Machine that Changed the World.
Under the proposed free trade agreement the US car companies will almost
certainly integrate still further their Mexican and US, Canadian operations,
concentrating production of a few vehicles in Mexico, and importing
remaining domestic Mexican needs from up north. With production of 700,000
split among 10 car models, Mexico's plants still operate on a much smaller
scale than those in the US.
The United Auto Workers union has opposed Nafta precisely because it fears
that such restructuring would lead to a loss in their jobs. In February GM
gave a hint of what might happen, by shifting production of some engines
from Moraine, Ohio, to Toluca, Mexico.
Mr Victor Barreira, head of Ford Mexico, says 'we would like to have high
volume plants in Mexico, keeping some production at home, and exporting some
. . . We will pick the place (between the US, Mexico and Canada) where it
makes sense to produce a vehicle.' He hints that Ford is looking at
producing small vehicles in Mexico. Detroit may thus shift production of
some small cars from Asia to Mexico.
The proposed Nafta makes such as strategy more attractive, by putting
minimum North American content at 62.5 per cent (compared with just 50 per
cent in the US-Canadian FTA) for cars to be eligible for tariff-free imports
into the US. It is much easier for the US Mexican-based plants rather than
Asian-based plants to meet this condition, since practically all the parts
of the US Mexican cars are from the US, or Mexico.
Mexico's two other car producers - Nissan and Volkswagen - are at some
disadvantage, since they import many of their parts from their home country.
Nissan has thus strongly attacked the high local content provision under
Nafta. It would have to pay Mexican tariffs on cars produced for the Mexican
market, if they do not meet the content rules.
Volkswagen decided long before Nafta was proposed to bring parts producers
to Mexico, to help it compete in the North and South American markets. Mr
Dietrich Aufenacker, sales and marketing vice-president, says 'if you want
to sell a product in North America you have to source in North America. Our
strategy is thus sourcing in dollars in dollar-dependent countries. That is
the only way to reduce dependence on the EC.' VW is thus bringing a minimum
of 25 German suppliers to Mexico.
The company last year exported from Mexico 60,000 cars to the US, and this
year hopes to increase this to 100,000.
At same time it is boosting exports from Mexico to Central and South
America, from around 5,000 last year, to a hoped for 10,000 next year. Mr
Aufenacker hints that like Ford the company may bring to Mexico another line
of cars, to compete with its North American rivals.
Even with the booming domestic market, Nissan and Volkswagen are likely to
face more intense pressure from the US car companies as Mexico releases its
import restrictions. Under the proposed Nafta, Mexico will let car producers
import Dollars 1 value of cars for every 80 cents of exports, a ratio
gradually falling to 55 cents over 10 years, and then disappearing.
Currently Mexican car makers can only import Dollars 1 value of cars for
every Dollars 2 of exports.
Ford, Chrysler and GM do not produce any compact cars in Mexico at present,
but under Nafta will import them from the US, thus entering a segment of the
Mexican market that VW and Nissan have traditionally dominated. Chrysler in
particular reckons that imports of such cars from the US will increase its
market share in Mexico.
The threat of more competition has forced VW to introduce Japanese style
work groups and 'just-in-time' inventory management in an effort to raise
productivity. Worker resistance to this led to a month-long strike in July
and August. For while productivity at Mexico's export plants is high, it is
still pitifully low at the older plants in and around Mexico City that
source the domestic market.
