FT  13 JUL 92 / Cuba to facilitate foreign investment
CUBA's National Assembly has approved changes to the 1976 constitution that
would facilitate foreign investment, grant a mandate of direct secret
elections for deputies, and permit freedom of religion for the first time
since 1959.
The changes, first proposed by October's party congress, will not permit
opposition parties, nor allow private ownership of the 'fundamental means of
production'. The government will continue to control prices, wages, and
ration basic goods.
The law will allow private, in effect foreign, investment in selected state
enterprises, let individual Cuban companies export and import without
seeking central government permission, and recognise foreign ownership of
property in joint venture deals.
The changes will give what is now common practice greater legal validity. In
the past few years Cuba has sought to attract foreign investment to soften
the blow of the collapse of trade with the former Soviet Union and eastern
Europe.
Foreign companies have invested heavily in tourism, and less so in oil,
nickel, biotechnology and light industry. They have tended to form joint
ventures with nominally independent Cuban companies, that are nevertheless
heavily backed and controlled by the government.
Mr Juan Escalana, president of the National Assembly, told Granma, the
official newspaper, that the investment reforms 'will demonstrate the will
of the state, the government to continue along the path already taken of
encouraging investments, negotiations, trade openings, in short to boost our
international economic relations'.
The direct elections of deputies is intended to make the parliament more
responsive to local demands. In the past deputies were chosen by municipal
and regional councils, which are dominated by loyal party members.
On Saturday, Cuba's President Fidel Castro expressed support for a
constitutional clause linking economic development and protection of the
environment, saying these issues had almost become a new world ideology
following last June's Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Reuter adds from
Havana.
Mr Castro said Cuba would be the first country in the world to include the
linked themes of the environment and development in its national
constitution.
