FT  11 APR 92 / Yachting: The American's cup
ROD 'Rocket' Davis, one of America's top sailors and now a New Zealand
citizen, once gave an off-the-cuff explanation of the extraordinary success
of Kiwi yachting. 'People in the outside world don't realise you have to be
able to handle a boat to get off that goddamn island. It's an escape route',
said Davis.
In some US circles he will never live down the soubriquet 'Benedict' Davis
(after the War of Independence traitor Benedict Arnold), bestowed by rival
helmsman Dennis Conner. For Davis is skipper of the New Zealand yacht
challenging for the America's Cup. After a near-flawless campaign the Kiwis
are in the challenger finals.
Fate stage-managed a race on Tuesday that eliminated Japan from the final
four and confirmed New Zealand's place. While the technology and financial
muscle for the Nippon challenge came from Tokyo, her key sailors were Kiwis,
led by Chris Dickson, who did not fit with the NZ sailing establishment.
In reasonably consistent 9-to-12-knot winds, Japan won the start, led by 17
seconds at the first turn and then by 21 secs after the first run. It was
the kind of performance that had brought Japan through the three round
robins as an unlikely points leader. However, Davis drove the Kiwi sailors
like a Roman galley master up the second beat and at the top mark reversed
the deficit to lead by 21 secs. New Zealand covered Nippon's every move to
ensure a 31-sec victory.
'They made it tough for us', said Davis. 'Anyone who thought they would lie
down just because they were as good as eliminated was absolutely wrong. I'm
pleased because we showed again that if we sail smart, our boat can take the
passing lanes. So we can always win, even when behind.'
Davis is going to have to prove that statement against another US helmsman
sailing as a mercenary, Paul Cayard. Il Moro di Venezia, skippered by
Cayard, is the other challenger finalist. She started out with NZ as joint
favourite to make the finals, so once more the form book is vindicated.
Italy's predicted chances were based more on firepower than previous
success. Syndicate head Raul Gardini, former head of the Ferruzzi
conglomerate, has spent close to Dollars 70m (Pounds 40m) of the company's
money on a five-boat programme that left no developmental stone unturned.
Yet even Cayard's deft and conciliatory personality has been unable to steer
round the cultural problems that tend to occur when Italians and
Anglo-Saxons collaborate. Cayard began the semi-finals by bringing more
Americans aboard, the most significant being Stevie Erickson, his regular
crew from two-man Star class.
Erickson is unable to sail actively on Il Moro, having not qualified by two
year's residence in Italy, but he has ousted Gardini from the owner's
'jump-seat' position. Rules bar him from participating in the running of the
yacht, but he discusses wind directions and tactics with Cayard until the
10-minute gun.
Another - American  - pal of 'Cayardini', as the sailors call him, is
watching from the tender and calling advice. John Kolius has been tune-up
skipper for Cayard for over a year, and the two are as inseparable as Bonnie
and Clyde.
Given that the sub-text of any America's Cup campaign is an inflamed
technology-led nationalism normally found only in wartime, one might suggest
that the New Zealanders need only stand back and let civil war take out the
Italian challenge.
Certainly the French team eliminated themselves from the semi-finals. Their
boat was fast - in five jousts the Kiwis had not managed to beat Ville de
Paris - but Marc Pajot's team came out for the final four on a downward
slide.
On the morning of the first race, French finance controller Yvon Kergreis
was discovered diving beneath the Nippon keel as she left the dock.
Apparently it was a prank rather than espionage, but an outraged and
embarrassed Pajot sent Kergreis back to Paris on the first aeroplane. 'I am
really disappointed', said Pajot. 'We are playing sport, not spying.'
Humour rather than retribution was the Nippon response. 'I accept Marc's
apology but I would still like to see his keel', said Dickson. An hour later
there was a pre-start collision between Nippon and Ville de Paris - judged
to be the latter's fault  - which took the front metre off the French bow
and seemed to destroy Pajot's will to win.
