FT  25 JUN 92 / The Faltering Recovery: Chicken industry finds some
sustenance - Recession has hit the Midlands hard but it is not all gloom.
Two companies illustrate the contrasts
MRS PENNY SMITH is not a pin-striped finance director. Around the plant of
Perry Poultry she wears the same as everybody else - white wellies, white
overall, blue hairnet, white helmet. She washes her hands and disinfects her
boots when she enters each part of the plant and does the same when she
leaves.
Hygiene is important in the chicken business. Perry Poultry buys plucked and
gutted chickens which it cuts, portions and packs. It marinates them -
tandoori flavour so far, garlic and herb soon.
Perry Poultry is a small player in a crowded industry, based in Bilston in
the heart of the Black Country, a part of the west Midlands better known for
metal processing than food processing.
The metal processors are deep in recession, but Perry Poultry has been
expanding since its first production in August 1989.
Yet the food processing industry has its own hazards. 'Orders are fairly
easy to get if you are a conforming plant (one which meets European
Community standards) with a good reputation,' said Mr Alistair Ross, Perry
Poultry's chairman and main shareholder. 'To make a profit out of it is
where the skill comes in. It is not to be recommended for people with a
nervous disposition.'
The problem is that the profit margin is narrow. Perry Poultry would like to
make 4 per cent. More usually it has to make do with 2 per cent or 3 per
cent. The line between success and failure is fine.
Directly or indirectly, Perry Poultry supplies the likes of Kentucky Fried
Chicken, Marks and Spencer, J. Sainsbury and Tesco. Mrs Smith explained:
'Our customers are looking for lower prices all the time but we don't see
any raw material costs coming down: there's the squeeze.'
So far, Perry Poultry has carved its way through the conflicting pressures.
It lost Pounds 35,000 pre-tax in its first year, but in 1990 had pre-tax
profits of Pounds 188,000 on a turnover of Pounds 5.27m. It staged a further
advance last year, and this year will probably have pre-tax profits of about
Pounds 400,000 and turnover of Pounds 15m.
To keep profits rising, Perry Poultry has to nurture its place in the
market. This it seeks to do by offering flexibility, service and quality:
orders are usually despatched the same day or the day after they come in and
the chicken is cut manually, achieving a greater accuracy than machine
cutting.
But the company also has to keep its costs down. It used bank finance for
its early development but last year preferred to expand using equity
finance. It had a cash injection of Pounds 250,000 from 3i, the venture
capital group, in exchange for 15 per cent of the equity. Now Perry Poultry
looks to TSB, its banker, only for working capital.
But its biggest overhead is labour costs. The company started with 30
employees and now has 270 on basic wages of between Pounds 137 and Pounds
160 for a 36-hour week. But there is little pressure for higher wages.
Unemployment in Bilston is too high for that.
