FT  23 JUN 92 / Letter: Lloyd's costs and assets base seen as root of
problems
Sir, You identify correctly the key issue for Lloyd's and its future, in
your editorial 'Lloyd's and its casualties' (June 19). Unless Lloyd's can
build its capital base, it has no future - a truism for any business
organisation.
My 11 years as a Lloyd's Name have led to an overall loss from my membership
 -with further losses to come. In aggregate, I have handed over money to the
society for the dubious privilege of risking all the assets on which my
family and I depend. Yet I do not face financial ruin and would prefer to
remain a Name.
But the worldwide casualty insurance business has shown dreadful returns for
its sources of capital in recent years - whether shareholders or private
capital, as at Lloyd's. The Hoare Govett report on Lloyd's in May shows
clearly that Lloyd's, the UK composites and the US insurers do not produce
profits to match the risks being taken. There has been too much insurance
capacity chasing too little worthwhile business - and the situation may well
be continuing.
Why Lloyd's should believe it can attract corporate capital, when it cannot
retain the capital it has already, escapes me. Yet, perhaps there are
insurers who would prefer to have Lloyd's underwriters act for them rather
than conduct the underwriting themselves. To attract this business, Lloyd's
will have to demonstrate that its costs are competitive.
Lloyd's has come to believe that an annual salary of Pounds 100,000 should
be commonplace for an active underwriter of a medium size syndicate and
syndicates believe they should take profit commissions of between 12 per
cent and 20 per cent of profit, while Lloyd's brokers believe their
commissions should always be at least 10 per cent of premiums payable. The
whole Lloyd's infrastructure had become greedy and complacent.
But once sensible returns are in sight, risk capital will return from
individuals as well as companies.
John D Incledon,
Suite 33,
140 Park Lane,
London W1Y 3AA
