FT  27 OCT 92 / Extremists' knife enters near Egypt's heart: The threat to
tourism from the recent attacks on foreigners
LAST MONTH Mr Fouad Sultan, Egypt's tourism minister, boasted that the
country had 'the least terrorism of all the countries of the world. . . .'
and that 'everything is under control'.
Mr Sultan, regarded as one of the better performers of a generally
lacklustre Egyptian administration, could be excused for wondering whether
he might not have erred by tempting fate.
A sudden rash of Islamic extremist violence against tourists is endangering
the country's multi-billion dollar tourism industry at a time when it was
achieving spectacular growth rates and new investment was pouring into the
sector.
The slaying last Wednesday of a British tourist south of Cairo and the
stabbings at the weekend of Russian visitors to Port Said at the entrance to
the Suez Canal have cast a pall over an industry that had been reaping
tremendous rewards since the end of the Gulf war.
Together with concern engendered by the Cairo earthquake which killed up to
600 people (none of them tourists) these latest incidents have drawn
unwelcome attention to the possible dangers of Third World travel,
especially in a country where Islamic extremism is on the rise.
Tour operators and large hotels contacted in Cairo yesterday said they were
experiencing cancellations among both individuals and, more worryingly, tour
groups - the lifeblood of the industry.
The Cairo Marriott said that tour operators were reporting that group
numbers would be down by as much as 20 per cent. Italian groups - tourism
from Italy has been booming - were prominent among those notifying
cancellations.
Foreign embassies in Cairo, sensitive to the importance of tourism to the
hard-pressed Egyptian economy, have been guarded in their comments on
dangers to visitors, but most western missions have felt obliged, in
response to inquiries, to point out the risks
In London, Thomson, the UK's biggest travel company, said it saw no reason
at the moment to be concerned about future bookings or the safety of its 700
customers currently in Egypt.
The company, which takes 25,000 tourists to Egypt annually, said: 'These are
isolated incidents, just as there was another bombing in London on Sunday
night.' Thomson said it had had 'one or two' cancellations.
Kuoni Travel, which carries 15,000 UK tourists to Egypt a year, said it had
one cancellation last Friday.
Mr Martin Thompson, managing director of Abercrombie &amp; Kent Travel, an
upmarket operator, said: 'We believe that people should not go off the
beaten track in Egypt.' The company, which takes 11,000 tourists to Egypt
each year from the UK, the US and Australia, said: 'We're keeping our ears
close to the ground both here and in Cairo. But nobody in London has
cancelled so far.'
However, Egyptian tour operators fear a return of the gloomy Gulf war period
and its aftermath during which Nile ferries sailed empty and hotel occupancy
rates plummeted.
With investment of more than USDollars 1bn planned for an industry which is
Egypt's biggest foreign currency earner, apart from workers' remittances,
the stakes are high. A million Egyptians are estimated to derive their
livelihood either directly or indirectly from the tourism sector, which
contributes 6 per cent of gross domestic product.
Barring accidents, Mr Sultan had predicted that numbers of visitors would
grow to 5m annually by financial year 1994/95. This would represent a 400
per cent increase in tourist numbers in a decade, and there remains scope
for further growth.
Hotel room capacity in Egypt has more than doubled since 1985 to 53,000,
barely keeping pace with demand. Another 14,000 are under construction and
there are plans for more.
Businessmen with projects already under way are unlikely to be deflected by
the recent troubles, but those planning to make commitments may pause; for
whatever officials might say about internal stability, there is increasing
concern about a surge in fundamentalist violence amid growing signs of
disaffection with the established order.
Unless, the authorities can find a way to neutralise Islamic militants,
prospects are for more rather than less trouble. Ominously, extremists under
the umbrella of al-gama'a al-Islamiya (literally, Islamic groups) appear to
have decided to target visitors as a means of undermining the government's
authority.
Anonymous spokesmen have, since August, been threatening to strike at
tourists and tourist installations. That they have now made good their
threats suggests that a rudimentary network exists to carry out pin-prick
attacks. The militants may have found the government's Achilles heel.
