FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (4): Scandal and more -
Finance
FINANCE AND FINANCIERS IN EUROPEAN HISTORY 1880-1960 edited by Youssef
Cassis Cambridge Pounds 40, 445 pages
IN Maupassant's novel Bel-Ami the provincial hero, George Duroy, has the
luck and cynicism required to rise from obscurity into a Parisian social
elite of dubious morals, financial and sexual. He thrives in a world where
politics is inseparable from the financial improprieties of a sophisticated
elite. But financial scandal was a feature of the Third Republic and the
belle epoque. Excesses such as the Panama affair and Maupassant's imaginary
Moroccan bond scandal were symptoms of the regime's political instability.
Hubert Bonin might have done well to include Maupassant's fictional
financier, Monsieur Walter, in his contribution to this important volume of
essays. His chapter on the political influence of bankers and financiers in
France shows the links between high finance and politics after 1850. He
shows that the banking industry benefited from a liberal environment until
the 1940s. In 1945, it was abruptly nationalised.
Alain Plessis' parallel chapter on the role of bankers in French society
examines why financiers were the target of 'recurrent and impassioned
attacks' by politicians and journalists. While there was a closed financial
elite, Plessis argues that its members were not accurately characterised by
critics who lapsed into anti-semitism and hyperbole in their attempts to
show that France was ruled by a clique of 200 families.
These examples give the book's flavour. Its central purpose is to explore
the role of finance in European history. It does this first by analysing the
position of the financial sector in six European countries through various
indicators. It then looks at the position of financial elites in society.
The volume's great merit is that it adopts a broad comparitive approach.
European finance can be understood not just in terms of economics, but also
in terms of political and social forces and in the context of international
affairs.
A starting point is the notion that, in spite of the recent collapse of
rival modes of production and distribution, modern capitalism, and
particularly its origins, is still rather poorly understood. Indeed,
academic study of the role played by capitalists and financiers has advanced
little since 1967, when Professor Rondo Cameron published his pioneering
work on Banking in the early stages of industrialisation. Cameron argued
that bankers and financial intermediaries had played a greater role in the
industrial revolution than history had previously allowed.
Sidney Pollard and Dieter Ziegler usefully assess recent historical work
which has raised important reservations about some of Cameron's applications
of his ideas, notably his thesis that Scotland's more sophisticated
financial structure kept the country's economic growth rate above that of
England.
The broad issue of banks and economic development is well treated in a
series of chapters and Harold James offers a useful summary of the
contributions. He concludes that the years between the 1880s and 1930s were
a golden era for commercial banks. By contrast, in the 1930s there was a
secular shift associated with the world depression. In the UK, the influence
of commercial banks declined as building societies and savings banks took a
greater share of deposits. In the rest of Europe, there were banking crises
after which the savings banks grew faster than their commercial
counterparts.
