FT  04 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Time bombs in the Balkans
THE ORGANISATION of Islamic Conference is not normally given to radical or
shocking pronouncements. Communiques from its ministerial meetings tend to
reflect a careful consensus between its 50 diverse member states, and to
sound rather bland. Thus when the organisation's foreign ministers send the
world an angry ultimatum involving the threat of military force, something
unusually disturbing is clearly afoot.
That something is, of course, the Serbs' campaign of territorial
aggrandisement and 'ethnic cleansing' in Bosnia-Hercegovina, and the
suffering of their mainly Moslem opponents. As this week's Jeddah meeting
shows, dismay is by no means confined to Europe or the west; emotions are
becoming inflamed throughout the Islamic world. That adds yet more tinder to
the increasingly combustible mess that is the former Yugoslavia. Inevitably,
it also brings outside powers one step closer to being sucked into the
conflict. The only question is whether that involvement will come by mutual
agreement under the auspices of the United Nations, or whether - as the OIC
communique implies - individual countries will feel obliged to take matters
into their own hands by arming or otherwise abetting the victims.
Things are not as simple as the Islamic foreign ministers would have us
believe. Using force against Serbia - for example, in the form of selective
bombing raids - will not stop what is largely a civil war in Bosnia, and
certainly not in the next 44 days. Nor will it necessarily improve the lot
of Bosnian Moslems.
Fitting response
But western nations do need to think again about how they might more
effectively alleviate the tragedy, even if they cannot end it. Welcome as it
is that countries such as Britain and France have sent troops to escort
humanitarian relief convoys in Bosnia, it was never likely to be enough. As
winter draws on and the prospect of mass starvation nears, a more
far-reaching undertaking to set up 'safe zones' in Bosnia where the Moslems
will be protected as well as fed seems the only fitting response.
Intervention along such lines would be a logical extension of the UN's
current humanitarian mission. Properly implemented, and provided safe zones
did not become the springboard for a Moslem counter-offensive, it might also
begin to draw a line under the Serbs' territorial expansion, and provide a
basis from which to embark on the long and painful task of rebuilding
Bosnia.
Protracted presence
The difficulties in such a course are considerable. It would require a
substantial expansion of forces operating under the UN mandate in Bosnia -
preferably including US ground troops and soldiers from a number of Islamic
countries - and a readiness on the part of public opinion in the countries
concerned to accept there will be casualties. There would be a danger of UN
forces becoming over-identified with one side in the conflict, or of their
presence becoming protracted.
All these objections cannot be lightly dismissed. But the point was long ago
passed in the Yugoslav conflict when the consequences of not intervening
were more serious than the dangers of intervening with force.
The safe zones proposal is only a beginning. It should be implemented in
conjunction with a further tightening of sanctions against Serbia and a
rigorous military enforcement of the no-fly zone over Bosnia. It should also
be accompanied by stronger action to prevent the conflict from spreading to
Kosovo - through strong pressure on Serbia, which controls the province and
is oppressing its majority Albanian population, to allow in a UN observer
force, and failing that through the threat of direct intervention. Civil war
in Kosovo could rapidly drag in other regional powers such as in Albania,
Macedonia, Greece, Bulgaria and Turkey. It must be prevented.
