FT  14 APR 92 / Technology: Making virtual reality a certainty - Technically
Speaking
IN A handful of laboratories around Britain, strangely garbed figures
gesticulate into empty space. They are experimenting with 'virtual reality',
an advanced form of computer simulation which many believe could make a
profound contribution to most activities where humans interact with computer
systems.
Leisure, in the form of advanced video games, is an obvious application.
Education, training and scientific research are other possibilities.
But virtual reality does itself no favours with a name redolent of science
fiction and alien worlds. The apparatus needed to make it work serves also
to drive a wedge between VR evangelists and other people. This may be the
most difficult barrier to finding general acceptance and support for a
technology which could prove as important as Apple Computer's windows and
mice in demystifying data processing.
A helmet must be worn bearing 'accelerometers' which calculate where the
eyes are looking; a pair of miniature television screens beam the correct
image directly into the eyes. A heavily wired glove must be worn to allow
tactic sensations - the feeling of moving a molecule from one site to
another like balls or a snooker table, perhaps, or holding a ray gun to zap
imaginary opponents.
W Industries, a UK-based leader in VR, calls its helmet the 'visette', its
tactile device the 'space stick' and its VR computer 'expality'.
Stripped of the science fiction aura, however, VR is simply a kind of
sophisticated computer simulation in which the UK seems especially skilled.
Well-established software houses like Admiral, for example, build
traditional simulators to train the pilots of the British and foreign air
forces.
The five-year old W Industries, founded by Jonathan Waldern and based in
Birmingham, took a year to build its first arcade game and now has 170 units
installed worldwide at more than Pounds 25,000 a system. The Trocadero
Centre in London's West End houses a number of examples of 'Virtuality', as
Waldern describes his creation. It has been funded to the tune of Pounds
2.4m by Apax Partners with a view to flotation in three years.
Division, a tiny company formed in 1989 by a group of researchers in
parallel processing, has signed an agreement with International Business
Machines to develop a computer-aided design workstation based on VR. The
idea will be to take in patterns from existing computer-aided design systems
and convert them into three-dimensional worlds.
Hull University, meanwhile, has appointed Europe's first university chair in
VR. Roy Kalawsky, a chief engineer at British Aerospace, has been appointed
visiting professor of virtual reality environments.
The astonishing thing about VR is how inexpensive it has become to create
advanced simulators. Division's transputer-based parallel processing system
starts at Pounds 30,000. W Industries's arcade machines are based on
Commodore Amiga personal computers.
The interface hardware, however, is primitive. You can call a wired helmet
and glove a visette and spacestick but it is still a cumbersome way to
communicate with a computer. The analogy has to be with the earliest
computers when the teletype was the only way to input or retrieve
information. Inevitably, there will be improvements.
The real secret of VR lies in the software. W Industries is building a
library of games to add to its jump jet, space battle and stock car racing
simulators.
Division is trying to create a new way of communicating with the computer
for as whole range of activities from business statistics to pharmaceutical
research.
Companies like Microsoft have garnered a fortune from computer interfaces a
hundredth the sophistication of what W Industries and Division are trying to
achieve. VR could be the UK's toehold in tomorrow's computing. It would be
sad if its real significance was trivialised by hyperbole and futuristic
glitter.
