FT  19 FEB 92 / Management: Time to step aboard a flight to the interior:
Health Check - Dr Michael McGannon explains how regular travellers can avoid
the worst excesses of jet-lag
President Bush made news last month when he keeled over at a banquet in his
honour in Japan. Contrary to popular belief, the president was probably
suffering more from common jet-lag than from a rare intestinal virus.
Scientific evidence is mounting that long distance air travel can cause
health problems, ranging from sleep disturbances to heart disorders.
Moreover, jet-lag can blunt negotiating skills, putting you at a
disadvantage with well-rested locals. Surprise, surprise: some of that
disadvantage is of your own doing.
Dealing with jet-lag means understanding the nature of the problem. Proper
operation of the body's functions, including sleepiness, wakefulness,
appetite, intestinal function and body temperature, relies on the
light-dependent cycle known as the circadian (diurnal) rhythm.
When disturbed by flying across time zones, this rhythm becomes confused.
The result is severe fatigue, loss of mental lucidity and disorientation as
the rhythm searches for a new reference point.
Researchers at the Johnson Space Center in Texas have shown that the
prolonged immobility forced on passengers causes the body to excrete
excessive amounts of two essential substances: potassium and sodium.
This loss accounts for decreased muscle strength, weakened physical and
mental reflexes, confusion, and quite possibly, disturbances in heart
rhythm.
Given the differences between people, a universal remedy to jet-lag is
probably not possible. But the following suggestions have done the trick for
some of the 3,000 international executives I have worked with. Try them all.
BEFORE DEPARTURE
First, try to re-set your biological clock. For trips with a stay of a week
or more, it pays to change your daily rhythm before departure to simulate
your new local time zone.
If you are going from Europe to the west coast of America where you will be
going to bed about nine hours earlier, get to sleep one hour earlier every
day for 3 or 4 days before departing.
Though potentially disruptive to your pre-departure schedule, this can help
you arrive adapted to the local time.
For two to three day trips, attempt to 'tough it out' by sticking to the
home schedule. That way you will not be adapting twice in as many days and
you can arrive home hitting the ground running.
Johnson Space Center research suggests that physical exercise on the day of
the flight helps release potassium into the blood, thus compensating losses
resulting from flight immobility.
WHILE IN FLIGHT
To beat jet-lag, you must adhere to several 'absolutes'. Proper hydration is
essential because the humidity of the aircraft's cabin air can be
uncomfortably low.
Re-humidifying the air to more comfortable levels would require about two
tons of water on a Boeing 747 for a 10-hour flight: that would be very
expensive. Your strategy should be the same as the flight crew: re-humidify
yourself.
You can kill two birds with one stone by drinking at least one glass of
orange juice (potassium and water) every hour.
Resist the seductions of free alcohol and coffee, substances that will wring
your system dry and cause potassium losses, setting you up for the worst
case of jet lag possible.
Before dozing off (easier if you have previously exhausted your body with
exercise), do a few arm lifts: using the arm rests, lift your weight
(discreetly) off the seat several times. This will help to keep the blood
circulating well while you sleep.
AFTER ARRIVING
Arrange your schedule - perhaps by arriving a day early - to include a
work-out before meetings. This will provide vital organs, including the
brain, with well-circulated blood, richly saturated in oxygen.
Lastly, take the initiative in dealing with jet-lag because if you are
failing to plan, you are planning to fail.
The author is the medical director of the Insead Business Health course
