FT  18 SEP 92 / Fix, float or do nothing: The difficult options facing
Britain's economic policymakers
Rarely is it open to governments to rebuild their economic policies from
scratch. Yet that is the position in which Mr John Major's embattled
administration now finds itself, even if it is reluctant to admit as much.
What are its options, after the failed attempt to transform Britain into a
low-inflation, competitive international trading nation by anchoring
sterling to the D-Mark?
The main choices might crudely be characterised as: fix, float or do nothing
 -this last being little more than floating by another name. In other words,
should Mr Norman Lamont or any successor as chancellor restore sterling to
the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) or perpetuate the present punch-drunk
float? Yesterday's nebulous commitment to go back into the ERM as conditions
permit would provide an adequate cloak for whichever of these divergent
policies ultimately appealed to the government. There is then a set of
sub-options, which concern ways of reinforcing credibility once the basic
policy choice has been made. What follows is a plain man's guide to the pros
and cons of the various avenues open to the government. It starts with the
de facto option of the moment, namely:
Floating. The minimalist case advanced by pro-floaters for allowing sterling
to find its own level is that anything would be better than continuing to
put up with a German monetary policy within the ERM that is wholly unsuited
to British domestic economic conditions. Policymakers in Britain would enjoy
the freedom to set interest rates at a level designed to address the problem
of debt deflation and the associated maladies of falling house prices,
rising unemployment and low consumer confidence. In fact they have already
done so by permitting a two-point reduction in interest rates back to the 10
per cent level of Tuesday.
Instead of the burden of adjustment falling on domestic demand, the exchange
rate would, if this policy were maintained, take the strain; and it would
provide an escape valve over the longer run against the vicissitudes of
policy in the US, as well as Germany. On this view the exchange rate is a
market price; and it provides an adjustment mechanism that is perfectly
designed to cope with divergent economic policies in the Group of Seven
industrialised countries and in the ERM. Once a move to floating and the
conflict between what is needed to support the pound and the requirements of
the domestic economy disappears.
This was, in effect, Britain's answer to a similar problem in 1931, when
sterling went off the Gold Standard. The subsequent float was associated
(see chart) with Britain's highest rate of economic growth this century. But
there are snags.
Devaluation following a decision to float carries inflationary risks, as the
increased cost of imports feeds through to domestic prices. In the 1930s,
when Britain was still at the heart of the sterling area, that risk was less
because a great deal of the world was simultaneously floating downward with
sterling. Today, the sterling area is no more and Britain's pattern of trade
has shifted substantially to continental Europe. The inflationary
consequences of devaluation are thus potentially greater.
The obvious, and worrying, precedent is the decision by Tony (now Lord)
Barber to float the pound in 1972. That contributed significantly to an
inflationary boom that took the annual rate of increase in the retail price
index to 27 per cent by mid-decade. A further worry is that, after the
government's loss of credibility over the past week, the markets might not
take kindly to a rapid reduction in interest rates. Even if base rates of 6
to 7 per cent were appropriate for the woes of the British economy today, a
rapid move in that direction might put sterling into free fall.
Yet the risks can be overstated. As far as inflation is concerned, today's
devaluation is taking place against a background of an extremely depressed
level of activity, which will tend to reduce the adverse impact on prices.
And while the markets clearly need careful handling in the short run they
are not necessarily antipathetic to expansionary policy. According to David
Hale, chief economist of the Kemper financial group in Chicago, the UK's
poor economic performance has contributed to negative market sentiment in
recent months. Improved sentiment for British equities on the basis of lower
interest rates and devaluation could well be associated with subsequent
capital inflows which would help stabilise the pound.
A second snag concerns the political implications of staying out of the ERM.
John Major's frequently stated desire to put Britain at the heart of Europe
would be hard to reconcile with a free-floating position outside the system.
Yet it is possible that his aspiration has already sustained a mortal blow
as a result of this week's events. A No vote in this weekend's French
referendum would anyway make it hard to define where precisely the heart of
Europe is located.
Should the government decide that the inherent risks of floating are
outweighed by the rewards, it would probably have to review its overall
fiscal stance and would almost certainly feel obliged to improve domestic
monetary discipline to compensate for the abandoned D-Mark exchange rate
anchor. The trouble with such a move is that it was the failure of domestic
money supply targetry in the 1980s that prompted the ill-fated experiment
with exchange rate targets in the first place.
This means that Britain might be forced to rely on a wider range of
indicators. The risk is that a lack of precision in defining the targets
constitutes an invitation to sacrifice monetary virtue on the altar of
political imperatives. Yet precision encourages financial intermediaries to
use their ingenuity to by-pass disciplinary measures, for example, by
borrowing off-shore, so distorting the authorities' chosen target.
Another strategy for bolstering Britain's credibility in a return to
floating would be to grant independence to the Bank of England. This is
music to the ears of Bank officials, who would almost certainly be tougher
guardians of the currency than their counterparts in the Treasury. The Bank
never conceded that monetary policy was tight, let alone excessively tight,
when sterling was hopelessly overvalued in the early 1980s. But it took
decades, rather than years for the Bundesbank to establish its reputation
for monetary rectitude. So Britain's Liberal Democrats, who have been
pushing this nostrum hard, have probably over-sold their case. Which brings
us to:
Fixing. There is unlikely to be any such thing as a quick fix, not least
because nobody can be sure of the future shape of the ERM, in the light of
the French referendum and the problems of the Italians - who are bravely (or
foolishly) committed to re-assuming their ERM obligations next Tuesday - and
the Spaniards. Britain has also given itself more time to decide on a return
than Italy because the Treasury feels that the turmoil on currency markets
over the past week has other causes than the French vote. UK Treasury
officials yesterday said the recent weakness of the dollar, low US interest
rates and the Bundesbank's high interest rate policy were other factors that
had derailed UK policy.
This reasoning is largely self-serving. But it could also imply that these
problems would have to be resolved before the UK will be prepared to
consider full EMS membership as a genuine policy option. And the markets
appear to be looking for a protracted period on the sidelines. Yesterday's
rise in share prices was predicated on a continuing fall in interest rates,
implying a possible further depreciation in the sterling parity. Gilt
yields, meantime, fell at the short end of the market on similar assumptions
about falling base rates, while long bond yields rose on the thesis that
inflationary pressures looked more threatening with the ERM discipline
removed.
The case for going back in at some point in the future, if there is a
worthwhile ERM left to go into, is simple enough. As John Shepperd,
economist at SG Warburg Securities, puts it: 'Whatever happens over the next
few weeks I am convinced that Mr Major has not turned his back on the ERM
for good. Even if Britain re-joins at a lower rate of perhaps DM 2.65, the
ERM policy is the only route open for Britain if it wants to lock into lower
inflation. All the other policy prescriptions look threadbare.'
In one sense the sheer awfulness of the latest debacle lends strength to the
ERM case. An argument for entry in 1990 was the belief that Britain was not
competent to run its own monetary policy. After this week's humiliation, the
same argument must apply in spades. But that in turn could also be taken to
imply that Britain's second-time judgment about when to re-enter and its
choice of central rate within the parity grid might be flawed once again.
The argument could run in perpetuity.
Perhaps the most powerful argument for reconsidering an external anchor for
monetary policy is that Britain, along with Sweden, has lived through a
series of post-war currency depreciations, in and out of fixed rate exchange
rate systems, that have proved to be nugatory. In the end the nominal
depreciations have always been off-set by inflation and competitiveness has
shown no long-run real improvement. While there may be a case for
devaluation in response to one-off external shocks, a succession of
devaluations becomes self-defeating as market expectations adjust.
The floaters' counter-argument is that the present devaluation is not
primarily about restoring competitiveness. It is merely a by-product of the
attempt to address domestic economic problems with appropriate domestic
remedies.
The UK would certainly face massive problems rebuilding the credibility of
its commitment to the mechanism. It was, after all, the chancellor, who said
recently that: 'The ERM is not an optional extra, an add on to be jettisoned
at the first hint of trouble. It is and will remain at the very centre of
our macroeconomic strategy.' In the event, Britain showed less determination
to stay in the ERM than Sweden, a non-member, was prepared to demonstrate in
maintaining the link between its currency and the Ecu.
It would be unwise to underestimate John Major's commitment to disinflation
via the ERM. But he is also an accomplished politician. It is hard to
believe, regardless of the purely economic merits of the case, that he would
embark on a second experiment with an external monetary target before the
economy is firmly established on a growth path again. For many on the Tory
benches and in the country, once was more than enough.
