FT  11 NOV 92 / Matrix Churchill: Bush administration 'knew about arms
network'
MR JAMES BAKER, the outgoing US secretary of state, in March 1989 approved
the worthiness of the Ohio affiliate of Britain's Matrix Churchill to do
business with Iraq, in spite of the fact that the State Department was the
recipient of US intelligence reports which described Matrix as an Iraqi
military procurement front company more than three months before.
Documents obtained by the Financial Times and previously described in
Congress show that Mr Baker signed the Matrix Churchill certification on
March 14 1989. The approval by Mr Baker was sought by Baghdad because Iraqi
law required the certification of any US company seeking to become a
contractor with Iraq.
Accompanying the Baker document was an authenticated certification dated
February 24 1989 and signed by Mr Gordon Cooper, chief executive of Matrix
Churchill of Cleveland, Ohio.
Last night a US intelligence official, who asked not to be named, said the
Bush administration knew about Matrix Churchill's military procurement
activities in both the US and Britain, having first received British
intelligence information in 1987. 'The intelligence information was shared
between London and Washington, and at very high levels,' he said.
According to a US official the State Department received details about the
military procurement activities of Matrix Churchill in late 1988, several
months before Mr Baker vouched for Matrix as a US exporter to Iraq.
The US Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control acted two years ago to
freeze the assets of Matrix Churchill in Ohio and identified the company as
an Iraqi entity involved in military procurement in the US.
Mr Henry Gonzalez, the House banking committee chairman who has been
investigating the financing of Iraq's war machine by the Atlanta branch of
Italy's Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL), recently cited a June 1989 US
intelligence report on Matrix Churchill's role in the procurement network.
Matrix Churchill's Ohio affiliate has also been named in recent court
proceedings in Atlanta as a BNL-funded company involved in aiding Baghdad's
military procurement. BNL Atlanta financed Matrix Churchill in both the US
and Britain by way of letters of credit.
Mr Gonzalez claimed the Bush administration allowed the company to operate
from Ohio 'despite knowing that the network was responsible for procuring
technology for Iraq's covert nuclear, biological and chemical weapons
programmes as well as various long-range missile programmes'.
A two-year investigation of Matrix Churchill's Ohio affiliate by the US
Customs service will probably be completing its evidence-gathering process
by early January. The officials investigating the Matrix case are likely to
make criminal referrals to the Department of Justice early in the new year.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, home secretary, said yesterday he did sign a Public
Immunity Certificate restricting the information available about Matrix
Churchill, but added: 'I certainly didn't seek any immunity in order to
conceal from the courts the truth.'
Mr Clarke, interviewed on the BBC's World at One programme, said: 'I have
personally had nothing ever to do with sales of weapons to the Iraqis and I
haven't sought immunity for any documents simply on the basis that they
might prejudice a prosecution or be helpful to the defence. I wouldn't dream
of signing any such certificate.'
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, last night refused to be
drawn on the relevance of documents for which he signed Public Immunity
Certificates. He told the BBC's The World Tonight programme that it was not
'a matter of opinion or discretion' but his duty. He stressed that the
decision to make documents available which were not normally in the public
domain rested with the judge and not with him.
