FT  01 SEP 92 / Troubled city loses its head: Letter from Rostock
Driving northwards to the Baltic city of Rostock, past the placid lakes of
the east German coastal countryside, hate and violence seem far away. Even
Rostock's city centre, with its tall buildings rising like a red brick cliff
along the main street, suggests stability rather than anger, order rather
than turmoil.
But a few miles from the city in the soulless housing estate of
Lichtenhagen, the scars of violence are all too visible. It was here, in
sight of the shipyard cranes which testify to the city's former maritime
glory and present anxiety, that right-wing extremists threw Molotov
cocktails at the building where 20,000 asylum-seekers were housed, prompting
widespread condemnation and reawakening ugly memories.
It will take a long time for Rostock and its 240,000 inhabitants to live
down the ugly events of the past week. 'I'm sad Rostock has got into the
press this way,' says a 66-year old pensioner. 'The city where I was born
has come into discredit. It's not true that only fascists live here; they
are only the minority.'
Locals say the vicious rioting which broke out against foreign asylum
seekers was the culmination of months of frustration at the inability of
local, state, and federal politicians to deal with the problems arising from
Germany's generous open-house asylum policy.
Even many who condemn the violence, and blame the police for not reacting
fast enough, admit that the people of Lichtenhagen - who face immense social
and economic changes following unification - were put under extreme
pressure. Families of Sinti and Roma gypsies from Romania had occupied a
prominent area outside the main shops, pestering passers-by, begging, and
allegedly stealing from shop counters. 'Politicians had allowed things to
drag on. People here felt molested,' says Steffen Garschke, who runs a shoe
repair shop overlooking the scene.
The violence perpetrated by right-wing thugs, local youths and extremists
from other German towns, erupted during a peaceful demonstration called to
draw attention to the problem. It escalated after police failed to stop the
first wave of attacks and ended with Vietnamese refugees (against whom there
is no real local resentment) being evacuated from a block where they had
also come under attack.
The roots of this brutality can be traced to the Nazi era, but more recently
to the former East German regime and the way it cut off most contact with
the outside world. In the past three years, the joy of unification has been
replaced by disappointment as the economic gulf between east and west
Germany closes only with painful slowness.
'A lot of people don't have jobs here,' says Jurgen Winter, 46, a soldier
who does not know whether the German army will still have a place for him
next year. 'Only one out of four youngsters can get an apprenticeship. The
tendency to violence among 14-year-olds is frightening.'
Defenceless foreigners are clearly an easy target, especially in the
knowledge that most asylum-seekers are not political but economic refugees.
To many in the east, frightened about their own future, foreigners are a
scapegoat upon whom most of their ills can be ignorantly blamed.
Politicians may have seen this, but action has been slow and calls to alter
the constitution to stem the inflow and speed up the asylum process have yet
to bring results. In their confusion and mistrust, many in Lichtenhagen
applauded and egged on those attacking the asylum hostel.
It is this partial complicity in the baiting and attacking of foreigners
that the people of Lichtenhagen will find hard to live down. They have had
one taste of retribution with the huge left-wing demonstration that swamped
the suburb on Saturday. Those watching from balconies were subjected to
shouts of 'Nazis out'.
More than 3,000 police in full riot gear were on hand. The demonstration
drew more than 10,000 people. Although it was fairly peaceful, with none of
the feared clashes between right- and left-wing extremists, there was an air
of underlying menace.
With its traditional strength in shipbuilding, one of the most international
of industries, Rostock has certainly not been xenophobic in the past. Even
under the communist regime, Cubans and Angolans were employed in industry.
At the Warnow yard, north of Lichtenhagen, the giant cranes are a symbol of
past strength, present doubts, and hopes for the future. Now, 3,100 people
work where 6,000 were once employed. 'The uncertainty over the future is
dreadful,' says Holger Haefke, yard spokesman.
If Kvaerner, the Norwegian shipping company, does buy the Warnow yard as it
has stated, and as many locals hope, the yard's workers will have an assured
future, with DM500m of promised investment. There is work until the end of
next year, but the presence of four cargo ships - built for the Russians who
now cannot afford them - shows how markets have collapsed.
Much of east Germany lived off Soviet contracts. Their disappearance is one
reason why Rostock lacks confidence in its future. This helps explain -
though by no means excuse - the roots of the violence. 'Frustration
gradually came to the boil,' Mr Haefke says. 'But it got to a level which
can only be condemned.' Unfortunately for Rostock, that condemnation has now
assumed worldwide dimensions.
