FT  02 JUL 92 / The Future of the European Fighter: Lighter and cheaper mean
easier to shoot down, says UK
'THE EFA is dead; let's make a lighter aircraft.' That, in a nutshell, is
how a British defence official yesterday interpreted Germany's rejection of
the Pounds 20bn four-nation programme.
But, echoing the position of both the government in London and British
Aerospace, he quickly pronounced as unworkable the proposal by Mr Volker
Ruhe, the German defence minister, to build a cheaper and lighter version of
the aircraft. Britain, the other leading partner with Germany in the
European fighter project, considers the Ruhe plan flawed on both military
and industrial grounds.
Although the UK, together with Spain and Italy - the junior partners in the
programme - are prepared to discuss the German proposal, they are expected
to try to use the talks to persuade Germany to reconsider.
While the three other partners accept that there is no longer a threat from
the combined forces of the former Warsaw Pact countries, they insist that
the Atlantic alliance now faces a multi-faceted and less foreseeable
security risk.
One of the biggest risks, they argue, is the increasing number of
sophisticated weapons falling under the control of smaller and potentially
unstable nations and the deployment of highly capable Russian fighters such
as the MiG29 or the Su27 in a growing number of countries.
'Russia has already exported many of its very sophisticated aircraft to a
significant number of countries, including Third World countries like Iraq,
Iran and North Korea,' Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the UK defence secretary, said
yesterday.
Any alternative to the EFA would still have to provide the four air forces
of the partner countries with a modern combat aircraft capable of winning
any engagement against the equivalent of a MiG29 or Su27. Such a fighter
would be required to engage multiple targets, be extremely agile in both
subsonic and supersonic flight, and have very high rates of climb and
acceleration.
A smaller version would inevitably have a lower capability, carrying less
fuel and fewer weapons.
UK defence officials believe such an aircraft would be likely to be defeated
in combat and therefore not worth investing in.
It would be feasible technically to incorporate EFA technology into a
smaller aircraft.
However, preliminary studies suggest that the current development effort in
EFA, whose cost is now nearing Pounds 8bn, would not be directly applicable
to any new fighter aircraft programme and would largely have been wasted.
The proposal would mean:
The seven EFA prototypes now at final assembly would have to be scrapped;
New prototypes would have to be built and the partners would have to start a
new design from scratch;
The EJ200 engine being developed by Rolls-Royce, MTU of Germany, Fiat and
ITP of Spain would have to be redeveloped;
Radar, electronic warfare and flight control systems being tailor-made for
the fighter would also have to be scrapped or redesigned.
Any plans for a new aircraft would seriously delay the current development
programme started in 1988 and scheduled to be completed in 1999.
New feasibility studies, project definition and other negotiations between
the partners could take between five and eight years, delaying the
replacement of ageing aircraft in the four air forces.
Germany has suggested that its smaller EFA2000 project could involve other
countries, including possibly France and Sweden. This would imply that both
those countries would be prepared to scrap their own principal military
aerospace projects: the Rafale fighter in France and the Gripen JAS-39 light
multi-role aircraft in Sweden.
There has been no evidence so far that either nation would be prepared to do
anything of the kind.
France orginally pulled out of European collaboration on a new fighter in
1985 because it wanted an aircraft optimised for naval and ground attack
roles rather than the EFA's primary air-to-air defence role.
Rafale's unit production costs, which have been formally quoted by the
French government to Germany, are understood to be higher than for the EFA.
German and British studies also rate the French aircraft below the European
fighter in air defence operational capability.
