FT  17 AUG 92 / Economics: GDP may give positive sign
THIS WEEK could see the technical end of the recession in the UK. Although
the median forecast is for a small fall in second quarter gross domestic
product, the forecasts range from a drop of 0.5 per cent on the first
quarter to growth of 0.4 per cent.
It takes only one quarter of positive output - however slim - to mark the
end of the statistical recession and last week's better than expected
manufacturing output figures could tip the balance. GDP excluding oil and
gas production has fallen for seven successive quarters.
However, there is a risk of the recession continuing into the Autumn.
Today's distributive trades survey from the Confederation of British
Industry suggests that retail sales are still falling. Official figures on
Wednesday are forecast to show flat sales last month.
The following include some of the other economic highlights of the week. The
figures in brackets are the median of economists' forecasts from MMS
International, a financial information company.
Today: UK, Confederation of British Industry distributive trades survey;
France, July consumer prices index (up 0.3 per cent on month, up 2.9 per
cent on year); Finland, July CPI; Australia, June export prices; Belgium,
markets closed, bank holiday.
Tomorrow: US, July housing starts (1.2m), July building permits, federal
open markets committee meeting; UK, July PSBR (Pounds 0.4bn), Bank of
England quarterly bulletin; Canada, June manufacturing data; Australia,
Federal government budget; Sweden, July CPI (flat on month, up 2 per cent on
year).
Wednesday: UK, July retail sales (flat on month, down 0.1 per cent on year),
second quarter GDP (down 0.2 per cent on quarter, down 0.8 per cent on
year); US, June merchandise trade (Dollars 6.8bn deficit); June, merchandise
exports (Dollars 36.1bn); June merchandise imports (Dollars 43bn); France,
July industrial production (up 0.7 per cent); Canada, June merchandise
exports (down 0.5 per cent), imports (up 0.1 per cent), trade balance
(CDollars 950m surplus).
Thursday: UK, July money supply data. M0 (up 1 per cent on month, up 2.2 per
cent on year), M4 (up 0.4 per cent on month, up 5.3 per cent on year), M4
lending (up Pounds 2.9bn); US, initial jobless claims for week ended 8
August (472,000), money supply data for week ended 10 August; Germany,
regular Bundesbank council meeting; Australia, Reserve Bank of Australia
annual report published, June manufacturing input prices, June import
prices, June export prices; Canada, July CPI (seasonally adjusted up 0.2 per
cent); New Zealand, second quarter retail trade.
Friday: US, July Treasury budget (Dollars 41bn deficit); Canada, June retail
sales (down 0.3 per cent).
During the week: Germany, July producer prices index (flat on month, up 1.2
per cent on year), July M3 - from Q4 base (up 8.5 per cent); Sweden, June
trade balance, June current account; Netherlands, June trade balance, July
unemployment rate (4 per cent); Italy, June wholesale prices index (up 2.8
per cent on year), June producer prices index (up 1.9 per cent); Denmark,
July CPI (down 0.2 per cent on month, up 2.4 per cent year).
