FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of Vehicle Manufacturing Technology (7): New trends
and challenges - Developments in paints and coatings
ENVIRONMENTAL pressures may be increasing on industry as a whole, but few
processes are closer to the sharp end of the debate than the motor
industry's paint shops.
Based on annual production of 10m cars, European manufacturers are using an
estimated 70,000 tons of solvent during the painting processes, the majority
of which is released into the atmosphere.
Emission controls are being tightened up, and common EC-wide legislation is
expected. But the environmental factor is only one of several trends which
makes the paint shop one of the most complex, and rapidly changing, areas of
modern vehicle manufacturing.
The need for better-looking and longer-lasting finishes, for a higher level
of automation to increase productivity, and more sophisticated control
systems to enable greater production flexibility are all increasing the
challenges for equipment suppliers.
The major suppliers - Durr of Germany with its sister company Behr, the Asea
Brown Boveri subsidiaries Flakt and Ransburg, and Taikisha of Japan - are
adapting to the growing demand for turnkey packages while keeping abreast of
a multi-disciplinary process involving everything from computers to sludge
removal systems.
Recent installations in the UK motor industry illustrate the trends clearly.
Vauxhall's newly-commissioned Pounds 60m paint unit at its Ellesmere Port
Astra manufacturing plant has Europe's first operational MAP (Manufacturing
and Automation Protocol) 3.0 network. MAP is a means of maintaining
efficient, reliable high-speed communications between factory-floor
computers.
The plant also has an innovative 'flocculation' system, designed to recover
paint overspray, developed as an experiment by Air Industrie, a subsidiary
of GEC Alsthom, and GM's European Technical Development Centre. Work is
continuing on ways to use the recovered paint, perhaps as a filler material
in compounded sound deadener pads.
Further south, at Iveco Ford Truck's Langley plant, the Iveco New Cargo line
has a fully automated Behr paint spraying system, equipped with four robots
and claimed to be the first in Europe to spray a complete cab automatically
in a single pass.
The system, designed for frequent colour changes, can handle 16 body styles
and 24 colours. Bodies are fed to the spray booth at random and the required
style and colour programme called up by an operator on a simple keypad at
the entrance to the spray booth. Thereafter, the complete spraying operation
is fully automatic and computer controlled.
Pre-treatment ahead of painting is also the target of investment. At Rover's
Cowley factory, a new body pre-treatment plant installed by Durr has
replaced the old spray dip system with a new full immersion pre-treatment
process, producing better corrosion protection.
Meanwhile, at the luxury end of the industry, Rolls-Royce has installed the
latest Behr two-component paint system. Known as 2K, the system mixes
precise quantities of paint and hardener immediately before they are applied
to the car body.
All these systems offer environmental benefits - the 2K process, for
example, requires a lower stoving temperature than typical single component
materials and thus consumes less energy.
According to Durr, the cost of new automotive paint plants will need to
increase by 20 per cent, or Pounds 1m-Pounds 2m, to accommodate new UK
emission regulations - operators have until September to submit approved
plans to local authorities for complying with the 1990 Environmental
Protection Act.
The response to the regulations takes a number of forms, according to Mr
John Barlow, Durr's UK managing director. On the materials side, there is a
move away from solvent-based paints to water-based paints - water-based
primers have been used for some years. Solvents are used to get the paint
airborne, and their replacement by water-based systems requires new sprayers
and a completely new stainless steel plant.
Where solvents are used, paints with higher solid contents have been
developed to reduce emissions. This is a further advantage of the 2K
process, which has a high solids content of up to 70 per cent.
New paint technologies, such as powder-coating are also being tried, but in
this case implementation in car plants is a long way off, says Mr Barlow.
The emission problem is solved but the spraying equipment is too wasteful.
Controlling and treating emissions, whether of air-borne solvents, or
paint-polluted water, is the other main area where technology is being
driven by the emission regulations and tougher rules. This has led to demand
for more sophisticated scrubbing and incineration systems, such as catalytic
incinerators, and water recycling equipment.
