FT  04 SEP 92 / German GDP falls 0.5% in second quarter
THE slowdown in the west German economy was confirmed yesterday, with second
quarter figures for gross domestic product showing a drop of 0.5 per cent
against the previous quarter.
In comparison with the same period last year, the economy still showed a
small positive growth rate of 0.6 per cent, according to the Federal
Statistics Office, although that was also sharply lower than the 3.2 per
cent posted in the unseasonally mild first quarter of the year.
At the same time, there was a slight drop in unemployment in both halves of
Germany in August, although it amounted to less of an improvement than
normal for the time of year.
Joblessness in western Germany fell by 6,100 to 1,821,600, a constant rate
of 6 per cent. In the east, where the official unemployment level is
suppressed by subsidised job creation schemes, short-time working, early
retirement and retraining programmes, the number out of work fell by 19,500
to 1,168,700, down from 14.6 to 14.4 per cent.
In the hothouse atmosphere of the German economic debate, the figures were
immediately subjected to conflicting interpretations.
Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the Bundesbank president, emerged from his
fortnightly board meeting to insist that they showed 'we are neither in a
recession, nor can one speak of recessionary tendencies in western Germany'.
He admitted, however, that there were some elements of weakness in the west
German economy, particularly in exports and in domestic demand for
industrial equipment.
The Bundesbank made no move to alter its key interest rates to signal any
relaxation in its tough monetary restraint. Mr Schlesinger said the discount
rate increase agreed in July (from 8 to 8.75 per cent) had done what it been
supposed to do: namely, increase domestic bank lending rates, but barely
affect money-market and capital market rates.
He rejected international pressure for some relaxation, saying there was no
room yet to relax the interest rates, nor any reason to raise them.
However, the Bundesbank stance was sharply criticised by the DGB union
federation, which called for a relaxation of interest rate policy to help
the fight against unemployment. It accused the bank of risking a recession
in order to force inflation below 3 per cent.
Mr Jurgen Mollemann, economics minister, also insisted that Germany was not
facing an outright recession, while admitting that 'the risks for a
continuation of the economic expansion have clearly grown.
Although there were no recent figures for the east German economy, there was
still no sign of a lasting improvement there: the collapse of trade with
east Europe, and a drop in domestic demand, had both hit recovery prospects.
