FT  23 JUN 92 / Tureen survives revolution to score success: Saleroom
SOTHEBY'S and Christie's spent the weekend in Monaco holding sales of
paintings, furniture and silver. Results were mixed, but Sotheby's scored a
success with its dispersal of 45 pieces of 18th-century French silver
collected by the late Arturo Lopez-Willshaw, making FFr33.3m (Pounds 3.35m)
with everything sold.
The French Revolution had a devastating effect on French silver and few good
items survived. But Lopez-Willshaw owned a soup tureen made by by
Edme-Pierre Balzac in Paris in 1757 and a ragout dish, the work of Thomas
Germain, both part of the Penthievre-Orleans service, the only French royal
service to survive. They sold for FFr6.6m and FFr3.3m respectively, the
former being acquired by the Louvre. The star of the auction was a rococo
coffee pot by Francois-Thomas Germain, which quadrupled its estimate to sell
for FFr8.3m, a record for a silver coffee pot.
The auction of Old Master paintings totalled FFr32m but 33 per cent was left
unsold. An American collector paid FFr2.2m for a pastel portrait of the
Marechal of Belle-Ilse by Maurice-Quentin de la Tour, at the bottom of its
estimate.
Christie's did quite well with a private collection of French furniture that
totalled FFr26.3m and was 18 per cent unsold, but less well with paintings,
which brought in FFr18m, with more than 40 per cent unsold.
In the furniture a console desserte in the Anglo-Chinese style, attributed
to Adam Weisweiler, was just within estimate at FFr3.4m. Three similar
consoles, which were made for the Prince Regent, are now in Buckingham
Palace.
Christie's sale of 19th-century pictures in London on Friday was also
something of a disaster, with the two top lots, 'Prometheus Bound' by
Gustave Moreau, and a view of Taormina by Carl Rottmann falling well below
their estimates of about Pounds 400,000. Yesterday at Christie's an Italian
maiolica bowl made around 1525, painted with the Deposition from the Cross,
made the top price of Pounds 55,000. In 1938 it had sold for Pounds 125.
