FT  27 NOV 92 / Argentina picks its way through pension maze: A scheme to
introduce private funds
EVERY Wednesday about 500 pensioners gather outside Argentina's Congress to
protest about their pitiful benefits and demand more money, only to face
riot police, dogs and, on some occasions, armoured vehicles.
Militant pensioners have tried storming the Supreme Court and one has
threatened to burn down Congress.
The plight of Argentina's 4.2m pensioners has become a political issue that
makes the government appear indifferent to the social costs of economic
reform.
Private pensions were seen as a way out of the dilemma. As well as ridding
itself of costly, corrupt and insufficient state schemes, the government
hoped such pensions would improve companies' competitiveness by reducing
payroll taxes and breathing life into capital markets.
Argentina aimed to have its private scheme in place by January, but trade
union and Congress opposition has delayed approval all year. Yesterday,
however, Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo said he was confident a tripartite
council from government, trade unions and business would agree a compromise
version that would ensure congressional approval before Christmas.
Mr Walter Schulthess, social security secretary, promises: 'There is going
to be a total transformation of the pensions system in Argentina.'
He has designed a hybrid scheme retaining some features of the state-run
pay-as-you-go system while copying features of a scheme operating in Chile
and introducing a mechanism to tide over existing contributors.
Initially the state will pay out a minimum benefit equivalent to about 20
per cent of the economy's average wage to all who have contributed to
pension funds for at least 30 years. Those who have contributed for longer
than this will get a 2 per cent annual premium for each year over the
30-year limit.
The state will also compensate people who are already paying into the state
system with a credit equivalent to 2 per cent of the economy's average wage
for each year's contribution, with an upper limit of 30 years.
Thus, contributors to the old system will be entitled to benefits equivalent
to 60 per cent of the average wage when reaching the retirement age of 65,
plus an automatic minimum benefit of 20 per cent of average wages. These two
state-run schemes will be funded by a 16 per cent payroll tax paid by
employers plus a fixed slice of tax revenues.
Finally there is a compulsory private pension fund scheme similar to
Chile's, funded by a 10-11 per cent wage deduction. Employees will channel
the money directly to a savings account held at a pension fund company.
Contributors will be free to pick and choose among competing funds, creating
competitive pressure to provide good service.
Mr Schulthess promises the private system will be 'strongly supervised by
totally independent regulators, since there will be strict norms on where
funds can be invested, that stipulate maximum amounts that can be invested
in each instrument.' Compulsory credit ratings, both of companies issuing
paper and of each fund's investments, will limit the scope for fraud.
The government will also create several reserve and emergency funds topped
up by the management funds themselves. Part of the money will come from a
mechanism limiting profits.
Any fund that yields 30 per cent over the pension system's annual average
yield will have to pay excess profits into the reserve funds, a sure way of
discouraging high-yielding but risky investments.
If there is a weakness in the system, it is regulation; Argentina has an
atrocious record of corrupt and incompetent state supervision and
private-sector fraud.
