FT  26 JUN 92 / Survey of India (23): Coal scuttle thrown open - Kunal Bose
says that New Delhi has no alternative but to invite private sector
participation in new projects. At the same time, the industry has a
four-prong plan to achieve 'self-reliant growth'
NOBODY is as yet talking about the privatisation of the Indian coal
industry, which was nationalised two decades ago. But under the new economic
order the coal industry, like any other public sector undertaking, cannot
depend on the government for financing new projects. So New Delhi will have
no alternative but to invite private sector participation in a number of
coalmining areas.
According to Mr S. K. Chowdhury, chairman of Coal India Limited (CIL), those
which may be thrown open to the private sector include washeries (where the
ash content in coal is reduced), power plants to supply electricity to the
mines, workshops for maintenance of equipment and shaft sinking and other
mine development activities.
The coal sector's allocation for the eighth five-year plan launched in April
1992 is Rs115bn. But government budgetary support will be limited to Rs28bn.
Doubt persists on whether CIL will be able to find the funds for the
projects identified in the plan. Its production target for 1996-97, the
plan's final year, is 258m tonnes.
Because of the strain on its resources, the government has no alternative
but to invite private sector participation in as many areas as possible. A
more important move under consideration is for the government to permit bulk
consumers of coal such as power, steel and cement to have captive mines.
Industries for which coal is the principal raw material would heave sighs of
relief if they were allowed coalmining rights. There is a running battle
between CIL and the major coal consumers over the quality and quantity of
coal supplied. For example, there was a supply shortfall of over 6m tonnes
of coal to the power sector in 1991-92.
Mr Purno Sangma, minister for coal, admits that 'complaints regarding the
size and quality of coal continue to be an area of major concern'. The
complaints mostly relate to the high ash content of the fuel and the
presence of such materials as stone and mud.
The minister believes that joint inspection by the producer and the consumer
at the loading point will largely eliminate the complaints. But to improve
the quality of coal will call for the setting up of washeries close to the
mines as a private initiative since CIL does not have the money to do the
job.
A study by experts found that a 7 per cent reduction in ash content would
lead to an improvement of up to 28 per cent in the calorific value of coal
and a 7 per cent saving in transport costs.
CIL, which needs substantial foreign exchange to finance imports of
equipment and spares, has decided to give a major thrust to the export of
coal and coke. Its newly created export unit hopes that exports will reach
2m tonnes in a couple of years. In addition, Mr Chowdhury explains, it hopes
for an extra Rs350 a tonne.
The single largest corporate employer in the world which no longer expects
the government to take care of its losses, according to its chairman, CIL
achieved an improvement in the year to March 1992. The company earned a net
profit of Rs1bn against a loss of Rs2.53bn in 1990-91.
How badly the coal business was run in the post-nationalisation period is
evident from CIL's accumulated losses of Rs22bn.
The perennial bane of CIL has been low productivity in the underground mines
and equipment problems in the opencast mines. According to Mr Sangma, in the
five years to 1991-92, the wage cost per manshift rose by 58 per cent, while
the output per manshift in the underground mines, where nearly 85 per cent
of CIL's total manpower is deployed, remained stagnant at 0.53 tonnes.
With wage costs equal to 85 per cent of the selling price of coal produced
in the underground mines, the loss on production of 60.31m tonnes in 1991-92
is estimated at Rs10bn. However, the loss has been made good by the profits
earned from production of 147.51m tonnes in the opencast mines.
Output in the opencast mines, however, leaves considerable room for
improvement. If the equipment which now remains idle for nearly 55 per cent
of working hours is put to more efficient use, that would help. The poor
equipment utilisation is in spite of 'fairly high investment in workshops'.
The challenge for CIL today is to generate enough resources to ensure
'self-reliant growth'. According to Mr Chowdhury, the aim is to achieve this
in four ways.
First, the underground mining operation which has suffered because of
inadequate supervision, delays in project implementation and neglect of dip
development is to be thoroughly overhauled.
Second, in its obsession to step up coal production, CIL has in the past
sacrificed the quality aspect. In the past decade, the share of superior
grades in total coal production has declined from 35 to 14 per cent. The aim
is to raise this to 20 per cent within three years.
Third, CIL has planned to liquidate coal stocks by 20m tonnes to a more
manageable 27m tonnes during the current year. But CIL cannot achieve the
target if the railways do not press into service sufficient numbers of
wagons. There is also scope to reduce the inventory of stores by Rs1bn.
The fourth task is to step up the export of superior grades of coal to
realise extra value.
While the government has yet to show the political courage needed to close
any of the uneconomic mines, it is trying to cope with the estimated 50,000
surplus workers by redeploying them in new coal projects and offering them
an attractive voluntary retirement scheme.
However, in this CIL will need the support of state governments, some of
which are run by non-Congress parties.
