FT  22 MAY 92 / Parliament and Politics: Tories win Maastricht victory -
Bill given second Commons reading with comfortable majority Opponents plan
to continue fight Hurd assurance on sovereignty
TWENTY-TWO Conservative rebels voted against the government last night as
the European Communities (Amendment) Bill, which ratifies the Maastricht
treaty, received a second Commons reading with a comfortable majority of 244
(336-92).
A total of 61 Labour MPs, including tellers, defied the leadership's advice
not to vote and opposed the motion. These included Mr George Howarth, the MP
for Knowsley North, who resigned his position as a frontbench housing
spokesman in order to do so.
Among the Tory rebels were former ministers such as Mr John Biffen and Mr
Michael Spicer, and other prominent Euro-sceptics including Sir Teddy Taylor
and Mr Tony Marlow, the MPs for Southend East and Northampton North
respectively.
Two Labour MPs - Mr Tam Dalyell, the MP for Linlithgow, and Mr Andrew
Faulds, the MP for Warley East - voted for the government motion. Earlier, a
Labour amendment was defeated with a government majority of 99 (360-261).
Opening the debate, Mr Douglas Hurd said that when Britain took over the
presidency of the European Community in July it would give a lead in
developing the move away from centralisation signalled by the treaty.
The foreign secretary told doubters on the Tory backbenches: 'The ball is at
our feet. We have a treaty now which more closely mirrors British priorities
than any of its predecessors'.
Mr Hurd sought to allay the fears of Euro-sceptics that the treaty would
lead relentlessly to a centralised Europe with perhaps a single executive
and a single parliament, with national parliaments steadily stripped of
their functions.
The foreign secretary insisted that the treaty reinforced the position of
national parliaments by limiting the areas in which the Community could
legislate, and by encouraging the greater involvement of the states.
Without mentioning Mrs Margaret Thatcher, the former prime minister, by
name, Mr Hurd played down her fears about growing German dominance in the
EC.
Mrs Thatcher's views were denounced in more trenchant terms by Sir Edward
Heath, the former Conservative prime minister who took Britain into the EC
in 1973. Again without mentioning Mrs Thatcher's name, he said he had been
'absolutely disgusted by the bigoted, xenophobic, and rabid' statements made
about Germany.
Sir Edward described the treaty as a 'great leap forward' but, to the
discomfort of ministers, criticised the government for not agreeing to the
social chapter and the directive on working hours.
Mr Gerald Kaufman, the shadow foreign secretary, claimed that the Maastricht
treaty embodied policies which had been advocated by Labour MPs but opposed
by the government.
He clashed with Mr Tony Benn, Labour MP for Chesterfield, who, in defiance
of the Labour leadership, announced that he would vote against the bill. Mr
Benn argued that Mr Kaufman had highlighted Labour's opposition to
government policy on the social chapter and other issues, but not to the
bill itself.
He told the shadow foreign secretary: 'All the logic of your argument is to
invite Labour MPs to vote for the bill.'
Summing up, Mr Norman Lamont, chancellor of the exchequer, said the
government did not believe that a single monetary policy required the
central determination of countries' levels of taxes and spending.
What was sought was a balance between what was responsible and the freedom
of countries to determine their own policies in these areas. 'We totally
reject the harmonisation of direct taxes,' he said.
For Labour, Mr John Smith, the shadow chancellor and a contender for the
party leadership, argued that the convergence criteria were 'too narrowly
formulated' and should be expanded to take account employment and economic
growth.
It was important for governments to 'recapture' the influence they ought to
have over economic and financial policy. In a world where corporations were
increasingly operating internationally, governments 'must do likewise'.
The 22 Conservative MPs who voted against the government last night were: Mr
Rupert Allason (Torbay); Mr John Biffen (Shropshire North); Sir Richard Body
(Holland with Boston); Mr Nicholas Budgen (Wolverhampton South West); Mr
John Butcher (Coventry South West); Mr John Carlisle (Luton North); Mr
Michael Carttiss (Great Yarmouth); Mr Bill Cash (Stafford); Mr James Cran
(Beverley); Mr Christopher Gill (Ludlow); Ms Teresa Gorman (Billericay); Mr
Harry Greenway (Ealing North); Mr Andrew Hunter (Basingstoke); Mr Toby
Jessel (Twickenham); Mr Tony Marlow (Northampton North); Mr David Porter
(Waveney); Mr Richard Shepherd (Aldridge-Brownhills); Sir Trevor Skeet
(Bedfordshire North); Mr Michael Spicer (Worcestershire South); Sir Teddy
Taylor (Southend East); Mrs Ann Winterton (Congleton) and Mr Nicholas
Winterton (Macclesfield)
