FT  28 SEP 92 / Angolan rivals abolish armies
ANGOLA'S former civil war adversaries formally abolished their armies
yesterday, ending a deadlock which threatened this week's first free
elections in the country, Reuter reports from Luanda.
The MPLA government and former rebel movement Unita said in a joint
statement that troops would fall under the control of the new unified
Angolan Armed Forces.
It added that until a new government was sworn in the new national force
would be supervised by a mixed commission overseeing a May 1991 peace
accord. The commission comprises officials of the two parties and
Portuguese, US and Russian observers.
Some 40,000 men of the original 150,000 combined forces have yet to be
demobilised and the two sides had been deadlocked over the naming of a
commander for the new 50,000-strong national army.
But after a meeting on Saturday to break the impasse, President Jose Eduardo
dos Santos and Mr Jonas Savimbi, Unita leader, said generals from both sides
would be at the helm.
Diplomats said the formal abolition of the enemy armies was largely symbolic
but would contribute to calm before the elections, which have been marred by
campaign clashes that have claimed at least 40 lives.
Unita also pledged in a statement released last night to respect the right
of the 4.8m Angolans to a free and fair vote.
Unita, backed by South Africa and then Washington, fought against the MPLA
which set up a one-party state with Soviet and Cuban aid when Angola gained
independence from Portugal in 1975. The war killed hundreds of thousands and
ruined the economy.
Diplomats expect a close vote in the race for the presidency and 223-seat
parliament. Some 800 international observers - half from the United Nations
 -are scattered across the country to monitor voting.
Four Russian crew and 11 Angolan passengers died yesterday when a UN
helicopter used by election observers crashed in northern Uige province, UN
officials said. Only one person aboard, an Angolan, survived the accident.
