FT  07 AUG 92 / Brussels rebukes airlines
FOUR European airlines have been rebuked by the European Commission for
increasing fares last summer in breach of EC law.
The Commission condemned fare increases introduced by British Airways,
Alitalia, Luxair and Iberia on 22 routes - all but one involving British
airports. The Commission decided the increases were not 'reasonably related'
to the airlines' long-term costs.
The Commission has not punished the airlines, which increased the fares
during the Gulf crisis when the regulatory regime was temporarily relaxed.
Instead, it has warned governments that they cannot use the prices as a
reference for future increases.
Britain asked Brussels to look into nearly 100 fare increases in April 1991.
Most of the fares were cleared by the Commission.
British Airways received a rap over the knuckles for increasing the standard
fares on 12 routes booked from Greece, Italy, Spain, Denmark and Belgium
into Manchester and London. The British carrier also broke the law with fare
increases on three routes out of Birmingham.
The European Commission yesterday gave Pepsico and General Mills, US
multinationals, the go-ahead to create Europe's largest manufacturer of
snack food products.
Brussels' competition authorities cleared the joint venture - which will
have sales of Dollars 640m (Pounds 335m) - after a routine one-month
investigation.
The US groups said in May they intended to merge their operations in six
continental European countries. A Commission spokesman said the
fragmentation of the EC snack food business meant the enlarged company would
command less than 10 per cent of the market.
The Commission found that the companies' operations overlapped only in the
area of savoury products, such as potato chips. But as the two companies
were active in different parts of the Community, Brussels decided the deal
would not distort competition.
Pepsico will own 59.5 per cent of the joint venture and General Mills 40.5
per cent. The joint venture will embrace Pepsico's operations in Spain,
Portugal and Greece, and General Mills' business in France, Belgium and the
Netherlands.
