FT  18 SEP 92 / Survey of Urban Development (11): Conflicting voices in the
corridor - Canary Wharf's failure casts a shadow over a bold planning vision
/ Appraising the idea of an east Thames development
THERE IS no more powerful reminder of the hazards and challenges of urban
regeneration than Canary Wharf, the insolvent office project that dominates
the east London skyline.
The failure of the project, which went into receivership in May, reflects
its over-ambitious scale and its perceived isolation from the heart of
London. At the same time, the tower's spectacular views over east London
underline the daunting scale of the regeneration task that remains.
This eastern fringe of London encompasses a large expanse of industrial
dereliction and under-developed land, albeit interspersed by historic towns
and areas of open countryside. It has been badly affected by the decline of
manufacturing and port-related industries over the last 20 years.
The depressed image of the area, coupled with a long-standing neglect of its
infrastructure, has held back development. With the exception of the
Docklands, an area from Tower Bridge to the Royal Docks, which became the
focus of the government's urban renewal strategy in the 1980s, the area has
been largely untouched by successive property booms.
Its potential as a long-term growth opportunity was identified in 1985, by
the strategic planning body for the south-east (Serplan). It called the
area, which stretched from Tower Bridge to Southend in Essex and Sheerness
in Kent, the East Thames Corridor. It contains an estimated 10,000 acres of
uncontaminated land that can be developed without encroaching on the Green
Belt.
The political will to develop the area gathered strength last year, partly
as a result of the shortage of housing land to the west of London.
Attention was focused on the area a little under a year ago when the
government announced that the fast rail link from the Channel Tunnel to
London would go through east London, via Stratford. In the same week, Mr
Michael Heseltine, then secretary of state for the environment, announced
that there would be a study of development prospects in the East Thames
Corridor.
'Large as the Docklands project is, it now needs to be seen as just one part
of a much bigger strategy that focuses on Stratford and seeks to develop, on
that basis, a huge linear city on both sides of the Thames,' said Professor
Peter Hall, an urban geographer who acted as his adviser.
The potential for this kind of development is being assessed by planning
consultants. Llewelyn-Davies Planning will submit a report on the area's
development potential to the secretary of state for the environment at the
end of this month.
The scope for development is constrained by the nature of the sites. The
main development sites are the Royal Docks, Barking Reach, Rainham Marshes,
Stratford Railway lands, Greenwich Peninsula and Beckton Gasworks at
Gallions Reach. The last two belong to British Gas.
The barriers to development are awesome. The problems include the area's
poor image, the recession, constraints on public spending, developers'
disillusionment with urban regeneration projects and the likelihood that the
area's land will be include on a contaminated-land register.
There is also a glut of existing buildings. A study by the University of
East London for Glenny, chartered surveyor, found that: 'With the possible
exception of high-quality warehousing and distribution, there are
substantial surpluses of most types of commercial space and housing, which
will have to be reduced, perhaps by conversion to lower-value uses, before
confidence can return and new projects realised.'
But despite these formidable obstacles, the case for developing the East
Thames Corridor has some merits. For one thing, it offers the only
substantial expanse of developable land in the overcrowded south-east. For
another, its position between London and continental Europe will become
increasingly important with closer European integration. Already, it is a
funnel for around half the south-east's trade with the EC.
Another factor working in favour of the region's development is the
improving quality of its infrastructure.
'East London is in the middle of a historic phase in its development: the
installation, over a 20-30 year period of new transport infrastructure such
as it has not seen in a century,' said the study by the University of East
London.
Improvements that have been put, or are being put, into place include the
M25 motorway, the Dartford Bridge crossing, the Lower Lea crossing, the
North Circular road, the Docklands Light Railway, the Stansted passenger
terminal and the City airport. In addition, the A13/M25 links, the M11
extension, the East London river crossing and Crossrail are due to be
installed in the second half of the decade.
But even with the large sums being spent on the region's infrastructure,
further investment will have a critical impact on the viability of
development. According to the University of East London: 'All (the sites in
the East Thames Corridor) need road and rail improvements to realise their
potential.' The only exceptions are the Royal Docks and Chafford Hundred,
which are already well served with infrastructure.
The success of the London docklands will largely depend on whether the
government continues with the Jubilee Line extension, jeopardised by the
receivership of Canary Wharf, which had been due to contribute Pounds 400m
to its costs.
In addition, much hangs on the location of a passenger station for the
Channel Tunnel fast rail link. In the view of the University of London
report: 'A Stratford interchange is seen as vital to the future prosperity
of docklands.'
The importance of putting the right transport provisions in place are
palpably demonstrated by the half-deserted office developments of the Isle
of Dogs. Its failure to match the area's infrastructure with the pace of new
development did extensive damage to its reputation. So, too, did the
hands-off approach to planning, which resulted in the development of an
excessive number of office blocks in competition with surrounding boroughs.
Now that the 1980s property boom is a distant memory, investors are unlikely
to make the same mistakes twice. Unless the right infrastructure and
planning mechanisms are in place, the East Thames Corridor will get no
further than the drawing board.
