FT  09 JUL 92 / Leading Article: Health for all
FOR TOO long, the UK National Health Service has been failing to live up to
its name. It has been an ill-health service, devoted to curing conditions
which might have been prevented by promoting healthier life-styles. Yet some
of the greatest improvements in the nation's health have come from simple
environmental improvements, such as cleaner water and better diet.
Yesterday's white paper on the health of the nation sets out a strategy for
moving health promotion up the agenda, which will begin to shift the
emphasis from cure to prevention. It identifies five priority areas on which
resources will be concentrated, including coronary heart disease and
strokes, the main causes of preventable, premature death. In each priority
area, clear targets are set for reducing their incidence, with detailed
programmes for achieving the targets involving all the relevant agencies.
There will be widespread support for this approach, especially the adoption
of clear and measureable targets by which progress can be judged. Debate
will no doubt continue over the wisdom of individual targets or the efficacy
of particular policy measures. The halving of pregnancies among girls under
16 is a particularly bold aim, and the means for achieving it - through sex
education and improved family planning - are likely to be contro-versial.
In implementing this strategy, the government will be assisted by its health
service reforms, which have strengthened the strategic planning role of
local health authorities. The white paper sensibly proposes improvements in
the provision of information on how the national objectives are to be
implemented locally. It also promises to monitor progress. While periodic
reports are promised from the health department on progress, there is a case
for these to be published annually, with rapid measures to prod backsliding
authorities into action.
Two omissions from the white paper have attracted criticism. The first is
the failure to ban all tobacco advertising. While there are reasons for not
introducing a total ban, there is scope for further restrictions,
particularly if evidence emerges that advertising encourages young people to
take up smoking. Meanwhile, the level of excise duties on tobacco should be
raised by significantly more than the rate of inflation each year. Removing
tobacco products from the basket of goods used to measure inflation might
make this step more palatable for chancellors committed to low inflation.
The second is that it overlooks the now well-established correlation between
ill health and poverty. One consequence of failing to address this issue
could be that health promotion campaigns, to persuade people to adopt
healthier lifestyles, overlook the underlying causes of bad diet and poor
housing. That is a most unfortunate omission in seeking to create a true
health service.
