FT  20 NOV 92 / Disinflation 'too quick': Bank of England seeks gradual
transition to price stability
SHORTLY after sterling left the European exchange rate mechanism on Black
Wednesday, it was reported that a collective sigh of relief could be heard
in the Bank of England.
The Bank's latest quarterly bulletin explains why. Policy had become far too
tight this year and disinflation was proceeding so quickly that price
stability - defined as an underlying inflation rate of 2 per cent or less -
might have been achieved next year.
The Bank has not turned away from seeking stable prices. Indeed, it says:
'It is vital that a steady and sustainable transition to price stability be
maintained. In the long run, economic growth is not promoted by tolerating
higher rates of inflation.'
Its bulletin, though, marks a new awareness of the damage caused by debt
deflation and the way falling house prices have damped consumer confidence
and UK economic growth. A too rapid move towards price stability might have
intensified that. Once sterling was forced out of the ERM and the UK freed
from having to maintain a monetary policy geared to German domestic
conditions, 'some easing of policy was desirable', the Bank says.
In spite of the fall in bank base rates to 7 per cent, the bulletin does
nothing to encourage hope of a strong economic recovery in Britain. 'Recent
economic data and surveys have suggested a subdued picture for activity in
the second half of this year,' it says.
The international outlook is also bleak. The prospects for world trade have
worsened since the Bank's last bulletin in August. The volume of world trade
in 1993 is expected to be only 12 per cent higher than in 1990, whereas 12
months ago it was expected to rise by 18 per cent between 1990 and 1993.
According to the Bank, economic activity in the UK's six Group of Seven
partner countries is now forecast to rise by 1.6 per cent this year - half a
percentage point less than forecast six months ago. It expects output among
the six to grow next year at a still sluggish 2.2 per cent, with the
European Community growing by only 1 per cent, reflecting an anticipated
slowdown in Germany and Italy.
The EC's expected 1 per cent rate of growth in 1993 would be unchanged from
this year and in 1991, and would compare with growth of between 2.5 per cent
and 3 per cent expected for Japan and the US next year. Subdued global
growth is one reason the Bank does not fear a swift revival of inflationary
pressures in Britain after sterling's large devaluation since September 16.
It also believes under-utilisation of capacity and the depressed state of
the labour market will delay, and may reduce, the pass-through of the
depreciation into prices.
UK inflation (when measured by the seasonally adjusted change in the index
in the latest three months over the preceding three months at an annualised
rate) has been lower than suggested by official figures in recent months.
Goods prices, which a year ago were rising at an annualised rate of about 6
per cent, have been growing at annualised rates close to 1 per cent. Average
prices reported by retailers have shown little underlying growth through the
summer.
The bulletin suggests reasons why low inflation has failed to stop sharp
falls in business and consumer confidence.
Companies have started to shed labour at an accelerating rate while those
affected by job losses differ from the 1980s. The proportion of women losing
their jobs has declined, as has the percentage of people aged 18 to 24. By
contrast, the proportion of unemployed aged between 25 and 49 has increased,
as has the percentage of jobless in the south-east.
A 'striking' change has been the sharp increase of short-term male
unemployment benefit claimants in mortgaged households from 34 per cent in
1986 to 41 per cent last year. Claimants are also more educated than in the
mid 1980s, with 41 per cent holding A-levels or higher qualifications
against 34 per cent previously.
The spread of unemployment to such groups has affected people with higher
expectations and greater financial commitments than in earlier recessions.
The Bank suggests that that has encouraged greater financial caution among
individuals than indicated by overall data on the economy. The sight of well
educated homeowners losing their jobs may have made skilled workers and
potential home buyers especially concerned about their own security and so
unwilling to borrow or spend more.
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, November 1992, Vol 32, No 4.
Subscription details from Bulletin Group, Economics Division, Bank of
England, London EC2R 8AH. Tel 071-601 4030.
