FT  08 DEC 92 / Icahn gives up his control of TWA to creditors and unions
THE SURVIVAL chances of Trans World Airlines, the bankrupt US carrier owned
by Mr Carl Icahn, improved yesterday after he agreed to give up control of
the airline and provide financial support to it.
The former corporate raider reached the deal with the airline's creditors,
its three unions and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, the federal
agency which is required to guarantee payments from TWA's underfunded
pension plans.
Mr Icahn, who holds a majority of TWA's shares as well as certain debt
securities, will relinquish control over the airline and abandon all claims
relating to it.
If the company's formal reorganisation plan is approved next year, ownership
will pass to the company's three unions and unsecured creditors.
The unions will receive 45 per cent of the equity in the airline, in return
for a cut of 15 per cent in wages and benefits. The unsecured creditors will
share the remaining 55 per cent, in return for forgiving about Dollars 1bn
of claims. Mr Icahn or his private interests will also provide Dollars 200m
of short-term financing to TWA.
The US pensions agency, which guarantees about Dollars 730m of TWA's
benefits, says the airline's plans are underfunded by Dollars 1.05bn
overall. Under the agreement, these pension plans will be frozen, and Mr
Icahn will become their 'sponsor', or responsible for their financial
performance.
TWA will issue a Dollars 300m note, paying interest at an annual rate of 11
per cent over 15 years, to help make up the funding requirements. Mr Icahn
or his private interests must then supplement these payments by Dollars 20m
annually for four years.
Yesterday, the various parties said a plan of reorganisation should be filed
with the bankruptcy court in January, which could allow the airline to move
out of Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection next year.
This could pave the way for the proposed sale of international assets to a
combined USAir-British Airways, subject to approval from US regulatory
authorities.
