FT  04 SEP 92 / The French Referendum: Major's problems will outlive vote -
He wants and expects a Yes, but has no illusions
FOR the moment British politics is held in thrall. The conventional wisdom
is that the outcome of the French referendum on Maastricht will be a
watershed for Mr John Major's government.
The Euro-sceptics - Conservative and Labour alike - relish the prospect of a
No vote on September 20. They predict that chaos in the financial markets
would untie sterling from the D-Mark through devaluation or the break-up of
the exchange rate mechanism. With economic and political union derailed, the
nation states of Europe would be free to cast off the shackles of Brussels.
On the other side of the argument, many of Mr Major's supporters foresee
political salvation in a Yes vote. The pressures in the ERM would evaporate,
reviving confidence in the economy. With his government holding the EC
presidency, Mr Major could then direct his formidable political talents to
persuading the Danes to rejoin the enterprise.
No-one should be surprised at the polarisation of the debate. In recent
years the nation's politicians have been incapable of discussing Britain's
place in Europe in anything other than blacks and whites. At Westminster you
are either for or against Europe.
The adversarial shorthand is convenient for both sides. The uncertainties
over the French vote are offered by the British government as an explanation
of its inaction in the face of deepening economic gloom. For the Tory
Euro-sceptics the referendum provides a focus for their assault on Mr
Major's economic strategy and his alleged willingness to surrender
parliamentary sovereignty.
There are advantages also for the media too. The notion that the
government's fortunes hinge on a single throw of a set of Gallic dice is
tailor-made for headline-writers.
However, those charged with steering British policy are confident of nothing
but that, whatever the result, the implications will emerge in different
shades of grey.
Whitehall is working to the assumption that the French electorate will
endorse European union. But there is plenty of contingency planning in case
France votes no.
The starting point is that the government would withdraw from the House of
Commons legislation to ratify Maastricht. Beyond that, most of the
assumptions in Whitehall would dismay the Euro-sceptics. Ministers dismiss
the notion that French rejection of Maastricht would provide Mr Major with a
chance to redraw Europe as he wished.
In a reference to Lady Thatcher's implacable opposition to European union,
one senior official commented bluntly: 'It's simply nonsense to think that
Europe would be turned overnight into a continent of Thatcherites.'
How Chancellor Helmut Kohl and President Francois Mitterrand would react is
not clear, but no one believes they would abandon their ambitions to bind a
united Germany to a more unified Europe.
For his part, Mr Major's disdain for the federalist ambitions of some of his
European partners has not dented his conviction that Britain cannot be
sidelined: that it would have to remain at the centre of whatever followed
Maastricht.
Nor does he consider that a No vote would offer a let-out from the
commitment to hold sterling to its DM2.95 central rate in the exchange rate
mechanism - underlined yesterday by the Treasury decision to raise Ecu10bn
(Pounds 7.25bn) in foreign currencies through the foreign exchange market.
He shares the growing concern of Tory MPs that the recession is being
prolonged by high German interest rates. But his commitment to the
anti-inflation discipline of the ERM pre-dated Maastricht and would outlive
it.
It is not hard to find cabinet ministers who would breathe a sigh of relief
if the markets forced a revaluation of the D-Mark against all currencies.
But they are far from convinced that the prime minister would be prepared to
retreat from DM2.95. They are certain that if France held firm, then Mr
Major would risk the political backlash from a rise in interest rates rather
than have sterling tagged with the lira as one of the sick currencies in the
system.
The implications of a Yes vote are similarly ambiguous. Lady Thatcher
offered another reminder yesterday that the Euro-sceptics are determined to
disrupt and, if possible, defeat British legislation to ratify the treaty.
They draw comfort from private acknowledgement in Whitehall that French
support for the treaty may do little to persuade the Danish electorate
eventually to change its mind.
The assumption among ministers is that French backing for Maastricht would
remove the pressure for a rise in British interest rates. But there remain
doubts that that in itself would be enough to pull the economy from
recession. In the words of one minister this week: 'We will all breathe a
huge sigh of relief - and then say to ourselves what the hell do we do now?'
There is little doubt that Mr Major wants and expects the French to say Yes,
but he can have few illusions that an electorate across the channel will
solve his problems.
