FT  27 NOV 92 / Foreign Exchanges: No move from the Bundesbank
THE D-MARK reversed a rise in the dollar in European trading yesterday after
the Bundesbank did not change its officially posted interest rates at the
fortnightly council meeting, writes James Blitz.
Trading was thin yesterday because of the absence of US markets on the
annual Thanksgiving Day holiday. However, there were residual signs of
tension inside the European Exchange Rate Mechanism.
The Irish authorities signalled that the punt's overnight rate will be
pushed up to 100 per cent on Monday to try and stave off a devaluation. This
did nothing to help the currency, which remained at the bottom of its band
against the Belgian franc, one of the strongest currencies in the system.
Dealers in Lisbon said the Bank of Portugal was buying escudos at Es89.85 to
the D-Mark. However, the French franc gained support after the country's
finance minister stated that he would maintain the current value of its
currency within the ERM. The franc closed virtually unchanged, at FFr3.387
to the D-Mark.
The dollar rose to a high of DM1.5985 against the D-Mark in what dealers saw
as a delayed reaction to Wednesday's quarterly gross domestic product
figures in the US. This showed a rise of 3.9 per cent against previous
estimates of 2.7 per cent. The dollar later closed nearly half a pfennig
higher at DM1.5970.
Mr Gerard Lyons of DKB International in London says the ERM still needs a
more credible realignment. 'We are in for further instability and the softer
currencies are vulnerable,' he says. The punt remains a strong candidate for
devaluation despite the Irish authorities' latest moves. Other analysts say
that new disagreements on the Gatt negotiations or the EC budget would
undermine the entente between Germany and France, sparking new currency
tensions.
However, dealers think that the recent pressure on the French franc is
unlikely to resurface before the New Year. This is partly because traders
are reluctant to keep open positions in the run-up to the year- end.
Interest rate markets are already assuming no easing in German policy at the
next council meeting on December 10.
Another factor easing tensions is the potential dollar upside that could
follow the imminent announcement of the economics posts in the new US
administration.
Miss Alison Cottrell, an economist at Greenwell Montagu in London, believes
that the Bundesbank will only ease policy on December 10 if there is strong
ERM pressure to do so.
She believes the only other motive for the German central bank to cut rates
would be concerted progress by the government in striking a solidarity pact
with the opposition parties and unions. This would have to be matched by
clear success in restraining the current wage round in Germany.
