FT  12 JUN 92 / S&amp;P cuts Barclays credit rating and reviews NatWest
A DETERIORATION in the balance sheet strength of Barclays and National
Westminster, the UK's two largest banks, has led to a further decline in
their credit quality, according to Standard &amp; Poor's, the US credit rating
agency.
S&amp;P yesterday downgraded the rating of Barclays by one notch from AA+ to AA.
It is now two notches below the top triple-A credit rating which it lost
last year.
NatWest has been placed under review for possible downgrade from AA+, a
process which usually leads to a cut in rating. The rating outlook for Royal
Bank of Scotland has also been changed from stable to negative.
Mr Barry Hancock, analyst at S&amp;P in London, said: 'Our decision reflects
structural changes in the balance sheet condition of the banks and in the
operating environment.' In particular, Barclays and NatWest have not raised
risk capital from the equity market in recent years and have not generated
capital from retained earnings, he said. Instead, both have issued
'quasi-equity' instruments in the capital markets. Last year NatWest issued
Pounds 140m preference shares in the UK and raised Dollars 250m preference
capital in the US.
Preference shares count as capital under the Basle Accord on international
bank capital adequacy and EC banking regulations which set minimum
capital-to-assets ratios. However, credit rating agencies do not regard
preference shares as pure equity capital.
According to S&amp;P, Barclays' ratio of risk capital - which includes ordinary
shares, reserves and minority interests but excludes property revaluation
reserves - to assets has fallen from 7.78 per cent in 1988 to 5.77 per cent
in 1991. NatWest's ratio has fallen from 7.73 per cent to 6.17 per cent over
the same period.
S&amp;P was the first of the big agencies to lower the credit ratings of the two
UK clearers from the top triple-A level. It downgraded NatWest in August
1990 and Barclays in February last year. Moody's, its US rival, downgraded
Barclays from triple-A last month. Moody's said yesterday that it had no
plans to review the ratings of either bank.
IBCA, the UK rating agency, looked at the ratings of both banks last month
but left them unchanged at AA+.
