FT  20 JUN 92 / Tennis: A terribly English revolution - John Barrett goes
behind the ivy to find out how Wimbledon has become the leading tournament
in a commercial world without losing its garden party feel
THE two-week tennis festival that begins on Monday on the lawns of the All
England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club (yes, they still wield the mallet
there) will attract crowds approaching 400,000 to watch the best players in
the world competing for record prize money of Pounds 4,416,000. The
tournament will generate a surplus in excess of Pounds 12m for the Lawn
Tennis Association, which will be ploughed back into the game, and the
tennis will reach a worldwide television audience of 1.5bn.
After 117 years of growth, Wimbledon has become part of England's sporting
psyche, as unmistakably English as Royal Ascot, Henley or the Lords Test. In
a thoroughly commercial world it is remarkable that the relaxed garden party
atmosphere at the Church Road ground has been maintained. How has this
delicate balancing act been achieved? Professional amateurism. All the best
features of the old traditions have been retained, and skilled professional
managers have been introduced to guide the growing business in the best
interests of British tennis.
The only commercial pressure at the first championship meeting in 1877 (for
gentlemen only; women were not invited to compete until 1884) was to raise
enough money to repair the broken pony roller. Play was suspended so that
everyone could enjoy their two traditional days at Lord's for the Eton v
Harrow cricket match. Some 200 spectators turned up on finals day, each
paying two shillings. A profit of Pounds 10 ensured that the roller could be
repaired.
The referee of that meeting was Dr Henry Jones, the man who had been the
moving force behind the introduction of lawn tennis to the All England
Croquet Club in 1875. He wrote for The Field, and had persuaded the then
editor, J H Walsh, that the magazine should donate a cup, worth 25 guineas,
as a prize for the first championship. I wonder what the good doctor would
have thought about this year's singles champions, who will collect about
Pounds 250,000 each.
The importance of Wimbledon to the LTA as the chief source of funds can
hardly be overestimated. Ever since the move, in 1922, from the old ground
in Worple Road to the present site, there has been an agreement to pass the
full annual surplus from the championships to the governing body. In the
pre-war years the surplus was about Pounds 30,000. In 1954 this had become
Pounds 60,445. Ten years later it was still only Pounds 57,712. Following
the introduction of open tennis in 1968, the revenues rose rapidly. In 1974
the surplus was Pounds 87,478; eight years later it passed the Pounds 1m
mark. By 1985 it had reached Pounds 5m; by 1988 it was Pounds 7.6m. Last
year it was Pounds 11.9m.
The tournament has always been alive to the need for change. It was the All
England Club which prodded the International Tennis Federation into adopting
open tennis by holding a professional tournament on the hallowed lawns in
1967. It may seem unthinkable that the club at the heart of the
Establishment could be so revolutionary but this has always been Wimbledon's
strength - to do what is right for tennis without losing the precious
atmosphere.
Two traditions have been crucial in keeping Wimbledon's feel: the
perseverance with grass and the royal connection.
Until 1974 three of the four Grand Slam Championships were played on grass
courts, with the French Open alone played on their traditional terre battu,
which we refer to now as clay. In 1975 the US Open at Forest Hills changed
from grass to Har-Tru, before moving in 1978 to Flushing Meadows and
DecoTurf ll, an asphalt surface with a high, fast bounce. In 1988, the
Australians moved from grass to Rebound Ace, a hard court which becomes
uncomfortably hot in summer. Ever since then, there has been pressure on
Wimbledon to change surface.
Yet Wimbledon was wise enough to know the value of being unique. Only at
Wimbledon (and at the few lead-up tournaments) can the great players of
today compete on the surface on which the giants of the past made their
reputations.
Grass courts have always presented a unique test, because the bounce is
never quite the same two days running. This calls for adaptability, speed of
reflex and speed off the mark. There is no time to think on a grass court,
so a player must have fast hand-eye co-ordination and rely on instinctive
reaction to get to the ball in time to make a shot without being rushed.
Technique, too, is put under the severest pressure, and the swing has to be
shortened to cope with the fast bounce. With briefer rallies than on clay or
cement, concentration is crucial. One lapse can cost you a match.
The grass courts themselves are part of the mystique of Wimbledon. So are
the customs of asking the defending champions to open the Centre Court
programme on each of the first two days, the insistence on predominantly
white dress, the provision of public picnic areas in Aorangi Park, the daily
starts at 2pm on the Centre Court and No. 1 Court, the bow to royalty in the
Royal Box, the limousine service, and afternoon tea with strawberries and
cream. All these little touches have preserved a link with the past. It is a
continuity the players respect and enjoy.
Ever since the then Prince of Wales, later George V, visited Wimbledon for
the first time in 1907, and consented to become the club's first president,
the championships have benefitted from the royal connection.
Star status has been a factor ever since Lottie Dod, the Cheshire
schoolgirl, won the first of her five Wimbledon singles titles in 1877 - at
15 years and 285 days old - to become the youngest-ever champion.
Wimbledon soon succumbed to foreign invasion. In 1905 the ladies' singles
went overseas for the first time through the success of May Sutton, the US
champion. Two years later Norman Brookes, a talented left-hander from
Melbourne, carried off the men's title to launch an invasion that would
overwhelm the home players. Since the First World War, only one British man
and five British women have won the singles at Wimbledon.
The arrival of Suzanne Lenglen, the mercurial Frenchwoman, in 1919, and the
arrogant American, 'Big' Bill Tilden, a year later, marked a turning point.
Through their successes Wimbledon became recognised internationally as the
world's greatest championship, a status it has never lost. Suzanne, an
attractive figure in coloured bandeau and matching cardigan, won six singles
titles with a balletic grace that captivated an admiring audience.
Tilden, a tall commanding figure with a complete repertoire of strokes and
the natural showmanship of a film star (he was a keen but poor amateur
actor), won three Wimbledon and seven US Championships. In the opinion of
his contemporaries Tilden was the greatest player the game had produced.
The period up to the Second World War saw revival in British fortunes. Fred
Perry's three successes in 1934, 1935 and 1936, together with Dorothy
Round's two Wimbledon singles successes in 1934 and 1937, marked the
pinnacle of British achievement.
The stars of the post-war era flared brightly but briefly before
disappearing into the professional void. Kramer, Trabert, Hoad and Rosewall
were names to conjure with before they were swallowed up.
With the arrival of open tennis in 1968 it was inevitable that commercial
interests would intrude on what had been a staunchly amateur scene. While
other tournaments leapt at the chance to maximise their income by allowing
advertising to proliferate around the perimeters of their show courts, the
Wimbledon approach was far more subtle. Direct exposure was restricted to a
small number of companies - Rolex on the clocks and scoreboards, Coca-Cola
on the drink dispensers, Robinsons on the bottles of Barley Water, Slazenger
on the canvas surrounds. This preserved the uncluttered look on all the
courts and with fast rising revenues from television, ticket sales, the hire
of entertainment marquees, and the merchandising of the Wimbledon name
produced the growing surpluses.
Britain's standings on the two international ranking lists are at their
lowest ever level. While other leading tennis nations were investing in
building new indoor and outdoor clubs, promoting the game against the rival
claims of other leisure activities, the British were basking in the growing
success of Wimbledon.
A succession of great champions enhanced Wimbledon's image. Rod Laver, the
greatest player of those years (probably of all time), won two Grand Slams,
as an amateur in 1962 and in 1969 as a professional. Margaret Court won the
singles three times at Wimbledon as she collected 62 Grand Slam titles.
Billie Jean King won her 20th Wimbledon title in 1979, to become the most
successful champion. Bjorn Borg won five in a row, proving that baseliners
could win on grass; Martina Navratilova claimed a ninth singles title in
1990, thus passing Helen Wills Moody's record. These stars made their
reputations at Wimbledon. In return, they have maintained Wimbledon as the
world's leading tennis tournament.
Perhaps the greatest lesson that Wimbledon has learned is that it must adapt
to changing circumstances. Ever since the move to Church Road, the club has
protected its interests by purchasing the surrounding land for parking and
expansion. The annexation of the former Barkers Sports Ground in 1967
(leased to the New Zealand Club until 1987 and renamed Aorangi Park) allowed
the construction of four more courts and the provision of extra space for
public restaurants and picnic areas. This helped to preserve the garden
party atmosphere.
This year the new, higher Centre Court roof has transformed the appearance
of the old stadium. The removal of pillars makes it seem bigger and more
modern, as well as providing a perfect view from all but 50 or so seats. A
self-service cafeteria opens this year - and Radio Wimbledon starts
broadcasting.
Yes, change is in the air. But, when it comes down to it, there will be the
same sense of expectancy as new names appear on the scoreboard, the same
tingle of excitement as the matches move towards their climax, the same
sense of occasion as the champions receive their trophies from royal hands.
Whoever they are, these two young athletes will have become part of an
enduring tradition. 'Wimbledon champions.' It doesn't get any better than
that.
