FT  21 MAY 92 / Survey of Turkey (6): Horizon shifts to central Asia -
Foreign Affairs
like Britain and France - has never lost its conviction that it has a
special role to play in international affairs. Yet, in spite of its
strategic position at the hinge of Europe and Asia, these ambitions have
been frustrated since the final collapse of the Ottoman empire in 1923, by
Turkey's economic under-development, its political instability including
three military coups in the last 30 years and the restraints imposed on its
freedom of action by the military might of its former Soviet neighbour.
True to the ideas of the founder of the modern Turkish state, Mustafa Kemal
Ataturk, Turkey has consistently attempted to project a western, secular
image, in spite of the fact that the vast majority of its inhabitants are
Moslems. Until very recently, however, its western allies have looked upon
it essentially as a rampart against Soviet military expansion, rather than
as an equal partner sharing their own democratic principles and traditions.
The considerable progress that has been made over the last few years to
transform Turkey into a genuine multi-party democracy, a market economy and
a society in which civil liberties and human rights are guaranteed are
beginning to change international perceptions, in spite of continuing
criticisms of the government's treatment of the country's Kurdish minority.
The European Community's gates will probably remain shut to Turkey until the
beginning of the next century (the reasons for which are examined in the
other article on this page). But, at a time when Turkey's international
credibility can no longer be based mainly on its former cold war role of
anti-Communist bastion and defender of Nato's south-eastern flank, it has
suddenly emerged as an invaluable partner of the west in preserving regional
political stability and preventing Iran from extending its influence and its
particular brand of Islamic fundamentalism throughout the area.
The Turks have found completely new foreign policy horizons opening up in
the aftermath of the cold war and the dissolution of the Soviet Union, which
has led to the independence of central Asian republics, such as Azerbaijan,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan and Tajikistan. All these
republics, with the exception of Tajikistan, speak Turkic languages and
share a common cultural and religious tradition with Turkey. Though they
have shown no desire - as yet, at least - to become part of a pan-Turkic
union, they look upon Turkey, with its comparatively advanced economy and
mixed secular, Islamic tradition, as a model they would like to follow.
Their overtures have been followed up with alacrity by Ankara. Turkey has
offered help to modernise the central Asian states' telecommunications and
transport networks, has started beaming special Turkish-language TV
programmes to its 'sister states,' is giving scholarships to enable central
Asian students to study in Turkey and has even proposed aid for the
introduction of the Latin alphabet in states which have used the cyrillic
version ever since their incorporation in the Soviet Union.
So far, so good. All this cultural aid is more than welcome in most of the
countries of the region, where Islam and secularism find no difficulty in
cohabiting in an atmosphere relatively free of tension, as in Turkey. But
Iran and Saudi Arabia are pursuing a similar goal, in which religion plays a
much bigger, if not predominant part. Iran's proselytising zeal, backed by
the distribution of tens of thousands of copies of the Koran, is nowhere
more in evidence than in Azerbaijan, the only one of the mostly
Sunni-dominated republics in which the Shia Moslems are in the majority.
This competition for the hearts and minds of the former Soviet
transCaucasian and central Asian republics is equally intense in the
economic sphere. During a recent tour of the region, Mr Suleyman Demirel,
the Turkish prime minister, generously offered some Dollars 1bn worth of
loans and export credits. However, Turkey can ill afford such largesse,
given the need to put its own inflation and debt-ridden economic house in
order. Certainly, oil-rich Iran and Saudi Arabia are much more capable than
Turkey of granting substantial financial aid to the poverty-stricken central
Asian region.
Indeed, the Turkish leaders are constantly stressing that their country has
neither the ability nor the desire to act alone in the region, however much
it has taken the cultural high ground in wooing the central Asian states. It
is well aware that Turkey's own contribution can be no more than a drop in
the ocean compared with the total western financial aid required by the
region and that the problem is further complicated by the priority that has
been given by western donor countries to aid for other, politically more
important parts of the former Soviet Union, such as Russia.
For the Demirel government, the new focus on central Asia is clearly seen as
a useful means of diverting public opinion from more long-standing and
intractable problems such as the Kurdish problem and its implications for
Turkey's relations with Iraq and Syria, its tense relationship with Greece
and and the closely connected issue of EC membership.
These problems will not go away, however. Though Turkey, largely thanks to
President Turgut Ozal's persistence in the face of strong domestic
opposition, fully supported the US-led anti-Iraq coalition in the Gulf War,
it did so with a heavy heart. Iraq was one of its principal trading partners
before the Gulf conflict and Iraq exported much of its oil through a
pipeline across Turkey, before Ankara turned off the taps. Though it has no
intention of contravening the United Nations Security Council's economic
embargo on trade with Iraq, it is no secret that Turkey would like to see an
early end to sanctions.
'Our sincere wish is to see Iraq come back to the world community as soon as
possible,' Mr Hikmet Cetin, the Turkish foreign minister said in an
interview. 'Turkey is the country most affected, economically, politically
and socially by the sanctions (apart from Iraq). We have calculated that
Turkey lost about Dollars 15bn during the crisis and is continuing to do
so.'
Nor is there much official or public enthusiasm about the continuing
presence of US, British and French aircraft on Turkish air bases near the
Iraqi border, which are acting as a deterrent against any attempts which
might be made by President Saddam Hussein to oust the country's Kurdish
population from its protected zone in Northern Iraq. The chances that the
Turkish parliament will authorise in June an extension of this so-callled
'Operation Comfort' for another few months are considered to be good. But
there can be no guarantee that this permission will be forthcoming
indefinitely, or indeed, for very much longer.
At the same time, Turkey's European relations continue to be bedevilled by
apparently insoluble disagreements with Greece over Cyprus, the northern
part of which has been occupied by Turkish troops since 1974, the Aegean
continental shelf, territorial waters and air space and Greece's refusal to
give the green light to the EC's financial aid to Turkey.
Though there has been some improvement in the bilateral atmosphere since Mr
Constantine Mitzotakis's government came to power in Greece and since the
meeting of the Greek and Turkish prime ministers in Davos, Switzerland,
earlier this year, there is, as yet, very little light at the end of the
tunnel. The only hope lies in the renewed efforts of the United Nations
secretary-general to finalise a deal on Cyprus this summer. For, as the
Greeks constantly emphasise, it is Cyprus which holds the key to better
Greek-Turkish relations.
Yet it is clear that Ankara would rather accept a continuation of tense
relations with Greece than an unsatisfactory settlement which failed to
guarantee the equal rights of the Turkish population within a Cypriot
federation.
