FT  05 OCT 92 / President urges German solidarity
PRESIDENT Richard von Weizsacker of Germany warned this weekend that the
democratic structure of the country would be threatened by a failure to
revive the east German economy and to cope peacefully with an influx of
foreigners.
In a sweeping appeal for national solidarity and understanding, delivered on
the second anniversary of German unification, he called on west Germans to
forego any real increase in their incomes for the next five years to finance
the necessary transfers in spending to the east.
He also called for the full force of the law to be invoked against
right-wing extremists attacking asylum-seekers and other foreigners.
He spoke in Schwerin, capital of the eastern state of
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, at unification celebrations marred by a rash of
demonstrations by both left-wing and right-wing extremists.
This coincided with scenes broadcast on television of Chancellor Helmut Kohl
being jostled by hostile crowds at the same event.
The president's speech amounted to both the most devastating and possibly
the most inspiring assessment of the challenges facing the united Germany to
be delivered since unification.
Germany was being criticised by its partners for concentrating exclusively
on the challenges of unification, and undermining their currencies by giving
priority to its domestic problems, he said. Yet if the country failed to
forge a real national unity it would become an international burden.
'We can endanger our entire democratic structure if we fail to put our own
house in order,' the president warned.
He said the level of unemployment in the east could not be allowed to drag
on for five years or more. At the same time west Germans could not expect
any real increase in their incomes, above the rate of inflation, for at
least five years; nor was there any realistic prospect of living standards
equalising in that time.
As for the rash of violence against foreigners, he said: 'The touchstone of
our democratic order is our behaviour towards the influx from abroad. We
cannot hope to dry up that flow. We can only attempt to channel it and,
step-by-step, to reduce it.'
Yesterday Mr Rudolf Seiters, the interior minister, promised new measures
against the right-wing extremists, including preventive detention and wider
powers of police arrest.
The failure to stem the rash of disturbances since summer appears finally to
have galvanised Mr Kohl into action.
The Chancellor used his strongest words to date in a message yesterday to a
rally at Sachsenhausen, the former Nazi concentration camp where a Jewish
museum was destroyed in an arson attack last week.
'There must be no tolerance of intolerance,' he declared. 'The law-based
state must not be prevented, by some ill-understood idea of liberalism, from
showing its teeth to terrorists, whichever side they are on.'
