FT  07 AUG 92 / Personal View: The pragmatic option on pension equality
The government must soon declare its hand on one of the most important
social and financial decisions any administration will face in the next
generation: how to equalise state pension ages for men and women.
For the past two years, company schemes have been grappling with the need to
put men and women on an equal basis, following a European Court ruling - the
Barber judgment - that occupational pensions must not discriminate between
the sexes. Now it is the government's turn to decide; it is critical that it
gets the answer right.
During the 1980s, the real income of pensioners rose on average by over a
third - more even than the record pay increases achieved by those at work.
One measure of a civilised society is how well it treats its elders, so this
improvement in pensioner income is welcome.
But the increase has not benefited all pensioners evenly. Indeed, little of
the rise has come from changes to the basic state pension. Much more
significant has been the growing contribution from 'second tier'
arrangements, particularly occupational pension schemes set up and largely
funded by employers.
Members of those schemes benefited from the exceptional growth of stock
values and yields during the 1980s, in sharp contrast with the 1970s, when
many employers with company schemes found that they had to divert resources
from business revenues or reserves in order to maintain existing pensions at
promised levels. But the 'fat' years are now behind us. Few expect future
investment performance to match the levels of the last decade.
Meanwhile, birth rates have generally fallen and people are living longer.
That means the number of pensioners is going to grow much more rapidly than
the working population. The cost of pension provision will quickly rise too.
Against that background, more than 80 per cent of company schemes moving to
equalise pension ages for men and women since the Barber judgment have
decided to do so at age 65. That is what we, and the Social Security
Advisory Committee, believe the government should do. The right to a full
basic pension in the state scheme should start at 65 - the current age for
men - for everyone.
Others have taken a different view, arguing for equalisation at 60 or 63.
The Equal Opportunities Commission, for example, has pointed to the problem
of poverty among women and the importance of the state pension in many
women's incomes, in part because their shorter working careers leave them
with inadequate contributions to second-tier schemes. We understand these
arguments, and we accept that the issue of how women build up occupational
pension entitlements needs addressing. But equalising pension ages for men
at 60 would be an expensive and poorly targeted solution.
But why 65? The first reason, frankly, is cost. The cost of state pensions
is now Pounds 26bn a year, some 11 per cent of total public expenditure.
Employers' contributions to the National Insurance Fund are outstripping
inflation as well as the rate of economic growth. The cost burden is
mounting perilously.
Every leading industrialised nation faces the same fundamental problem -
with an increasing proportion of elderly people in the population, how is a
decent level of pensioner income to be maintained or improved? All seem to
be coming to the same conclusion - the age of entitlement to a full pension
must be higher rather than lower.
Germany is moving from a pension age of 63 for men and 60 for women to a
unified arrangement at age 65. Italy is considering equalising at 65; so far
pensions have been available at 55 for women and 60 for men. New Zealand is
moving up from 60 to 65; Ireland already has an equal age of 66; Denmark has
long been equalised at 67 and a move to 70 is being contemplated; and the US
is the process of raising the current equal age of 65 to 67. France, in
pensions as in other areas, is different; it decided to equalise at 60. But
now a white paper proposes increasing the contribution period by 3 1/2 or 4
1/2 years - in effect, raising the age of retirement.
We acknowledge, as other countries have done, that such a change could not
be introduced overnight. So it does not mean that women now in their 50s or
60s would not be able to draw their state pensions at 60. But women
currently under 40, retiring beyond the year 2015, say, would begin to move
on to the same footing as their male colleagues.
Looking further ahead, we should be planning for more flexible arrangements
that will allow people of either sex (and their employers) to make their own
decisions about when they retire, suited to their own circumstances. That
kind of freedom to choose is already becoming more common in occupational
schemes. In the state scheme, too, men can retire between the ages of 65 and
70 and obtain an enhanced pension, meaning they gain extra income later to
compensate for the years in which they drew no pension. There is no good
reason why the same approach cannot be extended to allow early retirement
for all, with a reduced - but still adequate - starting pension.
Would people reject a phased move over 20 or 30 years to equal provision
based on the assumption that most would choose to work until 65? It is
unlikely given the evidence from other countries.
Many older people want to stay on the job. The UK Labour Force Survey has
shown that almost 20 per cent of men aged 65 to 69 remained in work. More
recently, a Gallup survey undertaken for the CBI showed that 25 per cent of
men and women up to age 70 who had actually retired were interested in
returning to work. More missed the companionship than missed the income.
Moving to a joint age of 65 would end a wartime anomaly that was mainly
designed to remove women from the labour market on the premise that they
should be at home when their husbands retired. That sort of thinking is out
of place today. For many women it could open up the opportunity of
contributing for a further five years and earning a higher pension. By
creating an expectation that women would normally work on as long as men,
equalisation at 65 could also help break down the so-called 'glass ceiling'
that many feel stops them from reaching senior positions.
Britain's pensioners are becoming better off and that is good news. But as
costs escalate they - or their children still in work - will lose out in
future unless equal pension treatment for women is based on current
arrangements for men. The author is director-general of the Confederation of
British Industry.
