FT  17 JUL 92 / German Interest Rate Rise: Europeans impeded by policies
'made in Frankfurt' - Bundesbank serves notice that the stability of its own
currency remains a top priority
UNITED Germany's policies on European integration, according to government
statements in recent years, have always been aimed at producing 'a European
Germany, not a German Europe'.
Those words, immortalised by author Thomas Mann, must be ringing hollow in
the ears of European finance ministers as they ponder the impact of
yesterday's fourth Bundesbank tightening move since unification in October
1990.
Once again, the Bundesbank has served notice that its priority remains the
stability of its own currency - not that of any other European country.
This has important implications for the Maastricht timetable for European
economic and monetary union (Emu). The German central bank's conviction is
that European monetary affairs will be best looked after if they are kept
securely in German hands. The Bundesbank cannot, however, spell this out in
public.
Yesterday's action thus serves several interlocking purposes. Any move to
cut German inflation can be billed - as Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank's
vice-president put it yesterday - as Germany's 'contribution' to the
Maastricht process.
The Bundesbank can correctly point out that it stopped short of taking the
more drastic interest rate step - an increase in the Lombard rate - which
would have looked like an all-out assault on Maastricht.
But the Bundesbank can also take comfort from the likelihood that
yesterday's discount rate increase, on balance, will impede fulfilment of
the Maastricht goals.
Several countries, led by Britain and France, are trying not to follow the
German move upwards. But yesterday's increase sets a firm floor under
European interest rates. Just at a time when most countries had hoped,
through easier credit, to develop the rhythm for economic recovery, they
find themselves dancing to an austere German tune.
Pursuing interest rate policies marked 'made in Frankfurt' is a political
irritant for most of Germany's neighbours. However, France, in particular,
has always thought that the effort would be worthwhile if, through improved
monetary co-operation, Emu were brought closer.
France's objective, under successive governments in Paris, is to manoeuvre
the Germans into a position where they will one day have to give up the
D-Mark and hand over European monetary supremacy to a European central bank.
Mr Jacques Delors, the EC Commission president, calls the process 'sharing'
monetary power.
Unfortunately, yesterday's action, by adding to the factors delaying any
firm European economic recovery, compounds the question marks over the
Maastricht plan of achieving Emu by 1999.
The probability that individual countries will reduce fiscal deficits - a
firm condition of the Maastricht process - will be heavily reduced if, as
seems likely, Europe remains stuck in a period of slow growth. This means
that Germany's partners - including Britain, even though it is not formally
signed up to Emu - may during the next few years be getting the worst of all
worlds.
Unless Britain and France can persuade the foreign exchange markets that
they can safely cut interest rates below German levels, Bonn's EC partners
will continue to suffer from high German interest rates in Germany.
At the same time, because of the deflationary impact of high European
interest rates, achieving the political goals behind the Emu process may
become more difficult.
Mr Brendan Brown, chief economist at Mitsubishi Finance in London, points
out that 'to get anywhere on the deficit targets (under Maastricht), Britain
and Italy in particular need to have high economic growth'. Their best
chance of achieving this, he says, is by improving export competitiveness
through a realignment in the European Monetary System.
For the moment, all EC countries are ruling out this step. This could
quickly change, Mr Brown believes, if the Italian lira, despite yesterday's
interest rate increase in Rome, is forced closer to its EMS floor against
the D-Mark.
