FT  03 NOV 92 / Parliament and Politics: Lib Dems rally to support of
government
LIBERAL Democrats, enjoying a rare taste of real political influence, found
themselves yesterday set apart from other opposition parties after rallying
behind a pledge to back the government motion in tomorrow's Maastricht
debate.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, party leader, has badly bruised relations between Liberal
Democrat and Labour MPs by insisting that his attachment to European union
is paramount.
Of the party's 20 MPs, 19 are expected to vote with the government. Talk of
a possible 'anti-Tory' alliance that emerged immediately after the general
election has all but disappeared.
One Liberal Democrat official, perhaps scuppering hopes of anything but the
loosest of pacts before the next general election, said that any new
alternative to the Conservatives had to be pro-Europe. 'We will have done
everyone a favour by setting that out very clearly,' he said.
Party managers were trying to counter Labour's assertion that the issue at
stake was the government's handling of Maastricht, ridiculing suggestions
that a defeat would lead Mr John Major to call a general election. The
party's MPs said that only if the prime minister was explicit in turning the
debate into an issue of confidence would the Liberal Democrat position
change.
One rebel is Mr Nick Harvey, the Liberal Democrat MP for Devon north and
party transport spokesman. He is expected to defy the party leadership and
vote against the government.
He appeared last night, however, to be the only exception. Ms Liz Lynne, the
Liberal Democrat MP for Rochdale, who Labour and Tory party managers had
privately suggested might rebel, confirmed that she would be voting for the
government motion.
She said: 'It is the line that the Liberals and that the Liberal Democrats
have always taken on Europe. I don't see it as a confidence vote.'
Liberal Democrats are becoming increasingly isolated among the opposition
parties. Scottish and Welsh nationalist have urged them to reconsider.
Mr Alex Salmond, Scottish Nationalist Party leader, said: 'Surely the
Liberal Democrats realise that the natural place for them is to be in the
lobby with the rest of the opposition and not in the lobby with a foundering
Tory government.'
