FT  02 JUN 92 / Survey of The Earth Summit (7): Trade bans unlikely to
succeed - Co-operation is better than coercion in persuading developing
countries to adopt environmentally-friendly policies
THE USE of trade bans as a stick with which to bludgeon poor countries into
adopting better environmental policies is unlikely to be effective, and is
probably playing into the hands of protectionists, according to recent
studies from the World Bank and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
While free trade is no panacea, co-operation will produce better results
than coercion, says Mr Lawrence Summers, vice-president and chief economist
of the World Bank in a new report on Trade and the Environment. Developing
countries in particular should not be forced to take action they cannot
afford, such as stricter environmental legislation, he argues.
The Gatt and World Bank reports, intended to fuel debate at the Earth Summit
in Rio de Janeiro, acknowledge that the failure to take proper account of
environmental costs has led in some cases to environmental degradation. But
they also argue that blanket harmonisation of environmental regulation,
sought to ensure fair competition between exporters, is inappropriate and
runs counter to accepted principles of international trade.
Trade measures may be justified as environmental policy 'in very narrowly
defined circumstances', they argue. Indeed Lawrence Summers notes that 'in
the case of worldwide problems like global warming or in the case of
regional problems like acid rain, there is no viable alternative to
international co-operation.' But at the same time, he insists that 'there is
almost always a better way of meeting environmental objectives.'
The bank debunks the 'deep ecology' view that environmental assets, such as
rain forests or endangered species, have infinite value, and from this,
argues that countries have a right to decide what value they give to
environmental quality, traded against the need to provide jobs, relieve
poverty, provide proper health care and education.
The reports are also valuable in providing substance to the argument over
whether 'dirty' industries are migrating to countries with lax standards.
They concede that the amount of 'dirty' industry output in developing
countries has grown steadily over the past two decades, but suggest that
this has more to do with the stage of industrialisation of many developing
countries than any other factor.
STUDIES in Chile and more widely across Latin America also contradict the
claims that free trade leads to environmental degradation and that
industries migrating to developing countries seek comparative advantage in
their lower environmental standards.
On the contrary, it is protected markets like those of eastern Europe that
have harboured inefficient companies using pollutive technologies, rather
than open ones.
Several reasons are given for this: companies have become fearful of
liabilities arising in the event of environmental accidents, and are
sensitive to the demands of 'green' consumers in export markets.
They economise by using common production standards in all plants, wherever
they are based, and find it cheaper to start new plants with
state-of-the-art technology rather than face the comparatively expensive
prospect of 'retrofitting' ageing plant. They also have to anticipate that
developing countries will over time demand more stringent environmental
standards.
Evidence drawn from the world timber industry also points to the paradoxical
conclusion that curbs on world trade in tropical hardwood could result in
more forest depletion rather than conservation.
The findings of a World Bank study of the timber industries of Brazil and
Indonesia challenge environmentalists who have fought for a ban on trade as
a main plank in their push to protect the world's forests.
About 60 per cent of forest depletion is due not to trade but farming and
cattle ranching, the study shows, with the balance split between road
building, urbanisation, fuelwood and logging: 'Activities geared to the
domestic market. . .are the main players in the deforestation process.'
The case is vividly illustrated in Brazil, where commercial logging accounts
for less than 1 per cent of GDP, and for under 1 per cent of export
revenues. Of total hardwood logging, 10 per cent goes on to the export
market, the rest being used inside Brazil.
As a result, trade measures against Brazil's exports are useless. They have
no influence on the deforestation process, and they lull environmentalists
into a false sense that progress is being made.
GATT, which polices world trade, and is at the centre of such controversies
as that over whether a trade ban is appropriate on tropical hardwood, argues
above all else that countries should have freedom to decide how to resolve
their environmental problems, and other countries are wrong to use trade
instruments against them if they disagree.
This challenge to the use of extra-territorial sanctions to force 'good'
environmental practices on other countries has aroused anxiety that a lack
of international agreement on environmental standards and practices will
make it a 'pig in the middle' in trade disputes.
The US 'dolphin-tuna' controversy was a first, but others are pending, such
as Swedish and Swiss bans on imports of chickens raised in cages.
The World Bank provides support for Gatt's role: 'Gatt rules can protect
(developing countries) from new forms of protectionism under the guise of
environmental policy, reinforce the respect of sovereignty in trade
relations, and shift emphasis from the use of trade sanctions to
negotiations. The rule-based multilateral system protects the interests of
small countries against power-based unilateral policing by large countries.'
Other ways of pressing countries to change environment policies could
include product labelling and financial or technological transfers: 'Trade
forums seem to be the wrong places to address environmental issues.
'The source of the problems is not in trade, but in the need to (take proper
account of) environmental costs.'
