FT  15 JUL 92 / Hillary in battle for cookie vote
THIS MAY be the year of the woman candidate in US politics, but not much has
changed for male candidates' wives.
The Democratic party has sought to use its convention in New York to
showcase its impressive roster of female candidates for this autumn's
elections, capitalising on the spreading belief that the white, male
homogeneity of US political institutions desperately needs a change.
A surge of interest in the issues of sexual harassment and abortion has
increased the focus on women candidates.
Sexual harassment moved to the top of the political agenda during the
challenge last year by Professor Anita Hill to the Supreme Court nomination
of Judge Clarence Thomas; it has been kept there by the continuing
investigation into assaults on women officers at a Navy pilots' convention.
Nor has attention on abortion faded after the Supreme Court's mixed decision
on the issue late last month.
On Monday, Senator Barbara Mikulski of Maryland, one of only two women with
the 98 men in the Senate, introduced some of her party's strongest
contenders for Senate elections in November: candidates such as Ms Lynn
Yeakel in Pennsylvania, Ms Barbara Boxer and Ms Dianne Feinstein in
California, and Ms Carol Moseley Braun in Illinois.
At the same time, though, Mrs Hillary Clinton was busy trying to fade into a
traditional, soft-focus pose as the wife of the Democratic party's
prospective presidential candidate.
Women candidates may be allowed minds and careers of their own, but Mrs
Clinton, who has both, wants voters to think first of her cookies.
She was accused of alienating traditional homemakers earlier this year with
a barbed remark about staying home and baking. Now, however, she is fighting
for the cookie vote in a bake-off against Mrs Barbara Bush, arranged by Good
Housekeeping magazine.
Mrs Clinton claims her recipe is more 'democratic' because it uses vegetable
shortening rather than butter, and is appealing to convention delegates,
through teeth that some observers describe as 'barely unclenched', to back
her in the contest.
It has not escaped the notice of some women delegates that there is a
certain incongruity between efforts to break one mould by bringing women
candidates to the fore, while pushing Mrs Clinton back into another.
Yesterday afternoon, however, she broke out of the mould with a rousing
political speech to the Democratic party national committee's black caucus,
in which she ranged from children's issues and education to civil rights.
She mentioned cookies once.
