FT  18 MAY 92 / The Lex Column: Wellcome
As the world's investing institutions brace themselves for this summer's
massive sale of Wellcome shares, they might care to ponder the accompanying
chart. Relative to the UK drug sector as a whole, Wellcome has enjoyed three
big surges in the past five years. The first was based on the original Aids
panic, the second on clearance for Wellcome's Aids drug, Retrovir, for use
in pre-Aids carriers of HIV. The third owed much to the realisation that if
Retrovir was slightly disappointing, Wellcome's older anti-viral drug
Zovirax was a goldmine. Given the switchback history of the shares, might it
not be time for another downward leg?
Part of the answer depends on Wellcome's drugs in development. Zovirax and
Retrovir between them account for nearly half of Wellcome's sales and much
more than half its profit. The future of Retrovir - better known as AZT - is
as cloudy as ever, but it still has a huge lead over its competitors.
Wellcome has several other Aids treatments in development, all based on the
same approach.
The strategy for Zovirax is largely defensive. The drug's potential against
shingles and chickenpox is huge, but it loses patent protection in Europe in
the mid-1990s and in the US in 1997. Wellcome has a new compound known as
256U, related to Zovirax but allegedly more effective, which should be
cleared in time to take its place. Meanwhile, it is pushing Zovirax as a
non-prescription cream against cold sores.
It also has drugs on the way against conditions as diverse as strokes,
depression, arthritis and migraine. A couple of new drugs against epilepsy
and cancer are thought particularly promising. Nevertheless, the company
could remain heavily dependent on anti-viral drugs for the rest of the
decade.
But there is a separate question. The company's history is that of a
charitable institution grounded in pure science. Some of that tradition died
in the run-up to flotation six years ago. Under the new marketing-oriented
management, more is being jettisoned. There was never any doubt about
Wellcome's ability to invent new compounds. The question is whether it can
wring more commercial benefit from its scientific ethos without damaging it.
If that trick is pulled off, the shares are a long-term buy wherever they
may be on the switchback.
