FT  01 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Backstage wrangling over Maastricht
gets under way
THE PATHFINDERS for what will be a marathon Commons struggle over
ratification of the Maastricht treaty begin their work in earnest today as
the bill starts a six-month progress through its committee stage.
But unprecedented preliminary meetings with MPs last night gave some
indication of the complexity now faced by Mr Michael Morris, the genial but
shrewd chairman of the Commons ways and means committee. As deputy speaker,
it is to Mr Morris that the task falls of adjudicating between the warring
views of the government, the opposition and the Euro-sceptics.
At a meeting, scheduled for 10.30 this morning, he will join fellow deputy
speakers and a phalanx of Commons clerks and officials to work out the means
to find a logical route through a barrage of points of order.
The calculation is that over 30 aspects of the treaty merit reasonable
debating time in the Commons, enough to give two full days to the subject
for every week of the session between now and the end of May. More than 400
amendments have been tabled for what is a three-clause bill, barely filling
a sheet of A4 paper.
In an attempt to minimise wholly unnecessary disruption, Mr Morris passed on
his first conclusions to MPs last night. He indicated that he will group
linked issues together and try to establish a running order. Some amendments
will be dumped.
It looks as if a Liberal Democrat amendment, requiring the reinstatement of
the largely decorative preamble to the treaty, will kick off the
ratification process. Mr Morris has also indicated that Labour's demand for
the social chapter of workplace rights to be put into the bill could be
taken.
But there are more doubts over whether the same applies to pressure from the
Euro-sceptics for a debate on a referendum on the bill. Faced by a barrage
of points of order, expected to be unleashed just as soon as the committee
stage begins shortly after 3.30pm, it may be that the pragmatic course of
simply allowing such a discussion will prevail.
Most Euro-sceptic MPs are hoping that an unexpected upset - an amendment
that requires a renegotiation of the treaty, for example - will sink the
legislation. Last night Tory rebels were meeting to discuss their tactics in
the weeks and months to come. Their aim, according to Mr Michael Spicer, is
to debate the bill in an orderly fashion without inordinate filibustering.
Labour, meanwhile, appears to share that view but has imposed a three-line
whip - obliging its MPs to attend. By so doing, it threatens the government
with ambushes and aims to help erode its legislative programme as well as
the spirits of Tory MPs.
Nobody doubts that by the end of May - the government's broad schedule for
completion of the committee stage - the House will be staring-eyed with
frustration and exhaustion. Mr Roy Hattersley, Labour's former deputy
leader, concludes that opponents will be worn down into backing the
government's closure motions just to end the agony.
As one Europhile speculated of the sceptics last night: 'They are going to
irritate their way to eventual defeat.'
