FT  27 JUN 92 / International Company News: Digital may build stake of up to
10% in Olivetti
OLIVETTI, the loss-making Italian computer and office equipment
manufacturer, yesterday signed an agreement with Digital Equipment which
could lead to the US minicomputer maker owning up to 10 per cent of Olivetti
within two years.
Digital has agreed with CIR, Mr Carlo De Benedetti's holding company and
Olivetti's biggest shareholder, to pay L8,500 (Dollars 7.29) a share for
4.03 per cent of the equity, roughly three times the price at which
Olivetti's shares were suspended yesterday. Industry analysts believe the
premium indicates DEC's keenness to secure a European partner to help market
its latest technology.
The agreement marks a significant stage in the consolidation of the European
computer industry. The deal covers both equity participation and a
technology partnership.
Digital has agreed to buy immediately just over 4 per cent of Olivetti's
stock for L172bn; depending on the progress of the agreement, it will buy
another 4.03 per cent before the end of 1994. It will also buy a further
1.89 per cent on the open market by June next year.
If the plan goes smoothly, DEC will take two of the 19 places on Olivetti's
board.
Digital, with global revenues of Dollars 13bn, is the second largest
computer maker in Europe; last year it acquired the computer businesses of
Philips of the Netherlands and Kienzle of Germany. Its losses last year
topped Dollars 600m.
The deal gives Olivetti access to Digital's 'Alpha' microprocessor
technology, which many believe to be the most powerful available.
Alpha is Digital's version of a technology called 'Risc' which offers high
performance at moderate cost.
Digital will supply Olivetti with Alpha chips and systems to build into its
range of minicomputers and workstations.
European computer manufacturers have sought larger partners to share
development costs and open new markets. Fujitsu took an 80 per cent
shareholding in ICL of the UK two years ago, and earlier this year IBM spent
Dollars 100m on a stake in Groupe Bull of France.
Olivetti's choice of Digital as technology partner was not unexpected. The
two have alliances stretching back over 20 years and Olivetti makes the
personal computers that Digital markets in Europe.
See Lex
