FT  11 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Across the board improvement at Racal -
Interest charges reduced to Pounds 17.7m as borrowings are cut by more than
Pounds 100m
THE MOST impressive element of Racal Electronics' Pounds 55.6m pre-tax
profits reported yesterday is the exceptional strength of its cash
generation.
As a result, debt has fallen to Pounds 121m from the Pounds 225m it stood at
after the demerger of Vodafone Group last September. While Pounds 40m came
from tighter working capital control, even more was generated from
operations which last year made combined losses of Pounds 21m at the pre-tax
level.
There is nothing like being on the receiving end of a hostile bid - that
fails - to sharpen up a company's operations. What it means is that both
Chubb, the security division which is to be floated this October, and the
remaining Racal businesses will carry a considerably more manageable debt
load, with all that means for interest payments and the ability to grow by
acquisition.
The turnaround appears to have been across the board. Most impressive, for a
business thought to have been in a cash cow phase of its business cycle, is
the 20 per cent increase in operating profits to Pounds 53.8m at Chubb on
sales up only 3 per cent at Pounds 669m.
Also improving was the radio communications division, where profits almost
doubled to Pounds 22.5m, mostly on the back of successes in the US and
Canada.
The marine and energy division, part of which was believed to be up for
sale, increased profits from Pounds 14.98m to Pounds 16.29m, as a result of
improvements in the energy area. Sir Ernest Harrison, Racal chairman, said
yesterday that the Marine division will not be sold.
Network services, which includes the service which carries data between
government departments, bounced from losses of Pounds 14.36m to losses of
only Pounds 306,000 as the investment programme and start-up costs came to
an end.
Defence radar and avionics improved from losses of Pounds 335,000 to a
Pounds 6.38m profit and could be the exciting new division of the late 1990s
if Racal is as successful as it hopes to be in developing the
telephones-in-aeroplanes market that Racal says has a potential for sales of
Dollars 1bn within 10 years.
The Achilles' heel remained the data communications division which, after
Chubb, is the largest business area with sales of Pounds 323.7m producing
profits of Pounds 1.82m. This improvement from losses of Pounds 11.8m partly
reflected restructuring but the market is, and will remain after the
recession ends, particularly competitive in the US.
Sir Ernest recognises that unless profitability is improved here, benefits
emerging from improvements in the other divisions could be dwarfed.
'The key is to get profitability into data communications,' Sir Ernest said.
As a result of the reduced level of debt, the interest charge during the
year fell from Pounds 37.47m to Pounds 17.7m and gearing fell from 35.4 per
cent to 19.1 per cent.
Earnings per share rose to 2.3p from losses of 2.01p and the company is
proposing a final dividend of 0.7p, giving a total of 1p.
