FT  21 DEC 92 / Monday Interview: Rocket man flies new path - Leonid Kuchma,
Ukrainian prime minister, speaks to Chrystia Freeland
There is no road back,' says Mr Leonid Kuchma, the recently appointed
Ukrainian prime minister, late one evening in his dark, wood-panelled
office. 'There are no alternatives to the market and even if someone were to
try to recreate the old system it would lead to a complete catastrophe.'
Mr Kuchma is the first Ukrainian prime minster to stress the virtues of the
free market, and is steering a package of radical decrees through the
government which could finally begin the painful process of building a new
economic system.
Yet the driving force behind Ukraine's reforms is not a smooth graduate of
western universities. Instead, as the former director of Iuzhmash, the
world's largest rocket factory, Mr Kuchma is a product of the powerful,
tightly controlled Soviet weapons industry.
One clue to Mr Kuchma's remarkable transformation from missile maker to
market builder may lie in his rural roots. As a peasant's son growing up in
central Ukraine, he was surrounded by the dispossessed kulaks, the
once-prosperous peasants who made their nation the bread basket of Europe.
Sixty years ago Joseph Stalin starved 6m of these stubborn and independent
farmers before he succeeded in his drive to impose agricultural
collectivisation in Ukraine. But in the person of Mr Kuchma, the kulaks may
have the last laugh.
Does he want to rebuild the Ukrainian kulak class?
'Yes, absolutely. They were the people who wanted to work and knew how to
work. We must create conditions so that a man can earn money honestly and
now not be afraid of earning money,' Mr Kuchma says. 'Above all, we must
rely on a new class of small property owners.'
In many ways, Mr Kuchma thinks like his frugal, hard-working forefathers.
His conversion to the market does not stem from any theory of capitalism but
rather from a blunt assessment of the bottom line. In Mr Kuchma's view,
Ukraine simply cannot afford not to reform.
'Soon we will become cannibals and begin to eat ourselves,' he says of
Ukraine's disastrous public finances. 'Our national income is falling, yet
public expenditure is rising catastrophically. Everyone must understand that
we have no way out of this crisis other than to reform.'
This realisation was singularly lost on Mr Vitold Fokin, the former head of
central planning in Ukraine whom Mr Kuchma replaced as prime minister in
October. Under Mr Fokin's stewardship the government issued more than
Rbs900bn in cheap credits to the state sector, driving the budget deficit to
more than 40 per cent of gross national product and pushing inflation to a
monthly rate of more than 30 per cent in 1992.
Mr Kuchma's goal is to bring inflation down to an annual 5 to 6 per cent by
the end of 1993.
To do that he and Mr Viktor Pinzenyk, the minister of the economy and
architect of Ukraine's reforms, are piecing together a programme which aims
to combine stabilisation with economic restructuring.
To stabilise the economy Mr Kuchma is pushing through several government
decrees. He intends to liberalise most prices and to stop the practice of
financing the budget deficit by printing money, and thus bring the deficit
down to 9 per cent of GNP in 1993. He wants to restrict credit to the state
sector and bring interest rates closer in line with inflation. A decree
would also curb welfare payments by targeting the country's most needy
groups.
'We understand perfectly well that you can do anything you like with
financial policies alone,' Mr Kuchma says. 'But if the economy does not
begin to work from below, if the enterprises do not begin to work, then that
will not ever yield any real results.'
Mr Kuchma is pushing for rapid privatisation at all levels, including a
decree which, for the first time in Ukraine, will introduce full private
ownership over a portion of agricultural land. The government is calling for
'forced' privatisation of the retail and service sector and is backing an
International Finance Corporation pilot privatisation programme in the
western Ukrainian city of Lviv.
At a slower pace, Mr Kuchma also wants to privatise Ukraine's state
enterprises and plans to convert them into joint stock companies as an
initial step. The cabinet has already revoked a leasing scheme - through
which workers could lease their enterprises for a token fee - which allowed
industrial collectives, often in co-operation with managers, to block
privatisation.
In the past, Ukraine's nascent private sector has been smothered by an
onerous taxation system under which taxes could exceed 100 per cent of
profits. Government decrees bringing the tax on profits down to 30 per cent
and value-added tax down to 20 per cent are currently before the cabinet.
Will the departure of Russia's leading reformer, Mr Yegor Gaidar, put the
brakes on Ukrainian plans? Not in Mr Kuchma's view.
He has made it a priority to seek an economic rapprochement with Russia, his
main concern being to restore trade links with Ukraine's most important
partner and to negotiate favourable prices for the Russian oil on which
Ukraine is dependent.
But despite Russia's importance for Ukrainian trade, Mr Kuchma is confident
that Ukraine can pursue an independent economic course. He is also convinced
that Ukraine must launch its reforms before receiving significant aid from
the west.
'We must hope that when our economy begins to stabilise, the west will then
believe that Ukraine is serious about reform,' Mr Kuchma says. He believes
that before wooing the west he must first win over his own people.
He has launched a campaign to convince Ukrainians 'that what we want for
them is good and not bad, and that there is no other way out of the crisis'.
He says he will seek a social contract with all Ukrainian political parties
and trade unions which would place a moratorium on demonstrations and
strikes in the inevitably contentious first months of reform.
Yet Mr Kuchma is also aware that the strongest opposition to reform is
likely to be not on the streets of Kiev but in the intimidating, granite
buildings which house the government.
In the short term, parliament, which has restricted its own right to pass
economic legislation and granted Mr Kuchma sweeping economic powers for the
next six months, seems to be prepared to back the government, although Mr
Kuchma fears this honeymoon will be short-lived.
Mr Leonid Kravchuk, the president, could pose a more immediate threat and
one which Mr Kuchma has delicately sought to neutralise. Mr Kravchuk fought
Mr Kuchma's candidacy and appears to resent his growing power. Mr Kuchma has
held out a co-operative hand in response.
At the moment, the prime minister's fiercest opposition comes from a third
force, potentially more dangerous than the president or parliament. Known
colloquially as the mafia, this powerful group straddles the government and
private sectors. Mr Kuchma describes it as 'a social class which is
parasitic on the very sick economic body of Ukraine'.
Having launched his premiership with a tough anti-corruption campaign, Mr
Kuchma shrugs off Kiev rumours that the mafia poses a direct threat to his
life. The round-faced, diminutive man who made his career building missiles
seems undaunted both by warnings about the mafia and the prospect of
populist opposition to his reforms.
'This is an elementary battle for power, that is clear and understandable.
But the reform process has already begun and I think that it cannot be
reversed,' Mr Kuchma says. 'After all, today, in the Ukrainian budget we
have nothing apart from a gaping hole.'
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                            PERSONAL FILE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1938     Born in the village of Chaikino, Chernihiv region.
1960     Graduated from Dnipropetrovsk State University with a degree in
         engineering mechanics.
1960     Takes first job as engineer at Iuzhmash, a missile factory in
         Dnipropetrovsk.
1975-82  Secretary of the Communist party committee at Iuzhmash.
1986     Appointed director of Iuzhmash.
1990     Elected to the Ukrainian parliament from the city of
         Dnipropetrovsk.
Oct 1992 Ratified by parliament as prime minister.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
