FT  21 SEP 92 / An issue that won't go away: World capacity to reprocess
nuclear waste is expanding, but storage may now be a better alternative
During the coming winter, workmen will be putting the finishing touches to a
cavernous new plant at Sellafield on the Cumbrian coast, the main facility
of the state-owned British Nuclear Fuels. When it begins operating next
spring, the Pounds 1.85bn project will have the capacity to take in 1,200
tonnes of spent nuclear fuel a year, separate out the uranium and plutonium,
and transform the remaining waste into a form of glass which can be poured
into steel containers, where it sets rock hard for long-term disposal.
Across the English Channel at La Hague, on a windy headland near Cherbourg,
the French are expanding a similar facility to handle 1,600 tonnes a year.
And on the other side of the world, the Japanese have broken ground for a
plant of their own near Aomori on the northern tip of Honshu. The
Rokkasho-mura facility will handle 800 tonnes a year when it comes on stream
early next century.
All this suggests that the nuclear industry is finally getting to grips with
the problem of dangerous waste created by burning nuclear fuel. In the
history of nuclear power since the second world war, only one-third of the
120,000 tonnes of fuel discharged by reactors has been reprocessed.
Two-thirds, or 80,000 tonnes of it, lies in deep ponds of water or other
temporary storage, awaiting decisions about its final resting place.
But the reality is somewhat different. Even as all these new plants near
completion, questions are increasingly being asked about the wisdom - and
the huge cost - of reprocessing.
Earlier this year, Scottish Nuclear, the state-owned operator of two nuclear
power stations in Scotland, confirmed plans to explore long-term storage of
spent fuel as an alternative to reprocessing. 'We could save Pounds 43m a
year,' says Mr James Hann, SN's chairman, who believes that nuclear power
must slash its costs if it is to have any future. A public inquiry begins
shortly into SN's application to build a dry store to hold spent fuel for
half a century.
Nuclear Electric, which runs the 12 nuclear power stations in England and
Wales, recently signed a Pounds 13bn contract with BNF to reprocess fuel
from its existing Magnox and advanced gas-cooled reactors over the next 15
years. But beyond that, NE remains non-committal. It has built enough
storage capacity at Sizewell B, the large pressurised water reactor nearing
completion on the Suffolk coast, to house spent fuel for half the plant's
planned 40-year life.
NE's position is that, while reprocessing is appropriate for older plants
such as Magnox, because the spent fuel is corrosive, it is an expensive
option for newer technologies which discharge more manageable waste.
Germany has abandoned plans to build a reprocessing plant for a variety of
economic and environmental reasons. The US is not even contemplating
reprocessing. Government policy is to develop a long-term fuel repository
under Yucca Mountain in Nevada. But the project has encountered such strong
environmental resistance that it may never come about. The US Department of
Energy says that exploration of the site will take at least seven more
years.
The case for reprocessing has traditionally rested on three points. One is
military - it produces the plutonium needed for nuclear weapons. The only
reprocessing that has taken place in the US and the former Soviet Union is
for military purposes. The bulk of these countries' spent nuclear fuel has
only a temporary store.
The second reason for reprocessing is as a means of recycling uranium, until
recently a commodity in short supply. The third is to facilitate long-term
disposal; reprocessing separates waste into three levels of radiation risk -
high, intermediate and low - and only the first needs the most secure
storage.
But with the changed economic and political climate, the first two reasons
have weakened considerably. The need for plutonium - at least for military
purposes - has declined, and uranium has become plentiful, mainly because of
large exports from Russia, and is likely to remain so as nuclear weapons are
dismantled.
Meanwhile, the environmental lobby has mounted a campaign claiming that
reprocessing is an uneconomic way of dealing with spent fuel, because it
actually creates more waste through contamination of the equipment needed to
carry out the work, and it still leaves the world with the problem of
dealing with the end products.
A report by Friends of the Earth, the pressure group, earlier this year
concluded that reprocessing 'offers no benefits over alternative management
strategies for spent nuclear fuel, and produces significantly higher
economic and environmental costs'.
Added to this is the suspicion that the UK and France have upgraded their
reprocessing industries only because they existed already. They have also
found that reprocessing other people's waste can be made into a lucrative
business. The Sellafield plant, known as Thermal Oxide Reprocessing Plant
(Thorp), is fully booked for the next 10 years, and 40 per cent booked for
the 10 years after that. More than two-thirds of this business comes from
abroad. Cogema, the French state company which operates La Hague, is
similarly replete with orders, although in its case only half of the
business is foreign because of the heavy needs of France's own large nuclear
power industry.
Having made these huge investments, both these companies strongly resist
claims that storage provides a cheaper alternative. 'It's an unproven
route,' says Mr John Guinness, the newly appointed chairman of British
Nuclear Fuels, who observed the company closely in his previous job as
permanent secretary at the Department of Energy. He describes Scottish
Nuclear's preference for dry storage as no more than 'a sensible way of
keeping their options open'.
Mr Christian Gobert, the executive vice-president of Cogema, is more
forceful still about the storage option: 'You have done nothing. You have
taken a few measures which are not costly. You can forget it for a
generation. That's very comfortable but you have no final solution.'
The more technical argument for reprocessing is the extraction of plutonium.
Although the military requirement is declining, plutonium remains an
essential fuel for fast breeder reactors. But the fast breeder has an
uncertain future. The UK has just decided to cease funding its prototype at
Dounreay. In France, the nuclear installations inspectorate has blocked a
restart of the troubled Superphenix reactor which is spearheading the French
fast breeder programme.
At the moment, only Japan has a significant fast breeder programme, which
gives it a reason to proceed with the Rokkasho-mura plant. Mr Masato
Nakamura, of the nuclear fuel division of the Atomic Energy Bureau, says:
'We have never considered storage in place of reprocessing. Our view is that
Japan is a resource-poor nation, so we have to make use of a valuable
material.'
An alternative use for plutonium is in mixed oxide fuel (MOX), a cocktail of
fuels including plutonium which can be used in conventional nuclear power
stations. Up to 25 French stations could use it, according to Mr Gobert.
Even so, this potential source of demand for plutonium may not justify the
expense of reprocessing because of the large surplus of plutonium which is
building up. The Uranium Institute, a trade group, estimates that US and
Russian stockpiles of plutonium amount to more than 200 tonnes, and of
highly enriched uranium to about 1,000 tonnes.
Increasingly, though, the debate about reprocessing turns on environmental
considerations. The critics of reprocessing emphasise the dangers of
transporting nuclear waste sometimes half way round the world to the
reprocessing site, the radiation risks at the site itself, and the fact that
reprocessing still leaves an end product to be disposed.
Although both BNF and Cogema operate a policy of returning the processed
waste to their clients, they only ship back high-level waste because it is
easier and safer to transport. To compensate for the smaller volume, they
ship back slightly more high-level waste than they take in. But this still
leaves them with bulky low-level waste to dispose of. So even though neither
Sellafield nor La Hague is strictly a 'nuclear dustbin', where foreign
clients can dump their nuclear rubbish and forget about it, both sites have
to store considerable amounts of waste.
Mr Gobert rejects the accusation that the act of reprocessing actually adds
to the waste. He says that UP3, the newest facility at La Hague, produces
'no more waste than direct disposal, and we know we can do better than
that'. Mr Guinness says: 'What we are doing is socially desirable. We are
also making quite a lot of money. Taking the longer view, our children will
be mighty grateful that we have taken this course.'
However, both the UK and France do have to have final storage sites for the
end products of reprocessing. In the UK this is the responsibility of Nirex,
a company jointly owned by the government and the nuclear industry, which is
trying to obtain permission for a deep underground site next to Sellafield.
Despite the misgivings about reprocessing, it is unlikely that their state
owners will take a negative view of Sellafield and La Hague. Both plants
have been financed with money from their clients, so they place no burden on
state budgets. And their bulging order books promise healthy export earnings
for many years. Both companies make profits, although the adequacy of their
returns will not be fully tested until their new plants can show their
paces. If they are commercially successful, their owners could invite in
private investors.
In the long-term context in which the nuclear industry likes to see itself,
it may be misleading to see the debate in terms of storage representing an
alternative to reprocessing. At the moment, world reprocessing capacity
amounts to about 4,000 tonnes a year, according to the International Atomic
Energy Agency. However, the amount of spent fuel discharged each year is
about 9,000 tonnes. Although reprocessing capacity is expected to rise to
6,800 tonnes by the year 2000, spent fuel discharges will still exceed this.
Far from clearing up the backlog, the reprocessing industry will fall
steadily behind, even with its enlarged capacity. Long-term storage,
therefore, must play the leading role.
