FT  23 MAR 92 / Poll blow for French Socialists: Defeat for ruling party
confirms slide in Cresson's popularity
FRANCE'S ruling Socialists suffered a humiliating defeat in yesterday's
regional elections, losing well over a third of their popular support.
The party appeared likely to have got less than 19 per cent of the vote,
according to exit polls and partial results - compared with 30 per cent in
the previous regional elections of 1986. The Socialists' setback was even
worse when compared with the last French parliamentary elections of 1988,
when they got 36 per cent.
Mrs Edith Cresson, the prime minister, discounted the results, pointing out
that 'no absolute majority' had emerged from the vote. But the election is
widely expected to be a turning point for the government, since it confirms
the steep slide in Mrs Cresson's popularity since she was appointed last
May.
It will be hard for President Francois Mitterrand to ignore the result, and
many commentators have predicted he will have to change his prime minister
or even the entire government.
However, the overall message was not just a swingeing setback for the
Socialists but a sweeping rejection of all traditional parties of
government.
As expected, the big innovation of the election was a double breakthrough by
two protest groups, the extreme right-wing National Front and the ecology
movements.
The National Front, led by Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen, got an estimated 12.5 per
cent of the national vote. This appears to confirm France out as the country
with the strongest extreme right-wing party in western Europe.
The two ecological parties, the Greens and Generation Ecologie, got a
combined 14 per cent. The Greens, led by Mr Antoine Waechter got 7.6 per
cent, while Generation Ecologie, led by Mr Brice Lalonde, got 6.4 per cent.
The traditional conservative parties, the centre-right UDF umbrella grouping
and the Gaullist RPR party, also suffered a significant erosion of their
popular support, even though they came out well ahead of the Socialists with
a combined score estimated at about 33-34 per cent.
This was significantly down on their score in the 1988 parliamentary
elections (nearly 38 per cent) or the 1986 regional elections (nearly 40 per
cent). Their failure to gain any votes from the discredited Socialists is a
serious psychological blow.
In practical terms the Socialists' defeat is mainly indirect, because the
direct significance of the elections is confined to France's 22 regional
councils. Since the decentralisation policy of 1982, these have received
extra powers over certain aspects of local policy.
The traditional conservative parties controlled 19 of the 22 regions in the
outgoing regional council, and they have done considerably better than the
Socialists yesterday. But the breakthrough by the protest parties may make
it much more difficult for them to mobilise new governing majorities.
