FT  14 JUL 92 / Palestinians hope for future flexibility after Rabin offer
PALESTINIAN officials yesterday said the offer by Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the
Israeli prime minister, to meet Arab delegates either in Arab capitals or
Israel in the search for peace offered nothing new, but said they hoped that
the offer signalled that Israel might prove more flexible during the next
round of Middle East peace talks.
Jordan made no official response last night to Mr Rabin's offer to travel to
Amman for informal peace talks, or his invitation to meet King Hussein in
Israel.
However, the Jordanian ruler has previously refused all offers of separate
official talks with Israelis either in Jerusalem or in Amman.
No immediate reaction was forthcoming from either Lebanon or Syria, but
President Hafez al Assad, the Syrian president, has also professed the
utmost resistance to visiting Israel.
The only Arab leader to have made the trip was President Anwar Sadat, the
assassinated Egyptian leader, in a gesture which helped forge peace between
Cairo and Israel, but which ostracised Egypt from the rest of the Arab
world.
Senior Palestinian officials in Amman claimed that despite Mr Rabin's offer
to seek a breakthrough in the peace process, the Israeli premier was
avoiding what they called the 'pre-requisites for peace'.
'Our problem with Rabin is that he wants to sell himself as a peacemaker,
but he has to prove himself with deeds, not words,' said one official.
He said that Palestinian delegation at the peace talks wished to see Israel
first accept in full the Geneva convention, which bans Israel, as an
occupying power, from changing the identity of the West Bank and the Gaza
strip.
The official said that if Mr Rabin wishes to be serious about peace he must
show 'genuine readiness' to halt all settlements on the West Bank.
Palestinian officials said that Mr Rabin's offer to talk in neighbouring
Arab capitals echoed calls from the previous Likud government for a
normalisation of relations between Israel and its Arab neighbours.
However, Palestinian groups and the Arab governments participating in the
peace talks insist that Israel must first withdraw from the territories
occupied in 1973 before there can be any normalisation of relations.
The Arab delegations to the peace talks, Jordan, Syria, Lebanon and the
Palestinians, have consistently rejected Israel's call for the negotiations
to be conducted in the region.
