FT  31 MAR 92 / Refugees return to an uncertain future: UN begins
repatriation of Cambodians from Thailand
ONE of the largest repatriation programmes undertaken by the United Nations
began yesterday when 527 Cambodian refugees were bussed across the border
from Thailand to an uncertain future in their homeland.
The refugees, from among the 375,000 Cambodians living in seven sites in
Thailand, were welcomed by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the Cambodian monarch,
and Mr Yasushi Akashi, head of the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia
(Untac). The two men have joint responsibility for returning the country to
normal after two decades of war following a peace accord signed in Paris
last October.
Under the protection of a company of Malaysian UN soldiers guarding the
road, yesterday's returnees were welcomed by flag-waving schoolchildren and
driven to a temporary reception site in Sisophon.
From there they will be taken to farmland allocated to them in the area of
their choice and cleared of landmines by the UN. They will be given building
materials, agricultural tools and food for up to a year.
They are returning voluntarily, but some are apprehensive about the
continued strength in the countryside of guerrillas from the Khmer Rouge,
the extreme left faction which ran Cambodia between 1975 and 1978 and caused
the deaths of up to 1m people.
'I'm happy to be going back to Cambodia because I've been separated from my
parents for a long time,' said Mr So Koemsan, aged 29. 'I'm also worried
about many things, and my main worry is the Khmer Rouge.'
Prince Sihanouk acknowledged that there was an upsurge of fighting around
Kompong Thom between the Khmer Rouge and the existing Cambodian government
installed by the Vietnamese when they invaded the country and overthrew the
Khmer Rouge in 1979. He also expressed grave doubts about the Supreme
National Council.
The returning refugees, many of them children who have spent all their lives
in Thailand and enjoyed education and medical care from the UN, are likely
to find life hard in Cambodia.
Apart from the unstable political situation, they face a lack of government
services, the risk of malaria, and competition from displaced Cambodians who
never crossed the frontier into Thailand.
UN officials have struggled to secure funds for the Dollars 2bn operation in
Cambodia.
'We have all waited a very long time for this moment,' said Mr Akashi at a
welcoming ceremony in Sisophon yesterday. Mrs Sadako Ogatak, UN High
Commissioner for Refugees, said: 'We were there for you in Thailand and I
promise you we will be there to help you resettle in your homeland.'
