FT  16 NOV 92 / Barclays responds to concern over top job
MR ANDREW Buxton, chief executive of Barclays Bank, has acknowledged for the
first time that shareholders in Britain's biggest bank are concerned about
his additional appointment as chairman, creating a dual role which, he said
yesterday, would be 'kept under review'.
In his first public statement since the concern surfaced, Mr Buxton said he
intended to become chairman as planned on January 1, when Sir John Quinton
retires.
However, he said the board would then assess whether the combination of
positions was working to the bank's advantage. 'You have to pay attention to
what shareholders think. I am not going to oppose the feelings of
shareholders,' he said.
Separately, it also emerged that Barclays is likely to make a provision of
around Pounds 100m in its results for the second half of 1992 to cover the
risk of losses on a Pounds 350m loan to Imry, the privately owned property
group. Barclays has already made provisions of around Pounds 140m to cover
losses on that loan, but the bank believes that further provisions are
likely because of continued deterioration in the property market.
Mr Buxton said he was not closely involved in the decisions to lend to Imry.
He disclosed that Barclays was about to start closing high street branches
at a 'significantly' faster pace than the current rate of 100 a year in
order to cut costs. An announcement is likely in the coming weeks.
He said the closures will lead to a greater cut in staff numbers in the UK
banking operations than the 15,000 cut which was originally planned for the
four years from January 1991. Discussions with BIFU, the banking union, are
taking place.
Barclays US operations are being re-organised to concentrate on investment
banking. All North American operations, including lending to big companies,
are likely to trade under the name of BZW. A decision to stop using the
Barclays name in the US was likely to be made in the next two months, a
senior Barclays executive said.
Barclays will also reduce its involvement in lending to big US companies. It
will only lend if the borrower buys BZW's investment banking services.
Mr Buxton said the subject of the combination of the chairman and chief
executive roles comes up 'at every meeting' he has with institutional
shareholders. But he added that shareholders understood Barclays'
arrangements to ensure that there are limits to the power he holds. On the
other hand, he said: 'I am not surprised the issue refuses to die'.
A report on corporate governance from a committee chaired by Sir Adrian
Cadbury recommended the separation of the chairman and chief executive
roles.
