FT  04 DEC 92 / Kohl calms foreign concern: Diplomats told of efforts to
stop racist attacks
CHANCELLOR Helmut Kohl yesterday sought to reassure the international
community that Germany was doing everything possible to curb right-wing
extremism and halt the violence against foreigners.
His remarks in his annual address to the diplomatic corps, coincide with
reports from Germany's ambassadors in Washington, Paris and Jerusalem about
the potentially adverse effect on trade and tourism if the violence
continues. Sixteen people have died in more than 1,900 cases of arson and
attacks on foreigners since January.
Mr Kohl, who has been accused of responding too slowly and too late to the
right-wing violence, said that attempts to curb it 'were not appreciated
everywhere. No one here is playing down the problems.
'The overwhelming majority of Germans condemn xenophobia,' said the
Chancellor, who only the previous day, during a Bundestag debate on the
Maastricht treaty, made an unusual and impassioned plea for tolerance and an
end to racist attacks. 'Anyone who puts human life at risk, who stirs up
hatred, or sows violence, must, and will, feel the full force of the law,'
he promised.
The German authorities have started to take steps to ban right-wing
extremist groups, following the murder of three Turkish citizens last week
and the resulting mass demonstrations against such attacks. Measures are
also being introduced to curb illegal immigrants seeking asylum in Germany,
by amending the contry's liberal asylum law, as well as restricting the
number of Aussiedler, or ethnic Germans, of whom 2m live in the former
Soviet Union, Romania and Poland. The Aussiedler have an automatic right to
citizenship, housing and social welfare benefits. More than 26,000 of them
arrived in November, nearly 9,000 more than in the same period last year;
200,000 have arrived since January.
The Interior Ministry this week proposed restricting the number by making
the end of 1995 the final day for applying to live in Germany, and by
allowing only the first generation of those born after the war to be
admitted as Aussiedler.
