FT  03 AUG 92 / Pop goes the music business
THE cancellation of Michael Jackson's Wembley performance on Saturday -
minutes before he was due to perform to 72,000 people - may dent the star's
image. But it will cause only slight consternation to the music promoters
that have earned large fees from this summer's series of big pop concerts
around the country. The large number of events has helped to lift the
spirits of another industry knocked by the recession.
The Jackson concerts are among 40 large rock events staged recently around
the country, by bands such as Simply Red, Guns'n'Roses and Genesis, which
are expected to gross about Pounds 60m by the end of the summer.
The five-day Michael Jackson extravaganza that began last Thursday is
expected to gross Pounds 12m - a figure that some small quoted companies
would be happy to make in a full year, and which equals the total for the
whole of 1991, when only three large acts played in the country.
Observers say this year's bonanza represents one of the last echoes of the
Gulf war. The previous summer was out because managers tend to book summer
tours in January or February. In January 1991, in the midst of the Gulf war,
nearly all the big US acts except Guns'n'Roses pulled out. But, for all the
glamour of the mega-gigs, not even rock can escape the ravages of recession.
The signs have even been seen at concerts once expected to generate strong
demand. This was striking at a recent Stevie Wonder concert where the star
played to a less than full Wembley Arena - the smaller, indoor venue that
has a capacity of 12,000.
For the last of Dire Straits' London concerts the promoters were forced to
resort to continuous radio advertising.
The impact has been greater at smaller venues, although some, such as the
3,500-seat Hammersmith Odeon in west London, say they have benefited with
increased bookings from bands frightened by the prospect of playing at half
empty, larger venues.
It is records, cassettes and compact discs, the mainstay of the industry,
with retail sales in the UK last year of Pounds 1.26bn, that have really
suffered. According to figures from the industry's trade organisation, the
British Phonographic Industry (BPI), in the four-year period 1989 to 1992,
albums delivered to retailers fell by 15.2 per cent, and singles fell by 8.3
per cent. The most recent figures disclosed that the downward trend was
continuing with a 5.7 per cent fall in album deliveries in the year to March
1992.
Mr Maurice Oberstein, chairman of the BPI and of PolyGram UK, said: 'The
music industry is not recession-proof. Young people who make up a large part
of our audience are usually the first to become unemployed.'
As well as unemployment, demographics have also had a part to play. A trade
still heavily geared to teenage consumption has had to contend with a fall
of 1.5m people within its target audience in the six years since 1986.
Computer games have proved strong competition.
With the UK still in the grip of recession, predictions earlier in the year
by some in the industry of a return to the Christmas bonanza, traditionally
the most lucrative part of the year, now appear to be premature and
optimists have been forced to scale back expectations. That is a feeling
that some Michael Jackson fans only know too well.
Review, Page 9
