FT  20 MAR 92 / Technology: Tamarins return to the jungle - A Brazilian
experiment to save an endangered species from extinction
In a lush patch of Brazilian rainforest a group of golden lion tamarins
discover the joys of swinging between trees. Brought up in the Los Angeles
zoo and recently introduced to the wild, they form part of one of the
world's most successful experiments in saving a species from extinction.
The project brings together first and third world nations, private and
public sectors, environmentalists and farmers, as well as several scientific
disciplines. Its techniques are now being copied worldwide.
Only 450 of the monkeys survive in the wild. Throughout this century many
have been captured to keep as domestic pets by people attracted by their
exotic beauty and flaming golden fur. Moreover, their natural habitat has
almost disappeared.
The animal has been rescued through the combined forces of Aldemar Coimbra,
Brazil's first primate specialist, and Devra Kleiman, a director of the
National Zoo in Washington.
Coimbra realised the danger in the 1960s when there were around 600 left. He
was unable to raise much interest until 1972 when Kleiman held a conference
in Washington on Saving the Golden Lion Tamarin. Experts from Europe and the
US discussed how tamarins could be reproduced in captivity and then
reintroduced to their native habitat.
Breeding tamarins in zoos proved so successful that there are now more in
captivity than in the wild. 'When I started there were just 72 animals in 16
zoos. Now we have more than 550 in 130 zoos and a third of them are on
contraceptives because they are growing so quickly that we cannot find zoos
for them,' says Kleiman.
In 1983 the team of Brazilian and American scientists began the more
difficult process of reintroducing those born in captivity into the Atlantic
rainforest in the Poco das Antas biological reserve south of Rio. So far 69
have been reintroduced with a 70 per cent survival rate and a further 60 are
to be reintroduced this year.
Denise Rambaldi, who heads the field programme, says that the animals
generally adapt quickly. 'Initially they do not know how to defend
themselves against predators and they fall over a lot because they're used
to stronger branches in their cages. But after the third tumble they usually
learn.'
According to Rambaldi, the main indicator of the project's success is the
ability of the reintroduced animals to breed among themselves and with their
wild cousins. Of 33 surviving offspring at least 10 are the result of
crossing wild and reintroduced tamarins, adding variety to the gene pool.
Family histories are kept on all former captive and wild tamarins to avoid
inbreeding.
'There is no doubt that the ability of once-captive tamarins to bear
offspring sometimes by mating with wild tamarins and their gradual ability
to feed themselves in the wild proves that reintroducing them into their old
habitat has been a success,' says Coimbra.
The project is special for several reasons, says Kleiman. Reintroducing
captive-born animals is a pioneering method of preserving species, and the
preservation of tropical forests is a developing science. It brings together
130 zoos, IBAMA (the Brazilian state environment agency), the World Wildlife
Fund and the Rio Primate Centre.
The success of the project is far from guaranteed. 'We're fighting against
time. In less than 20 years tamarins could be extinct in Brazil and thus
worldwide', warns Coimbra.
The main problem is lack of forested land. The reserve is only 5,500
hectares, of which 60 per cent is covered by forest. Each group of five or
six monkeys requires 40 hectares of forest and Kleiman estimates that 20,000
hectares are needed to keep the 2,000 tamarins necessary for the breed's
sustainable survival. 'The larger aim of the project is to regenerate the
Atlantic forest for tamarins and other endangered species,' she adds.
Consequently, the project's organisers are trying to involve private
business, aiming to raise Dollars 250,000 a year to buy remaining
forestland. So far they have persuaded 11 farmers to dedicate their
remaining forest to protection for the monkeys.
Another problem is a wave of tamarin robberies to sell on Brazil's black
market. At least 10 have been stolen in the last year and a publicity
programme has been launched to raise local consciousness.
'When we have the international community supporting the feeding and
maintenance of these animals outside Brazil, sending them to Brazil and then
hearing they have been stolen it does not look good for Brazil,' warns
Kleiman.
One answer has been to hand every tamarin back in a special ceremony to the
Brazilian government to create more local responsibility. But Mr Jairo
Costa, President of the Brazilian Foundation for Conservation which helps
fund the project, believes a tougher crackdown on the trade is necessary.
'Catching an animal is regarded as a source of wealth. It is hard to
persuade someone with hunger in his stomach that for the sake of ecology he
should remain hungry.'
