FT  10 MAR 92 / MPs call for an electricity shake-up: All-party committee
says privatisation has not benefited consumers
IMMEDIATE and wide-ranging reform of the electricity market was called for
yesterday by an all-party committee of MPs, which said that privatisation of
the industry had not brought any benefits for consumers.
The electricity industry watchdog, Offer, supported the MPs' view, saying
that 'the lack of effective choice in the market this year is a most
unsatisfactory feature of the present situation'.
The call for reform came from the Commons energy committee in a report
entitled The Consequences of Electricity Privatisation, which found that the
competitive electricity market the government promised at privatisation has
not yet materialised. An important reason for this was the dominant market
position of the two generators created at privatisation, National Power and
PowerGen, it said.
The report argues that Offer 'should take steps as soon as possible to
reduce the dominance of the two generators'.
If more competition has not emerged by 1995, the report said, Offer should
refer the generators to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission. The two
generators should also be compelled to offer for sale any power stations
they planned to close. This would stop them from artificially tightening the
electricity market by temporarily closing stations.
The committee said there were few signs that competition in electricity
generation was developing. Although many new gas-fired stations were being
planned by independent generators entering the market, around half would not
have to compete on price because they had secured long-term, fixed price
contracts to sell their power to regional electricity suppliers who would
sell on to captive consumers. Meanwhile, these new stations would force
existing coal stations which produced cheaper electricity to close.
It was not clear, the energy committee said, how Offer could compel regional
electricity companies to refund customers if they had sold uncompetitive
power in this way.
But it recommended that Offer should immediately scrutinise all the deals
between regional companies and independent power stations.
The report also called for urgent reforms to the pool, or wholesale
electricity market. It said that although the pool was supposed to set a
competitive electricity price, most electricity was sold outside the pool in
contracts, and the contracts market was neither transparent nor genuinely
competitive.
The MPs' report was broadly supported by Offer, which published its annual
report yesterday.
It said that although large electricity customers had enjoyed price cuts
last April, this year they faced significant increases, and many were having
difficulty obtaining contracts to buy electricity at all.
Mr John Wakeham, the energy secretary, defended privatisation which he said
had brought price cuts of 10 per cent to three quarters of industrial
customers last year, while nearly a third had obtained reductions of over 20
per cent.
Contract auction halted, Page 8
