FT  07 DEC 92 / Survey of Israel (8): Sun worship - Tourists rediscover the
Holy Land
ISRAEL'S tourism industry is set to break records in 1992. Mr Uzi Baram, the
tourism minister, reckons the number of visitors to Israel and the occupied
territories will reach 1.65m by the end of the year, outstripping the
previous best performance of 1.52m in 1987.
The slump caused in 1990 and 1991 by the Gulf crisis and the subsequent war
has been quickly left behind. The depressant effect of the Palestinian
intifada, or uprising, in the occupied territories which was felt in 1988
and 1989 has also largely evaporated.
Instead, officials, hoteliers and tour operators alike say the establishment
of Middle East peace talks, giving some hope of a settlement of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, has been an important factor in encouraging tourists
and investors to come to the Holy Land.
'Every tourist and investor is taking a risk when coming to Israel,' says Mr
Baram. 'If the perception of the political situation is positive, if we are
pushing the peace process ahead, in cooperation with the US and Europe, then
people are more enthusiastic to come. And we have all the attributes to
attract more people.' Indeed, the story of Israeli tourism is one of great
potential thwarted by political instability. Even this year's record looks
meagre when set against the extraordinary combination of holy shrines,
archaeological sites, scenery, climate and warm seas that Israel and the
occupied lands can offer. Israel lags far behind Greece, for example, in the
number of tourists it attracts each year.
Mr Baram and his officials are aiming to raise the annual total number of
visitors to 2.5m over the next five years. They believe ultimately, the
'optimal' figure the country could handle without excessive overcrowding is
4m-5m. 'Our priority is still quantity, not quality,' says a senior official
at the ministry.
The importance to the overall economy is hard to overestimate. Already the
sector employs directly 50,000 people. The Dollars 2bn that tourism earns
Israel annually is equivalent to about one sixth of industrial exports. This
year, it will amount to about twice the current account deficit on the
balance of payments. As the deficit rises while Israel steps up investment
to cope with mass immigration, the importance of tourism earnings will be
greater than ever.
The government is therefore channelling considerable investment into
tourism, targetted mainly at three chief locations: Jerusalem, the Dead Sea
and Eilat on the Red Sea.
Over the next three years, it will spend some Shk250m on grants to new
projects, including those by foreign companies, with up to 30 per cent
available of the cost of an investment. An additional similar sum will be
spent directly on infrastructural and other facilities.
The core of tourism to Israel and the occupied territories has been Jews and
Christians from the US and western Europe. Israel is looking to the
Christian markets in the southern states of the US and the Far East for
expansion. The experienced and remarkably resilient Palestinian operators,
strong in the Christian pilgrimage business, are fighting to expand their
market share. Both look longingly at the prospect of Moslem pilgrims who
have largely been absent since Israel won all of Jerusalem in the 1967 Six
Day War.
This year has shown how even the prospect of peace can produce a surge in
numbers. The benefits of open borders that a peace settlement would yield
would be great. By the same token, however, an enormous amount is riding on
the success of the peace process. Any breakdown of the talks and resort to
violence in the area would send the numbers tumbling downwards once more.
