FT  19 MAY 92 / Technology: Gambling on a gut reaction - The pharmaceutical
industry is making startling advances in drug discovery. Paul Abrahams
begins a series by looking at progress in ulcer treatment
Leading gastro-enterologists gathered in San Francisco last week to discuss
the significance of a single bacterium. The outcome of that debate will
shape the drugs industry's most valuable market - for peptic ulcer
medication - worth more than Dollars 7bn (Pounds 3.9bn) a year.
The bacterium in question is helicobacter pylori (HP). Some specialists
believe the bacterium plays a vital role in the recurrence of stomach and
duodenal ulcers - nearly 80 per cent of patients whose ulcers are healed
subsequently have a relapse. The specialists argue that by eradicating the
bacterium in the stomach the risk of a recurrence is also eliminated.
The impact of a successful HP cure on the ulcer drugs market could be
striking. Nearly half the prescriptions for the leading class of ulcer drugs
 -known as H2-antagonists - are for maintenance therapy to prevent relapses.
Sales of the two leading H2-antagonists, Glaxo's Zantac and SmithKline
Beecham's Tagamet, totalled more than Dollars 4bn last year.
'If an acceptable method of eradicating HP can be found, it will profoundly
change the long-term management of peptic ulcer disease,' argues Anders
Vedin, president of Astra Hassle, the gastro-intestinal research division of
Astra, the Swedish pharmaceuticals group that sells an alternative therapy.
'By eradicating HP, you would eliminate the maintenance market for the
H2-antagonists, leading to significant savings in healthcare costs,' he
maintains. It would also give relief to the 15 per cent of the population
affected by peptic ulcers at some time in their lives.
Peptic ulcers are caused when there is an imbalance between the aggressive
qualities of the stomach acid used to break down food and the defensive
mechanism of the stomach lining. The hydrochloric acid starts digesting the
meat of the stomach lining - a painful and potentially dangerous condition.
The reasons for that imbalance are unknown. Diet, alcohol consumption and
smoking may have some effect. Stress may be a factor too. Doctors know that
between 10 and 20 per cent of patients taking non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs to treat arthritis develop ulcers within a month.
However, specialists are increasingly focusing their attention on HP, which
is found in about 90 per cent of patients with duodenal ulcers and between
70 and 80 per cent of those with peptic ulcers.
The problem is establishing a causal link between HP and ulcers, says John
Wood, director of medical affairs for group research at Glaxo, the UK
pharmaceutical company that markets the world's best-selling drug, the
H2-antagonist Zantac. A large proportion of the population is infected by
the bacterium, but fails to develop ulcers. He believes HP is one factor
among many.
Presently there are three main methods of dealing with peptic ulcers.
Historically, the most widespread treatment was anti-acid, such as milk of
magnesia, which counteracted the acidity in the stomach. In the event of
severe complications, patients required surgery, an expensive and
potentially dangerous procedure.
During the early 1980s, such traditional methods were largely abandoned
thanks to the development of a new class of drugs known as H2-antagonists.
These work by reducing the amount of acid produced by the stomach lining.
The cells responsible for secreting acid are naturally triggered by
histamine released in the stomach. The H2-antagonists act by blocking the
action of the histamine on the acid-secreting cells.
Once the ulcer is healed, H2-antagonists are also used to prevent relapses.
One study has shown that only 7 per cent of patients taking Zantac have a
recurrence of duodenal ulcers within the first year, compared with 49 per
cent of those who stopped taking the treatment. Glaxo reckons that about 80
per cent of patients with healed ulcers have a relapse if they do not take
any maintenance therapy.
More recently a third class of treatment, know as proton pump inhibitors,
has been developed. The best-selling version, Losec, is marketed by Astra of
Sweden. The drug works by controlling the final step of acid secretion,
blocking the action of the tiny acid pumps in the stomach wall. This reduces
the acid levels in the stomach and creates a suitable environment for
healing.
Once healed, patients are normally prescribed an H2-antagonist to prevent a
recurrence. This is usually for two years, but may have to be continued for
life - an expensive process.
So the attention of gastro-enterologists is now turning to the eradication
of the HP bacterium and the possible eventual end of such long-term
maintenance therapy.
Specialists are unsure why there might be a relationship between HP and
recurrent ulcers. According to Vedin at Astra: 'There appears to be certain
biochemical similarities between the HP organism and proteins in the gastric
lining, and that leads to damage. We know there is an effect, but it's only
now emerging how that might occur.'
At present, three different drugs are required to eliminate HP. The
treatment involves taking as many as 25 tablets at five different times a
day for up to four weeks. Patients have an understandable tendency not to
follow the regime properly. There are also problems with bacterial
resistance to the acid-resistant antibiotic involved in the treatment. Such
drugs are normally only administered in hospitals for patients who
frequently relapse.
The race is on to develop an easily administered treatment that would
replace the existing triple therapy and could be prescribed by general
practitioners. Takeda of Japan and Astra are separately conducting trials
using proton pump inhibitors and antibiotics such as amoxycillin. Astra
believes the reduction in acid levels achieved by the inhibitor allows the
amoxycillin to work more effectively.
Studies presented at the American Gastro-enterological Association's annual
conference last week showed that Astra may have come up with an answer to
the HP problem.
The studies demonstrated that Losec, together with amoxycillin, eradicated
HP in as many as 80 per cent of duodenal ulcer patients, and of these all
remained ulcer-free 12 months after the treatment. Specialists are now
experimenting to work out the most effective dosage. Some preliminary work
is also being done on gastric ulcers which are rarer than duodenal.
Glaxo meanwhile is also developing a Zantac-based treatment for HP called
ranitidine bismuth citrate, which would coat the ulcer and protect it from
further injury.
Astra admits there will always be a need for maintenance therapy. Even the
new HP therapies do not work in all patients and H2-antagonists will also
have to be used for patients on ulcer-forming, non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs.
However, the increasing preference of doctors for proton-pump inhibitors for
the initial treatment of ulcers is already hitting sales of the
H2-antagonists. Losec has already won 45 per cent of the acid-inhibitor
market in Sweden and 24 per cent in Germany. It has further to go in the UK
and US where it was only initially given limited approval - the drug
accounts for only 13 per cent and 8 per cent in those markets.
The impact of an effective cure for HP is likely to accelerate the trend
against the H2-antagonists. John Calam, senior lecturer in gastro-enterology
at Hammersmith Hospital, London, reckons it could take less than three years
for general practitioners to change their prescribing habits.
Others believe the natural conservatism of general practitioners will slow
the change. Vedin estimates it could take more than five years for the
market to alter fundamentally.
However, it looks as though a new HP therapy might not only cure the
disease, it may also cure the maintenance market out of existence.
The series will continue next month by looking at mind drugs.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
TOP 10 PHARMACEUTICALS IN 1991
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Rank Drug         Indication          Company        Sales      Growth
                                                    Dollars M      %
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1    Zantac       Ulcer               Glaxo           3,023      10.5
2    Vasotec      Hypertension/CHF    Merck           1,745      14.1
3    Capoten      Hypertension/CHF    BMS             1,580       7.5
4    Voltaren     Arthritis           C-Geigy         1,185       5.1
5    Tenormin     Hypertension        ICI             1,180       1.7
6    Adalat       Angina/Hypertension Bayer           1,120      12.6
7    Tagamet      Ulcer               SB              1,097      (2.2)
8    Mevacor      Hyperlipidaemia     Merck           1,090      43.4
9    Naprosyn     Arthritis           Syntex            954      10.3
10   Ceclor       Infections          Lilly             935      11.3
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
18   Losec        Ulcer               Astra             775     121.4
23   Pepcid       Ulcer               Merck             595      19.0
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: UBS Phillips &amp; Drew
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
