FT  18 SEP 92 / Survey of Pakistan (12): Near the bottom of the world table
 -Human Development
PAKISTAN'S economic growth rates, though at times impressive, have not
helped to improve the quality of life of many of the country's 117m people.
It was the world's fifth fastest growing country during the 1980s. But it
came 120th among 160 countries in the UNDP's human development index.
Some of the individual indicators for human develop- ment are depressing.
The government estimates that:
only 34 per cent of adults are literate;
public expenditure on education was 2.3 per cent of GNP last year,
significantly below the 3.7 per cent average for developing countries;
only 40 per cent of children of primary school age are enrolled in schools;
52 per cent of children suffer from malnutrition and only 55 per cent of the
population has access to medical care.
Conditions for women are worse than for men. This has been a particular
source of concern for foreign aid donors and development experts. To counter
this, the federal and provincial governments have committed Rs53bn (Pounds
1.15bn) over the next three years to a Social Action Programme to improve
the indicators.
'We feel that we need to have an accelerated programme so that lost time can
be made up', says Mr Sardar Asseff Ahmed Ali, minister of state for economic
affairs.
Under the programme's tar- gets, literacy is projected to rise to 50 per
cent from the present 34 per cent. In addition, there should be improve-
ments in nutrition, primary health care, family planning, rural water supply
and sanit- ation. 'This will be the biggest quantum jump in Pakistan's
history in the social sector', says Mr Ali.
Despite the programme, there is still concern at some of the obstacles in
the way of improving social welfare, especially the high population growth.
The present 3 per cent growth rate is among the highest in the developing
world. In addition, some developmental experts are concerned that
initiatives for improving the status of women can only succeed if more women
hold public office.
At present, there are only two women members (Benazir Bhutto and her mother)
in Pak- istan's 217 seat lower house of parliament and one among the 87
upper house legislators.
Prime minister Nawaz Sharif's government plans to introduce a special
constitutional amendment which will reserve 20 seats for women in the lower
house, Mr Ali says. Some developmental experts argue that more women members
in the parliament may in turn strengthen the women's rights lobby, putting
more pressure on the government to give closer attention to their
development. On this and other areas of social programmes, the next three
years will be an important test of Pakistan's ability to match its quality
of economic growth with the quality of life for its people.
