FT  03 OCT 92 / Worry haunts the grey suits in Tory shires: FT reporters
look behind the chorus of congratulations lined up for next week's party
conference and listen to some of the dissenting members whose points for
debate are unlikely to survive the keen scrutiny of careful party
impresarios
MOTION FROM NORTHAMPTON SOUTH: (Tory MP Michael Morris elected 1974) This
conference asks the government to change, in the economic realities of the
1990s, the emphasis from the service industries to those that manufacture.
This conference asks for the government to give more encouragement to
industry, rather than the consumer, to lead us to a balance-of-payments
surplus.
MR JOHN PERKINS, partner of Perkins and Tustin, solicitors, is a quiet man.
Mild of demeanour, with grey suit and neat tie, he is an active Conservative
supporter of 20 years' standing. But long before Black Wednesday, he was
worried.
'A policy concentrating on inflation is just not adequate,' he said. So he
devised a motion for the party conference that goes to the heart of
government economic policy. It asks, in effect, for the government to
encourage manufacturing.
Mr Perkins wondered whether he might be thought a rebel, but he will not be
considered such in Northampton South. Local MP Mr Michael Morris, deputy
speaker of the Commons, said: 'The message from my constituents is that they
actually want practical help and assistance.'
Northampton South has a diversified industrial base and the impact of the
recession has been less severe than in, say, the West Midlands. But
unemployment doubled in the year to October 1991 from 3.5 per cent to 7.0
per cent and has since climbed to 9.0 per cent.
The seemingly effortless economic growth of the 1980s has stuttered, calling
into question basic tenets of government policy and feeding the creeping
disillusion of the local faithful.
Black Wednesday left Northampton South Conservatives unconvinced that the
government is getting to grips with the situation.
Mr Malcolm Lloyd, who has a metal-finishing business, wanted results.
Hecommented: 'Mr Major will equal Major Disaster if he's not careful.'
