FT  29 JAN 92 / Czechoslovaks queue to cash in on capitalism: Investment
funds are changing the face of the mass privatisation programme
IN THE course of a few weeks, an investment fund, called Harvard Capital and
Consulting (HC&amp;C), has changed the pace and nature of the entire mass
privatisation programme in Czechoslovakia.
Funds are a relatively new phenomenon in a country which is embarking on a
radical programme of economic reforms. In recent months, more than 450
private investment funds have mushroomed in Czechoslovakia with the aim of
participating in the sell-off of state-owned enterprises to the population.
Set up by large banks, enterprise managers, or individual entrepreneurs, the
funds have started marketing their investment expertise aggressively in an
effort to woo Czechoslovak citizens, who are often confused by the
privatisation process.
Under the mass privatisation programme, an estimated Kcs200bn (Pounds 4bn)
worth of state-owned assets will be distributed to citizens above 18 years
of age in the form of vouchers. For a small fee - about a week's wages -
citizens can buy and register a voucher book entitling them to shares in the
new private companies once the privatisation process is completed.
Long queues, unseen since the demise of communism, have now reappeared in
the country as would-be participants attempt to register their voucher
books. Yet, while only 700,000 people had registered before Christmas, the
number has sharply increased to more than 2m since then. It was the Harvard
Fund which created this surge of interest.
Advertised five times a day on television, the fund has attracted
participants by promising a tenfold return in a year's time. Waiting for
customers at local post offices, where voucher books are bought, the fund's
22,000 agents offer Kcs10,350 in one year to those willing to assign their
voucher book, bought for Kcs1,000, to the fund.
According to Mr Viktor Kozeny, the young director and owner of the fund, the
guarantee is a simple put option as seen in western capital markets. By
entering this fund, clients become shareholders of the fund's capital. In
one year's time, they can choose to sell their share in the Harvard fund at
either the promised guarantee, or a market price if higher.
However, the scheme, decried by privatisation officials as a hoax, has
caused havoc. Other funds have started offering similar financial
guarantees; Investicni Banka, which opened a investment fund with Flemings
of London earlier last year, is now promising a guaranteed return of
Kcs11,000 in one year.
Privatisation Ministry officials believe this is a very dangerous trend. The
Harvard Fund, they point out, is in no position to know today if it will be
able to meet its obligations in a year. They also claim it is misleading
people in its advertising.
'We look at our critics and we smile,' Mr Kozeny responds from his
chauffeur-driven limousine. 'There is no law in the country which prevents
me from making such a promise.' He maintains that the shares will increase
greatly in value and therefore he will be able to match his guarantees.
Not everyone agrees. One local banker points out that state-owned assets are
evaluated on a book value basis, and in many cases their market values will
be markedly lower. Second, the ability to live up to guarantees depends on
the liquidity in the capital markets at the time of the sell-off.
'If 250,000 people each ask the Harvard Fund for Kcs10,350 in a year's time
the fund will have to come up with Kcs2.5bn.
'To do so, the fund will have to sell some of its assets. If all funds do
this, the market could collapse and funds go bankrupt.'
Bankers further believe that liquidity problems will be compounded by the
funds' need to cover their costs. Investment funds are supposed to pay the
fund managers, usually gathered in a holding company, a 5 per cent fee on
the value of fund assets. This is supposedly met from customers paying an
entry fee into the fund and a yearly management fee.
However, in the words of one banker: 'If about Kcs200bn of state-owned
property become the assets of the funds via the voucher scheme, then 5 per
cent equals Kcs10bn. The domestic market will not have this money and will
have to rely on foreigners buying in or the whole thing may collapse.'
In the view of HC&amp;C's president, money should not be a problem. Mr Kozeny
says he is setting up a credit enhancing facility with the help of foreign
money. 'Moreover, money could come from my other companies.'
As the head of 13 companies, including a credit managing company charged
with collecting bad debts among enterprises and a consulting company
advising joint ventures, Mr Kozeny seems unruffled.
The lack of legislation governing the activities of investment funds has
prompted officials to prepare a law which, they say, will be presented to
parliament this spring. Investment funds at present are bound only by a few
paragraphs on joint-stock companies in the Business Code which was adopted
in parliament last November.
The new law should force funds to spread risks by investing the vouchers in
at least 10 enterprises. Moreover, funds may not be allowed to acquire more
than 20 per cent of a company's equity.
'But what', asks Mr Kozeny, 'will prevent my other companies from also
buying equity in a profitable local enterprise?'
At the Privatisation Ministry, an official laughs. 'The Harvard Fund will
end having to administer half the properties privatised this spring, which
account already for half the country's companies. He will have to set up a
new central planning commission.'
