FT  10 AUG 92 / Olympic Games prove a runaway success for Spain
RIGHT DOWN to yesterday's agonisingly close water polo final between Spain
and Italy, nothing in recent Spanish history has done more to bring the
nation's people together than the Barcelona Olympic Games.
Brilliantly organised, executed and hosted by Barcelona, the Games ended
with last night's victory in the men's marathon by Hwang Young-cho of South
Korea, followed by the closing ceremony and a pyrotechnic show designed to
symbolise the creation of the world.
It seemed from the start that Barcelona's Games would finally bury the
bitter nationalist rivalries that have emerged in post-Franco Spain.
National and regional leaders, uniting to celebrate an unexpected success
for Spanish athletes, have ignored old differences to hail an Olympiad which
saw Spain win 13 gold medals.
Even Mr Jordi Pujol, leader of the nationalist Catalan government, has
embraced the Iberian cause. He has spent most of the Games biting his nails
and whooping for Spanish victories in the company of King Juan Carlos and
Queen Sofia.
These are images that might bury forever Madrid's fear that he represents
anything more than a proud regional tradition content to embrace the Spanish
crown.
The spirit of unity reached its climax when thousands of red and yellow
Catalan flags rose to salute Fermin Cacho of Soria, in the Castillian
heartland, when he burst through the leaders to win the men's 1,500m gold
medal on Saturday night. His victory marked the culmination of a series of
home victories that ensured Barcelona became not a platform for extremists,
but the place where all of Spain enjoyed some of its finest hours.
Spanish success, which included golds in athletics, swimming, hockey,
football and cycling, has been greeted with delirium by the home fans.
Spain, however, is not the only emerging nation to break the tape ahead of
sporting giants. South Korea, which won 33 medals in Seoul, continued its
success in Barcelona with 29.
Amateur sportsmen and women from amateur nations have also performed well.
Of the 64 nations to win medals in Barcelona, the three Baltic states,
Croatia and Slovenia have all scored victories.
Winning opportunities for smaller countries have improved with the demise of
big players such as East Germany (112 medals in Seoul), Romania (down seven
medals) and Bulgaria(down 20). The Unified Team won the most medals, but
some 20 fewer than last time.
The end of the eastern bloc has also allowed western nations to win medals.
Every western European country increased its tally except Britain (down
five), Germany (down 74 from the joint totals of the two German teams) and
Portugal (down one to zero).
The triumphs of fledgling nations have reinforced the message of opportunity
and optimism touted at the opening ceremony two weeks ago.
Bickering within Spain over the financing of the Olympics has also been
overshadowed. About Dollars 10bn (Pounds 5.2bn) was spent on revitalising
Barcelona and ticket sales have been so high the organisers were yesterday
predicting a possible Dollars 6m profit.
But the entire country knew before the flame atop Montjuic was lit that the
next two years are going to demand great sacrifices as Madrid struggles to
keep growth above 2 per cent and curb its runaway public deficits.
Although Spain will bask in the afterglow of the Olympiad for some time, the
end of the 1992 Games marks the end of Spain's honeymoon as a democracy and
as an economic sprinter.
