FT  23 DEC 92 / Moscow in turmoil over top cabinet jobs
THE Russian government was in turmoil last night as its radical and
conservative camps strove to promote or retain their own ministers in
portfolios responsible for the shaky reform process.
Mr Pyotr Aven, trade minister, resigned - reportedly telling aides that
'once (acting prime minister) Yegor Gaidar went, it was clear I was doomed.'
Mr Aven, one of the 'inner core' of ministers who launched Russia's economic
reforms last January, was in charge of talks with the Paris and London Clubs
on the Dollars 70-Dollars 80bn debt Russia inherited from the former Soviet
Union.
President Boris Yeltsin has said he would insist that new Prime Minister
Viktor Chernomyrdin keep the reform team in his government.
Mr Yeltsin was said last night by his press secretary to have 'a slight
cold.'
The cold was serious enough, however, to have caused the cancellation of a
planned meeting tomorrow with Mr Leonid Kravchuk, Ukrainian president, and
to postpone again the thrice postponed meeting of heads of the Commonwealth
of Independent States in Minsk, the Belorussian capital, due to take place
on Friday.
As the government battle raged on, the two senior pro-reform ministers - Mr
Anatoly Chubais and Mr Alexander Shokhin, were said to be using the
president's support for them as leverage to gain the appointment of Mr Boris
Feodorov, at present Russia's representative at the World Bank, as a deputy
prime minister in charge of the ministries of finance and the economy.
These ministers must now be agreed by parliament.
Russia's parliament adopted a resolution yesterday advocating membership of
the International Finance Corporation (IFC), a unit of the World Bank which
specialises in aid to the private sector, Reuter reports from Moscow.
Itar-Tass news agency said IFC membership would grant Russia access to large
foreign loans and investments, speed privatisation and facilitate creation
of a stock market. Tass said Russia's share in the capital of the IFC would
amount to 3.42 per cent, making it one of the largest shareholders.
