FT  11 NOV 92 / Matrix Churchill: How UK helped the Iraqi war effort -
Waldegrave failed in his rearguard action against pressure from Clark and
Trefgarne
PREVIOUSLY classified government documents released during the Matrix
Churchill trial reveal an aggressive determination by the Department of
Trade and Industry to support exports to Iraq in the three years prior to
the 1990 Gulf war.
Document after document shows the evolution of government policy on Iraq and
how Foreign Office minister Mr William Waldegrave fought an unsuccessful
rearguard action against pressure from Mr Alan Clark, trade minister, his
successor Lord Trefgarne, and at later stages against the Ministry of
Defence. One document catches the concern in a simple phrase when it says
that the intention of the paper is to discuss ways in which 'UK Ltd is
helping Iraq'.
And among the most revealing notes are plans for a ministerial meeting
convened by Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, in July 1990. The
meeting discussed a detailed review of policy on exports to Iran and Iraq.
The final outcome is not clear but machine tools continued to be exported
afterwards.
The documents also show that Mrs Margaret Thatcher, then prime minister, was
kept informed about many sensitive exports, although at times it appears she
voiced concerns. One document suggests she may have been informed of
applications to supply equipment with a potential military role to Iran and
Iraq as early as February 1988.
The summary record of an inter-departmental committee (IDC) on defence sales
to Iran and Iraq dated February 24 1988 and marked 'confidential' carries
the note 'Advice to Prime Minister' and discusses the suitability of engines
for minelaying vessels.
The documents show a picture of civil servants across three Whitehall
departments almost casually discussing the extent to which the guidelines on
exporting arms to Iraq were ambiguous or circumventable.
The same February 1988 summary record refers to an export licence
application for two 9mm Browning pistols destined for Iraq. 'The IDC agreed
that this equipment was clearly lethal and therefore prohibited under our
embargo on lethal weaponry,' the document notes.
'However, MoD informed the IDC that, because the consignee was Saddam
Hussein's son, they intended to draw this application to the attention of
ministers.
The documents indicate a consistent picture of the Department of Trade and
Industry and, to a lesser extent, the Ministry of Defence champing at the
bit to grant licences while the Foreign Office sounded a note of caution.
As 1988 wore on, a logjam of licence applications for export of dual-use
equipment to Iraq and Iran built up. Decision-makers, meanwhile, pondered
the consequences as the ceasefire process between the Gulf war belligerents
continued.
This culminated in a strongly worded letter dated November 4, 1988, arguing
for a 'marginal relaxation of controls' from Mr Alan Clark, then minister
for trade, to Mr William Waldegrave, then Foreign Office minister.
The letter notes Mr Clark's concern about 'the large number of licence
applications for export of dual-use equipment to Iraq and Iran agreed at
official level but deferred by Ministers.' The goods were valued at more
than Pounds 5.6m for Iran and Pounds 3.1m for Iraq and included spare parts
for civil aircraft and helicopters, communications and transport equipment
and machine tools.
By this time, an element of departmental bickering had crept into some of
the correspondence. A memo dated September 30, 1988 and signed by Mr Stephen
Lillie, an official in the Middle East department of the Foreign Office,
notes that the DTI had requested 'retrospective clearance' from the Foreign
Office and MoD for 'an export licence already issued by the DTI to Matrix
Churchill for the temporary export of lathe equipment to the Baghdad Trade
Fair'.
By the beginning of February 1989, Foreign Office officials were assuring
themselves that the intelligence value of the Matrix Churchill contracts
would outweigh the potential implications for nuclear proliferation into
Iraq.
A detailed memo from Mr Lillie outlines intelligence information that
indicated Iraq's intention to use Matrix for the supply of munitions
factories in Iraq headed by Dr Safa Habobi, himself a director of the
Coventry company.
More alarming was the recognition that Dr Habobi was engaged in attempts to
acquire gas centrifuge technology for uranium enrichment in a procurement
network outside Matrix Churchill.
Stopping the Matrix exports, the memo concluded, would not prove an
effective obstacle to Iraq's objectives. 'Neither would it absolve Britain
morally from any involvement in this network, since all non-licensable
Matrix Churchill equipment would remain freely available to Iraq.'
A further important consideration was also vexing the Foreign Office, the
memo says. Refusal of the exports licence could force the closure of the
company. 'If this happened, we would lose our intelligence access to
Habobi's procurement network.'
The argument was powerful enough to persuade Mr Waldegrave to give his
recommendation that the licences be approved.
By September 1989, however, Mr Waldegrave recommended the refusal of further
Matrix Churchill licences, arguing that the intelligence considerations no
longer applied.
A DTI memo notes: 'In December 1988 Ministers agreed on a more flexible
interpretation of the guidelines to reflect a more relaxed approach to the
less sensitive items such as civil aircraft spares and machine tools.'
A DTI memo later that month noted that Lord Trefgarne agreed that the
Foreign Office view should be opposed.
A July 17 brief for the minister of defence procurement outlined how the
trade and industry secretary had succeeded in securing a ministerial meeting
to review policy on defence-related exports to Iran and Iraq two days later.
The meeting was to be chaired by the foreign secretary.
The paper outlines the expected stance of the Foreign Office, Treasury, and
the Ministry of Defence. The Foreign Office, it said, would 'shy away' from
removing the guidelines altogether, and the Treasury would focus on the
implications of further defence exports to Iraq on the critical state of its
finances.
By this time the policy had been long established. Increasing fear of public
exposure was growing throughout the late 1980s. As one memo recorded: 'The
Minister should be made aware of this unfolding situation, especially since
it could reach the Press . . . '
