FT  22 JAN 92 / Trafalgar House wins court ruling over oil rig payment
TRAFALGAR House, the construction and shipping conglomerate, yesterday won
an important ruling in its battle with Midland and Scottish Resources over
payment for the Ocean Emerald oil rig.
A ruling by the High Court stipulated that Trafalgar can keep control of the
rig until it is able to draw upon the Pounds 118m letter of credit with the
project's bankers or unless it is paid in full by MSR.
Former shareholders in Davy Corporation, which Trafalgar took over last
June, will get their second payment, totalling Pounds 54m, from Trafalgar
once the conglomerate can draw on the letter.
Trafalgar warned that the second payment of 45p a share could still be a
long way off since it might not be able to draw on the letter of credit
because of MSR's refinancing of the contract.
Mr Allan Gormly, a director of Trafalgar, said: 'The High Court ruling is an
important clarification. We have our hands on the asset but we are no nearer
being able to draw on the letter of credit.'
Last autumn MSR told Trafalgar that it had drawn up a plan to refinance the
Emerald rig project, with Den norske Bank, the Norwegian bank, largely
replacing several British clearing banks as the project's banker.
Under the plan MSR offered Den norske Bank the rig as security. This
jeopardised MSR's prospects of obtaining a so-called section 10, ship
mortgage guarantee, from the Department of Trade and Industry. Only once the
project was backed by this section 10 guarantee would Trafalgar be in a
position to draw upon the letter of credit.
MSR argued that under a clause in the rig contract which related to the
letter of credit, Trafalgar would only be paid once the rig was fully in
production.
Mr Jon Hawksley, MSR's managing director, said the company was still
considering whether to appeal against the judgment. But he added that he was
confident that the dispute would now be settled between the two parties. 'We
feel it is now in the best interests of all parties to get on with the
project.'
Trafalgar's shares rose 1p to close at 135p, while MSR's fell by 12p to
close at 38p.
French purchase for John Brown associate, Page 18
