FT  07 DEC 92 / Survey of Israel (12): More jobs as exports climb -
Industrial good news outweighs the bad
THEY may hesitate to admit it, but 1992 has been an exceptionally good year
for Israeli industrialists.
Industrial exports are expected to grow by an impressive 14 per cent this
year to total nearly Dollars 9bn after dropping two per cent in 1991;
industrial production is forecast to rise eight per cent, creating close to
7,000 new jobs.
These good tidings come in spite of the slump which continues to affect most
of Israel's main export markets and the crisis plaguing its all-important
military industries.
'In general, we can't complain,' says Mr Yoram Blisovsky, director-general
of the Israel Manufacturers Association. 'What seems clear is that now, in
contrast to the past few years, export industries have taken the lead as the
main areas of growth.'
Indeed, ever since the Soviet Jewish immigration wave began in 1989, the
main industries to benefit had been those which produce goods for the local
market, mainly food and textiles, as well as those supplying inputs to the
construction sector, which underwent a boom owing to the population
explosion.
After immigration slowed in the past year, however, industrial growth has
been fuelled mainly by exports, particularly electronics, textiles and
plastics. Some of the increase in exports this year is merely compensation
for the drop that occurred last year, owing to the Gulf War. But according
to Mr Jonathan Katz, managing director of Economic Models and Forecasts, a
consulting firm, a good part of the increase can be attributed to government
policy which has helped ensure profitability.
'As a result of the new exchange rate policy adopted last December, whereby
the government announces in advance the rate of devaluation over the course
of the year, there's more certainty for industrialists, and this has
undoubtedly helped them with sales,' he says.
The jump in exports has been accompanied not only by improved profitability,
but by a drop in real wages and higher productivity. These developments have
come more gradually, however, resulting from efficiency-boosting measures
undertaken by most of Israel's leading industries in the late 1980s.
'Today, there are no longer any more 'sacred cows'. Israeli industries know
that the government will no longer pump money into them just to avoid
massive lay-offs and that they must justify their existence,' says Mr Katz.
'As a result, previously financially-strapped companies like Koor Industries
and Israeli Aircraft Industries (IAI) have in the past year begun showing a
profit.'
But like most of Israel's defence industries, even IAI, the country's
biggest company, has been experiencing difficulties of late and was recently
forced to seek Dollars 180m in emergency government assistance.
Israel's defence industries, which managed to overcome sharp national
spending cuts in the mid-1980s by relying more heavily on export markets,
have indeed become one of the key casualties of the post-Cold War era. In
the past five years, the share of military sales in total exports has
dropped from 25 per cent to 12 per cent.
For Israel's new Labour party government, which has made fighting
unemployment one of its top national priorities, the prospect of sizeable
layoffs in the military industries is extremely daunting. On the one hand,
it cannot allow unemployment to rise; on the other hand, it cannot permit
itself to pump state funds into industries which have no future prospects.
As a result, how the government chooses to deal with the collapse of the
military industries will be one of its key tests in the coming months.
The military industries are not the only ones exerting pressure on the
government these days. Manufacturers in the textile and clothing businesses
have been hoping to find a more attentive ear in the new government, because
of its concerns regarding unemployment, on the issue of import
liberalisation. Thus far, however, their repeated threats to close down
factories and dismiss thousands of workers if the market is opened further
to cheap imports from the Far East have made little impact.
Ironically, it is the textile industry which has experienced one of the
highest rates of export growth in recent years.
Mr Blisovsky believes 1993 will probably be as good a year as 1992 for
Israeli industry. 'A lot will depend on what happens in the world market and
to what extent we can maintain our competitive edge. As it looks now, there
probably won't be any further improvement, but there certainly won't be any
deterioration,' he says.
