FT  16 JUN 92 / Mr Yeltsin goes to Washington: Economic reform and nuclear
arms cuts are on the table at the first US-Russia summit
When President Boris Yeltsin and President George Bush meet in Washington
today for their first formal summit, their talks will be a far cry from the
tense, superpower summitry of the Cold war.
Mr Mikhail Gorbachev used to come to Washington to give up his malign
inheritance - arms, imperial control and domestic oppression. Now, Mr
Yeltsin, the closest there is to his successor, comes to ask for aid to
build a foundation for a free Russia. 'I do not come to Washington with hand
stretched out,' he told the Izvestia newspaper last week: but in fact, he
must.
There is little that Mr Bush can do to fulfil Mr Yeltsin's expectations in
the economic arena, but the meeting may provide a useful dress rehearsal for
the summit of the Group of Seven leading industrial nations in Munich next
month. Ironically, the most visible achievement of the summit may be that
the two leaders will agree on further cuts - perhaps radical ones - in their
respective arsenals of strategic nuclear weapons, a more traditional focus
for Cold war meetings.
The evaporation of superpower hostility, however, has robbed disarmament of
some of its urgency. Economic relations have replaced security at the heart
of this summit, and both presidents need to demonstrate that they have
formed a new partnership capable of addressing the formidable challenge of
integrating the former Soviet republics into the global economy.
Mr Yeltsin needs western support to make the shift to a market economy and
for political stability. Mr Bush, for his part, needs to demonstrate in the
field of foreign affairs the leadership which few believe he has shown on
the domestic stage. Opinion polls show that foreign affairs are still Mr
Bush's strongest suit with voters and represent one of his best hopes for
turning his lacklustre re-election campaign.
Neither side, however, can boast that it has lived up to the bargain sealed
only a few months ago, when Russia seemed embarked on a headlong rush to
capitalism and democracy, with a Dollars 24bn package of western aid to ease
the transition.
Mr Yeltsin, hindered by the Russian parliament, has made slow progress at
putting together and implementing economic reforms. He has also disappointed
the west by his hesitancy over dismantling the Soviet war machine.
Mr Bush has found it no easier to get his own legislature to do his will.
Many congressmen are embarrassed by their failure to act on Mr Bush's
Russian aid bill, and Mr Bush shares in that embarrassment because so far
his efforts on its behalf have been lukewarm.
Mr Yeltsin's shopping list for the summit has already been advertised. He
wants access as soon as possible to the Dollars 24bn package put together by
the G7 and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) - and beyond that, as he
told Izvestia, to the private investment which he hopes will come once a
programme to execute reforms has been agreed with the IMF. He wants a
five-year moratorium on Russia's hard currency debt of more than Dollars
80bn, more than Dollars 60bn owed to western countries. He wants an end to
the rules which prohibit certain high-technology exports to Russia.
While Mr Yeltsin will make these demands in Washington, his real audience is
the G7 leaders in Munich. They alone can unlock the Dollars 24bn package.
But the summit does give Mr Yeltsin the chance to convince doubters in the
west that Russia is worth supporting now. Foreign leaders feel unsure, not
because they have ceased to believe that the cause of political and economic
reform in the former Soviet Union is of the first importance - but because
they worry that there is insufficient preparation for funds to be used
properly.
Mr Yeltsin last week explained that the introduction of ministers with
industrial backgrounds into the government did not mean that the reform
effort under Mr Yegor Gaidar, now prime minister, was blunted; that his
refusal to free oil prices as the IMF had wished was a decision taken to
preserve social peace; and that 'I will not allow deviations from reforms .
. . I do not give in to pressure.'
He, has, though, some more explaining to do. The privatisation programme has
been delayed and has, in any case, been tiny; nor has a privatisation code
been approved although Mr Yeltsin last week said that he would 'bring a
surprise to the US'.
The Russian parliament, however, continues to thwart the president and to
stall on privatisation. Last week it also indicated it would seek to pass a
law cutting value added tax - the main source of government revenue - from
28 per cent to 14 per cent, and on some items, to 7 per cent. There is as
yet no firm inter-republican agreement on currency and interest rates, which
means that Russia is printing a currency - the rouble - for all the other 14
former Soviet states, with only limited control over it.
Mr Yeltsin remains a reformer. But, although he is unchallenged by any
serious contender, he is not surrounded by people of a like mind. He must
placate an industrial lobby of growing power and frustration if he wants to
keep production going and avoid strikes. He cannot alienate his military,
and he cannot wholly ignore his parliament. He has, for much of this year,
used his popularity to support a government which raised prices, but has
drawn back from pushing on with reform which would also raise unemployment.
But the Russian parliament has little incentive to implement reforms so long
as the US fails to pass the legislation for its own share of the G7 package.
The grandly titled Freedom Support Act is a repackaged hodgepodge of
legislation, most of which had been already proposed by the Bush
administration in different forms. It includes the repeal of restrictions on
trade with the Soviet Union and measures to expand contact between the US
and Russia through organisations such as the Peace Corps. Its core, however,
is a renewed attempt to win congressional approval for the US's Dollars 12bn
share of a Dollars 60bn capital increase for the IMF. This increase is not
in itself directly linked to Russia but, without it, the IMF will soon run
short of money to carry out its plans both in Russia and elsewhere.
When the act was launched in April there seemed to be a groundswell of
feeling in Congress that aid for Russia was important enough for members to
swallow their traditional reluctance to vote on foreign aid in an election
year.
The Los Angeles riots may have slammed shut this window of opportunity by
shifting political attention back to domestic issues, and some congressmen
blame Mr Bush for not pushing it open again. Wherever blame lies, Mr James
Billington, the librarian of Congress and an expert on Russian history,
calls the US response to the crisis in Russia 'hesitant in tone, trivial in
content, humiliating in impact'.
According to this analysis the US is treating Russia merely as an economic
supplicant, like other developing countries, rather than as a still potent
superpower. In spite of its floundering reform programme and the apparent
quenching of its military ambitions it retains a mighty nuclear arsenal and
an entrenched military establishment which continues to wield influence.
Russian troops are still engaged beyond their frontiers in sporadic
hostilities with the Moldovan forces in the TransDnestr areas, and show no
signs of being withdrawn, in spite of Mr Yeltsin's promise that they would
be. Nor is there any agreement to pull Russian troops out of the Baltic
states - though, again, Mr Yeltsin has promised Mr Vytautas Landsbergis, the
Lithuanian president, that they would come out soon.
The west has made little public complaint over the lack of withdrawal so
far: but it cannot remain indifferent to the continued stationing of Russian
forces on foreign territory against the wishes of the host country.
Mr Yeltsin has stressed that the army is under his control. He says it is
'close to us' and that 'another coup like that of August is impossible'. The
possibility of a rebellious military has not appeared to US and Russian arms
negotiators to be sufficiently imminent to lend any urgency to cutting their
nuclear arsenals beyond the levels agreed last year in the Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty (Start).
Mr Bush has proposed cuts that would bring each side down to 4,700 warheads
and eliminate intercontinental ballistic missiles with multiple warheads, or
Mirved ICBMs. The US administration views these weapons as destabilising,
because of the tempting target they make for an opponent considering a first
nuclear strike, and the parallel temptation for their owner to launch them
quickly to pre-empt just such a strike.
The problem for Mr Yeltsin is that Mirved ICBMs such as the 10-warhead SS-18
make up about 60 per cent of his nuclear force. Mr Jack Mendelsohn, deputy
director of the Arms Control Association, a Washington group which studies
disarmament issues, says that the elimination of these weapons would leave
Russia short of the 4,700 warhead force Mr Bush has proposed.
Mr Yeltsin, therefore, wants a reciprocal reduction in the US's
submarine-launched Trident missiles, carrying 3,456 warheads after Start.
American conservatives, such as Mr Douglas Seay of the Heritage Foundation,
a Washington-based think tank, argue that the Russian demand is based on an
outdated insistence on nuclear parity. 'The US is not a threat to Russia and
does not need to be defended against, any more than Britain or Japan need to
protect themselves against America,' he said last week.
Both sides seem anxious for an arms agreement but, however significant, this
would be the icing on the summit. Its centre will be the political embrace
between the two presidents, whose personal relationship has until now been
frosty, and the economic partnership they could build between their
countries.
Mr Bush has the opportunity to don the statesman's mantle and demonstrate
his own and his country's leadership in the task of anchoring Russia to the
international community.
Mr Yeltsin, though he hates the role, must play the junior partner. In
Washington, and again in Munich, he must convince his western counterparts
that he is serious about reform, if he wants his demands to be met.
