FT  12 SEP 92 / Finance &amp; the Family: Prudential warns of bonus rate cuts -
With-profits endowment policy holders face tougher times ahead
PRUDENTIAL, the UK's biggest life insurer, this week took the prudent step
of warning the City that it expects to cut its bonuses for with-profits
policyholders next year.
In publishing its interim figures, it accounted for the profits on its life
fund on the assumption that the bonuses for next year would be cut. Usually,
life offices assume that bonuses will be maintained, so this is a bad sign
for the Pru's with-profits pension and endowment holders.
This would be the third year in succession in which the Pru's bonus rates
had been cut. Several other offices have already followed this lead and the
latest strong signal they have sent out could strengthen the trend towards
lower pay-outs.
However, the Pru's final decision on bonuses will not be made until the
beginning of next year, so nothing is yet certain. If investment returns
recover by more than the Pru expects in the next four months, then bonuses
may survive intact.
Other companies quickly asserted that they were also likely to cut bonuses.
Standard Life, which now sells slightly more endowments than the Pru, sent a
signal at the beginning of the year by cutting its interim reversionary
bonus (payable to the relatives of policyholders who die during the year).
An actuary for Standard Life confirmed that across the industry, terminal
bonuses were very likely to be cut. Actuaries at Life Association of
Scotland and GA Life concurred that the trend in bonuses must be downwards.
Falling bonuses are bad news for investors. However, recession and
accompanying high interest rates are among the main factors forcing them
lower. Therefore Prudential asserts that the real return (after inflation)
available to investors need not be forced down.
Existing policyholders should also avoid panicking on two other fronts.
First, although pay-outs will fall, it is still highly unlikely that an
endowment will actually fail to pay off a mortgage.
A recent survey by Money Management found that unit-linked endowments
offered by four companies - Providence Capitol, M&amp;G, Manulife and Scottish
Mutual - will, on current projections, fail to meet their sum assured. But
these are wholly different from with-profits endowments, which are typically
underwritten so conservatively that they will overshoot their target unless
bonuses are cut radically.
John Lister, actuary with GA Life, is sure that nominal investment returns
will drop, taking bonuses with them. But this is a long way from saying they
will fail to pay off the mortgage. For 25-year policies starting this year,
GA Life needs to earn almost exactly 9 per cent net per annum - a rate not
far above current money market rates and easily supported using profits from
protection business.
A second myth which needs de-bunking is the idea that current bonus rates
can be 'locked into' by surrendering a policy now. Life policies do not work
that way. Current terminal bonuses are paid out only to those who have
stayed the course, including many good years. Surrender values are
calculated differently.
Lister points out that those who break the contract by giving up a policy
early cannot expect to receive all of the terminal bonus, and deprive other
policyholders of funds, at a point when bonuses are justifiably coming down
because of lower investment returns. Unfortunately, there is no easy way out
of a with-profits policy once it is started.
