FT  24 JUN 92 / Building society probes up steeply
COMPLAINTS to the building societies ombudsman more than doubled over the
past year, according to the scheme's annual report.
There were 9,525 complaints and inquiries to the ombudsman in the year to
March 31 - six times the figure for 1987-88, the first year of the scheme.
Mr Stephen Edell, the first ombudsman, said a third ombudsman, Mr Brian
Murphy, was appointed last month to help cope with the 'flood of
complaints'. Ms Jane Woodhead became the second ombudsman last summer.
Mr Edell said he did not know why numbers had risen so quickly, particularly
since complaints about Abbey National, formerly the largest building society
and now a bank, was no longer under the scheme's jurisdiction. However, he
said the success of the scheme and increased publicity as well as the
recession may account for part of the rise.
The sharpest rise in complaints related to interest rates on investments,
with over six times more complaints than in 1990-91.
The main factor in the rise was failure by building societies to alert
customers to changes and replacements to accounts, such as when accounts are
replaced with similar products offering improved rates of interest.
The report noted that most such complaints arose as a result of the launch
by Nationwide Anglia of its Bright Horizons investment range in late 1990.
Mr Edell said the onus was on individuals to look after their investments,
and that there would be no pressure to oblige societies to inform
account-holders in writing of changes to their accounts.
Complaints relating to mortgage repossessions increased by 171 per cent over
the year. However, Mr Edell said there were few cases in which action could
be taken because the ombudsman lacks the power to stop repossessions and
cannot deal with cases being handled by the courts.
The most common complaint on repossessions was that properties had been sold
too cheaply by building societies.
Complaints about insurance more than doubled, mainly as a result of the fees
customers are charged to take out insurance other than a package offered by
a building society.
While the number of complaints about home-income plans for the elderly was
small, Mr Edell expressed concern about these schemes.
Mr Edell said that the problem of negligent valuations and surveys was
difficult to deal with because it often fell outside his jurisdiction.
The Building Societies Association has proposed an ombudsman scheme to deal
with surveyors.
Mr Edell said most awards made were of hundreds of pounds or in the low
thousands. He made formal decisions in 392 cases, of which 19 were resolved
wholly in the complainant's favour.
Building Societies Ombudsman Scheme Annual Report. Grosvenor Gardens House,
35-37 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1X 7AW. Free.
