FT  26 NOV 92 / Bosnian Serbs halt convoys to Moslems
THE WAR of nerves between Bosnian Serb leaders and the UN mounted yesterday
when Serb militiamen refused to allow food aid to reach the stranded Moslem
town of Srebrenica in eastern Bosnia.
A relief convoy to another Moslem-held town, Gorazde, also under siege by
Serb forces, was forced to turn back when a French armoured personnel
carrier hit a mine.
At the same time, the UN interrupted its humanitarian flights into the
Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, after a French aircraft was hit by small arms
fire on approach to the airport.
A spokesman for the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) said it was
not thought the aircraft had been deliberately targeted. There were no
casualties.
More stringent security precautions have been introduced since an Italian
cargo aircraft was shot down by a missile over Bosnia in September.
The 20-lorry UNHCR relief convoy to Srebrenica, which has been cut off since
May, was blocked despite guarantees by Mr Radovan Karadzic, the leader of
Bosnia's Serbs, that it would be allowed to cross Serb lines.
The incident followed a tougher stance by the UNHCR, which has said it will
cut off aid to Serb-held areas in eastern Bosnia until convoys are allowed
through to the two besieged towns, swollen with refugees. The UN has until
now tried to adopt an even-handed position on aid to the different Bosnian
regions.
Mr Laurens Jolles, the leader of the UNHCR convoy, held out little hope that
the convoy, escorted by three armoured personnel carriers, would reach
Srebrenica yesterday. He called the blockade the 'beginning of a crisis'.
Across the bridge in Ljubovija, most villagers were hostile towards western
journalists and the UN. Some spat angrily, saying the convoy would never
pass. 'You think the west can tell us what to do? Why should we allow the
enemy to be fed? They never should give aid to Moslems who will just attack
us again,' said one Serb.
A UN peacekeeper with the convoy said the protest was ordered from the top,
saying that it was part of the strategy to appear 'spontaneous.'
Serb women from the nearby town of Bratunac have blocked two previous
convoys attempting to reach Srebrenica.
However, Mr Jolles was adamant that he would continue efforts to get the aid
through. 'We will wait for days at the borders if need be to get to
Srebrenica,' he said.
At the same time, villagers in Ljubovija appeared ready to risk the severing
of aid in order to allow Serbs to keep control over eastern Bosnia.
