FT  09 SEP 92 / Management: What are you going to tell the troops? / A look
at the development of team briefings
Do team briefings achieve anything? Briefings, one of the personnel
management fads of the 1980s, are supposed to inform employees of what is
happening in their companies in the hope of increasing their commitment.
Nobody knows how many UK employees are covered by team briefings - one
recent survey estimated that 55 per cent of UK companies practice briefing
employees while another put the figure at 36 per cent.
But it seems that the number (estimated at 4m in the late 1980s) is steadily
increasing, especially in financial services and retailing. The chances are
that if your local store opens half an hour later once a week for 'staff
training', the employees are in fact being briefed.
The Industrial Society was one of the pioneers of team briefings in the
early 1980s.
Its original team briefing advice described a top-downwards, face-to-face,
monthly communication session in which a manager addresses groups of four to
15 people for a maximum of 30 minutes.
The Society originally promoted the team briefing by saying it was a
technique modelled on the way the Roman army briefed troops before a battle.
That approach, according to consultant Andrew Lambert, is badly out of date.
Employees, he says, resent not being able to give their own views and often
find that the information they are being fed is irrelevant or old hat.
Lambert's own consultancy recently found that of 87 companies surveyed about
their team briefings, nearly 40 per cent had no 'feed-back' mechanism for
employees' views and only 29 per cent formally monitored the effectiveness
of their briefing system.
Recent survey evidence of employee attitudes also suggests that most are
left unmoved by team briefings.
A survey of 700 employees by the Manchester School of Management found that
81 per cent of respondents thought briefings either left unchanged (77 per
cent) or decreased (4 per cent) their commitment to the organisation.
Defenders of the system point to the fact that the same survey shows that 59
per cent of respondents at least felt better informed about their companies
as a result of briefings.
But that means briefings are still failing merely to inform more than a
third of employees.
The Industrial Society, and most other team briefing specialists, now say
that if briefings are to be of greater use, they should be less one-way,
both to satisfy employees' desire to complain or contribute and to use
employees' knowledge.
David Trevor, currently advising the Regional Railways division of British
Rail on its briefing system for 30,000 staff, says that the system has
recently been spreading most rapidly in the public sector and the privatised
utilities, partly to keep employees abreast of the huge changes these
organisations have been undergoing.
That, he believes, could encourage the trend towards more two-way briefing,
thanks to the relatively strong union traditions in the public sector and
the commitment to an employee voice.
The traditional, top-down briefing, is still dominant in manufacturing but
one of the UK models for two-way briefings is now the British Aerospace
military aircraft division.
Even British Aerospace has not yet gone as far as the US company which
conducts briefings by lap-top computer, and allows staff to make criticisms
or suggestions anonymously.
To make more mundane team briefings work better, the key, all the experts
agree, is for companies to be clear about what they want from the briefings.
Even if the aim is the limited one of simply informing staff of corporate
developments, the briefing must be well structured and relevant and must not
be beaten by the grapevine.
