FT  14 MAY 92 / Survey of World Electricity (18): When profit comes before
policy - UK utilities face energy efficiency dilemma
A FEW years ago, Walt Patterson and his wife halved their electricity bill
by replacing all their lights with low energy lamps. 'It was a pretty
sizeable investment - about Pounds 10-Pounds 12 per light. But after two to
three years we have already recovered that,' he says.
Few householders are as enlightened as Mr Patterson, an energy specialist
who was one of the first to preach the environmental gospel. But if only
more of us would replace our lamps, the savings in national energy
consumption would be 'spectacular', says Mr Patterson.
'If people caught on how much they could save, just for lighting, the
regional electricity companies would be very worried. Their sales would drop
like a stone.'
There, he says, is the rub. The regional electricity companies which supply
domestic customers are not promoting energy efficiency products because
their profits depend primarily on selling more electricity, not helping
customers to save it.
Brenda Boardman, at Oxford University's Environmental Change Unit, agrees.
'At the moment, the regulation governing the regional electricity companies
is structured around them being utilities, and being on a growth curve by
selling more units,' she says.
'I want them to become energy service companies, selling warmth and lighting
rather than units of electricity,' she says. This would mean the companies
would consider insulating homes and installing low energy lighting as
alternatives to supplying more power.
There is, she says, enormous scope for saving. 'Say your fridge uses 100
units of energy. The average new fridge will use 90, a saving of around 10
per cent. If you are well informed, and buy the best fridge on the UK market
you will be down to 43. And if you buy the best fridge anywhere on the world
market, you will be down to 19 - a saving of 80 per cent.'
The super-efficient fridge, moreover, will not necessarily be more
expensive. There is no correlation between the capital cost of a fridge, and
its efficiency.
What Ms Boardman, Mr Patterson and many others advocate is 'least cost
planning,' also called 'demand side management'. Briefly, this means meeting
the country's energy needs by energy conservation measures whenever that is
cheaper than building new power stations.
At the moment, there is very little demand side management in Britain. The
legislation brought in when the electricity industry was privatised two
years ago, has no provision for demand side management, except that the
regional electricity companies must promote energy efficiency.
'That means leaflets, which is a minor point,' says Ms Boardman. 'Most just
give general advice like 'insulation is good,' whereas what's often needed
is household specific advice and money.'
And, she points out, the government has been unclear about its objectives,
failing to distinguish clearly whether it wants to reduce demand, promote
energy efficiency, (getting more from each unit of energy), or simply cut
the carbon dioxide emissions which result from burning fossil fuels and
cause global warming by any possible means.
Privatisation, she suggests, may have made demand side planning a less easy
option, because when the government controlled the industry it could decide
whether to opt for supplying more power, or managing demand.
'Before, the government could, for instance, have considered giving Pounds
1bn to the Department of the Environment to spend on insulation, rather than
building new power stations. Now, industry has to be able to compare those
options.'
One of the strongest arguments why demand side management will not work in
the UK electricity industry now is that it is not 'vertically integrated'.
Privatisation split the electricity generators - who build most power
stations and are the primary suppliers of power - from the regional
electricity companies - who sell it to meet customers' demand.
This means there is no longer one integrated company which can compare a
'supply side' option, like building a new power station, with a 'demand
side' option, like insulating more homes.
Offer, the electricity industry watchdog, made this point in a brief
examination of least cost planning in an energy efficiency review produced
last year.
This argues that what the regional electricity companies do will not affect
the generators' decision to build or not to build new plant, and that the
regional companies would have to recoup the cost of investing in
demand-management programmes by putting up their prices.
'The question in the UK is, what is the incentive for regional electricity
companies to promote energy savings?' says Mr Tony Boreman, at Offer. At the
moment, there are two main reasons why the companies actually have a
disincentive to promote energy saving.
First, if they invest in installing low energy lights in domestic homes, for
example, they cannot pass the cost on to customers. By contrast, they can
charge customers for the cost of buying more power.
Second, the companies have a relatively stable cost base, which means that
more unit sales mean more profits. This means that even if they could
recover the costs of putting the lighting in, they would lose out because
the new lights would consume fewer units of electricity.
This has not completely deterred regional companies from investing in energy
efficiency - competition from gas has encouraged them to use energy
efficiency as a marketing tool, especially when it comes to selling industry
electrical solutions to problems.
'It is in the interest of the industry to keep customers away from gas,'
says Mr Simon Roberts, energy campaigner for Friends of the Earth. 'But in
the small business and domestic market there is no incentive to save energy.
It is not happening in existing homes.' What is needed, he says, is real
incentives, and penalties for companies that do not encourage demand
management.
Mr Tim Wolfe, at the Association for the Conservation of Energy (ACE),
believes a system could be introduced in the UK. 'There has been lots of
opposition from the Conservative party in the UK, saying it is not
appropriate because our industry is not vertically integrated. I don't
believe that matters.'
Others agree. Firstly, the regional companies do have some avoidable
supply-side costs - such as spending on sub-stations or upgrading their
local networks - which they can offset against managing demand. Second,
points out Mr Wolfe, they can be given an incentive to invest in demand
management.
So far, Offer has suggested the possibility of introducing an 'E factor,' as
the gas industry did last year. This 'E factor' would be added to the
regulatory formulas that govern how much the regional electricity companies
can increase electricity prices to customers. It would allow the cost of
approved energy saving programmes to be reflected in the electricity price.
But this, Mr Wolfe believes, is not enough. 'Say a programme costs Pounds
5m, and saves the company Pounds 7m in the cost of buying more power - they
have already made Pounds 2m. But they might have lost Pounds 2.5m in
revenues from the power they would have sold. We believe they should be
allowed to recover that Pounds 2.5m. Not the Pounds 5m the programme cost -
just the Pounds 2.5m.'
An E factor which allows the companies to recoup the costs of energy saving
programmes would encourage them to spend on programmes, but not save energy,
he says. But an E factor which allowed them to recoup lost revenues would
encourage them to spend less on the programme, and save units. 'This is a
fundamental issue, and one I don't believe Offer will meet head on.'
Brenda Boardman agrees. 'At the moment there is a double disincentive - no
pass through of costs, and no profit except by selling more units.'
'There should also be a greater emphasis on planning,' suggests Mr Wolfe.
'Offer could require the regional companies to put forward energy plans
every two years, or could set the companies targets.'
Most important, say all advocates of least cost planning, is to change the
regulation governing the regional electricity companies, so that their
profits are not directly linked to higher sales.
'If their costs were unit-sensitive, but not their profits, then instead of
advertising at you to buy things, they would be discouraging you, because it
would cost them more,' says one commentator.
Offer has asked for comments on its energy efficiency document before June,
and may then move to implement some form of E factor. It is unlikely,
however, that it will be enough to get the regional companies installing low
energy lights and fridges.
