FT  22 SEP 92 / Warning over stress-related illness at work
MORE than 750,000 people took time off work in 1989-90 because of
work-related illness, a conference was told yesterday.
Dr Paul Oldershaw, head of technology and health sciences at the Health and
Safety Executive, told the three-day conference in Sheffield on occupational
health that work-related illness would be a big concern in the future.
Stress at work was also recognised as an important cause of sickness
absence, Dr Oldershaw said. Research had shown that occupational stress
could have an impact on physical health. 'We need to gain a better
understanding of the causes of psychological stress and how these impact on
the health and performance of the worker.'
Some 8,000 lives and 27m working days in Europe are lost each year due to
work-related accidents and ill health.
Dr Oldershaw called for more debate in the European Community to identify
areas that could be treated and where further research was necessary.
He said the largest single area of work-related health disorders was
musculo-skeletal injury: 'It affects workers in heavy manual activities,
such as lifting, as well as less strenuous but more repetitive tasks such as
keyboard operators and supermarket check-out staff.' Almost 30 per cent of
women workers do not know if their employer has an equal-opportunities
policy, a survey of 20 organisations suggests.
The survey, conducted by Riley Advertising, which specialises in recruitment
advertising, found that all but one employer had such a policy. Researchers
questioned both employers and 437 of their women workers.
More than half of those women who are aware of their employers'
equal-opportunities policies said they were only partly successful. More
than 60 per cent said their employers were not committed to their policies.
However, more than 80 per cent thought the policies were useful.
The survey also found that fewer than 8 per cent of women workers said their
employers had consulted them when drawing up equal-opportunities policies.
Women and Work. Riley Advertising, Riley House, 4 Red Lion Court, London
EC4. Pounds 35
