FT  28 OCT 92 / Arts: 'Lulu' as melodrama - Theatre
The story of Lulu, a woman with an insatiable sexual appetite who comes to a
sticky end, must go deep into mythology, whether it is treated as tragedy or
farce. It can also be melodrama, as an impressive new production by the
Cambridge Theatre Company shows.
Frank Wedekind's original Lulu was regarded as so shocking that it was not
performed in his lifetime (1864-1918). Alban Berg later made an opera of it.
Quite why the play as a whole was suppressed - it was allowed to run in
separate parts - is not clear. It is not far out of line with the real life
activities of Jack the Ripper and the fantasies in The Picture of Dorian
Gray, both of which were broadly contemporary. Anyway, it is in this spirit
that the Cambridge have picked it up in a new version by the once fierce
playwright, Edward Bond, and his wife Elisabeth Bond Pable. The pair have
worked on Wedekind before.
The Bonds may have deeper thoughts in mind, but their Lulu ccomes across as
melodrama through and through. Lulu is a victim of child sex abuse. Molested
by her father at an early age, she takes to sex like a duck to water and
seldom stops paddling. It takes her a long way: from the artist's studio of
Berlin to the salons of Paris and finally the garrets of London. By then her
father is 80 but still hankering after her and she is still tempted.
She falls to Jack the Ripper's knife when she is reduced to picking up men
from the streets and paying them to sleep with her. The original portrait of
Lulu, painted in Berlin, has made its way to London via Paris and now hangs
in the attic. Lulu has remained true to her principles: she spurns the
advances of her lesbian admirer, Countess Geschwitz. Only men will do,
though at one stage she regrets that she cannot make love to herself.
Is this shocking? No, because it contains no new insights and we have become
inured to sexual violence. The story has no moral as far as one can see. Yet
the direction by Nick Philippou at the Lilian Baylis Theatre is wonderfully
done. Watch the way Lulu dangles a piece of asparagus dripping with butter
an inch or so above her mouth. It may have been picked up from the movie of
Tom Jones, but it catches the link between sex and eating.
There is a scene which could be farce when Lulu has four lovers in and
around the dining room at the same time: one serving, one eating, the
husband peeping through opera glasses from behind the door and the man from
the local billiard hall concealed behind the curtains. Philippou's direction
achieves the remarkable feat of playing this straight.
There are some liberties. When Lulu picks up an African prince she tells him
her name is Daisy; he begins to sing the famous song. There may also be some
losses. A reference to a riot in the Reichstag has become irrelevant. The
symbolism of Lulu's investments is thrown away. She has put her money into a
company called Jungfrau. The share price collapses catastrophically just as
she decides to cash in because she is subject to blackmail and her own body
is worn out by over-use.
Lulu is played by Susan Lynch with great physical elasticity. She has one
defect, though it may be deliberate. She has a nasty curl to her lips and
her voice can become unpleasantly harsh. The hair and eyebrows are
excessively severe. Melanie Jessop plays the lesbian countess with such
feeling that perhaps she is in the wrong play. The men are all more than
competent, but this is Lulu's show.
Lilian Baylis Theatre until November 14. (071) 837 4104
