FT  09 OCT 92 / Technology: Virtual reality takes its seat in class - Andrew
Baxter looks at a new approach to teaching children with learning
disabilities
Discworld, as fans of comic-fantasy novelist Terry Pratchett will know, is a
disc-shaped world carried through the Multiverse by four immense elephants
riding on the back of the ponderous galactic turtle Great A'Tuin.
Closer to home, more down-to-earth worlds are being created at the Shepherd
School in Nottingham, the largest in Britain for children with severe
learning difficulties - with a serious educational aim in view. Over the
past year, the school has been exploring the educational and training
benefits of Desktop Virtual Reality.
A sophisticated virtual reality system, with a display that changes up to 10
times a second, allows the user to experience the illusion of being within
the alternative environment on the screen.
Users normally 'immerse' themselves in virtual reality for entertainment -
by putting on a headset with a small LCD screen in front of each eye.
Desktop VR is the next generation, using the same VR software but on a
desktop computer.
This week, the school, along with Nottingham University's Virtual Reality
Applied Research Team, and Aldermaston-based Dimension International which
supplied the software and hardware, unveiled findings from a small pilot
project involving 12-20 students.
Virart, established last year, had been looking for a way to test the
benefits of virtual reality in education. The project's first stage has
involved creating virtual worlds which incorporate the well-established
Makaton symbol and sign system used by the school to help children master
the basic 500-600 words of vocabulary.
For example, says David Brown, a member of the Virart team, the screen could
create a three-dimensional car which the child could 'get in' and drive
around in, but the two-dimensional Makaton icon would be constantly in view.
The aim is to help the child learn the symbol, and thus to communicate,
giving the child at least some control over its environment.
Fully-interactive environments displaying images of the words along with the
appropriate symbol or sign ought to have more impact than static pages of
information.
The results so far have been impressive, says head teacher David Stewart.
'We have children here for 16 years from the age of three to 19. Our main
concern is to look for every way to help the children, so Desktop VR is an
important tool in our armoury.' And even if the system cannot always aid the
learning process, the three-dimensional world is as near to the real world
as some children get, he says.
So far, 20 symbols have been incorporated into virtual worlds, but it will
take three years, and more funding, to convert the whole Makaton library,
says Brown.
Further developments of the programme at Shepherd School will include the
introduction of sound and more detailed worlds, while the more able children
can create their own virtual worlds.
Other applications in education are possible, says Brown. History could be
presented in a different way using Desktop VR, and as the medium is
interactive, the student could change the course of past events and watch
what happens.
