FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of Vehicle Manufacturing Technology (6): Machines are
now used for tasks beyond spot welding - Robots
ROBOTS have become an established part of the vehicle manufacturing scene
over the past 15 years. The motor industry accounts for as much as 40 per
cent of the 450,000 installed industrial robots worldwide but their use is
changing and applications are expanding.
The traditional picture of long lines of robots each making billions of spot
welds on car bodies in a working life of eight to 10 years is still true,
but only half the story. Those same welding robots are as likely to be
grouped in flexible manufacturing cells and capable of handling a wide range
of models in quick succession.
At the same time, smaller robots are increasingly being used in engine
assembly, where their ability to do quality, repetitive work with a
precision of 1/100th of a millimetre is much in demand. Robots are being
used in final assembly work and paint spraying, and suppliers hope to be
able to develop these markets now that the technology has been proven.
There is an emerging trend for robots to be used in automotive
sub-contracting, prompted by the vehicle manufacturers' need to be as
confident in the consistency and quality of out-sourced components as for
their own work.
The shorter lives of car models, prompted by increased competition in the
industry and the Japanese producers' early efforts to reduce product
development times, are changing the use and design of robots.
The traditional practice of replacing a robot after two model cycles may
have been appropriate when each car model was lasting six to eight years.
But with model lives reduced to three to four years, users want to keep
their robots for further models, and thus want increased flexibility,
according to Dr Axel Gerhardt, a senior board member at the holding company
for Kuka, Germany's largest robot supplier.
Many of the latest trends in the use of robotics originated in Japan where
labour shortages have spurred much greater penetration of robots into
industry overall compared with Europe and the US. But robot suppliers such
as ABB Robotics, the largest in Europe, believe the European automotive
industry is as enthusiastic a user of robotic automation as its Japanese
counterpart.
However, some of the more recent applications of robots are less prevalent
in Europe, giving an opportunity to suppliers if they can convince producers
of the economic benefits. There are national variations too: the UK is a
long way behind the US and the rest of Europe in the use of robots in the
paint shop, says Mr Mike Wilson, UK sales and marketing director at GMFanuc
Robotics.
The versatility of modern industrial robots for tasks that go beyond spot
welding is illustrated by Kuka's involvement in final assembly of the
Citroen XM. Following painting, robots dismount the doors and tailgate, with
the aid of sensors, for completion on separate trim lines; the cockpit is
picked up by robot from an automatic guided vehicle, inserted through the
door and then bolted to the body by a second robot.
Robots are used for applying the adhesive sealants and for fitting the glass
exactly into the body aperture with the aid of ultrasonic scanners; seats
are inserted by robot after measuring the exact position of the body by
means of tactile sensors, wheels are mounted and doors and tailgate
refitted.
Some of these tasks are difficult for robots because of the nature of final
assembly. Robots are having to operate in a less structured environment,
says Mr Wilson, and deal with less defined objects such as seats.
Another problem, at least outside Japan, is that labour is available and
costs less than in skilled manufacturing areas. So robot suppliers have to
find applications that create added value, says Mr Stelio Demark, head of
ABB Robotics.
There are still opportunities for greater use of robots further up the
production line. Relatively new processes such as laser-cutting and
water-jet cutting are likely to become more prevalent, in association with
robots, especially for working with plastics and new advanced composites.
Mr Demark sees a substantial increase in automated arc-welding in the
automotive industry and sub-suppliers. And Comau, the Italian robotics and
systems group, expects some interesting investments in the body area,
prompted by the increased need for new models, according to Mr Massimo
Mattucci, vice-president for engineering and marketing.
In paint spraying, says Mr Demark, robots have hardly scratched the surface.
Last year, ABB strengthened its position in the robotic painting market with
the acquisition of Graco in the US, but GMFanuc, a US/Japanese concern, and
Behr of Germany have strong positions.
The flexibility of robots to handle model changes will be the key to their
further implementation in the car body area. In engine and transmission
production, robots are becoming better established, and Mr Mattucci suggests
a new generation of engines prompted by tougher environmental regulations
could be the spur to further investment in robots.
However, an increasing portion of business for robot suppliers seems likely
to come from refurbishment of existing robots rather than new purchases as
customers seek maximum value from their manufacturing investments.
In the past three or four years, this has been a growing trend of robot
refitting and modification in the motor industry, carried out during model
changeovers and restoring robots to previous levels of accuracy and
productivity.
