FT  30 APR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Peace-time challenges for
Afghan farming - The agricultural devastation caused by 13 years of war
IF PEACE finally returns to Afghanistan after 13 years of war, restoration
of the agricultural sector would be one of the most difficult challenges
faced by a new government.
According to United Nations estimates, the 1.3m hectares (3.2m acres) under
irrigation when the war began, have shrunk to less than 1m ha because of war
related devastation. Some 250,000 ha of forest have also disappeared,
creating shortages of firewood and timber for construction.
Among the principal causes of the Afghan tragedy are the estimated 10m mines
that have have been laid. According to a UN estimate, at least 500,000 farm
animals have been killed by the mines. Also the country's capacity to
increase its foodgrain production has been severely hampered by continuing
warfare and large-scale refugee movements. Now, in addition to the estimated
17m people living in Afghanistan, at least 5m live in refugee camps in
neighbouring Pakistan and Iran.
Mr Farooq Azam, former adviser on irrigation to the Afghan government before
the communist coup of 1978, says 'the land has become uneven because of
heavy bombing and mine blasts'. Now, the Authority for the Restoration of
Infrastructure in Afghanistan, the non-governmental organisation which he
heads, is trying to establish new projects for training of farmers and the
disabled to improve their skills for increasing crop yields. But, the task
is a difficult one. He quotes a retreating Soviet general who said in 1989
that 'they have made the land of Afghanistan such that it will fight its own
people for ten years', adding that this is the time-frame expected for the
completion of clearing operations.
The UN launched a worldwide appeal for the supply of 100,000 tonnes of wheat
in early April, to alleviate potentially severe food shortages. 'The silos
are empty, do we start digging cemeteries?' said Mr Benon Sevan, the UN
secretary general's special envoy for Afghanistan, when he launched the
appeal. So far, among the major donors, Pakistan and the US have committed
themselves to sending 40,000 tonnes and 10,000 tonnes respectively while
additional pledges may come from European countries, officials and diplomats
say.
They are not very hopeful, however, that any large scale international
effort will be mounted for reconstruction and rehabilitation in Afghanistan.
The Pakistani government is now revising estimates for reconstruction from a
1989 assessment. The new figures are expected to be provided to the UN
secretary general within the next two to three weeks and may be used for
launching a fresh international appeal.
At a time of economic pressures in Western economies and more interest in
giving assistance to the newly-independent republics of the former Soviet
Union and Eastern Europe, donors are less likely to make major commitments
to Afghanistan, officials say. Further pressure has resulted from
uncertainty about the future of a commitment of USDollars 600m made by the
Soviet Union after its troops withdrew from Afghanistan.
'We don't know if Moscow still wants to keep up with its commitment or not,'
says a senior government official.
A newly-installed government in Kabul is now expected to appeal for
assistance from donors. The twin factors of expected luke-warm response and
fears of infighting between rival mujahideen groups are likely to go against
them, but Mr Azam remains hopeful that 'there are still good people out
there' who will come to Afghanistan's help once again in its hour of need.
