FT  04 APR 92 / Housing starts suggest stimulus for market
THE government yesterday welcomed a small rise in February housing starts as
further evidence that interest-rate reductions are beginning to stimulate
the housing market.
According to provisional estimates from the Department of the Environment,
12,000 dwellings were started in Great Britain during February, compared
with 11,300 a year earlier. There were 12,900 completions, against 12,500 in
February last year.
The rise took housing starts in the three months from December to February
to 35,100, up 3 per cent on the same period a year ago, while completions
fell by 4 per cent to 41,600.
Mr Tim Yeo, environment minister, said the figures were an encouraging
message for the economy as a whole, given that housing starts provide
earlier evidence of economic activity than other construction figures.
Statistics for January and February show increases for both private-sector
and housing association starts, with private starts rising from 20,400 to
20,800 and housing association starts up sharply from 3,300 to 4,600.
In contrast, over the same period, starts made by local authorities, new
towns and government departments fell from 1,200 to 500.
On a seasonally adjusted basis, total starts fell by 1 per cent in the three
months from December to February, compared with a year earlier, while total
completions fell by 3 per cent. Private enterprise starts fell by 3 per
cent, while completions rose by 1 per cent.
Housing starts are generally seen as a leading indicator of activity in the
economy. They tend to precede house price rises by as much as a year.
The Labour Party's tax proposals would penalise the professions, including
civil engineering, and prejudice the industry's future, according to Mr
George Dixon, vice-president of the Federation of Civil Engineering
Contractors.
Speaking in Harrogate yesterday, Mr Dixon said he was worried that Labour's
proposed structure of income tax and National Insurance contributions 'would
clobber if not the present take-home pay then certainly the aspirations of
the up-and-coming engineer or surveyor'. He urged Labour not to forget that
civil engineering is a 'profession with worldwide application, and a mobile
profession'.
