FT  13 MAY 92 / Survey of West Norfolk (3): A well-kept secret is about to
be revealed - Old Hanseatic links are being revived in a bid to attract more
visitors / Tourism has become one of the most important employers in the
area
AT THE north end of King's Lynn, the last fishermen's yard in the old
fishing quarter, next to the port, has been rescued from oblivion. Here, at
True's Yard, two tiny restored cottages stand testimony to the days of
fishing under sail and form a home for decades of maritime data.
Just around the corner there is a different sort of local colour - the
tattooist's shop window displaying an astonishing variety of designs.
Walk through a couple of twisty, narrow streets and you suddenly find
yourself in the Tuesday Market Place, a huge car park most of the week but
transformed on Tuesdays and Fridays into the market for which it was
designed in the twelfth century.
Around the marketplace stand the handsome merchants' houses dating from the
prosperous days when King's Lynn was one of just half a dozen English ports
allowed to join the Hanseatic League, a protective trading partnership of
north European merchants established in the fourteenth century.
Banks, hotels, pubs and other businesses may have come and gone in the
marketplace, but its character and beauty are undiminished. Go south along
the east side of town, avoiding the ugly, pedestrianised High Street, taking
in the Guildhall of St George, the oldest guildhall in England and home to
the annual King's Lynn Festival, the ornate Customs House built in 1683, and
arrive at Saturday Market, a focal point of the town since the early 1100s.
It, too, houses cars every day except, naturally, market day on Saturdays.
Here stands St Margaret's Church, begun in 1100 by the first Bishop of
Norwich, completed in the thirteenth century and largely rebuilt in the
eighteenth century.
At the front door are marked the flood tides which have reached it - the
last and worst was on January 11, 1978. Opposite, stand two buildings with
chequerboard flintwork: the Victorian Town Hall and the Guildhall of the
Holy Trinity, built in 1421 and home of King's Lynn's treasured regalia,
including the renowned King John Cup and Sword (both fourteenth century,
made at least 100 years after John's death).
The attractions of King's Lynn have been West Norfolk's best-kept secret,
according to Mr John Barrett, head of tourism and leisure for King's Lynn
and West Norfolk Council.
His department is going to change all that. They are about to start a
five-year marketing campaign for the town, drawing extensively on its links
with Germany through the Hanseatic League.
'There is a unanimity among people of the town that we have by no means
reached the full potential for visitors without spoiling the facilities,' he
says.
Tourism has become the second most important employer in the area after
agriculture since Anglia Canning closed down, but much of the employment is
seasonal.
Mr Barrett's aim is to extend the length of the season as far as possible,
and the promotion of the historic town as a tourism centre is central to
that aim.
In October, the council plans to spend Pounds 80,000 on improvements to the
already excellent tourist information centre (housed in the guildhall
heritage centre) and develop the gaols behind it as a visitor attraction.
Phase two will develop more of the town hall complex with a video to bring
the history of the town to life. Hopes are high for 40-50,000 tourists a
year.
Mr Barrett's brief is a huge one. West Norfolk is England's fifth largest
district council by area with a population of 130,000.
Its traditional catchment areas for tourists are Cambridgeshire,
Bedfordshire, Northamptonshire and Leicestershire, particularly
Peterborough.
There is also an increasing number of visitors from southern England, Dutch
and German tourists, via Harwich, and a significant number of French.
Although the council also promotes the pretty town of Downham Market and the
watery fens as tourist attractions, the main pull for visitors is the
stretch of coast along the Wash from King's Lynn, up past the royal parks of
Sandringham, the lavender farm at Heacham and on to the neat seaside resort
of Hunstanton. The town (resident population 5,000) receives a million
day-visitors a year and 100,000 staying-visitors (compared with Southend,
which takes in 2.5m day trippers and has a population of 130,000).
Hunstanton does not seem to have been affected by the recession, neither has
it suffered the decline of other British resorts over the last 10 years. The
council began investing in 1981, when it bought the resort's Princess
Theatre, continuing in 1984 with the construction of the seafront Oasis
Leisure Centre, complete with indoor and outdoor swimming pools, toddler
facilities, squash courts and indoor bowls hall.
'We have continued to upgrade and develop facilities,' Mr Barrett says. 'It
represents a huge investment in basic revenue terms in keeping the place
neat, tidy, clean and attractive to visitors, keeping the toilets clean, and
as a result we receive many unsolicited testimonials every year. It costs
us, but we were the only Norfolk resort to win the Blue Flag award (from the
Tidy Britain Group).'
Although Mr Barrett believes there is scope to improve the facilities of
Hunstanton, finding more car parking space would be a problem. The council
is trying to persuade British Rail to reinstate the now defunct King's Lynn
to Hunstanton line with a steam train - a move which proved remarkably
popular along the coast at Sheringham.
Next door to the Oasis centre is The Kingdom of the Sea, a private
development by Pleasureworld which they have since replicated in Great
Yarmouth. It is a hugely successful display of fish in natural settings and,
like the Oasis, provides excellent family entertainment, whatever the
weather outside. Attracting Pleasureworld to Hunstanton was a great success
for the council and they have taken careful note of the little things that
please their customers.
'This was the first development Pleasureworld made in eastern England,
purely because of the number of visitors to Hunstanton and the attention we
pay to our facilities,' says Mr Barrett.
'We lay great emphasis on getting the basics right: the dog warden
concentrates on visitor areas and Hunstanton has the highest proportion of
litter bins - it's what sets us apart.'
His department is also evangelical about their way of doing things and
anxious that everybody who comes into contact with tourists treats them with
care.
To this end, the council has established the West Norfolk Welcome, an
introduction to customer care for retailers which costs little but teaches
the benefits of good service.
'We have one of the most efficient relationships with the the private sector
in any local authority,' Mr Barrett claims with some pride.
'We're always invited to any meeting of any organisation involved with
tourism, and likewise representatives of those bodies attend our tourism sub
committees.'
For the sake of King's Lynn's best-kept secret, one must hope he is not too
successful.
