FT  11 JAN 92 / Forth Ports seeks share flotation
FORTH PORTS Authority, which handles most port operations on the Firth of
Forth in eastern Scotland, is to seek a flotation on the Stock Exchange.
It is the only trust port so far to choose this route for changing its
status under new ports legislation.
Forth Ports Authority yesterday received consent in principle from the
Department of Transport to privatise by way of flotation and Stock Exchange
listing. It hopes to achieve the flotation by the spring.
Forth Ports is the largest port operator in Scotland and is one of the more
profitable of the 14 main ports which have been faced with compulsory
privatisation under the Ports Act of last year. In the year to December 1990
it made a pre-tax profit of Pounds 8.9m on turnover of Pounds 31.2m. It says
it had a good year last year.
The authority operates Leith and Grangemouth on the south side of the Firth
of Forth and Methil, Kirkcaldy and Burntisland in Fife. Cargoes include
chemicals, petroleum products, steel, timber and cement.
Mr Hugh Thompson, the managing director, said Forth Ports set its sights on
a flotation as long ago as last summer, before the doubts about trade sales
of ports emerged with the recent controversy about the sale of Tees &amp;
Hartlepool Port Authority.
Unsuccessful bidders for Tees &amp; Hartlepool are challenging the government's
decision to favour Humberside Holdings as the purchaser of the north-east
England port.
Mr Thompson said the entire equity in Forth Ports would be sold, with shares
possibly being reserved for management and employees. He expected
institutions and some members of the public to buy shares. He said he was
not worried about the possibility of the port being taken over by another
company.
Forth Ports has retained British Linen Bank, the merchant banking subsidiary
of Bank of Scotland, as its adviser on the flotation. Under the Ports Act
half the proceeds of the sale should go to the government.
Forth Ports has property holdings in Leith, which is the port for Edinburgh,
and elsewhere. In 1987 it created a subsidiary called Edinburgh Maritime
which proposed a large property development that would have involved filling
in redundant docks and reclaiming a large acreage from the Firth of Forth.
Mr Thompson said that the project, which attracted local opposition and did
not find favour with the local authorities, had been shelved. The authority
had planning permission for developments on two sites in Leith and was
awaiting an upturn in the property market.
'We are talking to possible clients and end-users,' Mr Thompson said. Other
property schemes were under consideration.
