FT  16 JUN 92 / Survey of China (3): Resisting new world order - Foreign
relations: trade takes over the driving seat
THE collapse of the Soviet Union and China's desire to modernise its economy
are the two main determinants governing the country's external relations.
The former robbed it of the opportunity to engage in power politics by
playing the US off against the Soviet Union, with whom it had just
normalised relations. The desire to modernise has meant that ideology has
taken second place to trade-based relationships - a policy no better
demonstrated than in China's policy towards the Korean peninsula.
The aim of China's foreign policy today is to ensure the stability of its
borders - especially those with central Asian countries of the former Soviet
Union, the Korean peninsula and Indo China - and to resist president Bush's
new world order, which Beijing sees as nothing more than a US grab for
global hegemony, under the rubric of non-interference in other countries'
domestic affairs.
In prosecuting this policy, the past year has seen some notable failures, as
well as successes, for Chinese foreign policy.
In July last year, Mr Jiang Zemin, general secretary of the Communist Party,
visited Mr Mikhail Gorbachev in Moscow, the first visit of a Chinese party
leader since Mao went there in 1957. The restoration of party-to-party
relations in 1989 had promised big things for China, especially concerning
the transfer of sophisticated Soviet military technology, but this was
dashed in the aftermath of August last year.
The disintegration of the Soviet Union, the end game of which was the
attempted coup against Mr Gorbachev, was wholly unanticipated by Beijing.
China moved quickly to recognise the Yanayev junta only to see it crumble
after three days of chaos in Moscow's streets.
Today, senior Chinese officials are scathing about Mr Gorbachev. According
to Mr Jiang En Zhu, a vice-foreign minister: 'The disintegration of the
Soviet Union represented a failure of their domestic and foreign policies.'
He went on to enumerate how the Soviet Union had engaged in rivalry with the
US and had failed to improve the lot of its people. 'Since 1980 China's
gross national product has grown by an average of 9.6 per cent a year; the
people's life has been improved,' he says.
Since its initial stumble, Beijing has regained its composure and moved to
establish diplomatic relations with members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States. A succession of latter-day central Asian potentates have
travelled to Beijing over the past six months to sign treaties of friendship
and commerce. According to western diplomats a vigorous trade is being
conducted across China's northern boarder.
On the Korean peninsula, China has been a force for stability. It has deftly
managed its relationship with Pyongyang while deepening its relations with
Seoul. It sponsored a divided Korea's entry into the United Nations and has
sought to curb North Korea's nuclear ambitions.
Kim Il Sung, the North Korean dictator, visited Beijing last October hoping
to secure economic aid. Mr Kim tried to play the Confucian card; in a replay
of Korea's traditional relationship to the Middle Kingdom, Mr Kim
characterised China as the elder brother to the younger North Korea. The
Chinese took him instead on a tour of foreign joint-venture companies and
told him to modernise his economy.
Meanwhile, trade between China and South Korea is growing strongly and last
year totalled Dollars 5.7bn on a bilateral basis. In north-eastern China,
mainly Shandong province, South Korean companies have set up more than 130
joint ventures with an aggregate investment in excess of Dollars 120m.
The Chinese embrace of South Korea is mirrored more widely in its growing
relations with south-east Asia. Diplomatic relations have been established
with Indonesia and Singapore - to where Yang Shangkun, China's president,
paid a visit earlier this year. Relations have been repaired with Vietnam,
although they remain subject to dispute over the Spratly Islands, and
Cambodia.
If central, north and south-east Asia represent a relative triumph for
China's foreign policy then Europe and North America remain relative
failures. The events of the June 4, 1989, Tiananmen massacre, still cast an
unhelpful shadow over China's relations with the developed world.
There is a widespread view in the West that the Chinese government is out of
step with the march of history; that it is a regime living on borrowed time.
When Li Peng, China's prime minister, visited Europe and the UN earlier this
year, the mainland Chinese press was full of reports of deals done with
industrialists; no mention was made of the pressure he came under about
China's record on human rights or the opprobrium with which he is held.
China's relations with the US have been particularly tense since Tiananmen.
The US is the only world power capable of effecting change in China. US
success has been weak on the political front but considerable in trade
matters where it holds the whip hand, in the form of its annual renewal of
most favoured nation status, MFN.
China acceded to US demands over intellectual property and copyright; it now
seems likely to do so again about US demands for greater transparency in
goods and services trade. US pressure has been successful in getting China
to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and the US-led Missile
Technology Control Regime, which seeks to control the export of missiles
with a range greater than 300 kilometres.
However, Mr David Shambaugh, of London's School of Oriental and African
Studies, observed*: 'The American missionary impulse to convert China is
once again shaping the evolution of the relationship . . . US-China
relations, which have historically followed a love-hate cycle, are likely to
get worse before they get better.'
Relations with Britain are dominated by Hong Kong. They have been slow to
thaw from the post-Tiananmen freeze. Britain's appointment of a leading
politician to the governorship may pose another set of problems for China as
it seeks to regain the colony with as little of the baggage of western
liberalism as possible.
Mr Christopher Patten will want to leave his stamp on the colony. He is
expected to be predisposed to listen to calls for greater democracy. Whether
he can accede to them is a different question. But one thing does seem
certain. In Mr Patten, Hong Kong will have an able advocate and China a more
sophisticated adversary than they have been used to for a long time.
*Asian Survey, January 1992, p30
