FT  21 APR 92 / International Bonds: Emu concerns raise yields in Ecu sector
POST-Maastricht euphoria in the Ecu bond market has evaporated, as fears
about the ratification of the treaty on European monetary union surfaced in
recent weeks.
The agreement on European monetary union reached by European Community
governments at Maastricht in December was supposed to remove the uncertainty
surrounding the future of the European currency unit which had been
undermining the Ecu bond market. In the wake of Maastricht, bond prices
raced ahead, as predicted, and, at the start of 1992, the outlook for the
market appeared propitious.
Several months later, the surge of new bond issues has dried up in the face
of investor disinterest.
The disappointing performance of European bond markets has pushed Ecu yields
higher, and, as a result of worries about ratification, Ecu bonds have
underperformed other European bond markets.
'Ratification of the treaty, which must occur before it comes into effect on
January 1, 1993, is not just a case of 'rubber-stamping',' said Mr Paul
Hammett, an economist at Paribas Capital Markets. 'New laws and, in some
countries, constitutional changes are required.'
Fears have been stirred by the approach of referenda on monetary union in
Denmark on June 2, and in Ireland on June 18. In addition, there has been
pressure for a referendum in France, although the treaty could be ratified
by parliament, where a three-fifths majority is needed. However the market
has been most rattled by anti-monetary union stirrings in Germany, where the
issues of loss of sovereignty and of their own currency have come to the
fore. This change of mood in Germany has highlighted the lack of debate over
monetary union within most European nations - apart from the UK and the
Netherlands - until now.
In the last few weeks, there has been substantial selling of Ecu bonds by
large institutional accounts, pushing yields back to pre-Maastricht levels.
Central banks, which have been a particularly important investor base in
this market, have been the main sellers.
'There has been a small amount of retail buying, but that has been no match
for large-scale institutional selling,' one Ecu bond trader said.
However, sentiment improved somewhat last week, as the threat of a
realignment of the Exchange Rate Mechanism faded. Following the election
victory of the ruling Conservative party in the UK on April 9, sterling
rallied strongly, removing fears that the currency's weakness within the ERM
would force a realignment.
In fact, the risk of realignment is now probably the lowest it has ever
been, and the prospect of sterling's move to the narrow band of the ERM has
further buoyed sentiment. The completion of a series of European elections
has also ended some political uncertainty.
In addition, fears about the future of the treaty may have been overplayed,
partly because the initial euphoria after Maastricht was overdone. 'The
chances of the treaty falling through are exceedingly small,' said Mr Neil
Rogers, bond analyst at UBS Phillips &amp; Drew. 'But when Ecu yields are the
lowest in the European Community bar German yields (as they were in the wake
of Maastricht), you have to question whether the market is offering any
value.'
Mr Hammett of Paribas also believes the risk of non-ratification is low,
warning of 'misguided pessimism'.
But there is little prospect of investors returning to the sector with any
enthusiasm, at least until European bond markets start to show some
direction. A cut in German interest rates, or even strong expectations of a
cut, would provide a much-needed fillip.
Meanwhile, activity in the new issues market, which surged at the start of
the year, is likely to remain subdued. There is little sign of any increase
of corporate bond issuance, since rates are not particularly attractive and
swap opportunities are scarce.
However, the supply of paper from European governments keen to demonstrate
their political commitment to the market is likely to continue, though at a
slower pace. Issuance may pick up in the second half of the year, especially
if market conditions improve as expected.
Many issuers are currently adopting a 'wait-and-see' approach. Spain, for
example, has not yet tapped the market this year, but is expected to raise
funds later in the year.
For countries such as Spain, the Ecu market offers an opportunity to pay
lower interest rates, without taking on any significant currency risk, as
well as making a political point. Portugal, which recently joined the ERM,
could be ready to raise Ecu funds later this year.
Belgium is about to start issuing Ecu commercial paper, but is not expected
to issue longer-term debt, under its new domestic bond programme, until
later in the year.
Meanwhile, for countries with lower interest rates, the interest rate
penalty for tapping the Ecu market has shrunk. While there is still no
prospect of activity from Germany, the Netherlands could decide to tap the
market later this year.
In fact, Ecu yields fell below Dutch government bond yields in the wake of
Maastricht, though that differential has now widened to more than 30 basis
points. If Portugal and Holland raise Ecu funds later this year, it is quite
likely that by the end of the year Germany will be the only significant EC
member not to have tapped the market.
However, there is a limited amount of issuance on the cards over the coming
weeks. This week, the UK plans to raise Ecu500m through its three-year note
programme, and Italy is expected to issue five-year CTE's under its domestic
bond programme, which could trigger some swap-driven Eurobond activity.
