FT  16 MAY 92 / Ravenscraig to close by end of June
BRITISH STEEL is to bring forward the closure of the Ravenscraig steelworks
in Scotland to the end of next month. It says market conditions mean there
will be no need for the plant's output after that date.
The company announced in January that it would close the remaining parts of
the integrated steel complex, at Motherwell near Glasgow, 'no later than
September'.
Shop stewards at Ravenscraig, which now employs 1,200 people, gave a
resigned response. Mr George Quinn, crafts convener, said: 'Most people
inside the plant will be relieved because they now actually know when the
closing date is. They are not hanging on.'
Opposition politicians in Scotland reacted angrily. The Scottish National
party said: 'We now face the scandal of an efficient, productive industry
being butchered while the largest single market for steel in Europe, the
North Sea, lies off our coasts.'
Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish secretary, whom British Steel informed shortly
after releasing the closure date, said the early closure was regrettable,
although it came as no surprise. It was now time to concentrate on plans for
the future of the Lanarkshire area, where an enterprise zone is to be
created.
British Steel's action is a further sign of its difficulties. It said the
market for strip products, in which Ravenscraig operates, had not improved
since the January closure announcement.
Although demand in the UK was 'not too bad', the company said, there was
falling demand accompanied by uneconomic price levels in the European
market. British Steel's two plants in south Wales had stocks to cope with
current UK demand and any upturn from other markets.
The closure affects both Ravenscraig and the related ore and coal handling
terminal at Hunterston on the Firth of Clyde.
The company is providing a counselling service for employees and will
relocate some to other parts of the company.
The final rundown of Ravenscraig started with the closure of its strip mill
early last year, with the loss of 770 jobs. A further 1,245 jobs went last
summer when British Steel closed one of the two working blast furnaces at
the plant.
Last month Nucor, the US steel producer, said it would investigate the
possibility of establishing a 1.2m-tonnes-a-year mini-mill on a greenfield
site in Scotland. It ruled out taking over any of the Ravenscraig plant.
