FT  12 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Mercury spreads wings to Canada - Hugo
Dixon and Roland Rudd report on C and W's latest deal
AFTER MORE than a year of negotiations with several of the world's largest
telecommunications companies Lord Young, chairman of Cable and Wireless, has
finally pulled off his big deal.
The international telecommunications group sees three main advantages from
the sale of 20 per cent of Mercury Communications, Britain's number two
telecommunications operator, to BCE, the Canadian telecommunications group.
Firstly, it has crystallised the value of C and W's UK subsidiary. The
Pounds 480m price values the company at a notional Pounds 2.4bn, while at
the same time giving rise to a Pounds 300m exceptional profit.
Secondly, it has produced a partnership which C and W hopes will enhance
Mercury's ability to compete more effectively against British
Telecommunications and provide the basis for further collaboration around
the world.
At the same time as BCE is bying a fifth of Mercury, C and W is investing
Pounds 30m in BCE's UK cable television interests.
Thirdly, the cash generated from the deal will reduce the group's gearing by
about 20 percentage points and so allow C and W to maintain its current
investment programme in Mercury while taking on new projects outside the UK.
Without the deal C and W would have had a net cash outflow of Pounds
300m-Pounds 400m in the year to end-March 1993, estimated Mr Laurence
Heyworth, of stockbrokers Robert Fleming Securities.
C and W's eagerness to make such a deal is underlined by the fact that BCE
was not the group's first choice.
Lord Young held extensive talks with AT&amp;T, the US telecommunications group,
which broke down earlier this year because C and W was afraid of losing its
independence.
He then turned his attention to US West, one of the US 'baby Bell'
telecommunication companies.
They agreed to pool their mobile communications interests in the UK but
could not reach agreement about a partnership over Mercury.
Lord Young had been conducting simultaneous negotiations in Montreal and
London with BCE.
At the end of August the two sides were able to reach a tentative agreement
at a meeting of their senior executives at New York's exclusive Plaza
Athenee Hotel.
The fine detail was settled earlier this week.
The financial benefits of the deal are clear. The price BCE paid for its
stake was in the upper ranges of what analysts expected. Moreover, because
of the group's underlying negative cash flow, it needed to raise money if it
was to continue to expand.
The value of the partnership with BCE is more nebulous.
The deal might have been expected to presage a more aggressive attack on
BT's dominant UK market position, but both companies made clear that neither
Mercury nor BCE's cable television interests would be stepping up their
investment as a result of the deal.
There might also appear to be substantial synergies between Mercury's
long-distance network and BCE's local cable operations, which have just
begun to provide telephone services. But the potential to collaborate is
restricted by Mercury's licence which prevents it from showing 'undue
preference' to any customer.
Mercury already has 14 operational agreements with cable TV operators to
provide them with long-distance services. Its agreement with BCE's cable
interests will have to be on the same arms-length basis, although they do
plan to develop products and services jointly and exchange personnel.
Another possible area for collaboration would have been by Northern Telecom,
BCE's telecommunications manufacturing subsidiary, increasing its supply of
infrastructure equipment to Mercury. However, the UK company said supply
arrangements would continue to operate on an arms-length basis and it would
not be changing its multi-source purchasing policy.
Other areas for collaboration could develop in the long-term, but nothing
has been agreed.
Lord Young said the main focus would be in the European Community, although
he conceded that opportunities were restricted by the monopoly structure of
most markets.
In any event Lord Young made clear that the BCE partnership was not
exclusive. C and W already has joint ventures with US West in the UK, and
Bell South, another 'baby bell', in Australia.
More are in prospect as telecommunications markets are opened up around the
world. 'We are embarrassed by choice,' said Lord Young. 'Our problem is
deciding which company offers us the best returns for shareholders.'
The cash from the BCE deal will eventually be used in such investments. 'It
is not going to burn a hole in our pockets' said Mr James Ross, C and W's
chief executive.
Whether C and W will cut BCE in on such future deals will depend on the two
groups' ability to form a productive relationship in the UK.
