FT  18 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Legal row threatens Cabra's Fulham deal
A LEGAL row has broken out between Fulham Football Club and Cabra Estates,
the heavily-indebted property company which owns Craven Cottage, Fulham's
ground.
The argument could scupper a January 1990 agreement between the two sides
for Fulham to be paid to leave its ground early so Cabra could re-develop
the site as residential housing.
In turn, a separate agreement under which Cabra was to sell another west
London football ground, Stamford Bridge, to its incumbent, Chelsea Football
Club, is also at risk.
Fulham had planned to ground-share with Chelsea, while Chelsea would have
used the money raised to help meet the Pounds 22.85m price tag for Stamford
Bridge.
Successful completion of the two deals is seen as central to Cabra's plans
to reduce its net debt, which stood at Pounds 52m at the end of March.
Fulham and several of its directors, including Mr Jimmy Hill, the TV
presenter, went to the High Court yesterday to seek a declaration that they
are no longer bound by a clause in the 1990 agreement.
Under the agreement, the directors said they would not provide any evidence
which could help Hammersmith and Fulham council. In a separate action the
council has blocked Cabra's re-development plans.
Fulham alleged that only one of the agreed payments from Cabra has been
made; security for other payments has not been provided; and Cabra's
financial position has deteriorated.
The directors therefore claimed it is now in the best interests of Fulham
for 'relevant evidence' to be given to a public inquiry, now underway, which
is hearing Cabra's appeal against Hammersmith and Fulham's rejection.
The inquiry, which is due to end shortly, has heard from Savills, Cabra's
property agent, that the redevelopment project would lose money, even if
house prices rose substantially.
Fulham Supporters Club, which gave evidence on Tuesday, claimed that Cabra's
failure to secure financial guarantees to cover two future payments due to
Fulham have incurred penalties which are mounting at Pounds 10,000 a day.
Cabra's accrued penalties owing to Fulham now exceed Pounds 5m, a spokesman
for the Supporters' Club claimed.
The high court hearing and the inquiry continue.
