FT  18 DEC 92 / British Gas seeks fortune abroad as home front sours:
Deborah Hargreaves reports on how a privatised utility confronts a break-up
threat
It was a neat coincidence that British Gas should buy control of Argentina's
largest gas distribution company on the day that Sir James McKinnon, its
regulator, called for the break-up of the company.
The announcements show both the tightening grip of UK regulation and British
Gas's drive to shift an increasing amount of business out of that grasp into
growth markets overseas.
In the Argentine deal, for instance, a consortium headed by British Gas
acquired Distribuidora de Gas Metropolitana for Dollars 300m (Pounds
197.30m), giving British Gas a majority stake in the privatised utility,
which it will run. Other overseas activities include plans for exploration
in Kazakhstan, a gas distribution company in Canada and some gas networks in
eastern Germany.
The push overseas is not surprising. Ever since British Gas was privatised
in 1986, it has faced increasing pressure from the regulatory authorities.
Now its future is being decided by an inquiry by the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission.
In his submission to the inquiry, Sir James McKinnon has argued for a
break-up: British Gas's UK pipelines business, which represents 85 per cent
of the company's assets, should be transferred into a new company, he said
on Wednesday.
'The key to British Gas's monopoly is its ownership and control of the gas
transportation and storage system,' he said. Effective competition could not
be introduced into the UK gas market while British Gas owned the pipelines -
even if it separated them into a subsidiary.
Sir James's views are backed by many of the independent gas marketing
companies that have sprung up in the past five years. They suspect they are
charged more for transporting their gas through British Gas's pipelines than
the company itself pays.
'I'm very concerned that competition with British Gas as a marketer be on an
even keel. I'm not sure I believe in Chinese walls,' said Mr Norman Ellis,
managing director of Kinetica, the only UK company that has managed to build
a rival pipeline.
British Gas has expressed its irritation with Sir James for making
'inappropriate' statements while the issue is under review. But it must be
facing up to the fact that it is unlikely to emerge intact from the
monopolies commission inquiry.
The Office of Fair Trading recommended the wholesale sell-off of the
pipelines in its report on the gas market in October 1991. The OFT backed
off from this demand in return for British Gas's co-operation with the rest
of its recommendations, which included a gas release programme and the
reduction of British Gas's monopoly in the domestic sector. But British Gas
was required to place its pipelines in a separate subsidiary.
'It is not a new issue and to the extent that we are going to discuss it,
our discussions will be with the Monopolies and Mergers Commission,' Mr
Philip Rogerson, British Gas's managing director of finance, said.
British Gas is extremely keen to retain the Pounds 16bn-worth of assets that
are tied up in the pipelines business. The rest of its UK business is purely
a marketing operation, with about Pounds 3bn in assets, which should see
margins eroded severely as intense competition builds. For this reason,
British Gas has insisted on a higher rate of return for its pipelines than
Sir James will allow. It was this that forced the monopolies commission
inquiry. Sir James wanted the rate of return to be between 2.5 per cent and
5 per cent while British Gas pushed for 6.7 per cent on its existing
pipelines and 10.8 per cent on new investment.
The City is not sure how to evaluate the threat of break-up: 'Many
shareholders see it as a positive move in unlocking value', said Mr Nick
Antill, industry analyst at Hoare Govett, 'but I think it's a myth.
Investors would get a one-off payment from the sale of one of the companies
or two shares in separate companies, one of which would not do very well
financially.'
The monopolies commission could go further and break up the company into
regional marketing units, as in the electricity industry and as was
suggested at British Gas's privatisation.
The row over the break-up of the company goes some way to explain the vigour
with which Mr Cedric Brown, British Gas's chief executive, is pursuing
investments abroad. It will be a long time, however, before this part of its
business catches up with profits from its UK monopoly.
British Gas receives less than a quarter of its overall profit from overseas
operations. It had set a target for 60 per cent of its profits to come from
its two international divisions - Exploration and Production and Global Gas
 -by 2000, but has recently backed off from this goal.
'We want to be part of developing gas businesses where we can build markets
and be a key player,' said Mr Russell Herbert, managing director of Global
Gas. But its international strategy is under review by McKinsey, the
management consultants.
The City has not understood British Gas's move into gas distribution
overseas: 'Many investors are pretty negative about Global Gas. They're not
happy about the company putting money into regulated businesses abroad,'
said Mr Antill.
British Gas's involvement in Argentina will be subject to scrutiny by a
regulatory body. But the company stresses the positive effect the
acquisition will have on its revenues and the possibility of spin-off
business.
With a turnover of Dollars 610m (Pounds 384m) a year, British Gas expects
Distribuidora de Gas Metropolitana to add to its profits immediately. The
Argentine market has been growing at 6 per cent a year.
Mr Herbert also expects British Gas to gain around Dollars 160m of
associated business such as providing consultancy services for Argentina's
newly privatised gas industry as well as engineering and pipeline services
for the country's water industry.
Argentina provides as much comfort to British Gas's critics, however, as it
does to the expansion-minded management. In Argentina the gas pipelines
business is run separately from local distribution - by design, not
coincidence. The Argentine government set out to learn from the strengths
and weaknesses of the UK's gas privatisation before drawing up its own
plans.
