FT  17 DEC 92 / World Trade News: Mixed signals in world steel markets -
Barriers and liberalisation
STEEL exporters can be forgiven for feeling confused.
On the one hand, the European Community is imposing dumping duties on east
European exporters, and the US is hurling a blizzard of duties at steel
exporters in Europe, Asia and south America.
On the other, negotiations resumed this month on a Multilateral Steel
Agreement aimed at demolishing tariffs, dismantling non-tariff barriers, and
cutting steel subsidies.
Is the industry being liberalised? Or is it headed for conflict and
protectionism? How can the celebrations of US steel-makers over price rises
after the imposition of duties on foreign competitors fail to contradict
aims of free trade in steel? How can this debate occur without reference to
the chronic oversupply of steel that underlies the present conflict?
US trade officials argue there is no contradiction. They say the
countervailing duties announced two weeks ago target past sins -
specifically EC subsidies to European steel makers. The MSA would set a
liberalising programme for the future.
EC officials insist this is disingenuous. The duties, which are expected to
be followed in January by a deluge of dumping actions intended to punish
exporters who allegedly sell at below cost, have come swiftly after the
expiry in April of import restraints that have protected the domestic US
steel industry for most of the past decade.
These restraints, agreed by US trading partners in the guise of 'voluntary'
restraint agreements under threat of anti-dumping and countervailing duty
suits, were imposed on EC member states in 1982 and the rest of the leading
exporting nations in 1984.
'Our impression is that the US is just trying to get rid of imports,' an EC
official said this week.
Some steel industry experts in the US would not disagree. As domestic US
manufacturers have celebrated price increases in recent weeks of up to 5.6
per cent, one producer boasted to the Wall Street Journal: 'It's going to
bode well for domestic steel. . . The foreign people are staying at home
right now.'
Such confidence may be premature, at least for traditional suppliers in
large integrated steel mills. Analysts say the future for the US industry
lies in the mini-mills - high-productivity, high-technology plants - such as
those created by Mr Ken Iverson of Nucor.
Nucor could be said to be the most successful US steel company of the past
two decades. It has pioneered the use of a cost-effective new steel-making
technology called thin-slab casting to become one of the world's lowest-cost
steel manufacturers.
Mr Christopher Plummer, a Pennsylvania consultant with RSI Metal Consulting,
said that in the long run US steel companies had more to fear from the
mini-mills than foreign competition: 'In less than 15 years mini-mills could
be controlling one-third of the US sheet market,' he predicted.
'Before 1988 there were no mini-mills involved in big structural products.
Foreign companies controlled over one-third of the market. Today mini-mills
are virtually dominating the production.'
Perhaps, then, the combined assault of countervailing duties and dumping
actions is intended to buy time for efficient mini-mills to replace
uncompetitive integrated steel mills. All that Mrs Carla Hills, US trade
representative, has said is that she hopes a multilateral steel agreement
would eliminate 'trade-distorting practices that have plagued this
industry'.
However, neither the Multilateral Steel Agreement talks nor the dumping and
subsidy cases are addressing the fundamental issue of overcapacity in the
world steel market.
'Even if demand were high and the industry was at something approaching full
capacity, there will still be downward price pressures,' says Mr Michael
Finger, a World Bank economist.
EC officials agree. While recession has aggravated problems, they see the
high fixed cost structure of the steel industry as forcing producers to
squeeze the last possible tonne of steel out of each plant: only those
plants with high utilisation rates stay profitable.
They nevertheless see problems in an MSA that fails to address the problem
of oversupply. In the EC, new steel capacity tends to be agreed only when
old plants are taken out of production to offset the new.
They are also concerned that if the US duties succeed in shutting out a
large proportion of the 10m tonnes of steel products currently imported
every year, then other countries (including EC member states) will suffer as
exporters target new markets for their output.
As a result, there are likely to be intense foreign pressures on the US to
agree new VRAs giving foreign producers at least limited access to the US
market.
The US steel companies insist they will not succumb to government pressure
to accept VRAs. But because they expect to have difficulty in proving that
imports have inflicted injury - a precondition for the US International
Trade Commission making the recently announced duties permanent - it is
thought they may have no alternative, as long as price floors are set.
All this provides a puzzling backdrop to renewed negotiations aimed at a
trade liberalising MSA. According to one industry lawyer, the US wants to
restart the MSA talks to impose discipline on subsidies in the steel
industry. Under the MSA, 95 per cent of all subsidies would be eliminated.
Waivers could be allowed for environmental purposes, research, worker
assistance and company closures. Last March the US agreed that those
subsidies would be permissible but actionable.
For the remainder of the 24 countries negotiating the MSA, it is the 'but
actionable' that causes concern: 'It is the US threat of unilateral action,
in the form of countervailing duties and dumping charges, that have brought
people to the table,' one negotiator said.
The next meeting on the MSA is pencilled in for February next year, when the
Clinton administration will still be polishing its buttons. Meanwhile, there
are 72 US dumping actions - expected on January 26 - to be contended with.
'Whether MSA talks resume or not, that looks from here like a declaration of
war,' an EC official said.
