FT  29 APR 92 / Row over Genscher successor hits Bonn
GERMANY'S ruling coalition was thrown into disarray last night, when the
nomination of Mrs Irmgard Schwaetzer as foreign minister was rejected by her
own party, the minority Free Democrats (FDP).
In a shock vote last night in the party's parliamentary group, Mrs
Schwaetzer was defeated by Mr Klaus Kinkel, the 55-year-old justice
minister, who is now expected to succeed Mr Hans-Dietrich Genscher in the
key government post.
There was no reaction from Chancellor Helmut Kohl and other members of the
coalition, but the confusion seems sure to damage the government's
international standing.
The nomination of Mrs Schwaetzer, currently construction minister and
formerly a deputy foreign minister, was seen as favoured by Mr Kohl.
At the same time there was public disagreement between the chancellor's
Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and its Bavarian sister-party, the
Christian Social Union (CSU), over the appointment of a deputy chancellor to
replace Mr Genscher.
The CSU wants the post for its own leader, Mr Theo Waigel, the finance
minister, but Mr Kohl insists that it belongs to the minority FDP.
The turmoil in the corridors of the coalition coincides with an
intensification of the public- sector strike launched at the weekend in an
increasingly bitter campaign for higher wages. Public transport throughout
the industrial Ruhr region was brought to a standstill, causing motorway
jams, and refuse disposal workers throughout the country will be called out
today.
After a day of confusion in Bonn it seemed virtually certain that FDP
back-benchers would get their way and Mr Kinkel would become foreign
minister to succeed Mr Genscher, his long-time mentor.
An FDP meeting, which argued for five stormy hours before voting for Mr
Kinkel, also decided that Mr Jurgen Mollemann, economics minister, should be
its candidate for deputy chancellor.
The revolt in the FDP was led by parliamentary back-benchers, furious at
their party executive for nominating Mrs Schwaetzer without consultation.
They demanded a meeting with the executive yesterday afternoon, at which Mr
Kinkel said he was willing to serve as foreign minister. The group gave him
63 votes to only 25 for Mrs Schwaetzer.
Mr Kinkel, a lawyer, was head of West Germany's BND intelligence service
from January 1979 until October 1982 when he became a state secretary in the
Ministry of Justice. During his years at the BND, he worked hand-in-hand
with Mr Genscher at the Foreign Ministry.
Married and with three daughters and a son, he studied law at the
universities of Tubingen, Bonn and Cologne.
The political manoeuvring in Bonn last night overshadowed the growing chaos
caused by the strike. Central government and state employers urged the
unions to return to negotiations, but union leaders refused to do so without
an improved offer.
The oTV public sector union, with 900,000 members, is demanding a 9.5 per
cent pay rise. The government has offered 4.8 per cent and rejected an
arbitration award of 5.4 per cent.
The union promised yesterday that refuse disposal workers and hospital
administrators would join the strike today.
Employers hold firm, Page 2
Maastricht loses appeal, Page 2
