FT  03 JAN 92 / BMA will seek doctors' views on fee-charging
ALL BRITAIN'S 36,000 doctors working in general practice are to be
questioned in a survey which could reshape important aspects of the family
doctor service.
The British Medical Association will use the results of the survey - being
conducted for the BMA by the Electoral Reform Society - in negotiations with
the government on future developments in general practice.
A number of controversial and politically sensitive questions will be raised
by the survey. These include asking family doctors whether they endorse the
BMA's policy of opposition to GP fund-holding under the government's health
reforms, and whether there are circumstances in which they would support
patients paying for consultations with their doctors.
Family doctors have until the beginning of next month to complete the
survey, and the results will be reported to a special conference of the
BMA's general medical services committee in June. Publication of the survey
results could therefore coincide with the general election campaign - in
which the future of the National Health Service is expected to play a
prominent part.
However, Dr Ian Bogle, chairman of the BMA's general medical services
committee, said yesterday that the BMA had begun planning the exercise 18
months ago and that the timing close to the election was not deliberate. BMA
leaders would want to negotiate on the results whichever party was in power.
The survey will ask family doctors whether there should be changes in their
present contractual responsibilities to provide patients with medical cover
24 hours a day. If doctors favour changing the current arrangements, the
possibilities of establishing local primary care emergency centres or
stationing GPs in accident and emergency departments of hospitals are
suggested.
Other questions ask whether family doctors would favour ending their
self-employed independent contractor status with the government and moving
to a salaried service.
The hospital service has received most attention since the government
introduced its health reforms in April even though 90 per cent of medical
consultations begin and end with family doctors. An increasing range of
treatment is likely to be carried out in the GP's surgery in future, and the
survey asks doctors whether they would be willing to provide services such
as crisis and addiction counselling, hypnotherapy, physiotherapy, chiropody,
laboratory analysis and x-rays.
The survey might change BMA policy on some issues - most controversially, on
its opposition to fund-holding.
