FT  22 JUN 92 / Political row may erupt over top people's pay
INCREASING the pay of senior civil servants, judges and officers in the
armed forces is set to cause its traditional political embarrassment for the
government next week when the cabinet is expected to consider the latest
report from the Top Salaries Review Body.
The report, said to recommend significant pay rises after a review comparing
the public and private sectors, is likely to be delivered to Downing Street
later this week, though almost certainly too late to be discussed at
Thursday's cabinet meeting.
Although ministers are resigned to a row about the rises for the 2,000 or so
judges, senior civil servants and senior officers covered by the review -
because there is never an optimum time to make such increases  -
sensitivities are particularly acute in the prelude to a tough public
spending round. The government's aim in public sector pay negotiations is an
increase of no more than 4 per cent.
Criticism of large pay increases for the chairmen of privatised utilities
and ministerial urging of pay restraint on the private sector will add to
the government's discomfort. The government's business managers know that
the issue could become a 'lightning conductor' for more general backbench
concerns about the lack of economic growth.
One option to reduce vigorous parliamentary opposition to the pay rises is
to make public the top pay review at the same time as the review body's
separate report on MPs' office costs allowance - an area where MPs tend to
take a more generous view than the government.
The top pay review represents the first wide-ranging study since 1985, which
recommended increases of up to 46 per cent. Even though the government
phased in those rises - as is likely this time - it faced a Commons
rebellion.
The contrast between senior figures in the public and private sectors will
be reinforced with the publication today of a British Institute of
Management survey which found that managers and directors of small companies
gave themselves pay rises of just 4.6 per cent over a 12 month period to
January 1992.
The Labour party has been quick to capitalise on the simmering unrest among
Tory MPs. Mr Tony Blair, the shadow employment secretary, said it was
unacceptable at a time of recession and rising unemployment that 'those at
the top in the public sector are taking pay rises many times the rate of
inflation'.
The sensitivity surrounding the pay rises were signalled earlier this year
when Sir David Nickson, the review body chairman, arranged a delay to avoid
the review being published just before the April 9 election.
