FT  27 APR 92 / Arts: Hamlet - BBC Radio 3/Renaissance Theatre
Hamlet turns a new face to every decade, Peter Hall said. Kenneth Branagh's
Hamlet face we have seen. In this recorded production, which he has
co-produced with Glyn Dearman for the Renaissance Theatre Company in
collaboration with the BBC, his face is immaterial; it is his voice that
counts. He could not give a like performance on stage; the soliloquies, for
example, are private, for his own satisfaction (and of course for ours). He
is an assortment of people - a confident young prince, a tearful mourner of
his dead father, a seriously affectionate suitor of Ophelia, a know-it-all
amateur actor, a deadly fencer. One thing he never is, whatever he may say:
he is not mad.
Simple to make Richard Briers's Polonius think so. He is a credulous old
thing, though his advice to Laertes, wiser than often thought, is wisely
impounded. Derek Jacobi's Claudius, not much older than his stepson (who is
thirty), is too actively intelligent to be taken in by such foolery; his
rejected repentance is particularly good. It is easy to persuade Gertrude,
(Judi Dench, ideal) that if her beloved son behaves other than she is used
to there must be something wrong with him. Ophelia (Sophie Thompson) is
never bright enough to know.
On Hamlet's own side we have a sharp Horatio (Michael Williams), and a
sympathetic Fortinbras from James Simmons. Bernardo and Marcellus,
officer-class sentinels, are only too ready to swear silence when the
Ghost's voice threatens from below, for the Ghost is John Gielgud. 'More of
a voice than a character,' Sir John says, yet he effectively mixes anger and
indignation, even in his few lines in Gertrude's closet.
It is great to hear the text as it might have been composed in Shakespeare's
mind, with no secondary concern for scenery or costume or period. The text
is the complete First Folio with the accepted additions from the good
Quarto, and it plays about three and three-quarter hours, with brisk
delivery and comparatively little time given to sound effects.
Ophelia speaks, not sings, her mad songs; if this is to save time, Patrick
Doyle's long intermezzi might have been truncated instead, comely as they
are. Listening with the text in my hand, I noted a good many minor errors,
unless they were editorial changes - worst, when Laertes (James Wilby),
threatening to charge Hamlet 'Thus diest thou', said 'Thus didest thou',
something quite different.
BBC Radio 3, 26 April. Also published as a Random Century Audiobook, on CD
or cassette.
