FT  20 OCT 92 / Ikea's logic furnishes a market riddle: John Thornhill
describes a curious interest in Habitat
As a rallying cry it is less than impressive. As a statement of intent it
has proved remarkably effective: 'We shall offer a wide range of home
furnishing items of good design and function, at prices so low, that the
majority of people can afford to buy them'.
The words are those of Mr Ingvar Kamprad, the Swedish entrepreneur,
outlining the business philosophy behind Ikea.
Ikea is the privately owned furniture retailer, which, in four decades, has
grown from a single store in Sweden's backwoods to become one of the most
successful international retailers in the world.
At the end of last year, Ikea ran more than 100 outlets in 25 countries,
with annual sales of SKr22.3bn (Pounds 2.2bn).
The company's vast blue and yellow retail sheds selling about 11,000
strangely named furniture products, such as Orgryte sofas and Smedvik dining
tables, are a feature of the international retailing landscape. Yet the
company's remarkable expansion is due largely to organic growth.
Ikea's reported interest in buying the UK and French arms of the struggling
Habitat chain, owned by Storehouse, has therefore inspired considerable
curiosity, and even outright puzzlement, within the furniture retailing
industry.
Mr Richard Hyman, director of Verdict, the retail consultants, says: 'The
possible acquisition has no commercial logic at all. If Ikea has a spare
Pounds 50m to invest, I would have thought they would have done better to
continue expanding what is clearly an outstandingly successful format,
rather than buying a loss-making high street chain which provides very weak
competition.'
Such sentiments are expressed in slightly more muted form even within the
Ikea Group. The furniture company's headquarters in Denmark yesterday
continued to deny all knowledge of the possible acquisition of Habitat. Its
UK business was similarly baffled.
A clue to the conundrum may lie in the fact that Storehouse is conducting
talks with the Ikea Foundation rather than with the Ikea Group itself. The
Ikea Foundation, set up by Mr Kamprad, is the legal owner of the furniture
group and is responsible for other activities, including the disbursement of
awards every three years to improve the quality of life and the environment.
The idiosyncratic Mr Kamprad may therefore be conducting the discussions
through the foundation without telling his colleagues in the furniture
group. He has certainly expressed a personal interest in Habitat before.
Three years ago, when Storehouse came under siege from the corporate raider,
Mr Asher Edelman, Mr Kamprad contacted the company and asked if he could buy
the furniture chain.
Mr Michael Julien, then chief executive of Storehouse, visited Denmark to
discuss the deal with Ikea, but it faded away. So did the threat from Mr
Edelman.
Sir Terence Conran, the former chief executive of Storehouse and the guiding
spirit behind Habitat, said Ikea then believed it could use Habitat to
expand into a different segment of the UK furniture market. 'They saw that
Habitat could be the leading edge of Ikea giving the group an up-market high
street presence,' he said yesterday, emphasising that he had no knowledge of
the current talks.
At the end of March, Habitat was running 40 stores in the UK, after slimming
down the chain in recent years in the face of recession. Habitat also runs
36 more successful stores in France, which contributed profits of Pounds
7.1m last year, and 17 troubled stores in the US, which incurred a loss of
Pounds 7.7m. In total, the Habitat group incurred losses of Pounds 8.8m on
sales of Pounds 201.2m.
Ikea is certainly not the only name in the frame as a potential acquirer and
'issues of substance' are still said to be under discussion. Au Printemps,
the French retail group, has also expressed interest in acquiring the
successful French arm, at least. Several other groups are also believed to
have come forward with proposals.
City analysts suggest, nevertheless, that Ikea is the likely prospective
victor, but they believe that any buyer would be most likely to acquire the
UK and French businesses as a package, leaving Storehouse to dispose of - or
close - the US arm separately.
If Ikea were to complete the acquisition, it would command a strong position
at the upper end of the hugely fragmented UK furniture market, even though
its combined percentage share of the sector would still be in low single
figures.
Furniture retailers have been badly affected by recession, but Ikea has
proved resistant. After establishing a presence in Warrington in 1987, it
has opened stores in Wembley and Birmingham generating sales of Pounds 91.4m
last year. It plans to open stores at a rate of about one per year for the
forseeable future, with Gateshead and Croydon being added to the list this
year.
Ikea seems likely to retain Habitat's distinctive style and name. Mr Kamprad
may provide the listless retailer with the purpose Storehouse has been
singularly unable to supply during the past few years.
Lex, Page 26
 ---------------------------------------------------
                IKEA'S EXPANSION
 ---------------------------------------------------
Year    Outlets     Countries     Turnover SKr (m)
 ---------------------------------------------------
1954      1            1                3
1964      2            2               79
1974     10            5              616
1984     66           17             6770
1991     96           24            22325
 ---------------------------------------------------
