FT  05 NOV 92 / London Stock Exchange: Securicor rises amid BT talk
STRONG GAINS in the two classes of Securicor stock as well as associate
Security Services shares led to a revival of suspicions in the market that
BT could be considering buying out the minority in Cellnet held by
Securicor/Security Services. The Securicor companies hold a 40 per cent
stake in Cellnet, one of the two UK cellular phone networks, with BT holding
the remainder.
There were hints in the market of determined buying interest in Securicor
shares from top quality brokers. The buying was accompanied by stories,
confirmed last night, that BT may be considering selling its stake in McCaw
Cellular Communications, the largest of the US cellular phone companies, to
telecoms group AT&amp;T.
Last night, the three companies confirmed that AT&amp;T was negotiating to take
a 33 per cent stake in McCaw for Dollars 3.8bn as party of a broad alliance
between the two businesses in wireless communications. If the deal goes
through, BT, which bought its 35.8m class 'A' and 'B' stock for Dollars
41.50 a share in 1989, would sell out at Dollars 49.
In spite of considerable scepticism in the market about the stories,
Securicor ordinary shares raced up 18 to 868p, the 'A' shares 19 to 562p and
Security Services 18 to 463p. But they pointed out that turnover of 1m was
well in excess of normal levels of activity in Securicor 'A'. The latter
have risen sharply from around 480p in mid-September. BT 'old' were 3 1/2
off at 376 1/2 p on low turnover of 2.8m.
Sainsbury setback
Solid interim results from J. Sainsbury failed to impress the stock market,
which went into hurried retreat as analysts disagreed on the immediate
outlook. Most agreed that the shares had enjoyed a good run ahead of
yesterday's announcement and that some profit-taking had followed the
results.
However, talk that one agency broker was holding 8m shares was also put
forward by some in the market as a reason for the shares tumbling 18 to
487p. Turnover was a sizeable 6.5m shares.
There was also some dissent from the mostly positive response from analysts
that sales from the British Airways promotion in Sainsbury's shops had been
disappointing. Together with the launch this week of a new price promotion
by Tesco, this has sparked fears of a price war and overhung the sector. In
addition, hectic activity in the options market last week - which saw the
equivalent of 9m Sainsbury shares bought - was also thought to have
undermined the price.
Invergordon active
Buying activity in Invergordon Distillers led to inevitable speculation that
Whyte &amp; Mackay was returning to haunt the company that it mounted an
unsuccessful Pounds 350m bid for a year ago. The deadline forbidding Whyte
to return to the fray passed at the weekend and yesterday saw the first busy
day's trading since then.
However, while acknowledging Whyte's continuing interest - the US-owned
drinks group still holds a 41.3 per cent stake in Invergordon - analysts
countered that the Scottish whisky company has underperformed in recent
months and that the stock looked good value. The shares leapt 15 to 326p in
turnover of nearly 1m.
Carlton slips
A spate of rumours conspired to prompt a fall in Carlton Communications.
However, one securities house argued that the talk was spurious and
yesterday's slide of 16 to 700p presented a buying opportunity.
Initially there was talk that the new US president's threat to increase
taxes on overseas companies would hit Carlton, which has a big US exposure.
There were also rumbles of critical articles in the specialist press. Then,
Lehman Brothers told clients that even if a tax charge was levied it would
have a minimal effect on Carlton's profits. No one discovered any foundation
to the talk of bearish press stories.
Wellcome recovered 25 to 1018p following recent gains by the two other big
UK pharmaceutical companies with substantial US exposure, Glaxo and
SmithKline Beecham.
The shares responded to a short squeeze and were helped by talk that the
company's anti-epilepsy drug was about to be discussed by the US Food and
Drug Administration. However, analysts said that an FDA meeting had been
anticipated for some time and the shares were really just catching up.
SmithKline held steady at 540p in the 'A's but Glaxo slipped 13 to 822p.
Reuters Holdings was a strong performer as Lehman handled sizeable buying
orders in the US and the UK. The shares were squeezed up 41 before settling
with the market to close 31 up at 1221p. In its latest media review Hoare
Govett said the stock had 10 per cent underperformed over the past three
weeks and looked attractive.
BAT Industries rose 8 to 914p on improved third quarter profits.
Some persistent selling pressure from one of the integrated securities
houses was behind the steep decline in Lloyds Abbey Life which retreated 16
to 367p, although dealers pointed out that turnover remained below 1m
shares.
The Clinton victory was given a distinct thumbs down by the oil sector. The
majors fell heavily, with BP down 3.9 per cent and Shell down 2.4 per cent,
and many of the second line issues down over 3 per cent.
Mr John Toalster at Strauss Turnbull, the stockbroker, said Clinton's win:
'will not be celebrated in oil industry boardrooms; there appears to be a
strong antipathy between the industry and the new president.' The analyst
said there were concerns in the US of a possible increase in federal taxes
on gasoline and the possible imposition of an import tariff on crude oil.
Strauss said sentiment amongst US investors could become negative and
described BP as 'massively overvalued with downside to around 170p.' BP
stock closed 9 off at 223p on 6.1m traded after the group confirmed
long-running market stories by announcing the sale of its 49 per cent stake
in the Olympic Dam copper/uranium/gold/silver project in south Australia for
Dollars 456m. Shell, a weak hold according to Strauss and still weighed down
by the negative stance adopted recently by County NatWest, lost 13 to 527p
on 5.3m traded.
The Lasmo presentation to analysts failed to sustain the share price which
dipped 7 to 176p on heavy turnover of 4.2m.
The profits warning from Burnfield stunned the market which reacted by
chopping the share price from an overnight 165p to 85p before a close of
87p, a net decline of 78.
Shares in Inchcape fell 16 to 491p, with sentiment hit by reports of profit
downgradings, after a series of analysts' visits to the company. English
China Clays gave up 7 to 423p after agency broker James Capel downgraded its
current year profit estimates because of continued weakness in the European
paper making industry.
Shares in Tomkins, currently locked in a bid battle with Hanson for food
manufacturer RHM, eased a penny to 225p. The company has been doing the
rounds of City institutions in an attempt to win support for the agreed
offer and there was talk in some quarters that a number of institutions were
as a result, less hostile to the bid. Shares in Hanson closed 2 3/4 ahead at
229p and RHM softened a half-penny to 262p.
Bid speculation surrounding APV gained further strength yesterday sending
the shares climbing 9 to 98p, and turnover soaring to 5.8m. The attention
once again centred on Siebe, which unsuccessfuly bid for APV in 1986, as the
likely predator. Shares in Siebe edged a penny forward to 350p.
International drinks groups were weak in the face of worries over GATT and
US taxation changes. Grand Metropolitan shed 3 to 415p and Guinness 7 to
531p. However, Allied Lyons benefited from news that it was to sell one of
its French vineyards, with a price tag in excess of Pounds 100m.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1992
NEW HIGHS (83).
BRITISH FUNDS (3) Fd. 6pc '93, Tr. 8 1/4 pc '94, Tr. 2pc IL '94, OTHER FIXED
INTEREST (1) Leeds 13 1/2 pc '06, AMERICANS (2) Ingersoll-Rand, Time Warner,
BANKS (3) HSBC, HSBC (75p Shs), Lloyds, BUSINESS SERVS (1) Salvesen,
ELECTRONICS (1) Electrocomps, FOOD MANUF (4) BSN, Nestle (Br), Do (Reg),
Unilever, FOOD RETAILING (2) Dairy Farm, Iceland, HOTELS &amp; LEIS (1)
Millwall, INSCE COMPOSITE (2) AEGON, Aon, INSCE LIFE (2) Britannic, Lincoln
Natl., INV TRUSTS (35) Abtrust New Dawn, Do Wts., Do B Wts., Abtrust New
Thai Wts., Brit. Assets, Do 6pc Cv. '95, ECU, EFM Dragon, EFM Java, First
Philippine Wts., Flmg. Far East, Foreign &amp; Colonial, Gartmore Emrg. Pacific,
Govett Oriental, Independent, Jupiter Euro., Law Debenture, Malacca Fund,
Murray Intl., New Frontiers 6 1/2 pc Ln. '10, New Zealand Inv., Overseas
Inv., Pacific Assets, Do Wts., RIT Capital, Do 2 1/2 pc Cv. '00, SHIRESCOT,
Scot. Inv., Second Alliance, Siam Fund, Sth. East Asian Wts., TR Far East
Inc., Templeton Emrg. Mkts., Do 1pc Ln. '01, Thai Euro Fund., MEDIA (5) News
Corp., News Intl., Sterling Publs., TVS Ent., Do 7.4pc Pf. '08, MTL &amp; MTL
FORMING (1) Morris Ashby, MISC (1) BAT Inds., OIL &amp; GAS (1) Calor, OTHER
FINCL (5) Burlington, Gerrard &amp; Natl., Lon. Scottish, Perpetual, Swire
Pacific, OTHER INDLS (2) Charter Cons., Staveley, PACKG, PAPER &amp; PRINTG (4)
Bemrose, Carnaud Metalbox, Enso-Gutzeit, Macfarlane, STORES (3) Fine Art
Devs., GUS A, Tie Rack, TELE NETWORKS (2) Cable &amp; Wireless, Securicor,
TRANSPORT (1) Forth Ports, WATER (1) Severn Trent.
NEW LOWS (43).
BUSINESS SERVS (2) Scott Pickford, Welpac, CHEMS (1) Hartons, CONTG &amp;
CONSTRCN (3) Brandon Hire, EBC, Jarvis, ELECTRICALS (3) Beales Hunter,
Burnfield, Kembrey, ELECTRONICS (1) Process Systems, ENG GEN (4) Dobson
Park, Fenner, Richardson Westgarth, Torday &amp; Carlisle, FOOD MANUF (2)
Borthwicks, Daniels (S), INV TRUSTS (6) Archimedes Inc., Contra-Cyclical
Inc., Exmoor Dual Inc., Do Zero Pf., Gartmore Scot. Inc., Kleinwort Dev.
Fd., MEDIA (1) Fitch, MTL &amp; MTL FORMING (2) Apollo Metals, Thyssen, MISC (3)
Assoc. Brit. Consultants, Excalibur, Flogas, MOTORS (1) Evans Halshaw, OIL &amp;
GAS (2) Britton, North Sea Assets, OTHER FINCL (3) Baltic, Do 7pc Pf.,
Lightship, OTHER INDLS (1) Kelsey, PROP (1) Derwent Valley, STORES (2)
Alexon, Fired Earth Tiles, TEXTS (2) Brit. Mohair, Tomkinsons, MINES (3)
Driefontein, Hartebeest, Waverley.
