FT  10 DEC 92 / International Company News: Deutsche Bank brushes off
disappointment - Chief executive remains confident despite a 5% decline in
profits
IT LOOKS, at first sight, as though the mighty Deutsche Bank has run out of
steam.
On Tuesday, Germany's biggest bank reported operating profits down by 5 per
cent, worse than expected. Deutsche's share price fell DM13.9 to DM653.1,
and continued to fall yesterday, closing at DM648.00.
The drop in operating profits - to DM4.94bn (Dollars 3.1bn) from DM5.20bn -
was hardly dramatic compared with the recession-blighted results of
Germany's biggest industrial companies.
But the profits fall was in sharp contrast with the sparkling figures
produced by Deutsche's competitors in recent days.
For example, Dresdner Bank, Germany's second-biggest bank, reported total
profits up nearly 17 per cent to DM2.37bn, while Commerzbank, the
third-biggest, achieved a 13.3 per cent increase to DM1.67bn.
Smaller banks reported even higher increases, suggesting that the German
banking sector has remained a haven of prosperity amid Germany's deepening
economic gloom.
The reason for this is that loan demand has held up despite high interest
rates and the recession.
This partly explains money supply growth has this year far exceeded the 3.5
to 5.5 per cent target range, and is indirectly one of the reasons why
German interest rates are at such high levels.
Moroever, the economic slowdown has not yet led to a significant increase in
bad debts - although chief executives of all the big banks have warned of a
sharp increase in the risk environment.
As Mr Wolfgang Strutz, senior partner of BHF-Bank put it a fortnight ago as
his bank started the reporting season with a 17 per cent profits increase,
the mounting risks hang like a 'Damocles' sword' over the whole sector.
Nevertheless, the question remains - why is Deutsche Bank doing far worse
than its competitors? Some of the answers include: Deutsche's size: in terms
of retained profits, Deutsche Bank is bigger than its next three competitors
put together, as Mr Hilmar Kopper, the bank's chief executive, pointed out
on Tuesday.
As the bank said when the slowdown first became apparent at the beginning of
August, when it reported a 3.2 per cent drop in half-year profits, its size
means that it feels the effects of the economic slowdown earlier than its
rivals.
The profits decline is from an extremely high base. Last year, total
operating profits climbed by 16.5 per cent to a record DM5.97bn.
Interest margins shrunk by 10 basis points at the ten-months stage but, at
2.31 per cent, they are still ahead of those of other banks.
A shift in the bank's credit mix towards lower risk, lower margin interbank
business. This reflects the bank's conservative approach to commercial
lending, a caution which is likely to put the bank ahead of its competitors
as the economic environment worsens.
Currency movements - particularly the depreciation of sterling against the
D-Mark - shaved interest income. This was up 4.2 per cent to DM9.1bn over
the 10 months, but would have been DM150m higher if exchange rates had
remained stable over the year.
Disappointing results from own-account trading. Deutsche Bank earned DM850m
from its own market activities - more than other German banks, but some
DM100m less than in the same period last year.
Other banks managed to increase their own account profits, and analysts were
disappointed that Deutsche failed to extract maximum profits from the bund
market - which performed vigorously in the third quarter of the year - and
from the currency market turbulence.
These factors, however, do not completely explain why Deutsche's net
interest income climbed much more slowly than that of other German banks:
Deutsche's increase in net interest was 4.2 per cent, while at Dresdner it
rose by 10.6 per cent; by 10.3 per cent at Commerzbank; and by 17.3 per cent
at Bayerische Hypotheken und Wechsel-Bank.
Analysts suggest that Deutsche Bank is suffering from a 'normalisation' of
business conditions in eastern Germany. Both individuals and businesses
there now know enough about capitalism not to leave their cash in current
accounts, where they receive no interest. Analysts suggest that deposits
have been moved to interest-bearing accounts at the same time that lending
risks have climbed, thereby squeezing the interest margins on business in
eastern Germany.
How true this is cannot be evaluated from the published figures, and Mr
Kopper went to great lengths on Tuesday to explain that the bank had not
profiteered from its DM3bn investment in the east. Credits in the new
federal states total DM18bn, where the risks are often at 'the limits of
what is justifiable,' Mr Kopper said.
The chief executive underscored his confidence in the future by saying that
the bank's dividend for the current year would be held at DM15 a share.
He brushed aside comparisons with other banks, saying that Deutsche would
show its true colours in its full-year results, which are struck after
provisions for bad debts, and predicted that post-tax profits would be at
least as high as they were last year.
Mr Kopper also boasted that Deutsche - unlike some other large German banks
 -easily met tough new capital adequacy requirements which take effect at
the beginning of next year.
For all its problems with profits growth, Deutsche remains Germany's biggest
and most powerful bank. This will prove invaluable as the economy
deteriorates further.
