FT  21 JAN 92 / Salvoes fired to stop dock work running dry: Why failure to
win a frigate contract could mean death for a shipyard
expected by early next month - is likely to have a decisive effect on the
shape of Britain's warship building industry.
Whatever is decided will be extremely bad news for at least one of the four
designated warship yards, each of which is fighting for its existence in a
shrinking market.
Previous contracts have been fiercely competed for, but this is the first
since the government announced plans for scaling down the Royal Navy's
fleet.
The order for up to three frigates, worth about Pounds 400m in total, is
being contested by all four of the warship yards that have survived since
privatisation in 1985-86. They are VSEL at Barrow-in-Furness in Cumbria,
Yarrow Shipbuilders on Clydeside, Swan Hunter on the Tyne and Vosper
Thornycroft at Southampton.
VSEL's Merseyside subsidiary Cammell Laird, which is destined either to
close or be sold for other uses, has already in effect dropped out of the
race.
Overcapacity has reached a point where yards are fighting to squeeze each
other out. Mr Noel Davies, chief executive of VSEL, expects total employment
in UK warship building to fall from a 1990 figure of about 21,000 to about
8,000 by the middle of the decade.
Sir Robert Easton, chairman of Yarrow, which belongs to General Electric
Company (GEC), believes there are still too many shipyards. 'They won't all
survive,' he says. Mr Davies at VSEL goes further: 'We say only two will
survive.' And even that figure is based more on the MoD's keenness to avoid
a monopoly than on the volume of prospective orders for the Royal Navy.
The 10 orders placed so far for Type 23 anti-submarine frigates have been
split between Yarrow and Swan Hunter. Yarrow was appointed design authority
and won the first order when it was still part of state-owned British
Shipbuilders. It is still reeling from the loss of the last order for three
frigates, awarded to Swan Hunter just over two years ago.
Tenders for up to three more were invited last summer. The MoD, convinced of
the savings to be made by ordering in single-yard batches, is expected to
place a full three-ship contract. Neither of the current Type 23 builders
sees any sense in splitting the order. The prime contenders this time are
considered by insiders at the MoD to be Yarrow and VSEL, the losers in the
last tender.
Yarrow, which cut its workforce by 645 just before Christmas and now employs
2,750 people, is counting heavily on winning the order. It has delivered
three Type 23s, with three more due by the middle of next year. There its
order book ends. It is hoping for a Pounds 180m deal to build two corvettes
for Malaysia, but negotiations have proved difficult.
VSEL is also warning that without a Type 23 order it would 'in the long run
become less viable'. Its current business is submarines - a safe slot, as no
other yard could afford the investment needed to build nuclear-powered
submarines. But it is not enough for VSEL. The order for the fourth and last
Trident ballistic-missile submarine is expected by about June, but a Labour
election victory would call that into question. Even if it goes ahead, steel
work on the Trident programme will run out by 1996. There would then be a
gap before the start of work on a new version of the Trafalgar attack
submarine.
VSEL needs a frigate order not just to fill that gap but, says Mr Davies,
for 'long-term and fundamental' reasons. In order to make 'reasonable use'
of its assets it cannot afford to allow its workforce, already down from
12,500 to about 9,000, to fall below about 5,000. It reckons that the navy's
submarine programme after Trident will provide work for only about 2,200.
A share of the frigate programme would keep employment at 4,000 to 5,000 and
enable VSEL to provide value for money. The Trident programme, Mr Davies
says, will be 'several tens of millions' cheaper to the government if VSEL
gets back to making surface ships as well. It has not built any at Barrow
for a decade, and just one in that time at Cammell Laird in Birkenhead. That
yard was given an order for a Type 22 frigate in 1985 after workers had
defied pickets to continue working.
Vosper Thornycroft, employing 1,900, holds a niche making boats of
glass-reinforced plastic (GRP), including the navy's latest anti-mine
vessels. But orders for more minehunters have been suspended and the other
three warship yards all covet Vosper's preserve. Yarrow would use its own
GRP facility and the other two would buy GRP hulls from France.
Vosper hopes shortly to conclude a Pounds 150m contract for two corvettes
for Oman, bringing it back into the business of steel ships for the first
time since it built the destroyer Gloucester, launched in 1982.
'We would would need some investment to be 1992 state-of-the-art,' admits Mr
Martin Jay, Vosper's chief executive. Whether Vosper would have capacity for
both the Omani order and a complete batch of frigates is questionable.
Swan Hunter on Tyneside is dismissive of its rivals' 'whingeing', rejecting
'the myopic view that the whole future of the UK shipbuilding industry is
down to one order'.
The last of the Type 23s it is building is due for delivery by the end of
1994, but it sees 'exciting prospects' in the UK and overseas in both naval
and merchant ships.
The yard, employing about 3,800 including 1,000 on short-term contracts, is
also working on an auxiliary tanker, Fort George. If it loses the frigate
contest, it would bid for the navy's planned new helicopter-carrying
'aviation support ship', tenders for which are due to be invited soon. It
would also compete for two amphibious assault ships planned to replace the
ageing Fearless and Intrepid. These would all be larger vessels. VSEL, by
contrast, could not accommodate ships of this size in its dock hall.
Although now predominantly a warship yard, Swan Hunter says it will not
necessarily remain one. It claims to have the UK's only design team with the
experience and expertise to build both warships and merchant vessels, and
places high hopes on plans for a new category of container ship.
'No shipbuilding company can any longer rely on the MoD for the whole of its
order book,' says Mr Roger Vaughan, joint chief executive. He argues that
one batch of frigates is not enough to secure anybody's long-term future.
Politically, the frigate decision presents a balance of conflicting
considerations: the interests of Conservative MPs in Barrow and Southampton;
Tory difficulties in Scotland, where Yarrow's yard sits in Labour territory
on the north bank of the Clyde; and the fate of the Conservative-held
marginal seat at Tynemouth, next door to the bedrock Labour constituency of
Wallsend where Swan Hunter is located.
'The government needs to take a view of the capabilities it wants to see
retained in the UK,' says Mr Davies at VSEL. 'This is the first major
decision it has to make.'
