FT  15 FEB 92 / UK Company News: M&amp;G sets up largest investment trust issue
M&amp;G, the fund management group, is launching what is likely to be the
largest investment trust new issue ever.
Up to 995m package units in the Recovery investment trust are on offer at
100p each - although M&amp;G does not expect to raise anything like as much as
Pounds 1bn.
The offer has been set at a level which ensures that it will be enough to
meet applications.
The trust will follow the same investment philosophy as M&amp;G's Recovery unit
trust, which has a very good long term record, but has failed to beat the
returns available from a building society over the past five years.
The recovery philosophy does badly in recessions but M&amp;G says it provides
opportunities to buy shares cheaply which will subsequently perform well
when the economy grows once more.
Like many other recent investment trust issues, the trust is linked to a
Personal Equity Plan (PEP) and is timed so that applicants can place a full
Pounds 6,000 of shares into PEPs for each of the 1991-92 and 1992-93 tax
years. The incentive to use next year's PEP allowance may have been reduced,
however, by the Labour party's statement this week that it will not abolish
PEPs.
M&amp;G has mounted an intense marketing campaign for the new trust, including
television adverts, after the flotation of the Income Investment Trust last
year raised Pounds 246m.
The trust has a split capital structure, with three classes of shares. Zero
dividend preference shares will pay no income but will have first claim on
the trust's assets when it is wound up in 2002.
The planned redemption value of the zeroes will be 150p, but that will
require a 5.01 per cent per annum growth in the assets of the trust.
Income shares will be entitled to all the income of the trust but will have
a guaranteed repayment value of 0.1p per share. They will also be entitled
to the revenue reserves (if any) when the trust is wound up. The forecast
gross dividend is 5p per share.
The capital shares will be entitled to the assets of the trust after the
zeroes and the income shares have been repaid. The initial net asset value
per capital share will be 50.9p.
There will also be a geared ordinary unit, comprising one income and one
capital unit.
The individual classes of shares and the geared unit can only be purchased
through a tender offer via financial intermediaries.
Through an offer for subscription, individuals can buy a packaged unit of
all three shares at 100p.
The tender offer closes on March 20 and the offer for subscription closes on
March 27. Dealings are expected to start on April 3.
For comment, see Serious Money, Weekend page II
