FT  06 MAR 92 / International Company News: FDIC rejects Drexel proposals
THE Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the agency which oversees the US
thrift industry and which has filed multi-billion civil suits against Mr
Michael Milken, former head of the junk bond department at Drexel Burnham
Lambert, yesterday rejected a 'global settlement proposal'.
Under this, the mass of civil litigation arising from the collapse of the
once high-flying US investment bank would have been settled in one swoop. To
achieve the settlement, Mr Milken had offered to contribute another Dollars
500m to a settlement pool, while 200 of his former colleagues at Drexel
would provide Dollars 300m in Drexel employee partnership interests. The
pool to be split between the numerous claims would then amount to Dollars
1.3bn.
The FDIC was one of the largest and most powerful claimants, and its
rejection, if sustained, could throw the settlement plan into question. In a
letter, the FDIC said that it had voted to reject the proposal 'because it
did not provide for adequate or sufficient information upon which the board
could base an informed judgment'. The FDIC said it did not have enough
information about the relative contributions of the various settling
individuals, and their financial status. There have been suggestions that
the FDIC was worried that, if Mr Milken remains a rich man after the
settlement, it would been seen to have struck a poor bargain.
The Florida Department of Insurance weighed in yesterday with a lawsuit
against Mr Milken. The insurance regulators are seeking more than Dollars
225m on behalf of policyholders at Guarantee Security Life Insurance
Company, a small life company with about 57,000 policyholders.
It was seized by the regulators in August, 1991, and declared insolvent. The
Florida authorities have sued Merrill Lynch, Coopers &amp; Lybrand, and other
GSLI advisers with malpractice and aiding management in breach of fiduciary
duty.
In the suit against Mr Milken and his brother the insurance department
alleges that the duo violated federal securities law and Florida law by
manipulating the market in junk securities; 'misrepresenting and concealing
their actions to encourage participation by investors such as Guarantee in a
rigged market'; and aiding and abetting others in breaching their fiduciary
duty.
Meanwhile, the formal hearings which could approve a plan of reorganisation
for Drexel Burnham Lambert, which has been in bankruptcy since early 1990,
began in the US courts yesterday.
