FT  21 NOV 92 / Travel: Storms and solitude - Snapshot / Auvergne
THE WAR memorial was festooned with fairy lights, a halo of them placed
around the stone cock at the top. The fir trees surrounding the memorial
were plastered with tissue decorations. St Mamet-la-Salvetat, in the far
south-west corner of Cantal, in the heartland of rural France, was en fete.
In the bar opposite the memorial Madame was not happy. Someone had just been
sick in the toilets. In a big blue apron, she strode to the scene of the
crime. At least two of the customers looked culpable. In the street outside
there was much hand-shaking as neighbours greeted each other on their Sunday
promenade, some of them calling at the boulangerie to pick up a treat.
On this particular afternoon there were no fire engines in the village's
centre de secours (emergency services building) - just tractors and floats
decorated for the fete. On the outskirts of the village the sound of guns
was alerting everyone to the start of the ball-trap. Quite why these
shooting contests are held after a typically vinous lunch is a mystery.
As we drove out of the village, towards the lake at St Etienne-Cantales, the
plastic bunting hung across the road started to clack in the wind and spots
of rain began to fall. A spectacular thunderstorm with fork lightning and
monsoon-like rain was about to mar the day's activities - though fortunately
a French village fete usually lasts about four days.
As the storm rumbled in the distance, we made our way to the lake. Deserted
and surrounded by trees, it was stunningly beautiful. Normally, if you seek
Sunday afternoon tranquility, the lake is not a place to visit because
hundreds of holidaymakers crowd its little beaches and the area buzzes with
water sports enthusiasts. But on this day it was silent and grey.
The Auvergne has the capacity to absorb large numbers of tourists in its
huge empty spaces and you can generally find complete peace. It is ideal
countryside for those who enjoy fishing, picnicking by quiet streams and
exploring the wooded and hilly countryside on foot.
Heathers and broom tumble over rocky outcrops. In summer harebells, rosebay
willowherb, foxgloves and ferns proliferate in a landscape of water meadows
and stone-roofed houses. Best of all is the smell of hay and wild garlic -
and the absence of sunflowers.
If you want a bit of market day bustle, or are a serious food shopper, then
you can visit a country market almost every day. Aurillac, the provincial
capital, has markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays. Maurs, described as the
Nice of the Cantal - goodness knows why, since it is clearly a small country
town - has one on Thursdays.
A good way to sample any rural area is to base yourself in a small village -
and walk. It may even help you sympathise with the EC agricultural policy.
St Mamet is not much of a place, but it has two butchers, two general
stores, two bakers, a post office and a chemist and a doctor.
Keen walkers will appreciate the local cuisine - fat sausages called Jesus,
substantial pork dishes, stuffed cabbage, quail and freshly-caught river
fish. Almost every charcutier will have large jars of tripe on the counter.
If you cannot face tripe, choose Auvergne cheeses and country breads instead
 -perfect picnic food.
Jill James travelled with VFB Holidays of Normandy House, High Street,
Cheltenham, Glos. Tel: 0242-526338, fax: 0242-570340.
