FT  08 FEB 92 / Congress likely to stop Dollars 12bn injection into IMF
THE BUSH administration has run into serious difficulties in its attempt to
persuade the US Congress to support a Dollars 60bn recapitalisation plan for
the International Monetary Fund this year.
The US share of the quota increase would be Dollars 12bn, the single largest
contribution since Washington is the largest IMF shareholder, with about 19
per cent of the voting shares.
Stiff congressional opposition to foreign aid in the 1992 election year
means the IMF may have to wait until next year for an increase, despite
growing demands on the world financial organisation, particularly from the
former Soviet Union.
Sen Patrick Leahy, the chairman of the Senate foreign appropriations
sub-committee responsible for foreign aid, said there was 'no support' in
the House or Senate for a quota increase in 1992.
His judgment was confirmed by a senior congressional staff member of the
House appropriations committee who said the Bush administration had not
pushed hard for IMF recapitalisation. 'The President had a golden
opportunity to mention the IMF in his State of the Union address (last
month) - but he dropped the ball.'
The IMF argues it must receive a quota increase this year or face the
prospect of its liquidity ratios falling below historical levels. This would
come at a time when it is seeking to play a greater role in helping the
former Soviet republics led by Russia make the transition from a centrally
planned economy.
This year, the US shifted position in favour of early IMF membership for
Russia and other reformist republics. Officials justified the move by saying
they wanted a neutral body to shoulder the burden of direct financial aid to
the former Soviet Union rather than the US, which has a Dollars 400bn budget
deficit.
In congressional testimony this week, Mr James Baker, Secretary of State,
said the IMF, rather than western countries, would provide funds for
currency stabilisation in the republics.
The US agreed to support a quota increase for the IMF in mid-1990. However
Congress failed to act, and the issue subsequently became embroiled with a
controversy over Dollars 10bn of US government-sponsored housing loan
guarantees to Israel.
President Bush urged Congress to support a 120-day delay in approval of the
guarantees, halting consideration of the IMF quota. The US and Israel remain
deadlocked on the loan guarantee conditions.
Congressional officials said yesterday that foreign aid bills in the House
and Senate would likely be ready by the end of March. But it was unlikely
that the bills would mention a quota increase, though members could attach
an amendment to that effect.
In the past, however, House and Senate members have found it difficult to
vote for the IMF and World Bank quota increase - for fear of being attacked
by their opponents in an election campaign. 'It needs presidential
leadership,' said one official yesterday, 'it needs Bush to take some of the
political heat.'
