FT  02 APR 92 / Technology: Seizing virtual reality
Few subjects in the computing world have generated more hyperbole than
virtual reality.
Most of the excitement has revolved around so-called immersive VR in which
the human subject interacts with a computer-generated imaginary world via a
special headset with an internal display screen and a 'dataglove'.
In this form VR is rather like an exotic arcade game played on a
personalised simulator which 'tricks' the brain into thinking it is in the
'virtual world'.
But immersive VR has serious drawbacks, not least the fact that using the
equipment for more than a very short time generates a type of nausea dubbed
'simulator sickness'.
Of more immediate practical interest is the appearance of desktop VR systems
which will run on ordinary PCs equipped with standard high-resolution
screens. These systems have many potential applications in design work,
medicine, remote handling, and training - as well as for entertainment.
One indication that VR is moving out of the laboratory and into the world of
real applications is that public conferences and exhibitions are beginning
to be held on the subject. The latest, organised by Meckler, a conference
and exhibition organiser on information technology, began in London
yesterday.
The two-day meeting, designed to examine the impact and applications of VR,
is covering a wide range of topics including the use of VR in mental
therapy, in the treatment of phobias for example. This subject is being
explored by Peter Ward, director of the information modelling programme at
Leeds University's School of Medicine.
Other speakers include Myron Krueger, one of VR's founding fathers, and
Robert Stone of the UK National Advanced Robotics Research Centre.
Among the exhibitors at the conference is a UK company called Dimension
which offers a desktop VR system for Pounds 12,057.
The Berkshire-based company supplied one to West Denton School in Newcastle
where the children are experimenting with it as part of a project funded by
the Department of Education.
