FT  13 JUL 92 / Sheikh 'wanted BCCI control': How the bank was helped
SHEIKH Khalid Bin Mahfouz, whose family controls the National Commercial
Bank (NCB) of Saudi Arabia, planned to gain control of the Bank of Credit
and Commerce International during the mid-1980s, according to court
documents filed in the US by the Federal Reserve Board.
The documents, filed in a series of actions that have led to the freezing of
the sheikh's US assets and a Dollars 170m (Pounds 89m) fine, show the extent
to which, according to the Fed, Sheikh Khalid helped to prop up the ailing
BCCI when it was facing a liquidity crisis. They also show how the sheikh's
apparent co-operation enabled BCCI to dilute some of its worst debts using
depositors' money, thereby appeasing its auditors.
Negotiations on the takeover plan were held with Mr Agha Hasan Abedi, BCCI's
founder, in the spring of 1986, according to the documents. When the talks
reached an impasse, Sheikh Khalid was persuaded to settle for the
acquisition of 30 per cent interests in both BCCI and in CCAH, the holding
company of First American Bankshares. This would give him holdings in BCCI
roughly equal to those of the ruling family of Abu Dhabi, the largest
shareholder.
Sheikh Khalid struck a deal that would give him the shareholdings for
something over Dollars 1bn. According to the documents, 'Mahfouz regarded
his purchase of both CCAH and BCCI shares as a single transaction.' The
holdings were acquired through a series of deals and arrangements designed
to help BCCI overcome its financial problems. The deals were arranged
because the bank was not ready to issue new shares or capital notes and
Sheikh Khalid was unwilling to inject new capital without them.
In the first of these arrangements, he agreed to borrow Dollars 270m from
BCCI's Bahrain branch, secured only by the as-yet-unissued shares and notes.
Against the loan he deposited the same amount in BCCI, thereby helping to
improve the bank's liquidity. Mr Haroon Rashid Kahlon, one of his
assistants, working with a firm of lawyers, drew up the procurement deed for
the shares, to be held by five Bermuda Khalid. In the deed the shareholdings
were to be sold over three years.
The first tranche of CCAH shares acquired by Sheikh Khalid was bought for
Dollars 135m in July 1986 from Sheikh Hamad bin Mohammed al-Sharqi, the
ruler of Fujeirah, one of the United Arab Emirates. The ruler had given Mr
Abedi and Mr Swaleh Naqvi, BCCI's chief executive officer, power of attorney
over his CCAH shares held in a company called Mashriq.
Sheikh Khalid had transferred a further deposit of Dollars 485m to his own
account at BCCI, adding to the earlier Dollars 270m. Both payments were
recorded on the books of NCB as an NCB deposit at BCCI in London. When the
procurement deed was executed, Mr Khalon directed four separate
disbursements: Dollars 300m for BCCI Holdings capital notes; Dollars 183m to
repay the loan from BCCI Bahrain; Dollars 135m to the account of Wabel
Pharaon at BCCI, the brother of Ghaith Pharaon, a Saudi businessman (paid as
consideration for Pharaon-held shares in BCCI); and Dollars 135m for the
CCAH shares.
The following September NCB paid Dollars 256m for a further tranche of CCAH
shares, giving him a 28.7 stake in the holding company. The same month NCB
transferred Dollars 160m to BCCI to buy 4m shares in BCCI Holdings. The CCAH
transaction later appeared on NCB's books as two loans, one to Mashriq and
one to Faisal Saud Al-Fulaij, a Kuwaiti businessman. The Fed contends these
were sham loans used to shield Sheikh Khalid's CCAH holding from US
regulators.
By April 1987 Sheikh Khalid was told by NCB's external auditors that the
bank could no longer account for the Dollars 755m purchase of BCCI and CCAH
securities merely as a deposit with BCCI and must show it as a share
purchase. In response Sheikh Khalid directed that the amount should be
re-characterised, partly as a loan to his wife and children and partly as an
investment by NCB in BCCI capital notes.
Later the same month Sheikh Khalid told Mr Abedi he wanted to divest his
holdings in BCCI and CCAH, for which he had negotiated a buy-back agreement.
The BCCI shares were all sold to ICIC Overseas, the Cayman-based BCCI
affiliate. The Fed says that while he insisted in disposing of his holding,
he agreed to keep his decision a secret and to remain as a director of BCCI
until July 1989.
By the time the Bank of England moved to close down BCCI in July 1991,
Sheikh Khalid was no longer a BCCI shareholder but NCB was still holding
Dollars 330m of virtually worthless capital notes from BCCI. While the NCB
itself may have been a loser as a result of the deals, the Fed contends
Sheikh Khalid made a personal financial gain from the whole episode of
Dollars 120m. The documents also outline other occasions where Sheikh Khalid
used NCB funds to get BCCI out of trouble when BCCI faced concerns from
auditors.
Sheikh Khalid, who resigned last week as chief operating officer of NCB to
fight the charges, has called them 'unwarranted and ill-advised'. In a
statement last week he said that 'at all times I acted on advice and with
the assistance of respected legal counsel to ensure that I complied with US
laws and regulations in regard to my investments in BCCI and First
American'.
The sheikh said he had voluntarily met all officials he was asked to, had
been 'forthright' in answering their questions and supplied them with
'thousands of pages' of documents. 'The ill-founded allegations made against
me are based on forged documents and the actions of others. Further, they
are based on unreliable, and possibly even compromised, witnesses.' The bank
itself also called the charges 'devoid of any substance' and denied NCB at
any time owned or bought any shares in CCAH.
