FT  02 OCT 92 / Survey of Software at Work - Autumn 1992 (39): A way through
the sales maz - Consultancy services supplier; User view
MANAGING long sales cycles is a difficult enough task. When many staff from
both buyer and seller are involved, it is almost impossible without a
suitable computer system, writes David Tebbutt.
Intera Information Technology uses Market-Base to help it sell its
consultancy services, exploration studies and related products to oil
companies, governments and banks involved in funding oil exploration
activities.
Staff in oil companies, banks and governments tend to belong to different
sectors, yet each might be involved in a different aspect of the same sale.
Team leaders, too, might be responsible for multiple contracts and multiple
individuals could have responsibilities within multiple projects.
A system was needed that could accurately reflect this diversity. The
company's existing system, Telemagic, was good but it did not properly meet
the need for a hierarchical, multiple contact, lead management system.
Kensington Marketing Systems, the publisher of Market-Base, is a small
London-based company which proved itself willing to listen and respond to
Intera's needs. The two companies worked closely together to perfect the
system.
The Intera database has been built over the years from contacts in past
projects, from attendance at shows and other promotions. It currently stands
at 1,100 people from 468 companies, all over the world. Mailings are
sometimes sent to multiple contacts within an organisation.
At other times the mailshots would be sent to specialists in certain fields
within the industry.
The addresses are pass ed to Microsoft's Word for Windows for creation of
the word-processed letters. Intera's Malachy Mulhall says of Market-Base:
'It's easy to use and easy to remember. You can immediately see its logic
and it finds information quickly.'
He advises companies to be very clear about their requirements before
looking for a system - 'be aware that a lot of sales people will try and
hoodwink you. If what you want is not on offer, keep looking.'
The cost of Intera's notebook version, plus a four-user version of
Market-Base, was Pounds 4,800, a price which included training and advice.
