FT  16 MAR 92 / Election 92: Tuning in to TV's coverage
LABOUR'S alternative Budget today will be followed this evening by a
televised confrontation on BBC's Panorama between Mr Norman Lamont, the
chancellor, Mr John Smith, the shadow chancellor, Mr Alan Beith, the Liberal
Democrats' economic spokesman.
The three main party leaders will appear separately on subsequent Panorama
programmes up to the election, starting with Mr Paddy Ashdown for the
Liberal Democrats, Mr Neil Kinnock for Labour and finally the prime
minister. The party leaders will also be interviewed separately by Sir Robin
Day on Sky News, but with Mr Kinnock, rather than Mr John Major, the last to
appear.
BBC1's flagship Nine O'Clock News has been extended by 15 minutes and will
feature foreign affairs editor John Simpson assigned to cover Mr Major,
foreign affairs correspondent Brian Hanrahan with Mr Kinnock and Carole
Walker with Mr Ashdown.
Sir Robin Day is back three mornings a week on BBC1's Breakfast News to
debate the campaign issues with a panel of 'three wise men' - Lord Jenkins
of Hillhead, Mr Denis Healey and Mr Norman Tebbit.
At 9.05am there is a daily Election Call hosted by Jonathan Dimbleby and
carried simultaneously on radio and television. The number to ring is
071-799 5000.
Campaign Report will go out three times a day on Radio 4's long-wave network
with the latest campaign updates at 10.30am, 3pm and 8pm. David Dimbleby
will conduct 40-minute interviews with the party leaders on the three last
Mondays of the campaign.
On BBC1 on Sunday evenings, Olivia O'Leary will present The Vote Race, a new
series designed to investigate what the party managers and manipulators are
up to. A studio audience linked to vote-meters will say whether they like or
believe the campaign messages.
The main ITN programmes will feature everything from live satellite links
from the constituencies to trend polling, focus groups and special reports
Channel 4 will also offer four critiques of the electoral process in its
Dispatches documentary series.
The network will also offer a special edition of the Channel 4 Debate on the
Sunday before polling day, an extended review of how the campaign is going
on Midway Sunday by the team from A Week In Politics and an election edition
of Hard News on press coverage of the campaign.
On every weekday evening Comment will be devoted to ordinary voters from
around the country discussing the campaign.
Sky will cover the daily morning party press conferences live in Sky News
Sunrise.
Sky News Phone-In will be extended daily to question politicians on the
issues dominating that day's campaigning, and throughout the day Sky news
crews will shadow leading politicians.
