FT  22 JUN 92 / Bigger may not be better: Europe
The top subject at this week's European Community summit in Lisbon, it
appears, is to be the admission of new members. On the face of it, this is a
very curious moment for the Community leaders to discuss the subject, right
in the middle of the Maastricht crisis. For this is a crisis over the nature
of the Community, and new members cannot possibly join unless the nature of
the organisation is in some sense settled.
And yet there is also a sense in which the enlargement issue is a mirror
image of the Maastricht problem. The treaty represents a substantial leap
forward towards a more integrated Europe; but the admission of a large
number of new member states must mean a Community which will be less
integrated than it is today.
The Commission has drafted a report on the problems of enlargement, which it
has submitted to the summit, and in which it says; 'widening must not take
place at the expense of deepening'; yet this is a logical and political
contradiction of opposites. For if the effective operation of the Community,
in terms of the functioning of its institutions, is to remain as integrated
with 20 members in future as it is with 12 today, then it is clear that
national political inputs to such a Community must be much more integrated
than at present. Which is politically impossible, QED.
It would be a 'tragic error', says the Commission in its weaken the
Community's decision-making capacity. Let us be clear: the weakening of
decision-making would not be an avoidable error, nor a possible danger: it
would be a racing certainty, on at least three levels.
The first level is simple arithmetic. If there are 20 governments
represented in the Council of Ministers, they cannot conceivably reach
decisions as easily as 12 governments; goodness knows, it is already
difficult enough for the 12. You only have to consider the time required for
each minister to say his piece just once, and add the geometrical increase
in the number of interpreters and translators. It is obvious that Community
decision-making must grind slower and slower.
The standard solution of European integrationists is an increase in majority
voting. That was the main achievement of the 1986 Single European Act, which
finally blew away the Gaullist myth of a national veto, and which will lead
by the end of this year to the Single European Market. And now the existing
member states have agreed to a further increase in majority voting as a
central element in the Maastricht Treaty.
But to argue that there must be much more majority voting in a Community of
20 than in a Community of 12 is a leap too far. It may be logical, it may be
sensible, and it may even be idealistic; but it is simply not realistic. Not
one of the 12 member states is demanding an immediate strengthening of
majority voting in order to admit new members. Considering the passions
stirred up in a number of member states by the prospective loss of
sovereignty already implied by Maastricht, it seems unlikely that they could
accept a further loss of sovereignty through another notch on the majority
voting ratchet.
The question is particularly acute for the large member states: France,
Germany, Italy, Britain and Spain. In the existing Community, the small
countries enjoy a very large premium in the Council of Ministers, with a
voting weight which is totally out of proportion to their population or
their GNP. This is a historical legacy from the days when the three original
large members (France, Germany and Italy) could afford this generous
concession, since there were only three small countries (Belgium, the
Netherlands, Luxembourg).
In today's Community of 12 the large members are outnumbered seven to five.
But all of the four plausible membership candidates are small (Austria,
Sweden, Finland, Switzerland), and they would tilt the balance still further
against the large countries 11 to 5.
In practice, such a Community would be dominated by small countries; it is
difficult to imagine the large countries accepting political subordination.
The British demand early enlargement, precisely because it would stop the
Community dead in its tracks; but even they might object to such a position
of weakness. Yet the small countries now inside the Community will not be
eager to accept a reduction in their voting weights for the sake of
admitting new members.
There may be grounds on which enlargement is nevertheless desirable, or at
least tolerable, despite its disadvantages. Economic and monetary union will
still be determined by Germany and by other large members with strong
economies, like France; the rich Efta countries should cause no problem.
The one thing which will certainly disappear with enlargement is any hope of
a common foreign and security policy. The Commission report says that new
members must give 'firm and precise commitments' on this subject, but this
is just empty piety. The Swiss will say: 'Yes, yes', and mean nothing; can
anyone seriously imagine a foreign policy which is commonly conceived in
Lisbon, Vienna and Helsinki? The very idea is laughable.
