FT  11 JUL 92 / Pan Am found guilty in Lockerbie bombing case
A US jury yesterday found Pan American World Airways guilty of wilful
misconduct in a case filed by relatives of the victims killed in the bombing
of a Pan Am jumbo jet over Lockerbie, Scotland.
Pan Am Flight 103 ended in disaster on December 21 1988, when a bomb hidden
inside a portable cassette player tore the jet apart shortly after it left
London for New York. All 259 people on board the Boeing 747, and 11 people
on the ground, were killed.
Yesterday's verdict comes after a civil trial lasting nearly 11 weeks in a
Brooklyn federal court. The plaintiffs are seeking more than Dollars 300m
(Pounds 157m) in damages from the airline and two subsidiaries, Pan American
World Services and Alert Management. Under international treaties, liability
damages are limited to Dollars 75,000 for each victim unless wilful
negligence is proved.
A second phase of the trial, to determine the amount of damages to be
awarded, will now have to take place. No date for this has yet been
scheduled. Pan Am, which stopped operating last year, is also thought likely
to appeal against yesterday's verdict. Lawyers acting for Pan Am and its own
legal department declined to make any immediate comment on the verdict.
The case centred on how the bomb got on board the jet. The plaintiffs argued
that the bomb had been placed in an unaccompanied suitcase, and put on an
Air Malta flight to Frankfurt. This bag, they contended, was then improperly
transferred to Flight 103 by a Pan Am employee. The employee, they
contended, failed to examine the bag and note that it did not belong to
anyone travelling on the flight.
The defence argued that the bag was smuggled into the Pan Am system at
Frankfurt, or even London, by terrorists. Lawyers said the plaintiffs were
seeking 'private vengeance' against the carriers, which had no control over
the disaster.
The jury was also told that the airline had improved security measures in
the months before the disaster.
Pan Am, which had been losing money for many years, went into bankruptcy in
January 1991, and ceased operating last December. Its affairs are still
being wound up, but the airline's insurers would be liable for any damage
award.
Yesterday, Mr Tom Plaskett, who was in charge of Pan Am at the time of the
Lockerbie bombing, claimed that the trial had 'failed to solve the mystery
that is the Lockerbie disaster'.
'Much of what we do know with certainty about Lockerbie was not shared with
this jury. . . We shall endeavour through the appeals process to shed some
light on this uncertainty,' he said.
