FT  31 JAN 92 / Survey of World Industrial Review (15): The enduring
obstacles - Tariffs and Trade
EASTER, 1992, has now become the latest in a long list of 'final' deadlines
in the seemingly interminable Uruguay Round of multilateral talks aimed at
liberalising world trade and preventing the growth of protectionism.
But even after five-and-a-half years of negotiations the unresolved issue of
farm subsidies could still wreck them. Failure to reach agreement might not,
by itself, have an immediate impact on the growth of world trade and of the
global economy. But it could strengthen trends towards protectionism,
bilateralism and managed trade.
The current round is the eighth conducted since 1948 when the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) came into force. And it is by far the
most ambitious as for the first time it has covered for first time sectors
such as agriculture, textiles, investment, services and intellectual
property.
Since September, 1986, when the new round of Gatt talks was agreed upon at
Punta del Este, Uruguay, the negotiations have been whittled down from 15
specific topics to seven. The talks have proved detailed and complicated and
several 'final' meetings have taken place.
Their complexity was in part forced on Gatt. The seven previous rounds had
reduced the tariffs on the manufactured products of the major industrial
markets from around 40 per cent to an average of 4.7 per cent. If Gatt,
which now covers 103 countries, was to remain, despite the changing nature
of world trade, global in its rule-making, it had to broaden its scope and
tackle new areas.
Agriculture - especially the dispute between the European Community and the
US over support for farmers, market access and export subsidies  - has been
the main stumbling block. Already, this has crippled the mid-review of the
Round in Montreal in December 1988, stalled the 'final' meeting in Brussels
two years later, and caused the end-1991 deadline to be missed.
On January 13, the participants in the Round agreed that the proposals made
before Christmas by Arthur Dunkel, Gatt's director-general, should be the
basic document for further talks leading to a final agreement by mid-April.
But the EC still maintained strong objections to the section on farming. It
remains to be seen whether a successful conclusion will be reached as
scheduled.
Since Gatt came into operation, world trade has acted as one of the primary
engines for the growth of world output. Annually, almost without exception,
the growth rate of the former has exceeded that of the latter. According to
Gatt, between 1960 and 1970, the volume of merchandise trade grew at an
annual average of 8.6 per cent while output grew at 6 per cent. The rates
have slowed: for 1970-80 to 5.3 per cent against 3.8 per cent for output;
and in the 1980s 4.2 and 2.7 per cent.
In the most recent decade, these rates have been unevenly distributed. In
Asia, trade in goods and services rose by an annual average of 7.7 per cent
and Gross Domestic Product by 5.4 per cent. In other areas, the rates have
been: north America 5.7 and 2.8 per cent; western Europe 4.2 and 2.2; Latin
America 2 and 1.6; and in Africa, the exception to the pattern, -0.3 and 2
per cent.
Exports of merchandise trade grew between 1980 and 1990 by an annual average
of 5 1/2 per cent to reach Dollars 3,485bn in 1990 (up 13 per cent that
year), while trade in commercial services, which expanded over the decade at
the faster pace of 7 1/2 per cent, reached Dollars 815bn in 1990. That was
up 17 per cent over the previous year and accounted for 19 per cent of all
world exports.
The distribution of merchandise trade (based on the value of exports and
imports) was: western Europe 46.5 per cent, Asia 21.9; north America 16.5;
central and eastern Europe and the Soviet Union 5.2, Latin America 4, the
Middle East 3.3 and Africa 2.6.
With some justification, Gatt, whose contracting parties account for about
90 per cent of world trade, can claim much credit for providing the impetus
for the growth in world output.
Through eight rounds, it has preached its gospel of multilateral trade and
most-favoured-nation status, which obliges each signatory to the Gatt to
grant the same treatment to all other members on a non-discriminatory basis.
It has evolved regulations which it has tried to enforce through its
adjudicatory disputes panels and complaints procedures.
But other factors must be acknowledged, The remarkable growth in
communications and transport and the fall in their costs have helped to
expand the transnational production of manufactured goods. The international
lowering of investment barriers and the integration of financial markets
have also influenced considerably the growth in global trade and output.
At the same time, these features have also contributed to growing
bilateralism and regionalism with the risk of an increasing disrespect for
Gatt's rules.
These trends were apparent even before the farm dispute thwarted the Uruguay
Round's progress and must be seen as protection against the effects of the
Round failing.
The EC's single economic market in 1993 is the most obvious and mature
example of regionalism. But in America, the 1989 Free Trade Agreement (FTA)
between the US and Canada is being expanded to include Mexico; in Latin
America and the Caribbean, there are four regional blocs either formed or in
the offing. In the Far East, the Association of South East Asian Nations
(Asean) - and Malaysia's Dr Mahathir Mohamad in particular - is trying to
set up an economic group which might include Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore,
South Korea and Taiwan.
Bilaterally, the US has 16 'framework' agreements in Latin America and one
in Singapore which could be the basis for FTAs. President Bush's visit this
month to Japan was a notable example, of the US trying to manage trade on a
bilateral basis.
In the short term, these arrangements might only confirm and
institutionalise existing trading patterns, like those between the EC and
the European Free Trade Association within the still-unratified European
Economic Area.
But as these groupings become more established and in the absence of a firm
international regulatory body, be it Gatt or its mooted successor, the
Multilateral Trading Organisation, they will become more exclusive and
resort increasingly to such protective mechanisms as anti-dumping actions,
countervailing duties and, in the case of the US, the retaliatory Super 301
provision of the 1988 Trade Act.
If the Uruguay Round fails, those countries with protective statutes will be
best insulated. By contrast, developing countries, especially in Africa,
which account for more than two-thirds of Gatt's members, will be especially
vulnerable.
In the short term, the growth of world trade and world output will be
governed more by global recession than the presence or absence of Gatt
regulations.
But, according to the findings published in The World Economy of December
1991, a minimalist 'face-saving' outcome to the Round would benefit world
trade by Dollars 118.7bn, while a 'comprehensive' agreement would produce
benefits of Dollars 262.5bn.
This is what is at stake if no successful conclusion is found by Easter.
Thereafter, protectionist trends will be stimulated by the US congressional
and presidential elections in November. The EC's attention will be on 1993.
Against this background, the Uruguay Round negotiations will be seen as a
temporary holding operation against the resurgence in world trade of
bilateralism and protectionism.
