FT  06 NOV 92 / The Property Market: Few come close to the ideal
The criteria used to judge property companies vying for Stoy Hayward's
annual award for financial reporting excellence highlight the need for
improvement in many areas of disclosure and treatment. Few property
companies come anywhere near scoring top marks in all areas.
The criteria have changed slightly over the three years of the award, but
the main categories have not. They include:
Introductory information. It should include a table of contents which is
comprehensive and detailed; financial highlights in summary at the front;
and a statement of company objectives including the types of business.
It should also include a record of performance over at least five years,
using indicators such as gross and rental income, value of total sales of
real property, value of all non-real property asset sales, total development
expenditure, pre-tax profits, dividends per share and net asset value.
Earnings per share should be shown in total and split between rental and
trading income.
Chairman's statement. There should be information on the economic and market
conditions over the past year and a forecast for the coming year; how the
company's results have been affected by market conditions; problems which
have materially affected the company's results; and significant investments
during the previous year.
There should be details of the strategy adopted by the management for the
coming year; a forecast of results in the next 12 months with an analysis of
the principal internal and external risks faced by the company; and a list
of the areas of business in which the company will be active in the future.
Accounting policies. The panel supports the capitalisation of interest - by
which interest payments are charged to the balance sheet and not taken as a
cost on the profit and loss account. It does not see it as an example of
'creative' accounting. However, there should be a clear statement of the
policy adopted and the amounts to be used. It believes companies should not
capitalise for more than one year after a building is finished, and that any
amounts capitalised should be net of tax relief.
Completed investment properties should be held in the accounts at their open
market value at the date of the balance sheet. Property investment companies
should have a full external valuation every year. The treatment of any
unrealised gain or deficit on revaluation should be shown.
There should be information on any property transfers between fixed and
current assets. The property should be transferred at book value. Investment
properties should be shown in a separate capital profit and loss account on
disposal, or shown as an extraordinary item.
How profits are taken on long-term projects prior to completion should be
disclosed. Profit should not be taken unless the outcome of the contract can
reasonably be foreseen - because the property has been pre-sold and
contracts exchanged.
Any goodwill - the difference between the price paid on an acquisition and
its net book value which is shown in the accounts - should be justified and
its accounting treatment explained.
Profit and loss account and notes. Income and expenditure related to
property investments, trading and other activities - including joint
ventures and listed and unlisted securities - should all be separately
identified. Trading income should be analysed by sector and location.
Balance sheet and notes. Property held for investments and property held for
dealing, and how much of each is under development, should be separately
itemised. There should be additional details by location, type, tenure, age
and rent review.
Borrowings - including the ability to alter the form of any loans and the
interest rate structure - should be shown, along with the timetable for
repayment, and the significance of those loans held in foreign currencies.
There should be details on deferred tax and potential capital gains payable.
