FT  15 MAY 92 / Survey: FT Traveller, Genoa (8) - Highs and lows amid the
diversity / City guide, Haig Simonian takes a stroll around Genoa to view
the contrast between its classic and modern architecture
STAND with your back to elegant via Roma, facing Piazza De Ferrari in the
heart of Genoa, and you could be in any well-kept Edwardian city, with the
newly-cleaned civic buildings opposite proclaiming their wealth and
well-being.
The first surprise comes to your left, where the 'new' Carlo Felice opera
house demands a closer look. The arcade along via Roma and the imposing
portico on the square instantly bring to mind a classical theatre, perhaps a
little touched up of late,
But it is the huge fly tower, thrusting 200 feet into the sky, which gives
the game away. Post-modernism is the theme in architect Aldo Rossi's
striking design for one of the best known landmarks, which was partly
destroyed in 1944 and only reopened to the public late last year.
The fly tower has been the most controversial part of the generally
well-received project. A close second came the series of windows and
balconies which look over the stage inside. The shuttered windows, evoking
the exteriors of a typically Genovese street, led to loud protests from the
purists. But the overall effect, which gives the audience the impression it
is looking at real life from the outside, is eye-catching and effective.
On the same square, but with its baroque main facade just round the corner
in Piazza Matteotti off via San: Lorenzo, is the lavishly restored Palazzo
Ducale, the best example of the Columbus-led urban revival now taking place
in the city.
The scaffolding covering the former seat of Genoa's Doges is only just
coming down to reveal white walls and gilded ornamentation. The sumptuous
interior, not yet open to the public, will provide a new exhibition and
meeting space akin to the restored Palazzo Grassi in Venice.
A few steps down the hill is the Cathedral of San Lorenzo, another
architectural gems. Its splendid Gothic facade, in multilayered marble,
leads into a majestic interior, with a fine rose window and a wealth of
intricate carving.
If Genoa from Piazza De Ferrari evokes civic glories, the city seen from the
top-floor balcony of the renamed and revamped Terrazza Colombo lends a
wholly different perspective. The 31st floor viewing gallery of the
skyscraper in Piazza Dante offers commanding views over the hills, city and
harbour. At the foot of the building is the heavily restored Porta Soprana,
a medieval city gate, near to which are the remains of what is believed to
be Columbus's house.
What is revealed from the terrace is more like modern Marseilles than an
ancient Italian city. The sprawling port and ageing 1950s' buildings nearby,
which would have counted as skyscrapers in their time, strongly recall the
French port.
The third place to see Genoa's diversity is beside the Loggia dei Mercanti,
also still covered in scaffolding, in Piazza Banchi in the thick of the old
town. Here the impression is of casbah rather than cosmopolitan metropolis.
The area, which some Genovese shun by night, is a maze of narrow alleys and
ancient, often delapidated buildings. The atmosphere is Neapolitan, if not
distinctly Middle Eastern, the exotic flavour heightened by the large
numbers of north African immigrants.
Genoa claims to have the biggest historic centre of any city in Europe and,
for anyone wandering around this area, it is easy to believe.
So far, there are only small islands of restoration. One day, there may be
more, although beautifying the area could, ironically, detract from its
seedy charm. However, sea change in Genoa's attitude towards its
architectural heritage is already apparent at the Columbus exhibition site
nearby, where four of the old 16th Century bonded warehouses have been
lavishly restored.
Finally, there is the modern, high-rise Genoa of the San Benigno office
complex, which includes the multi-storey World Trade Centre and a number of
other glass boxes in its midst.
The truth is that Genoa is full of contrasts. What could be more striking
than the difference between the solid 16th Century palazzi of via Garibaldi,
one of the finest streets in Italy, and the narrow lanes of the old town
only minutes away?
Via Garibaldi is rightly viewed as Genoa's architectural crown, with each
building, many now turned into banks, more splendid than the next. Their
history goes back to the 16th Century, when wealthy patrician families, many
of them in the banking business which made Genoa famous alongside its trade,
compete with one another to build splendid palaces, rather like the rivalry
between the elite of Tuscan towns such as Florence and Siena a century
earlier. Much remains, and a number of the buildings also contain fine art
collections.
The most obvious contrast of all is that of Genoa's differing heights. From
the harbourside to the top of town by the Castelletto is a long walk. But
once up on the Belvedere terrace, from which there is another fine view over
the rooftops out to sea, the effort proves worthwhile.
