FT  05 MAY 92 / Arts: Peter Grimes/Cos fan tutte - Glyndebourne
The Glyndebourne festival got under way this weekend  - unwontedly early, so
as to make time for building the bigger new opera house by 1994, but not too
unseasonably. At the dinner interval of Peter Grimes on Saturday there were
some intrepid picnickers on the lawn, and many more on Sunday (sunnier and
warmer) during Cos fan tutte. The famous gardens, front and side, are
intact, though not blooming yet; the cosy rear gardens and the tennis court
have already become building sites.
We need not be sentimental about the old house. The price of its vaunted
intimacy has always been a tight, airless acoustic: good for words,
unflattering to many voices, tricky for any conductor handling a
Romantic-size orchestra. With 1,150 seats the new house will be larger by
only a third, but the extra sound-space should be a boon.
On the other hand, producers will be inclined more than ever toward multum
in parvo stagings partly because of the irresistible temptation to explore
more of the repertoire than really fits Glyndebourne, but also to entertain
the ever-increasing proportion of their audience that has no great interest
in opera.
Trevor Nunn's new production of Britten's Peter Grimes is extremely
striking, but not overweening. The large cast, down to the last villager, is
presented in such sympathetic detail that the staging never dominates. It
opens nevertheless with a terrific visual coup: a whole, towering wall of
people crammed into the Borough's Moot Hall for the inquest, and singing
with maximum impact. Individual characters emerge at once: Donald Adams'
crusty Coroner, Geoffrey Moses' comically long-faced functionary, Susan
Bickley's beady-eyed, excitable Mrs Sedley (less of a witch than usual).
John Gunter's basic set is a crosswise section of a bleak East Anglian
shore, but it can accommodate a slice of the village too  - cramped
buildings leaning together, narrow winding lanes: as vividly natural as the
Albert Herring sets in the Peter Hall version. Grimes's hut is a plausible
boat-hulk, set high enough to leave a dangerous drop to the sea, with room
below for the procession of wrathful villagers. Britten's sea-interludes are
allowed to speak for themselves against nothing more than a changing play of
light on the front-cloth.
The grim story is played out with considerable impact. The East Anglian
accents that Nunn has made everybody learn are an uncertain asset; sometimes
they have the ring of picturesque 'truth', sometimes only self-conscious
quaintness. The Peter is an American tenor, Stephan Drakulich, who has
clearly made heroic efforts to master the dialect. That may or may not
account for his slightly throttled sound; but it is of a piece with the
desperately knotted character he presents, near breaking-point with
bafflement and anguish.
Grimes gets no heroic gloss here, which is a mercy (only Jon Vickers could
bring that off); but at his 'Now the Great Bear and the Pleiades', the roof
of The Boar opens to reveal a brilliant firmament. A risky inspiration: I
thought it struck home powerfully, reinforcing Peter's essential claim to
being a lonely visionary. Vivian Tierney sings a lovely Ellen, open-throated
and scrupulously musical, too brave and sensible to be either a prissy
schoolmarm or a bland saint. As Peter's luckless apprentice, 13-year-old
Daniel Wilmshurst is a heart-rending picture of dumb despair.
Alan Opie makes a fine, forceful Balstrode, contributing much more to the
action than mere sonorous utterances. John Graham-Hall, who was young Albert
Herring to the life only a couple of seasons ago, creates a haunted Bob
Boles, the sin-wracked Methodist; John Fryatt's Rector is lovingly detailed,
and Robert Poulton makes a lithe, flashy Ned Keene. Menai Davies's earthy
Auntie and her 'nieces' (Susannah Waters and Sarah Pring) figure strongly,
with help from Nunn's canny treatment: there is a hint, not overstressed,
that these village whores are also the local Fates. Andrew Davis conducts
the London Philharmonic to pointed effect. The score sounds superbly
prepared, and there are stinging touches that rarely register in larger
houses. The whole has an inexorable flow, never broken by passing events but
carrying them.
* * * As revived by Michael McCarthy, Nunn's cruise-ship Cos sails on with
visible eclat, but without  - so far  - a convinced focus. The six
principals are all good enough to weather the distractions provided by the
busy, extraneous passengers and crew who populate Maria Bjornson's shifting
decks; yet on Sunday the dramatic line went through blurry patches, not so
much ambiguous as just undecided about the tone and flavour of the tale.
With a few more performances it should find a sharper silhouette.
The ladies look too similar, but Renee Fleming and Suzanne Johnston sing
them with warmth and subtlety, abetted by Lillian Watson's reliably bright
Despina. John Mark Ainsley's stylish Ferrando is slightly shaded by Gerald
Finley's lusty, forward Guglielmo. As Don Alfonso, James Maddalena hovers
creepily at the edges of the action, a saturnine presence who never quite
reveals his hand. Bruno Weil is a serviceable conductor, with some
interesting ideas but no knack for welding the great act-finales into single
spans.
Glyndebourne Festival Opera. Peter Grimes in repertory to 22 June, Cos fan
tutte to 13 June.
