FT  12 MAY 92 / Elections speed Tehran's farewell to the ghost of Khomeini:
Anti-US slogans disappearing from the capital's walls indicate a readiness
to consider relations
ANTI-US slogans still emblazon Tehran's walls, and Friday prayers at the
University of Tehran kick off as usual with the regulation chant of 'Death
to America'.
But the slogans are fast disappearing. Mr Gholam Hossein Karbaschi, the new
city mayor, has despatched clean-up squads to remove the worst of the
graffiti. His employees apparently read the slogans and decide which are
just too good to remove. Any that fail the test are summarily whitewashed.
Iran's estrangement from the world economy is drawing to an end. Non-oil
exports doubled this year, trade with Europe and Japan reached record
heights, and supporters of reformist President Hashemi Rafsanjani scored a
runaway success in parliamentary elections.
In fact, reform is so advanced in Tehran that there is even talk of a
rapprochement with the Great Satan, the US. Even to whisper the word America
is risky, but several signals from Tehran point to a willingness to consider
relations.
Trade with US companies, conducted largely through intermediaries, is
booming. One diplomat in Tehran estimated that bilateral trade between Iran
and the US amounted to Dollars 500m (Pounds 282m) during the year to March,
making the US Iran's seventh largest importer.
As far back as last September, Mr Mohammad Javad Larijani, a member of
Iran's National Security Council and an influential adviser to Mr
Rafsanjani, told the Washington Post that normal relations with the US were
'theoretically not impossible'. He said that publicly stating such a
position in Tehran had been difficult because of pressure from hardline
critics.
With the hardliners' vitriol dampened by poor election results, the way is
presumably clearer for more constructive moves.
The biggest stumbling block to restoring ties is the Dollars 10bn of Iranian
assets which Tehran claims is frozen in the US. Washington seized the money
after Iran's Islamic revolution in 1979, but it has never officially
announced the amount it is holding. Iranian claims for compensation have
been bogged down at The Hague tribunal since 1981.
There were indications of a thaw in relations last November, when Washington
released Dollars 278m for weaponry impounded by the US after the Islamic
revolution, but there has been no progress since.
Emotions in Tehran are still provoked by talk of America. Candidates in the
elections to the majlis (parliament) accused one another of harbouring
friendly sentiments towards the US.
Some candidates even mentioned better relations with the US in public
speeches, however. Mr Rajaie Khorassani, former Iranian ambassador to the
United Nations, admitted in a campaign speech in early April that restoring
diplomatic relations with America was at least a possibility. 'The experts
study and decide that it is in the interest of the Islamic republic of
Iran,' he said.
'They are arguing about the price of relations, not the principle,' said a
diplomat.
Mr Ali Akbar Velayati, the long-serving foreign minister, is more cautious.
He denies that any positive approach towards the US is possible without the
unilateral release of funds by Washington. But Mr Velayati does not always
see eye-to-eye with his president about the speed of reform in foreign
policy.
Mr Velayati is closely allied with Iran's spiritual leader, Ayatollah Ali
Khamenei, whose politics falls between the reforming camp of President
Rafsanjani and the hardline faction of Mr Mehdi Karrubi, parliamentary
speaker. The president is reported to be frustrated with the slow speed of
Iran's rapprochement with the west.
Some suggest that the US is now more hardline on rapprochement than Iran.
'The United States sees Iran as it was 13 years ago,' said one American
commentator in Tehran. 'Things have moved on since then.'
Officially, Washington is nervous about Tehran's intentions. Iran is
reported to have bought some Dollars 2bn worth of tanks, aircraft and
submarines from former Warsaw Pact countries. It is developing medium-range
missile technology with North Korea. Rumours still persist that it is trying
to secure nuclear technology from a Central Asian republic.
Tehran has a case for rearmament. It has emerged from a devastating
eight-year war against Iraq in which its stock of military hardware was all
but wiped out.
Understandably, Washington wants to tread cautiously on relations with Iran,
at least until the US presidential election in November is over. Too much
political blood has been spilled over Iran in the past decade for rash
gestures.
But a new White House might do well to take a closer look at Tehran and
recalculate its sums. An expanding economy, replete with oil, gas, minerals
and enormous potential, is hungry for investment. But if these hopes of
betterment are not fulfilled, the country could still abandon reform and
turn back to the ghost of Ayatollah Khomeini.
