FT  08 APR 92 / Election 1992: Bridging the credibility gap - Scotland's
changing political landscape after 13 years of minority rule
THE QUESTION to Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish secretary, was cruel. 'What
credibility,' a woman asked him in a live TV debate on Monday, 'does your
party still have in Scotland?'
Mr Lang, visibly exhausted, dispirited and tetchy after weeks of often
unrewarding campaigning around Scotland, sidestepped the question. But it
was highly relevant.
The Tories do not have much credibility left. After 13 years of minority
rule in Scotland with a dwindling number of seats, they face further
humiliation tomorrow, with Mr Lang forecast to lose his own seat of Galloway
&amp; Upper Nithsdale. The question is how many of their nine seats (out of 72
Scots constituencies) they will still hold if electors vote tactically to
get them out.
By contrast Mr Donald Dewar, the habitually anxious shadow Scottish
secretary, has been smiling as never before. He fully expects to fulfil his
lifetime's ambition and walk into the Scottish Office in Edinburgh by the
end of the week. He has already been briefed on what to expect from Sir
Russell Hillhouse, the permanent secretary there.
But the impish grin on the face of Mr Alex Salmond, leader of the Scottish
National party, suggests that he too has a lot to be satisfied about. Mr
Malcolm Bruce of the Liberal Democrats often looks smug too.
The Press Association opinion poll and the latest System 3 poll for The
Herald produced a virtually identical result for Scotland, putting Labour at
between 40 per cent and 41 per cent (down a little compared with some
previous findings), the SNP on 25 per cent (also down a couple of points),
the Tories virtually unchanged on 21 per cent and the Liberal Democrats up
from recent lows at between 12 per cent and 13 per cent.
That suggests two things: first, Labour stands to win about 50 seats, the
same number as in 1987. There are very few more it can reasonably expect to
win and its MPs in the central belt are usually protected by massive
majorities.
Second, in marginal or near-marginal seats around the edges of the Labour
heartland the SNP, Tories, Liberal Democrats and sometimes Labour are
scrapping in a four-party contest which under the first-past-the-post system
makes predicting the winner with certainty impossible.
The campaign in Scotland has often been as bleak as the wintry weather in
which it has been conducted. Although there has been the uniquely Scottish
issue of the country's constitutional future, the positions of the parties
had been chiselled in granite before the campaign began. The SNP has set the
pace, provoking the other parties into attacks on its two-headed manifesto
of seeking a mandate for independence and presenting the leftwing policies
it would implement if it won power after new Scottish elections.
Its support has doubled since 1987 and it poses the greatest threat to
Labour, many of whose supporters give it as their second choice. It is
easily the most popular party among young people - especially those who
parents vote Labour - because it is fresh and iconoclastic, while Labour
seems the party of the establishment.
Yet it does not seem to have convinced enough people. Support in the opinion
polls for independence is at its usual level of around 35 per cent (against
45 per cent for devolution) and not all supporters of independence will vote
SNP.
It is a myth that there are hardly any Conservatives left in Scotland. There
are plenty in traditional Tory areas such as parts of Edinburgh and some
rural areas. But in safe Labour-held seats, far fewer Tories than normal
have been prepared to go out canvassing. All are disheartened by the lack of
direction from Mr John Major and frustrated at Mr Lang's inability to score
sharp political points.
Their pitch is essentially negative. Scotland now has lower unemployment
than the rest of the UK for the first time and a much milder recession - but
few Scots believe it. The Tories' main theme, that the constitutional status
quo is best, has been upheld in heartfelt speeches by Mr Douglas Hurd, but
this has probably done no more than cement the party's existing unionist
support.
The Conservatives' arguments about the risks of devolution for Scotland's
standing in the UK are sound but technical: the majority of Scots do not see
why they should not have a Scottish parliament of some sort and resent being
told it would not be good for them. Mr Major's pleas on the subject this
week embarrassed many Scots Tories.
Labour has conducted an efficient, low-key campaign concentrating on its
best issues such as health, education and employment. It has emphasised that
all will be better with its devolved parliament, but not spelt out details
of how it will work, to avoid presenting a target for its opponents. The
Liberal Democrats have used visits by Mr Paddy Ashdown to target rural
constituencies where their sitting MPs often have a strong personal
following.
The SNP is likely, along with the Tories, to be a victim of the
first-past-the-post system. Although polls have put its support as high as
31 per cent, it is unlikely to add more than half a dozen seats to its
existing four. However, it has tended to win more votes than opinion polls
suggest.
The SNP should score in three Tory rural seats: Mr Lang's Galloway, Sir
Nicholas Fairbairn's Perth and Kinross, and Mr Bill Walker's Tayside North.
It may also take Argyll &amp; Bute from the Liberal Democrats, and could take
Dundee East and the Western Isles from Labour.
But, barring an enormous last minute swing, the great prize of serious
advances into Labour seats in the central belt will elude the SNP. Even
Govan, its only central-belt seat, is finely balanced. It has have good
hopes in Kilmarnock &amp; Loudon, but Labour's majority there is 14,000.
Labour should take Ayr, Mr George Younger's former seat. Whether it captures
Stirling, where Mr Michael Forsyth, the Thatcherite Scottish Office minister
has a majority of only 548, depends crucially on how the anti-Tory vote
splits.
If Stirling goes, the Tories would be down to four seats. That assumes Mr
Malcolm Rifkind, the transport secretary, keeps Edinburgh Pentlands and that
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton holds Edinburgh West against the Liberal
Democrats. Mr Allan Stewart is expected to hold Eastwood (a rich dormitory
area for Glasgow) and Sir Hector Monro, the Scottish Tory with the biggest
majority, Dumfries.
The late upturn for the Liberal Democrats in the opinion polls makes them
less likely to lose Sir Russell Johnston's Inverness Nair &amp; Lochaber seat to
Labour, and to hand back Menzies Campbell's seat in Fife North-East to the
Conservatives.
Equally, Tory chances of avenging November's by-election humiliation at the
hands of the Liberal Democrats in Kincardine and Deeside may be more remote.
Friday therefore looks like yet another black day for the Scottish
Conservatives and a day of frustration for the SNP. The Liberal Democrats
could come out relatively unscathed.
Labour may be lucky to make a net gain of more than a seat or two. Yet it
should have come into its inheritance.
 ------------------------------------------------------
      SYSTEM 3 OPINION POLLS IN SCOTLAND
 ------------------------------------------------------
                                         % of   No of
                Now   Mar   Feb   Jan    vote   seats
                 %     %     %     %      in    87 won
Labour           41   44    38     38     42      50
SNP              24   26    28     26     14       3
Cons             21   22    22     23     24      10
Lib Dems         13    7    10     11     19       9
Greens            1    1     1      2      0       0
 ------------------------------------------------------
Source - The Herald
 ------------------------------------------------------
