FT  14 JUL 92 / Cuban revolutionary in an army green business suit: Castro
is courting capital - not capitalism
FOR a man who built a revolution on the expropriation of foreign capital,
Fidel Castro has been demonstrating a surprising flexibility. Last month the
Cuban leader donned an olive green army suit and blue tie to welcome 125
potential foreign investors, many of them Americans, to dine at the
government palace.
Cuba, he declared, was open to their money. His message has just been
underlined by Cuba's National Assembly. On Sunday it effectively formalised
a growing practice and passed a new constitutional article to allow foreign
investment in state enterprises, to let Cuban companies import and export
without permission from central government, and to recognise foreign
ownership of property in joint ventures.
Mr Castro firmly denies that Cuba, in soliciting foreign investment, is
accepting capitalism. 'Capital and capitalism are not the same,' he insisted
last month. 'Capitalists will not be the owners of our country. The country
will continue to be socialist.'
'Our country', he said, 'knew capitalism before the revolution and does not
have kind memories.'
Underlining this, the new wording of the constitution's Article Three
contains a warning to all those who might dare to challenge Cuba's one-party
communist system. The clause reads: 'Against all those who try to overthrow
the political, social and economic order established by this constitution,
all citizens have the right to fight with any means, including armed
struggle, if other methods are not possible.'
The contradiction at the heart of Cuba's new economic reform is hard to
miss. Castro's plan is for a partially foreign-owned capitalist enclave in
Cuba to rescue a socialist economy from its own shortcomings.
Cuba is looking to foreign investment to provide capital, technology and
management skills at a time when the island is facing a deep economic
recession because of the collapse of its economic lifeline to the former
Soviet bloc.
The obstacles, however, are enormous. The US embargo on trade with, and
investment in, Cuba means the biggest source of money, and the largest
market for Cuban goods, is out of bounds. The success of the capitalist
enclave will depend on an adequate internal market for labour, energy and
raw materials, as well as bureaucratic goodwill, all of which could be
undermined by a weak domestic economy.
The fear that the Communist government will fall, following the collapse of
the Soviet Union, and the public opposition of exiled Cubans to foreign
investment in the island means that only the bravest businessmen will invest
in Cuba, typically expecting their money back in about three years.
Foreign investment is nevertheless one of the few cards Mr Castro has left
to play in order to sustain the economy. This continues to reel from the
disintegration of the eastern bloc, with which Cuba did 85 per cent of its
trade - much at subsidised prices - just three years ago.
The deterioration even since last October is palpable. The value of the peso
on the black market has fallen, from 15 to 33 pesos to the dollar, as fewer
and fewer goods are available at official prices. Black-market prices over
the same period have more than doubled. People face shortages of meat,
chicken, soap, detergent and cooking oil. At almost every corner in Havana
there are long lines of people waiting for food or for extremely infrequent
buses.
On top of that, the US administration has caved in to Florida's extremist
Cuban exiles and agreed to support the Cuban Democracy Act. This act, which
now has a chance of becoming law, would seek to ban the subsidiaries of US
companies from selling to Cuba.
Many of the businessmen on the investors' trip to Cuba were from US
subsidiaries of companies such as Procter &amp; Gamble, American Express and
Philip Morris, and trade from all subsidiaries has recently been growing,
doubling between 1988 and 1990 to Dollars 700m (Pounds 366.4m).
Cuba's overtures to foreign investors are undoubtedly bringing in some
money. According to Mr Hector Hernandez, president of the central bank, Cuba
had signed 60 joint ventures with foreign investors by last year, and
another 100 were in the pipeline.
By far the most important are in tourism, with Grupo Sol, the Spanish
developer, leading the way. One-fifth of the 500,000 tourists expected this
year will be staying in hotels that are products of joint ventures.
After tourism, foreign investors have shown interest in mines and textiles.
Twelve Americans stayed on in Havana after the investor trip in an attempt
to clinch deals involving, among others, supplying food in Cuba's airport.
One executive from an international pharmaceuticals company left Havana
impressed by Cuba's biotechnology plant, suggesting that with the right
foreign partner Cuba could successfully penetrate some markets.
The Cuban government hopes that foreign investment will reach Dollars
400m-Dollars 500m a year, but even then it will at most form 2 per cent of
Cuba's estimated gross domestic product, and would not compensate for the
drastic losses caused by the end of subsidised trade with the ex-Soviet
Union. Cuba, for example, will be able to import only 6m barrels of oil this
year, against 13m in 1989.
For political reasons, Mr Castro has rejected moves to stimulate the economy
as China has done, by allowing a free market in agriculture. Cuban officials
say that such a market would create inequalities in income and thus threaten
social peace.
The government is concerned that freeing some sectors of the economy, while
leaving others controlled, would lead to a shift of resources and workers
into free markets, leaving the official sector to fall apart. Last month Mr
Castro warned that farmers caught selling their goods in the black market
would have their land confiscated.
The discontent caused by the worsening economic situation has provoked a
political crackdown, with leading dissidents being imprisoned or harassed.
Foreign journalists who ask Cubans about the current situation risk being
detained or, as happened recently to one, being beaten up.
For Cubans the repression is much worse. 'Rapid reaction brigades' of party
members have pounced on the few dissidents brave enough to display
opposition in public. Mr Raul Castro, defence minister and Fidel's younger
brother, threatened earlier this year to reconvene emergency revolutionary
tribunals - scrapped 20 years ago - to sentence opposition groups guilty of
violence against the state.
Such actions make substantial inflows of foreign investment unlikely for the
present. Many of the Cuban leader's guests last month said they had come to
look for opportunities on the assumption that Mr Castro would soon fall. Mr
Sais Gelrud, a Venezuelan oil engineer, caught their mood: 'This is all a
make-believe. Nothing is going to happen until that man goes.'
