FT  20 FEB 92 / S African voters reject ruling party in key by-election
THE South African reform process suffered a setback yesterday when the
ruling National party was thrashed by the right-wing Conservative party (CP)
in a key by-election, billed as a referendum of white opinion on the current
constitutional changes, write Philip Gawith in Potchefstroom and agencies.
Mr Andries Beyers, the Conservative candidate, easily defeated his National
party opponent, Mr Theuns Kruger, by 2,140 votes out of more than 17,000
cast in the whites-only election in the Potchefstroom constituency of rural
western Transvaal province. More than 75 per cent of those eligible voted.
The National party won the seat by 1,583 votes in 1989. The by-election was
required after the incumbent, Mr Louis le Grange, died last year.
Although the defeat will have weakened the National party by casting doubt
on the extent to which it speaks for Afrikaners, it is unlikely to halt the
reform process.
It will have reduced the chances of drawing the Conservative party into the
Convention for a Democratic South Africa (Codesa), the constitutional
negotiating forum which it has so far refused to participate in.
Dr Andries Treurnicht, Conservative party leader, said last night the
message to the government was that the white nation demanded a general
election.
Addressing thousands of jubilant supporters, Dr Treurnicht said the National
party did not represent the white nation at Codesa and could not continue on
a path for which it did not have a mandate. The message for whites was they
should not despair: 'The future is ours.'
The defeat lends weight to the view increasingly heard in recent weeks that
the government has not done enough to explain to the white electorate
developments in the negotiating process.
This view was endorsed by Mr Kruger.
Ironically, although the Potchefstroom defeat has weakened the standing of
the National party within the white community, it may yet gain in the
context of national negotiations.
It will be able to argue at Codesa that the African National Congress and
allies should not try to drive too hard a bargain for fear of accelerating
the slide of white support to the right.
Mr Saki Macozoma, an ANC spokesman, acknowledged yesterday that his
organisation was concerned at the possible loss of support for their main
negotiating partner.
Before voting, the government mounted a big effort to retain the seat, which
it has held since 1948. Mr de Klerk and key government ministers made
campaign appearances and appealed for support.
However, it did not help its chances with the bizarre timing this week of an
announcement of big changes to the white school system.
These mean many white parents will have to pay twice as much for their
children's education.
