FT  01 OCT 92 / Oilseed dispute raises fears of trade war between EC and US
THE US has given the European Community until noon today to agree to binding
arbitration on its oilseed subsidy regime, twice condemned by a panel of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade as contrary to Gatt rules.
Rejection by the EC, which has consistently refused any form of binding
procedure, would bring the Community to the brink of all-out trade war with
the US just as senior officials from both sides are planning a push to break
the deadlock in the Uruguay Round of global trade talks.
Equally critical, the ultimatum shows that the US is threatening to abandon
Gatt as a channel for resolving this dispute, endangering the foundations of
the trade system overseen by Gatt.
Trading partners have become increasingly anxious in recent years that US
frustration with the Gatt system of resolving disputes will tempt it to use
its might to settle them unilaterally.
Mr Julius Katz, deputy US trade representative, said in Washington: 'If the
proposal is rejected, that pretty much exhausts the Gatt process and we will
have to draw appropriate conclusions. However, there is still the
possibility of a negotiated agreement.'
Washington stopped short of saying it would impose tariffs on Dollars 1bn
(Pounds 580m) of EC food imports if Brussels did not swiftly remedy the
trade losses to US soyabean farmers from its subsidy regime.
The EC has refused to change the subsidy system, offering trade concessions
instead that have been rejected by the US and other oilseed producers.
Brussels says it will retaliate if the US imposes sanctions.
Mr Rufus Yerxa, US ambassador to the Gatt, told Gatt's governing council the
US was insisting on an effective procedure to determine 'once and for all'
whether the EC was going to implement the panel findings on oilseeds or
whether aggrieved parties had the right to retaliate.
Mr Yerxa said the US could not accept EC proposals for a loosely structured
working group with no powers to arbitrate.
Under the original US proposal, a three-member panel would determine within
30 days how much damage the EC subsidy regime caused oilseed exporters. If
the Community rejected the panel findings, trading partners would have the
right to retaliate.
The US has put global trading losses at Dollars 2bn a year, with its own
soyabean farmers accounting for Dollars 1bn. The EC says the figure is no
more than Dollars 400m.
Gatt deal hopes, Page 8
