FT  17 NOV 92 / SPD proposes changes in asylum law
GERMANY'S opposition Social Democratic party (SPD) last night voted to make
sweeping changes in the country's liberal laws on asylum to stem the flow of
immigrants.
A special party congress agreed the major policy shift, amid growing concern
in Germany about racist attacks on foreigners and about the growth in
right-wing groups exploiting immigration as an issue.
SPD delegates backed a proposal from party leaders to reject asylum-seekers
who did not face political persecution in their home countries.
They voted in favour of amending the German constitution to let officials
process asylum applications briskly and to reject anyone refused asylum
elsewhere in Europe. Asylum-seekers who entered Germany from a 'safe' third
country, such as Austria, would be sent back.
But the SPD proposals fall short of asylum changes being sought by
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union (CDU). It could
therefore be weeks before a compromise is reached and put into effect.
The collapse of communism has unleashed a wave of immigration across Europe,
much of it to Germany, which has the continent's most liberal asylum laws.
Up to half a million newcomers are expected to flood into Germany this year.
A violent backlash has spread, with radical right-wing groups attacking
foreigners and smashing buildings that house asylum-seekers.
The CDU wants to tighten the law drastically, streamline the asylum
procedure and turn away at the border anyone suspected of being an 'economic
refugee' rather than a refugee from political persecution.
Mr Kohl would need SPD support to amend the constitution, but the opposition
party has been divided, with left-wingers opposing change and moderates,
especially mayors who have to house and feed foreigners, pleading for a
solution.
Mr Bjorn Engholm, the SPD leader, urged his party to change course but
denied he was bowing to pressure from the far-right.
In an impassioned speech which invoked the Nazi period, he said: 'History
teaches us - foreigners are the target today, tomorrow it will be the
disabled, and the day after tomorrow, left-wing trade unionists and others
who think differently.' He added: 'Let's not wait until the immigration
problem creates new political majorities that we can no longer influence.'
Mr Ignatz Bubis, head of the country's Jewish community and the only invited
guest speaker at the congress, said the party should not be concerned with
changing the asylum laws. He urged all mainstream parties to stand united
against neo-Nazi violence.
