FT  19 JUN 92 / The Big Lie - Inside the Maxwell's Empire: Questions raised
by Maxwell's last hours - Jimmy Burns has retraced Maxwell's final days,
seen the autopsy report and the autopsy video, interviewed key witnesses and
gained access to hitherto unpublished documents. Here he sets out his
conclusions
IN THE larger-than-life story of Robert Maxwell, the manner of his death
remains the greatest mystery.
Did he fall overboard accidentally or did he commit suicide? Could he
conceivably have been murdered?
The lack of witnesses between the time of his last phone call to the crew on
board his yacht, the Lady Ghislaine, and the discovery that he was missing
has proved a major problem for investigators trying to get at the truth.
Another obstacle has been the inconclusive nature of forensic evidence. Two
autopsies were conducted on Maxwell's remains. One suggests death by
accident or natural causes. The other leaves open the possibility of suicide
or murder.
The evidence of the last 12 hours of Maxwell's life as he cruised,
apparently without purpose, around the Canaries, is often confused and
contradictory. The official investigations by the Spanish authorities was
less than rigorous.
At stake is a Pounds 20m insurance claim. For Maxwell's family and his
companies to receive that money they have to prove that he died as a result
of an accident or he had been murdered.
The Financial Times has retraced Maxwell's last hours. We have interviewed
key witnesses, including the Lady Ghislaine's crew. We have had access to
hitherto unpublished documentation including the Spanish police
investigation. We have conducted a careful examination of the yacht. The two
autopsy reports conducted in Spain and Israel have been made available to
the FT. What happened?
Why did Maxwell leave for the Canaries alone on October 31?
Maxwell flew to Gibraltar that morning as his empire was collapsing to meet
the Lady Ghislaine. He went without his butler and ****his personal
secretary. He had never done this before. He did not even take a tin of
caviar which always accompanied him on his cruises. Before leaving London he
made the unusual step of thanking Bob Cole, his press officer and confident
31 years, for his services.
He had been told by the Lady Ghislaine's captain, Gus Rankin that the boat
was not ready for the kind of cruise Maxwell was accustomed to. Two of its
crew members - a housekeeper and a steward - were on leave, the storm covers
were up, and there were no provisions on board.
Maxwell told Rankin not to worry. He would bring the provisions with him or
else 'rough it'.
Maxwell left his London staff in the dark as to where he was going and why.
He told Rankin he planned to take a few days off to recover from a cold. He
wanted to be dropped off in Madeira where his private plane would be waiting
to take him to New York or London. He arrived in Gibraltar carrying some
files and a limited supply of provisions.
Rankin, in his first interview, told the FT that he was sceptical about
Maxwell's motives. It did not strike him that his employer had a
particularly bad cold. 'He seemed healthy. He ate well throughout the
crossing.' He did no work on this trip, which was almost unheard of.
What was Maxwell's state of mind on the crossing?
Untroubled, according to those who talked to him during the crossing.
The Lady Ghislaine had the technical capacity to control his empire with a
push of a button. He almost invariably made use of it. In addition to a
fully equipped office - it included computers, copiers, shredder, crytophone
and fax machines - a satellite phone by his bedside identified his
priorities.
The organisations and buildings featured on the short-code dial of his
telephone included Headington Hall, Maxwell House, the Daily Mirror's
newsdesk, the New York Daily News, Macmillan, Rothschilds in New York, his
family, including Kevin and Ian Maxwell, and Eric Sheinberg, one of the
senior traders at Goldman Sachs, who carried out some of Robert Maxwell's
stock market deals.
Rankin said: 'I now feel we were being drawn into a game in which we had no
control.'
On November 2 he called his two sons Ian and Kevin to a meeting in Madeira,
then rescinded the order 10 minutes later. He then changed his earlier plan
to fly out from Madeira and chose to cruise towards the Canaries instead.
Maxwell rang his son on November 3 to cancel a speech he was meant to have
made to an Anglo-Israeli dinner in London.
One female crew member recalls that at one point she entered Maxwell's
office and found the floor covered in documents. She asked him if he wanted
them tidied up. He just kicked them under the table - as if he was no longer
interested in them. Maxwell may no longer have been interested in his
documents. But his family was. One day after his death, according to
Maxwell's chief pilot Brian Hull, his daughter, Ghislaine, and Betty
Maxwell, asked him to pick up some cases from the boat. Hull says he was
handed six hard-backed leather cases by Betty Maxwell who told him that the
documents had to be in London by noon.
Hull flew out at 7.15 next morning reaching the Mirror building in London
just before twelve.
Why would anyone want to kill him?
Maxwell made many enemies in his business career. In the last month of his
life he was accused of arms dealing and having close links with Mossad, the
Israeli Secret Service. His son Philip told Spanish officials on hearing of
his father's disappearance that he thought Maxwell had been kidnapped but
subsequently changed his mind. One Israeli minister still thinks, on the
basis of the second autopsy, that Maxwell may have been murdered.
Could anyone have boarded the ship that night?
All boats in the area on the night of his death have now been accounted for
by the Spanish authorities. Throughout the night of Maxwell's disappearance
the Lady Ghislaine had its radar and other equipment on. It picked up no
suspicious vessels. Rankin says: 'I was on the bridge most of the night. We
were doing 14 knots. It was impossible.'
Where were the crew?
At the time Maxwell died, Captain Rankin and two other crew members were on
the bridge. An engineer was in the engine room. The bridge is sound-proof
and the deck is out of ear-shot of the engine room. All other members of the
crew were sleeping and heard nothing that drew their attention to Mr
Maxwell's movements that night.
Along with other witnesses, the 11 crew members were extensively interviewed
by the police, by insurance investigators and Interpol.
Why did the Lady Ghislaine take such a circuitous route on Maxwell's final
overnight voyage?
Rankin was first told by Maxwell that he wanted to be taken to Los
Cristianos, the southern port of Tenerife, where he would fly out on his
private jet. Maxwell changed his mind. Rankin came under orders from his
employer to 'cruise all night' because it would help him sleep. The log of
the Lady Ghislaine shows that after leaving Santa Cruz it set a course for
the coast of Gran Canaria.
Rankin discovered that Maxwell was missing around 11.00am - an hour and a
half after the boat had docked at Los Cristianos. He did not alert the
international Rescue Co-ordination centre, in Stavanger, Norway, until
12.15pm. The Spanish authorities did not learn of Maxwell's disappearance
until 12.20pm. Why did Rankin take such a long time to contact the Spanish
authorities?
'We had to carry out extensive searches of the boat and the immediate area
around the port.' He also claims that the Spanish authorities failed to
record that he sent a crew member ashore at Los Cristianos soon after the
ship-board search had been completed to alert the local maritime police. 'I
can't remember exactly when that was - around 11.45.'
At one point they spotted a swimmer they thought might have been Maxwell.
Rankin also says he had difficulty in making radio contact with the local
authorities.
Why were the inner, sliding doors to Maxwell's state room locked after he
went missing?
On the evening of November 4, Maxwell ordered a stewardess to lock the main
sliding doors to his quarters from within, leave the key with him and make
her exit through the outer bathroom door, leaving it unlocked behind her.
On the morning Maxwell died, the main sliding doors were found locked from
without, the bathroom door was locked from within, and the heavy steel
framed doors leading to the deck were closed. Maxwell's key was missing.
Rankin had to use a master key to get in.
Maxwell could not have left through the bathroom which had access to the
outer deck. It could not be opened from the outside. While it was not
unusual for Maxwell to go out on deck in the middle of the night, to take
fresh air or relieve himself, the crew cannot remember an occasion when he
closed let alone locked the doors behind him.
The locking of the doors was a preconceived act and yet it has emerged that
the Spanish police chose not to consider in their inquiry.
Could he have fallen overboard?
Conditions were good and the sea was calm on the night of November 4/5. The
Lady Ghislaine made no sudden movements throughout the night, according to
Rankin, cruising at a constant speed of between 14 and 15 knots. The Spanish
police concluded that he lent against a wire on the main deck. The wire is
3ft 6ins, reaching Maxwell's waist. They suggest this had a 'trampoline'
effect throwing him into the sea. No evidence was found of the wire being
disturbed or even dislodged from its hinges as it might well have been by a
man of Maxwell's weight and size. Maxwell was 6ft 2in tall and weighed more
than 20 stone.
It would have been possible for him to fall over the guard rail on the main
deck, which is three inches lower than the wire, although he would have had
to lean well over it to lose his balance.
Had he been drinking excessively or taking sleeping pills?
No evidence was found of significant quantities of alcohol or drugs in his
body. His widow said his sleeping pills had remained untouched.
Why were there two autopsies?
The insurers were dissatisfied with the autopsy carried out in in Spain.
Did the second autopsy find anything new?
Yes. The post mortem carried out in Israel by Dr Iain West, head of forensic
medicine at Guy's hospital, and two Israeli pathologists with the family's
approval, found serious muscle tear and injuries to the left hand and left
shoulder. The pathologists believe this suggests that Maxwell hung on to
something before falling into the water. These crucial findings were not
discovered by the earlier Spanish autopsy.
Maxwell could have sustained such an injury by holding on to prevent himself
from falling by accident or by trying to hoist himself back again.
But West suggests that Maxwell could have also sustained such an injury as
he deliberately took his own life.
West believes such an injury could have been incurred by climbing over the
rail and slipping while still holding the rail. But it could also be a
crucial clue pointing to suicide. 'One sees this pattern of injury on
occasions in individuals who kill themselves as a result of falling from
high buildings. While some will jump or let themselves topple over a baclony
or out of a window others will actually will ease themselves over the edge
and hold on for a time with one or both hands before letting go.'
Could he have died of a heart attack?
Maxwell had been suffering for years from fluid and respiratory problems. He
was overweight and had been under some pressure. However, one of his leading
doctors maintains that he was 'healthy' before leaving on his final cruise.
Tests carried out by Spanish pathologists showed some evidence of ischemic
myocardial damage - in layman's terms, his heart muscles were damaged due to
lack of blood.
The Spanish doctors therefore reached the conclusion that he could have died
of a heart attack in the water having fallen following an accident possibly
provoked by breathing difficulties.
Dr West found difficulty in performing his examination because of the poor
state in which the body reached him. It had been poorly embalmed. Some parts
of the body were in an advanced state of decomposition. Others were missing
having been sent to Madrid for separate analysis by the Spanish pathologist.
But Dr West was unconvinced of the theory that Maxwell had suffered a big
enough heart attack while on board to send him toppling overboard.
He concluded that, while Maxwell had undoubtedly suffered' a degree of heart
damage' there was no evidence of a massive coronary.
Dr West, on the other hand, concedes that Maxwell could have suffered a
heart attack while in the water. In this, at least, the pathologists concur.
The other crucial finding by both autopsies was that there was no conclusive
evidence that the sole cause of death was by drowning, following tests on
Maxwel's lungs and samples taken from the sea water.
Dr West concludes that Maxwell's injuries do not point to a clearly defined
cause of death. The most likely conclusion that can be drawn from both
autopsies is that the physical cause of death was, most probably, a
combination of a heart attack and drowning while struggling in the water.
So how did Maxwell die? On the evidence available both murder - for which
there is no physical evidence - and a heart attack as a single cause of
death can probably be ruled out.
This leaves one of two possibilities. Maxwell either fell into the water by
accident or he committed suicide. Neither can be ruled out on the basis of
the forensic evidence.
Rankin told Maxwell's widow, Betty, on her arrival in the Canaries, that he
thought her husband had killed himself.
The verdict probably rests on Maxwell's behaviour, his state of mind, and
the looming catastrophe he would have to face if he returned.
