FT  12 FEB 92 / Trade and the Environment: Ivory sale ban fails to halt
poaching
THE BAN on world trade in ivory is insufficient to stop elephant poaching, a
report from the World Wide Fund for Nature re-vealed yesterday. Other
independent research goes further, arguing that as a trade measure the ban
will provide short-term relief at best.
Its success in curbing trade in ivory is due to the raised awareness created
by publicity around the ban, and should not lull those concerned over the
plight of elephant populations into concluding that the ban itself is likely
to be effective.
The need for dramatic action was accepted by all parties when in October
1989 signatories to the Convention on International Trade of Endangered
Species (Cites) voted for an indefinite ban on trade in elephant products.
In the decade to 1988, Africa's elephant population had fallen from 1.2m to
600,000. Annual exports of unworked ivory had risen from 200-400 tonnes a
year in the 1950s to an average close to 1,000 tonnes in the 1980s, earning
between Dollars 35m-Dollars 45m (Pounds 19.4m-Pounds 25m) for ivory
exporters.
Yesterday's World Wide Fund for Nature report remains committed to the need
for a total ban - but says better park protection and further financial
assistance are needed 'in order for the ban to be effective in most parts of
Africa'.
'While the ban may have played a role in reducing illegal hunting, other
factors such as additional law enforcement and financial assistance may have
more directly contributed to a reduction in poaching,' the report argues.
There is consensus that the trade ban has led to a collapse in demand for
worked ivory, particularly in the US and Europe.
But Dr Richard Luxmoore at the Wildlife Conservation Monitoring Centre in
Cambridge argues this fall is perhaps due more to enhanced awareness about,
and concern over, the threat to elephant populations than it is to the ban.
He points to a similar collapse in demand for fur products in the US and
Europe, which has been achieved without any comprehensive ban.
