FT  14 NOV 92 / Brokering a peace in Bosnia's war: David White travels with
a British convoy under Serb shellfire
As the British troops drove up to the Bosnian town of Maglaj yesterday
morning they were warned at a Moslem checkpoint that there had been mortar
attacks. In a valley further on, the thud of artillery every few seconds
could clearly be heard.
'We'll go in anyway,' Lt Col Bob Stewart told the convoy. 'I'm going to go
in really fast on the main road.'
Two vehicles waited behind. The other four Land Rovers, carrying 12 men and
four tonnes of oil, flour, baby food and medical supplies, drove on, trailed
by a BBC Radio Land Rover and an ITN film crew in an armoured Ford Granada.
We came to a stop at the end of a kilometre-long tunnel just before Maglaj.
A shell had landed on the railway tracks 150 metres ahead. Although a
British reconnaissance party had been attacked with small-arms and
machine-gun fire on a road to the town of Tuzla last week, this was the
first time British troops had faced shell-fire.
The mission showed the difficulties of trying to enforce a ceasefire in the
Bosnian war and of ensuring that aid supplies reach their destination.
After a short time, the vehicles dashed into the sunlight and down a rough
detour to meet a back road into town. The whoosh of incoming shells from
Serb forces continued sporadically.
Inside the town, Lt Col Stewart, commander of the UK battalion group
assigned to convoy protection, ordered his men into a cellar after a nearby
impact. He and Brig Roddy Cordy-Simpson, chief of staff of the UN Protection
Force's Bosnia command, were arranging to speak to the local Moslem and
Croat commanders, who work in close alliance.
'I don't think it's a minor violation that they're shelling Maglaj,' Lt Col
Stewart told his troops. 'This has got to be stopped. People live here.
They're people like you and I'
As a group of soldiers went to rush the aid supplies from the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees into a medical centre, another shell landed about
50m away.
Lt Col Stewart with Brig Cordy-Simpson, who brokered the ceasefire agreement
between Serb and Croat and Moslem forces earlier in the week, had been sent
to Maglaj by UN military headquarters in Bosnia to check on breaches of the
agreement, which should have taken effect on Thursday. Maglaj, in northern
Bosnia, was a town of 43,000 before the war. It is one of the main
destinations to which British troops are trying to get supplies. The UN says
14,000 displaced people are there.
The town has become accustomed to regular attack. In the smoky underground
room, commanders said it had been under fire from tanks, mortars and heavy
guns for several hours.
Brig Cordy-Simpson said he was 'obviously very disappointed' at the
fighting, the worst violation since the ceasefire deadline. However, some
regions had become quieter.
'Somehow we have got to find our way through these areas where the ceasefire
breaks down,' he said.
Into the valley of dearth, Page 7
