FT  14 MAY 92 / Survey of Argentina (6): Provincial burdens -
Decentralisation
ARGENTINA IS a country with a small population that is crammed into one
corner of its huge territory. The province of Buenos Aires, where over
one-third of the 32m population lives, casts a long shadow over the other 23
provinces.
Its stranglehold may be weakening now that the key posts in the federal
government are held by outsiders. President Carlos Menem is from the
province of La Rioja in the west, and Mr Domingo Cavallo, the economy
minister, is from Cordoba in the centre.
The government is trying to make Argentina a truly federal state, probably
for the first time ever, through a big decentralisation programme. When the
process is completed next year, Buenos Aires will be responsible only for
defence, federal justice, trade and economic policy, tax collection, foreign
relations and some educational services.
By law, 56 per cent of most taxes raised by the national government are
transferred to the provinces. Local revenues are increasing dramatically
with the rise in tax collection. Transfers are forecast at Dollars 12.8bn
this year, 26 per cent more than in 1991. Transfers should rise to Dollars
15.1bn next year. Oil-producing regions' revenues are growing faster still,
since they charge royalties on production.
Nonetheless, the provinces' atrocious finances are a permanent threat to
economic stability, and the federal government is trying as hard as it can
to force them to adjust. Only a few have advanced very far in reorganising
themselves. Far too many regions have a bloated, inefficient government
sector, burdened with over-regulation and corruption.
Mr Cavallo has ended the provinces' virtually automatic central bank
funding, and the World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank have made
reform a condition for releasing Dollars 600m-worth of loans earmarked for
local government.
Provincial governors may complain of bullying, but in the end they have
little choice but to comply. Some provinces, like Cordoba and La Pampa in
the agricultural heartland, are reasonably well administered. Cordoba is
perhaps the only province to have fostered a flourishing enterprise culture.
Others, such as La Rioja - which Mr Menem governed until he became president
in 1989 - are a disgrace. Last year, one in 10 of La Rioja's population of
221,000 worked for the government and wages consumed 65 per cent of
spending. Like some other provinces, it used to cover its budget deficit by
printing provincial money. Last year it raised a mere 5 per cent of spending
from local taxes; the rest came from central government transfers.
The provinces must change their political systems. Many are run by political
clans that have clung to power for decades through a blend of patronage,
corruption and brutality. Some ruling families lost power in last year's
gubernatorial elections. Those that remain are finding that their old tactic
of extorting federal aid in exchange for support in Congress is becoming
less effective.
Mr Cavallo believes that voters will demand more efficient local government.
However, there is an obvious risk that increasing tax revenues will
strengthen the power of local strongmen and allow them to stave off economic
adjustment.
The provinces could make greater efforts to develop untapped resources. For
instance, the western Andean provinces have done nothing to encourage
mining, and those on the Atlantic seaboard could easily develop fishing
industries.
Some analysts wonder if certain provinces are viable administrative units.
Some cover huge areas with small populations. Others are relatively populous
but have small economies. The burden of providing provincial and municipal
levels of government may be too much for them, making some form of regional
administration or amalgamation necessary in the future.
