FT  10 APR 92 / Election 1992: Small parties' positions in power broking
THE minority parties have been prepared to say more than either Labour or
the Tories about how they might broker their support in a hung parliament.
Their opening bargaining positions would be:
LIBERAL DEMOCRATS: Mr Paddy Ashdown has gone further than any other party
leader in setting out his terms for supporting a minority government.
His essential 'pre-requisite' is a promise, in the Queen's Speech, of
legislation to reform the electoral system. He is prepared to have
discussions at a later stage on what form of system.
Mr Ashdown has allowed himself an escape clause however. He would not
necessarily vote against a minority government if Britain faced an economic
or international crisis. Sharp falls in financial markets today could fall
into his definition of 'crisis'.
After electoral reform, Mr Ashdown has set extra spending on education,
Scottish home rule and a positive European policy, including backing for a
single European currency, as his priorities.
Mr Ashdown does not want a repetition of the 1977-78 Lib/Lab pact. He wants
a 'partnership' government in which Liberal Democrat MPs would hold
ministerial posts from cabinet rank downwards. He has not said how many
posts he wants or who might fill what slots. He will not support any
government relying on the support of Northern Ireland's unionist
politicians.
ULSTER UNIONISTS: Mr James Molyneaux, leader of the Ulster Unionist party,
has indicated that he would not be looking for government posts in return
for his party's support. He would support a government on an ad-hoc basis,
probably requiring a drip-feed of concessions.
In theory the party could support either Labour or the Tories, but Ulster
Unionists are more conservative by inclination.
Unionists set the repeal of the 1985 Anglo-Irish Agreement as their top
priority, but they know that would be politically difficult for either
Labour or the Tories and would require negotiations with the Irish
government. They might settle for a reaffirmation of the government's
determination to find a more acceptable alternative.
Other demands would centre on tougher security in Northern Ireland, moves
towards a devolved administration in and the reform of procedures at
Westminster for Ulster business.
DEMOCRATIC UNIONISTS: The Rev Ian Paisley, leader of the Democratic Unionist
party, will act in consultation with Mr Molyneaux. His demands would be
little different, except to perhaps put more emphasis on a return to a
devolved legislative assembly in Ulster, akin to the Stormont parliament
which collapsed in the early 1970s.
SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC AND LABOUR PARTY: The nationalist Social Democratic and
Labour party, lead by Mr John Hume, is unlikely to enter a formal pact, but
would support Labour - its sister socialist party - in most circumstances.
If Labour was relying on unionist support they would almost certainly
withdraw their support.
SCOTTISH NATIONALISTS: The SNP has a long standing policy of refusing to
make deals with the Tories. It also has a dislike and distrust of Labour.
But it might support Labour in order to prevent a Conservative government -
particularly as the Labour party proposes Scottish devolution, which the SNP
could justify as a step towards independence.
PLAID CYMRU: The Welsh nationalist party is highly unlikely to make any deal
with the Tories and says it will not support any government without a
promise of a Welsh parliament within a year. It may also see tactical
advantages of keeping Labour in office.
