FT  09 SEP 92 / OECD suggests reforms to lift Canadian productivity
THE CANADIAN economy requires further structural reforms to reverse the
slide in its international competitiveness over the past two decades, the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development says in its latest
report on the country.
While the OECD gives credit for some initiatives since the mid-1980s, it
concludes that 'improvement of Canadian productivity performance remains
elusive'. Greater attention should be given to education and training
policies, research and development, and to removal of remaining domestic and
external trade barriers.
The report notes that recent progress in lowering inflation and maintaining
fiscal discipline has set the stage for the next economic recovery. But it
cautions that the upturn will be sluggish.
Gross domestic product, which contracted by 1.7 per cent in 1991, is
forecast to rise by 2.3 per cent this year, accelerating to 4.3 per cent in
1993. Exports and housing are expected to be the mainsprings of the
recovery.
Despite the upturn in demand, considerable slack will remain in goods and
labour markets.
The OECD expects Canada's inflation rate, currently the lowest among leading
industrial countries, will be about 2 per cent both this year and next,
easily beating targets set by the government last year.
But it cautions that expectations of lower inflation, in the form of more
moderate wage demands, have yet to be firmly established.
'The private sector probably needs to see the targets achieved before
putting full faith in them when forming its inflation expectations,' the
report says.
The OECD notes that the impact of Canada's sliding productivity is evident
in the deteriorating trade balance and historically low profit margins.
It suggests that improvements in the much-criticised education and R&amp;D
effort require a reallocation of existing resources, rather than additional
spending.
The report says that although a further decline in the Canadian dollar,
which had fallen by yesterday morning to below 83 US cents from 89 cents
last November, may ease competitive pressures in the short term, 'exchange
rate depreciation is not a viable solution in the longer run.
'Indeed, as the economy recovers, a rapid downward adjustment of the
exchange rate might reignite inflation expectations, with the risk of
undermining the price performance achieved so far and, consequently, the
credibility of policies.'
