FT  24 DEC 92 / UK Company News: ITC rejects request to revoke HTV's licence
THE Independent Television Commission yesterday rejected a request that
HTV's television licence should be revoked before it was evident that it
could not carry out its obligations.
Sir George Russell, chairman of the ITC, has written to the C3W consortium -
which was seeking withdrawal of HTV's licence - saying there are no grounds
for revoking it. C3W was one of the losing bidders for the Wales and the
West franchise.
Sir George, in his reply to C3W, says that HTV has not indicated it does not
intend to provide an ITV service. He does not consider that for any other
reason the Commission 'has reasonable grounds for believing that HTV will
not provide that service once the licence has come into force.'
HTV has admitted it will have to save Pounds 10m a year to meet the demands
of the Pounds 20.5m a year it has to pay the government. It also has to pay
2 per cent of its advertising revenue to the Treasury.
Mr Charles Romaine, group chief executive of C3W, said yesterday that
savings of Pounds 12.5m had been found.
City analysts are now predicting pre-tax profits of Pounds 2.5m for calendar
year 1993, a figure that could well be exceeded.
Every aspect of the business has been looked at but the main savings have
come from the contracting out, or casualisation of services.
By the middle of next year the staff could be cut to a third of the more
than 900 figure in 1989. Staff are being encouraged to set up their own
businesses selling services to HTV.
For example, the outside broadcasting unit has been 'privatised' with HTV
having the right to the first 10 per cent of its time.
HTV's share of ITV advertising revenue, which fell as low as 5.3 per cent in
November, is expected under new deals now being done to rise to 6.2 per cent
and possibly as high as 6.4 per cent.
The company will also get an additional Pounds 1m from the sale of part of
its Culverhouse Cross site for which Atlantic Properties has won planning
permission for a retail development.
