FT  31 OCT 92 / The Financial Times Guide To Post-16 Education 18: Forest
goes for growth
CAN SUCCESSFUL schools expand without jeopardising their characters? And if
you want single-sex education for adolescents, but think co-ed better at
sixth-form level, how can schools provide both without forcing pupils to
change institution at 16?
Forest School, an independent school on the Essex/London border, offers a
model for dealing with both issues successfully. For Forest has expanded
rapidly without losing its soul and it keeps the sexes apart at the 11 to 16
age range while integrating them in the sixth form.
In barely a decade, Forest School doubled in size - expanding from 550
pupils in 1974 to 1,100 a decade later. It went co-ed in the process, but
did both - grow and admit girls - with no significant increase in the size
of the 'original' school. Since the mid-1980s it has grown to 1,200 on the
same basis.
The trick? In 1981 Forest's governors built a separate girls' school on the
same campus as the existing boys' school and created a federation to unite
its three schools - the third being a junior school, originally a boys' prep
school, but now admitting girls into a new section.
The three schools have their own classroom blocks, but share sports and
specialist teaching facilities for music, computing and the like. In the
senior schools, pupils are taught separately up to GCSE but together in the
sixth form. A-level pupils from both schools share a sixth-form centre. The
senior schools also have a boarding house with 23 boarders and room for up
to 60 - 'a selling point with parents worried they might have to move away,'
says David Tudor, deputy Warden.
Across the three schools, the balance is 800 boys to 400 girls. One
governing body covers all three. But the schools are not just separate in
name: each has its own teaching staff, headteacher and distinctive ethos. A
'super-head', the Warden, presides over the three.
'We provide an appropriate teaching environment for boys and girls of
different ages and enable each pupil to experience the friendless and
familiarity of a small community while enjoying all the benefits which come
from membership of a large school,' runs the prospectus. Warden Andrew
Boggis, just appointed from an Eton housemastership, is more succinct: 'We
run with nature.'
Nature and the market go hand-in-hand, it seems. Mr Boggis's predecessor but
one, the brains behind Forest's transformation in the late-1970s, saw a
clear niche. Ilford County High for Boys and Woodford County High for Girls,
the two local state grammar schools, both of which achieve results on a par
with Forest's, are single sex and unable to absorb all the local demand. Of
the other private schools in the area at the time, one was fully co-ed,
another single-sex, and a third (Brentwood) only admitted girls into the
sixth form. Brentwood has since imitated Forest and opened a girls' school
on its campus for 11- to 16-year-olds, though without a separate head
teacher.
Apart from nature and a niche, three factors were crucial to Forest's
success. First, it practised 'subsidiarity' long before the Eurocrats
hijacked the concept. The three head teachers have real autonomy in managing
their schools: they have their own teaching staff and premises, and far more
discretion than the deputy heads of a typical 1,200-strong state school.
Second, the school had enough space and resources to expand. It was not well
endowed with either: the campus is 27 acres, and part of a playing field was
used to build the girls school. The new school and related extensions cost
Pounds 4m at today's prices, which was partly met from reserves, the rest
coming from two appeals to parents.
Third, the school expanded its effective catchment area at the same time as
it doubled in size, to ensure that academic standards were not diluted. It
did so by copying from Haberdashers' Aske's, the thriving Hertfordshire day
school, the practice of mass bussing. Forest's catchment area now extends
across north and east London, from Islington to Chelmsford, though the
school estimates it still recruits 'somewhat more' from the vicinity than it
did pre-1980.
Was it worth it? Talking to pupils, the sense of belonging to the smaller
unit has not been lost, and most like the balance between single-sex and
co-ed.
Forest also holds its own on the fees and results front. 260th in the
FT-1,000, it gains average A-level results of three Cs, much the same its
local independent sector competition. It stresses traditional values - John
Patten would love the prospectus: 'A Shakespeare play has been performed
annually since 1960' - but an easy formality reigns, and pupils are
encouraged to take on extra-curricular activities. As to fees, its Pounds
4,449 a year for day pupils is the going rate locally for those opting-out
of the state sector. Around 35 of each year's 150 entrants have a greater or
lesser degree of financial assistance, either from the government's assisted
places scheme or from school scholarships.
No two schools are alike, and Forest's experience cannot be transplanted.
But its achievement represents two fingers to those who think it takes
bureaucrats to plan school provision.
