FT  23 OCT 92 / Willett quits Isosceles and Gateway
MR BOB WILLETT has resigned as a director of the Isosceles board and chief
executive of Gateway, its main trading subsidiary, in the latest twist in
the tale of the heavily borrowed buy-out.
Gateway was taken over by Isosceles in 1989 in a Pounds 2.1bn leveraged
deal.
Isosceles said Mr Willett's departure was a step towards combining the
boards of Isosceles and Gateway. It appears also to be an attempt to regain
control of Gateway's head office in Bristol. One insider said yesterday: 'It
is not a happy ship and that is a factor which weighed with the board.'
The group's banks were said not to have pressed for management changes,
although Mr Ernest Sharp, chairman of Isosceles, said they supported them.
Mr Alistair Mitchell-Innes, who is chief executive of Isosceles and chairman
of Gateway, will take on Mr Willett's role as well.
Mr Bob Nellist, finance director of Isosceles, will become deputy chairman
of Gateway.
Mr Sharp said Mr Mitchell-Innes' first task was to go to Bristol and start a
'very close review of the organisation and structure'. There was speculation
Isosceles may seek to strengthen the board further, perhaps by appointing
someone with more retail experience.
Mr Mitchell-Innes, 57, was a non-executive director of Isosceles, and
stepped into his present shoes when Mr David Smith, the previous chief
executive, left last autumn. He was chief operating officer of the UK
subsidiary of Nabisco Brands between 1984 and 1988. Earlier he worked at
Unilever, including a spell running the supermarket division of
MacFisheries, and at Brooke Bond.
Mr Willett came in for criticism over Gateway's trading performance which
has failed to meet budgets since the financial year began at the end of
April. Mr Sharp said that business was tough, but that 'the figures are not
a million miles away from the ones we gave the banks in August' when a
financial restructuring was being finalised.
Lenders to Isosceles, which owes more than Pounds 1.2bn, have been concerned
by the group's ability to service its debt. A New York-based firm which
trades in the debt of highly leveraged companies, said yesterday senior
lenders to Isosceles had offered to sell at prices between 75 per cent and
80 per cent of face value.
Mr Willett has a contract until August 15 1995 at an annual salary of Pounds
195,000 but his compensation has not yet been negotiated.
Background, Page 24
