FT  24 OCT 92 / Finance and the Family: Transfer temptations: the pros and
the cons - Planning Your Pension / Those moving jobs face a devilishly
tricky decision over their accrued benefits. Eric Short weighs the options
EACH YEAR, millions of employees in company pension schemes leave their
jobs. Many seek the services of an independent financial adviser or a life
company representative to help them decide whether to leave their accrued
benefits in the old scheme or transfer those benefits to another pension
arrangement - either to another company scheme or to a pension contract with
a life company.
But in many cases employees have not been given what is regarded as best
advice. Fimbra and Lautro, the regulatory bodies, have both issued guidance
on the subject which effectively tells intermediaries that they must make a
thorough investigation of the circumstances before advising clients. If in
doubt, they should not recommend a transfer.
The problem for employees, and for those intermediaries advising them, is
that precise comparisons between the alternatives are impossible because the
contracts are different.
The company scheme provides a pension whose value has certain guarantees and
some protection against inflation, and which does not depend on the
investment performance of the fund or annuity rates. In addition, the scheme
will offer a spouse's pension, together with other possible fringe benefits
such as paying a pension early because of ill-health.
In contrast, a personal pension or buy-out contract from a life company
operates on the money purchase principle, in that the transfer value is
invested and the accumulated value used to provide a pension through buying
an annuity. The value of the ultimate pension depends on investment
performance and annuity rates. The buy-out has some guarantees, but the
personal pension has none.
This uncertainty does not mean that the pension will be lower, as implied by
many commentators. But a personal pension or a buy-out is a lottery and like
most lotteries there are winners and losers. The task of the adviser is to
decide whether recommending a transfer will provide a winner or a loser.
So, how should you decide between a transfer into a corporate and a personal
pension scheme? A leading consulting actuary adopts the following approach.
First, the consultant sets out the benefits provided if the employee leaves
his accrued rights in the company scheme. This shows: (1) The pension
entitlement at the normal pension age of the scheme. This should show the
value at the date of leaving employment and the expected value at
retirement, assuming the present statutory increases and present company
policy are continued. (2) The cash option available at retirement. (3) The
spouse's pension paid on the death of the employee if this occurs after
retirement. (4) The spouse's pension paid if the employee dies before
reaching retirement age. (5) The pension available on early retirement. (6)
The amount of transfer value available in lieu of the deferred benefits and
the period for which this value is guaranteed.
If the arrangements are not completed by this date, the employee must obtain
a fresh transfer value calculation.
The next step should be to set out the benefits available if the transfer
value is invested in a personal pension.
A consultant can calculate the amount of the accumulated fund at the time of
retirement, using two growth rate assumptions. A life company making such
calculations for an IFA would have to use the growth rates set out by
Lautro. However, an actuary authorised by the Institute of Actuaries can use
his or her professional judgment as to the appropriate growth rate
assumptions.
The consultant then calculates the pension which the accumulated fund will
buy on several different assumptions - with and without a spouse's pension,
and with and without a 5 per cent annual increase.
He can then calculate the investment return which the life company must
achieve, after allowing for its expenses, to match the benefits provided by
the company scheme.
So which is best for the employee? This depends on a number of factors -
financial and non-financial.
Financial factors
The employee has to decide whether the recommended life company can achieve
a higher return over the time to retirement than is required to provide the
scheme benefits. An adviser can give an opinion as to whether he considers
the life company can achieve this return, using past performance as an
indication (but nothing more), but he cannot give a guarantee of a future
return - nor can the life company.
With bonus rates expected to be reduced next year, investors are getting a
foretaste of the volatility of life company investment performance.
The company scheme provides spouse's benefits which an employee has to buy
with a personal pension. As such, a personal pension is more favourable to a
single person than to a married person.
The employee should consider not only the benefits at normal retirement, but
those available on early retirement. The company may well be generous
towards early retirement and not impose the full actuarial penalty, whereas
with a personal pension the full penalty is imposed automatically.
Company pension schemes are becoming more generous in making pension
increases to offset inflation - increases that the actuary to the scheme may
not have taken fully into account in calculating the transfer value. With a
personal pension, any pension increases have to be paid for. In addition,
the company is effectively guaranteeing annuity rates, something the life
company will not do.
On the other hand, the company scheme has to achieve a similar investment
return to provide the benefits and this in turn implies that the scheme is
adequately funded. Not only is there the risk of fraud, but many schemes are
now being wound up without sufficient assets to pay all the full benefits.
The deferred pensioner is at the back of the queue if there is a shortfall.
Non-Financial factors
The employee's temperament is possibly the single most important factor.
There are several aspects to this: the employee can have a measure of
control of his pension assets in a unit-linked personal pension - he or she
can switch from, say, shares to cash if wished. In a company scheme, the
employee has little or no control in its operation. The circumstances under
which the employee left may be such that he wants nothing to do with
anything managed by his old employer.
The employee's attitude towards investment risks. If the employee is
risk-averse, or if the deferred pension represents a significant part of his
ultimate pension, he should consider the situation carefully before taking
those benefits out of the company scheme.
