FT  12 MAY 92 / Results of City rules review welcomed
THE LEGAL relationship between many of the UK's financial institutions and
their clients should not be subjected to fresh upheaval, the Law Commission,
the main legal reform body in the UK, recommends in a consultative paper
issued today.
The commission's paper, coming after a two-year review, was welcomed in the
City yesterday.
The general view among regulators and firms is that the present legal
position may be uncertain and messy, but it is preferable to fresh
legislation that might reopen many of the debates that preceded the UK's
Financial Services Act of 1986. The commission's views were sought by Mr
John Redwood, then minister for corporate affairs, in April 1990. He had
become concerned about the interaction of common-law fiduciary duties, which
spell out the basic legal relationship between advisers or brokers and their
clients, with the superstructure of rules for the investment industry
created by the Financial Services Act.
The rules do not match common law in all respects. In common law, for
instance, an agent - whether an insurance broker, stockbroker or any other
adviser - must disclose all commissions and other forms of income to a
client. The regulatory rules do not require this full dis-closure.
Also regulations allow investment banks to operate with 'Chinese walls'  -
barriers between different parts of their business to prevent conflicts of
interest or leaks of confidential information - whereas common law does not
recognise the existence of such internal divisions.
There have been no test cases on those and other discrepancies produced by
the Financial Services Act. The legal basis of many common City practices
has been left uncertain as a result - which makes City lawyers, still
stinging from the legal impact of the local authority swaps fiasco, nervous.
The commission considered four options:
Allowing regulatory rules to override common law. That would give financial
firms a 'safe harbour' from prosecution for breach of fiduciary duty,
provided they obeyed the regulations.
Even the City's self-regulating organisations seem to agree this would be
putting too much power into the hands of regulators. One said: 'The City may
be crying out for certainty. But the idea of giving SROs the power to
override common law is a nightmare.'
Leaving common law and regulatory rules to operate in their own spheres, but
not to attempt to relate them. That, says the commission, 'would lead to
great complication and uncertainty'.
Replicating common-law requirements in the regulators' rules. That would be
impractical, the commission says, since fiduciary duties are formulated in a
'broad and general way', and so would be difficult to turn into regulations.
Requiring the courts to take into account regulatory rules when deciding
whether a firm has fulfilled its common law duties. 'We provisionally favour
this approach,' says the commission. One reason is that 'it does not favour
an abdication of control by the courts in favour of the regulators.'
Under such an arrangement, the courts would assess the 'reasonableness' of
the regulators' own rules and a firm's compliance with them when assessing
compliance with the common law.
The commission says that may already be the state of the law, although
confirmation of that would be helpful.
In the City, where memories of the convoluted passage of the Financial
Services Act are still fresh, the recommendation was greeted with some
relief. Any other solution might have needed legislation - and the risk that
the City's self-regulatory system would again be exposed to political
scrutiny.
The British Merchant Banking and Securities Houses Association, a City trade
association, said: 'The regulatory system needs time to settle down. The
great majority of our members thought that to legislate would just cause
further uncertainties.'
Fiduciary Duties and Regulatory Rules (CP 124), HMSO. Pounds 15.50.
