FT  06 JAN 92 / Arabs debate stance on Mideast talks
MIDDLE East peace talks scheduled to resume in Washington tomorrow have been
put in jeopardy as Arab participants debate how to respond to Israel's
decision to deport 12 Palestinian activists.
Palestinian, Jordanian, Syrian and Lebanese negotiators have postponed
attendance in response to the Israeli move.
Palestinian leaders say their attendance could hinge on the outcome of a
United Nations Security Council session to be held today, which is expected
to condemn the Israeli action.
Israeli officials confirmed yesterday that their delegation would leave for
Washington as planned, and dismissed the possibility of dropping the
expulsion, which has drawn unusually harsh condemnation from the US, Russia,
Britain, France and the EC.
Diplomats in Washington said the US was likely to support a resolution
condemning the deportations as long as it was limited to that issue and did
not turn into a more generalised condemnation of Israel.
Such a resolution would go some way towards assuaging Palestinian anger, and
officials said it could help ensure that the delay in the peace talks would
be brief, perhaps as short as two or three days.
Mr Yassir Arafat, the leader of the Palestine Liberation Organisation, said
in Cairo after talks with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak that a final
decision on whether to boycott the talks had not yet been reached.
Mr Arafat then flew to Jordan for talks with King Hussein on the fate of the
peace talks. Jordan and Palestinians from the Israeli-held territories have
formed a joint delegation to get round the Jewish state's refusal to talk to
the PLO.
Israeli newspapers yesterday quoted Mr Nabil Shaath, a senior aide to Mr
Arafat, as saying that Palestinians would not boycott the talks, a move
demanded in emotional appeals by families of the 12 men awaiting expulsion.
But other Palestinian spokesmen made it clear they would attend only if
Israel suspended the deportation order.
The expulsions were in reprisal for the murder of a Jewish settler in the
Gaza Strip. The 12 have appealed to the Israeli army against the deportation
orders.
Unidentified gunmen killed a security official of the PLO in Lebanon's
southern port city of Sidon yesterday, Reuter reports.
Mr Hussein Sulaiman, an official in Force 17  - the security network of Mr
Arafat's mainstream Fatah movement  - was hit by two bullets as he left his
house.
Reuter adds from Washington: Arkansas Governor Bill Clinton, a leading US
Democratic presidential candidate, yesterday backed granting Israel up to
Dollars 10bn in loan guarantees to finance the immigration of Soviet Jews.
President George Bush postponed the decision in an effort to launch the
peace talks. He has to decide this month whether to seek further delay or
request the guarantees from Congress.
