FT  11 JUN 92 / International Company News: United Grain Growers plans
public offering
UNITED Grain Growers, of Winnipeg, Canada's first farmer-owned grain
handling and marketing company, plans to go public with an initial offer of
around CDollars 40m (USDollars 33m).
UGG, founded in 1906, operates 265 grain elevators and terminals in western
Canada. The company, whose crop forecasts are known worldwide, employs
1,500.
Revenues in 1990-1991 were CDollars 1.1bn, with profits of CDollars 2.7m.
Most of the revenues come from fees farmers pay for grain storage and
transfer to rail wagons.
Mr Brian Hayward, chief executive, said the offer would go ahead next spring
after approval of the 70,000 UGG farmer-owners who will retain control.
The new money will be used to modernise UGG facilities. The competing
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is also considering going public.
BCG, Canada's biggest telecommunications group, has dropped plans to raise
its 25 per cent interest in SHL Systemhouse, the fast-growing systems
integrator, to 60 per cent.
BCE says it will keep its options open, but the plan to create a strategic
alliance between itself, Bell Canada, its fully-owned telecommunications
utility, and SHL 'has been terminated'.
It would not immediately comment further.
BCE had planned to buy SHL treasury stock to bring its holding to 60 per
cent at CDollars 12.75 a share or CDollars 287m in all. Bell Canada's data
processing would have been transferred to SHL.
Since talks began last February, SHL stock has moved up to CDollars 16 in
the market as the company made acqusitions and made new contracts in North
America and Europe.
Canadian Bond Rating Service has again reduced its rating on Bramalea's debt
securities. The property developer, controlled indirectly by the Mr Peter
and Mr Edward Bronfman interests, is struggling with heavy debt and has
promised its bankers a new business plan.
CBRS reduced its Bramalea rating to non-investment grade six weeks ago.
Yesterday, it downgraded the rating another notch because of 'concern about
Bramalea's ability to restructure its balance sheet'.
