FT  14 FEB 92 / SFO may get civil action powers: Government opens door to
fundamental review of prosecution of fraud cases
THE GOVERNMENT would consider any request from the Serious Fraud Office to
allow it to opt for civil instead of criminal proceedings in prosecuting
large fraud cases, Mr John Redwood, corporate affairs minister, said
yesterday.
He also agreed to 'look at' any SFO request for greater investigative
powers, but said that in previous discussions Mrs Barbara Mills, the
out-going SFO director, had expressed satisfaction with the powers at her
disposal.
It was more important to examine how effectively existing powers were used,
he suggested.
Mr Redwood's comments, in an interview with the Financial Times, come at the
culmination of the Barlow Clowes, Blue Arrow and Guinness fraud trials. They
leave open the possibility of a fundamental review of the way fraud cases
are handled in the UK.
In civil cases, prosecuting authorities need to establish their case only on
a 'balance of probabilities', rather than the more stringent 'beyond
reasonable doubt' criterion required in criminal cases.
Mr Redwood's remarks followed a statement from the Labour party that it
would consider allowing authorities to choose between civil and criminal
proceedings.
Mrs Mills is known to hold that fraud should remain a criminal offence and
continue to be prosecuted in criminal courts. She is thought unlikely to
request that the SFO be given civil powers. That position could change under
her as yet unnamed successor.
Mr Redwood also revealed he was conducting a review of 'styles of
regulation' in the City and was 'about to talk' to the relevant bodies about
how regulation could be improved.
Regulators needed to be more 'pro-active', he argued, focusing on areas that
were giving cause for concern.
One subject understood to be under review is the sharing of information
between City regulators and the DTI. Within the City, there has been concern
that information gathered by the DTI's companies investigation division has
not been shared with City regulators. One regulator commented: 'We have a
close relationship with the Takeover Panel and the Bank of England, so it
would follow naturally if there was a rather closer relationship with those
in government departments responsible for prosecuting corporate
malpractice.'
Mr Redwood disputed Labour's claim that there was duplication of effort
among bodies with fraud-related responsibilities. 'If the SFO goes in, we do
not then send in DTI inspectors.' He said Labour encouraged the wasting of
resources by demanding a parallel DTI investigation to every SFO case being
pursued.
