FT  27 OCT 92 / Hungary backed by Germany over dam
GERMANY weighed in yesterday behind Hungary's increasingly frantic efforts
to stop Slovakia from damming and diverting the river Danube to feed the
controversial Gabcikovo hydroelectric barrage.
Mr Klaus Kinkel, the German foreign minister, issued a veiled warning of the
economic price of 'rash decisions' in the dam dispute after Slovakia began
at the weekend to block the Danube with quarry rock and concrete blocks.
Mr Kinkel said, without explicitly singling out Slovakia, that the European
Community's 'goodwill' in providing economic support was in danger. 'The row
has sparked a new, utterly unnecessary crisis in eastern Europe,' he said,
repeating calls for a negotiated settlement. The strong German intervention
drags the dam dispute squarely on to the European stage before tomorrow's
summit meeting between the EC and leaders of the central European countries.
Slovakia, despite pressure for a temporary halt, yesterday took construction
beyond the point of no return, diverting much of the river's flow into its
own territory.
The Hungarian government reacted yesterday with talk of reprisals. Mr Janos
Martonyi, state secretary at the Hungarian foreign ministry, ruled out
military action but pointedly kept all other options open and cast doubt on
the future of regional co-operation embodied in the Visegrad group of
central European countries.
Mr Martonyi re-emphasised Hungary's position that the diversion of the main
flow of the Danube, the international border, represented a territorial
violation as well as an environmental catastrophe in the making. Hungary
says that the dam will lower the water table, dry up marshes around the
Danube and damage the water supply.
The Bratislava government argues that the Gabcikovo barrage complex is
essential to the energy security and economic well-being of Slovakia, which
is to become independent from the new year.
The Czech and Slovak regional governments yesterday ratified a customs union
agreement between the two republics, writes Ariane Genillard in Prague. The
agreement was negotiated by by Mr Vaclav Klaus, the Czech prime minister,
and Mr Vladimir Meciar, his Slovak counterpart.
It allows for the free flow of goods between the republics after they become
independent on January 1 and should facilitate a renegotiation of the EC's
Czechoslovakia association agreement. EC officials are tomorrow to meet in
London the Czech, Slovak, Hungarian and Polish prime ministers to discuss
extension of the EC trade agreements.
