FT  04 JUN 92 / Maastricht in the Balance: No need to block the path to
convergence
THE PROGRESS and pace of European monetary union as agreed at Maastricht
hangs in the balance following yesterday's vote in Denmark. What need not be
threatened, however, is closer convergence of European economies.
Even if the Maastricht treaty was not ratified and economic and monetary
union did not occur in ways laid out in it, this need not be the end of
convergence, exchange rate stability, or even moves towards monetary union.
The exchange rate mechanism of the European monetary system has developed
into a durable, fixed rate regime. There has been no general realignment
since January 1987.
Inflation rates and differences among interest rates, both short and long,
have narrowed considerably. Exchange rate controls have been lifted in
virtually every participant in the ERM, the exceptions being Ireland and
Portugal. The EC has already gone a very long way towards creation of a
fixed exchange rate regime and an integrated capital market, open to the
world.
The ERM includes 11 of the EC's 12 member states, Greece being the
exception. Eight members are within the narrow 2 1/4 per cent divergence
limits; three - Spain, the UK and Portugal - are within the broader 6 per
cent bands. A number of non-EC countries are honorary members of the ERM.
Austria is the longest standing member of that club, its currency being
pegged to the D-Mark. The Finnish, Norwegian and Swedish currencies are now
pegged to the Ecu.
The question is whether the outcome of the Danish referendum could undermine
the stability of this creation and, in particular, prospects for further
monetary and fiscal convergence.
That it will call both into question is evident. But it may still be
possible to cajole the treaty through, though a greater degree of
instability is to be expected in the meantime.
But convergence, exchange rate stability and even monetary union could still
be attained.
The ostensible determination of most members of the EC to move to Emu became
evident only late in the ERM's history. The committee of central bankers
under the chairmanship of Jacques Delors, Commission president, that was
charged with examining the implications of economic and monetary union, was
established by the European Council in Hanover in June 1988.
Thus, much of the inflation convergence occurred before Emu was more than a
distant aspiration. In the cases of the UK and Spain, much of that
convergence even occurred outside the ERM.
Furthermore, the effects of German unification on German inflation, rather
than lower inflation elsewhere, have been among the most important causes of
recent convergence.
So long as fixed exchange rates can be maintained, further convergence of
inflation can be expected. There is no reason, in principle, why such
stability could not be secured. Fixed rate regimes, without exchange
controls, have been stable in the past. But they do require a determination
to put exchange rate stability above all other objectives in the setting of
monetary policy.
Failure of the Maastricht treaty need not affect that determination,
provided it has been grounded in a politically entrenched conviction that a
policy of low inflation and exchange rate stability, with what such a policy
entails for fiscal deficits and public debt, is in the interests of each
individual country.
It will make a difference, however, wherever the political commitment to
full participation in the evolution of the EC has itself been a principal
reason for the economic policy.
Among major countries, France, the UK and Spain must be deemed likely to
persist with their already established policies. Italy is a more uncertain
proposition, given the scale of the changes required, especially in its
fiscal policies, given also the Italian political impasse and the importance
of its founder-membership of the EC in Italian politics.
The Maastricht convergence criteria themselves are not precise targets. The
pressure any such targets exert need not be much less in the absence of a
treaty than in the presence of what was both an ambiguous and unassertive
one.
In one area, however, the disappearance of the treaty could make a
noteworthy difference. Bond rates. The most peculiar requirement of the
treaty is that long term interest rates of countries admitted to Emu should
'not exceed by more than 2 per cent that of, at most, the three best
performing member states in terms of price stability'.
But should participation of a given country within Emu be confidently
expected, then such convergence would have occurred long before.
Such a process could be at work now. But evidence for this would be that
long term bond rates are closer together than inflation, implying an
expectation of further convergence and ultimately, Emu.
The opposite is, in fact, the case. Bond rates diverge more than inflation.
This being so, any failure of the treaty need have no dramatic effect on the
bond market, except where that failure affects underlying inflation
performance as well, the main risks once more being in Italy or, of course,
in the case of the bond market most exposed to Emu, that for the Ecu itself.
Even if the Maastricht treaty were to fail, that need not be the end of
moves to Emu. Either formal treaties or ad hoc arrangements can be made to
tie the currencies of member states closer together, though this would
depend much on the German attitude to any such arrangement.
