FT  21 MAR 92 / International Company News: Bekaert to quit Japan joint
venture
BEKAERT, the Belgian producer of steel cord and wire, believes it could
raise more than BFr15bn (Dollars 435m) through the sale of a 49 per cent
stake in its Japanese joint venture Bridgestone-Bekaert Steel Cord  - three
times the book value of the holding.
Bekaert announced yesterday that it was bowing to pressure from its other
tyre-making customers and ending its 22-year-old joint venture with
Bridgestone Corporation, the Japanese tyre manufacturer.
Bridgestone-Bekaert, which generates profit of Y5bn annually on turnover of
Y40bn, makes steel cord for rubber reinforcement and sells about 80 per cent
of its production in Japan.
Mr Willy Snaet, a Bekaert vice-president, said yesterday: 'When Bridgestone
decided to take over Firestone (the US tyre manufacturer) recently, it moved
from being local to international and the relationship we had was
jeopardising our relationship with other customers.'
'It's a sign of the problems that they have in such a concentrated
industry,' added Mr Sebastian Scotney, a Belgian market analyst with Dillon
Read of London.
Bridgestone-Bekaert will become an independent company and Bekaert's shares
will gradually be sold to new investors on the Tokyo OTC market during 1993.
Mr Snaet said the Belgian group would probably not retain a stake in the
joint venture.
The Bridgestone-Bekaert stake is valued in Bekaert's net consolidated
accounts at just over BFr5bn. Although he stressed that the value would
depend on stock market conditions, Mr Snaet estimated that given the high
price-earnings ratios on the Tokyo market, the whole company could be worth
between BFr30bn and BFr36bn.
Analysts said such estimates should be treated with caution. They also
pointed out that some of the proceeds would have to offset the unspecified
cost to Bekaert of buying its outstanding minority stake in Bekaert
Dyersburg Steel Cord - a US subsidiary which was partly owned by
Bridgestone-Bekaert - in a deal announced last October.
On Monday, Bekaert is expected to announce a net consolidated loss for 1991
following another difficult year, and may only just cover its dividend
payout with earnings.
