FT  07 MAY 92 / Albania to launch economic reform package
ALBANIA'S new government plans to launch an economic package this month
aimed at reassuring the International Monetary Fund and other potential
lenders that the country's transition to a market economy is finally under
way.
The Democratic party's March election victory over the communists opened the
door to reform. But the economic and social chaos accompanying Albania's
emergence from half a century of self-imposed isolation has prompted western
governments and international financial institutions to move cautiously.
Yesterday Mr Sali Berisha, Albania's first democratically elected president
appealed to Europe for aid to rebuild his country. On his first European
tour since he was elected president last month, he promised shock treatment
to revive his country's 'ruined' economy.
The first measure will be to cut payments to unemployed industrial workers,
who still receive 80 per cent of their wages, despite the closure of most
factories after supplies of raw materials ran out last year.
Unemployment now exceeds 150,000, which is over 50 per cent of the urban
workforce. Under the new government's programme, wage subsidies will be
reduced by 10 per cent a month until they are eliminated. By that time, the
government hopes that industrial plants will be producing basic goods.
According to Mr Genc Ruli, the economy minister, about Dollars 100m (Pounds
56.4m) pledged in aid or loans from Germany, Italy, Turkey and Greece will
be spent on importing raw materials for industry. 'Our economic situation is
tragic. We shall be dependent on food aid for months to come. But we must
stop the subsidies if we are to get structural loans,' he said.
Albania is negotiating a Dollars 9m stand-by arrangement with the IMF, to be
followed by a World Bank adjustment loan. 'We are hoping for several hundred
million dollars, in a series of instalments,' Mr Ruli said.
The government is already concerned about meeting a major condition for the
stand-by loan: the liberalisation of prices for a basket of subsidised
goods, including bread, sugar and cooking oil. The economy ministry
forecasts that bread prices alone will rise fourfold. With higher wages and
steadily rising food prices, inflation has reached 500 per cent.
Following a disastrous 60 per cent decline in agricultural output last year
as collective farming collapsed, Albania survived the winter on food aid
provided first by Italy, then by the European Community. Despite severe
shortages, remittances in cash and consumer goods from about 150,000 migrant
workers in Greece have helped the south of the country to subsist.
Elsewhere, Albanians from Kosovo in Yugoslavia took advantage of the launch
of privatisation to invest in property and start small businesses. The
Albanian diaspora in the US is believed to have sent more than Dollars 1m in
private aid.
Yet despite the introduction of import taxes on popular items such as colour
televisions and second-hand cars, government revenues cover only 20 per cent
of expenditure. The public deficit has reached Lek10bn (Dollars 100m),
equivalent to 15 per cent of GDP. However, new fiscal arrangements are being
drawn up under the Phare programme, the vehicle for EC technical assistance
to eastern Europe.
