FT  23 MAY 92 / Property: Builders who are still waiting for buyers -
Developers hope that post-election optimism and the cut in interest rates
will be translated into sales
TODAY, THE first apartments go on show at Kensington Green, the Pounds 100m
redevelopment of St Mary Abbot's Hospital in Marloes Road, west London.
Since this 50-50 venture between Taylor Woodrow Capital Developments and
Mitsui Kensetu (UK) was launched a year ago, only five of the first 20
houses released have been sold, and another three are under offer, at prices
from Pounds 625,000 to Pounds 1.15m.
This slow rate of sales, coupled with the falling value of the five-acre
site (for which the North Thames Regional Health Authority was paid Pounds
47m), led Taylor Woodrow to write off Pounds 25m against the development in
its accounts for 1991 when it reported the first loss in its history last
month. Its Japanese partners have made similar financial provisions.
Yet it seems there is not much wrong with the development. Its architects,
Norman &amp; Dawbarn, have captured the character and quality of the best
traditional housing in Kensington, with 20th century amenities such as
adequate parking, a gated entrance with 24-hour security, and closed-circuit
TV surveillance. Nor is it particularly over-priced, with the first 33
apartments now for sale through Savills and Allsops at prices from Pounds
125,000 for a studio up to Pounds 880,000 for a three-bedroom penthouse with
spacious terraces and splendid views.
These prices equate to between Pounds 304 and Pounds 448 per square foot,
which is near the lower end of the scale for up-market new developments in
London.
Compare these prices at Kensington Green with those being sought for 3a
Palace Green, London's most expensive development, overlooking Kensington
Palace. Since this was launched a year ago, Regalian has yet to announce a
buyer for any of the 20 apartments, which range in price from Pounds 2m up
to Pounds 13.5m for the largest penthouse.
These prices equate to between Pounds 875 and an astonishing Pounds 2,000
per sq ft. Not all new developments are as expensive as these, of course,
nor are all developers having the same difficulty selling their new houses
and flats, although post-election optimism has yet to be translated into
sales, in spite of the cut in interest rates earlier this month.
Tony Kelley, managing director of CALA Homes South, says: 'Following the
election, everyone expected the property market to take off immediately, but
we thought it would take longer. In the first two weeks of May, however, we
have had our best sales this year, from first-time buyers at our Watford,
Hounslow and Pinner developments, to our family homes at Marlow, Horsham and
Poole.'
John Low, divisional managing director of Ideal Homes Holdings, says: 'We
are beginning to see a definite improvement in the housing market. We have
sold 13 starter homes on our Summerlands development in the Plymouth area in
the last four weeks.'
Other housebuilders confirm that more people are visiting their sites than
before the election, and this has led some big companies, such as Tarmac and
Wimpey, to stop discounting their prices. However, Wimpey, Countryside
Properties and Prowting Homes are still willing to do part exchanges, and
Barratt is promising to pay full market value for homes taken in part
exchange 'with no commission and no catches' - but the offer only applies to
buyers of selected new properties reserved before the end of this month and
legally completed by June 26.
Most major developers are offering three-year mortgage protection against
redundancy, and Lovell is coupling this with a guarantee that it will buy
back any of its properties in three years' time for the price paid for it.
Lovell's chief executive, Bob Sellier, explains: 'We are not prepared to sit
around and wait for the customers to come to us. Our offer applies to all
1,000 houses and flats on our 78 sites in England and Wales.'
Lovell wants to boost sales by at least 10 per cent. Last year, it sold 865
houses and flats at prices from Pounds 30,500 in Cleveland to Pounds 795,000
at Charlotte Park in Surrey, but the disposal of its Scottish housebuilding
division means that it is now unlikely to sell more than 700 homes this
year. It is only trading with the support of its banks, having made losses
of Pounds 56.4m in the year to September 30, 1991. The banks have agreed to
continue to make facilities available until the end of 1992. The market
leader, Tarmac, expects to sell 10,000 homes this year, only slightly more
than last year's 9,569, but it needs to improve profit margins.
In spite of writing down the value of its land bank of 17,000 plots by
Pounds 31m, it is still faced with an average plot value of Pounds 24,200,
which some analysts think is still far too high against an average selling
price of Pounds 77,000 for a new home.
By comparison, the Leeds-based housebuilder Tay Homes, which has increased
its land bank to 4,250 plots, or enough for more than four years at current
levels of sales, says the cost is only 15 per cent of average selling prices
of Pounds 67,000.
Wilson Connolly, one of the most profitable companies in the housebuilding
sector, sold 2,750 homes last year at an average price of Pounds 54,400 and
has built up a land bank of 14,400 plots at an average cost of Pounds
12,000. Last month, it raised Pounds 17m through a share placing to take
advantage of opportunities to buy even more land while prices are low.
Wimpey, Redrow Homes and Edmond are also among the builders who are actively
looking to buy more housing land. So too are Berkeley Homes and Charles
Church.
Octagon Developments, which has just opened its development of 14 houses in
Wimbledon Village, for sale through Hamptons at prices from Pounds 295,000
to Pounds 950,000, says that in the four weeks after the election it sold as
many houses as it would normally expect to sell in two months.
Bovis Homes is hoping that this post-election euphoria will extend to
Lydekker Park, its new development in the former grounds of Harpenden Lodge,
Hertfordshire, where new houses are available at prices from Pounds 175,000
to Pounds 365,000. There are also apartments at prices from Pounds 205,000
for a two-bedroom flat to Pounds 240,000 for a three-bedroom flat.
Five new apartments in the City of London have been opened, forming part of
a new square created off London Wall behind MEPC's flagship office
development, Alban Gate. The five apartments are for sale through Debenham
Tewson &amp; Chinnocks at prices from Pounds 165,000 for a one-bedroom
pied-a-terre to Pounds 275,000 for a two-bedroom penthouse.
Growing confidence in residential property is encouraging developers to
consider starting new schemes. One of the most ambitious in London is that
by Northacre Investments to develop the site of 14 derelict houses in
Observatory Gardens and Campden Hill Road, Kensington.
The site was sold last year by the Mountleigh Group with planning permission
for 70 flats, but Northacre made a revised application at the beginning of
May for up to 60 flats and an underground car park to be built behind the
restored facades of the houses in Observatory Gardens, and for the two
houses in Campden Hill Road to be refurbished as ten flats. The scheme has
been designed by Swedish architect Klas Nilsson and is funded by Dutch
investors.
The Grosvenor Estate is looking for a developer to buy a block of property
in Park Street and Rex Place, Mayfair, for refurbishment as 14 houses and
flats with garaging for 14 cars. The property has just been placed on the
market by Savills and Wetherell, who are seeking offers of Pounds 3.5m.
Finally, a mixed development known as Thomas Neal's in Covent Garden has
just been completed by Kleinwort Benson Property Fund and Langbourn Property
Investment Services. As well as offices and shops, this has 13 flats and a
house for sale through E A Shaw &amp; Partners at Pounds 100,000 to Pounds
335,000.
