FT  27 MAR 92 / Freeze on domestic gas prices
BRITISH GAS is to freeze prices to domestic consumers from next month and
will review them in June with a view to a cut if inflation stays low.
'There is not much doubt that if inflation continues to decline, the next
move we make on prices will be downwards,' Mr Cedric Brown, senior managing
director of British Gas, said.
The move has been forced on the company by a tough pricing formula which
restricts domestic gas price increases to 5 percentage points below the rate
of inflation.
British Gas is preparing to ask its regulator, the Office of Gas Supply, to
re-evaluate this and allow it to increase prices because of a cut being made
in its share of industrial business. This is part of an agreement with the
Office of Fair Trading to encourage competition.
British Gas is worried that this cut could reduce its ability to supply its
domestic customers cost-effectively.
Mr Brown said there had been a 17 per cent reduction in the price of gas in
real terms since privatisation in 1986.
But Mr Ian Powe, chairman of the Gas Consumers' Council said: 'There is
definitely an element of disappointment in the price news: we were all keyed
up to expect a price cut and it's a case of jam tomorrow.'
British Gas also announced its new commitment to consumers, which promises
its 18m household customers higher standards of service and offers them
fixed rates of compensation if the company fails to live up to its targets.
'We're determined British Gas will be second to none in terms of standards
and quality,' Mr Brown said.
Customers will, for example, be able to claim Pounds 10 compensation if
British Gas cancels an appointment without giving a day's notice. They will
be eligible for a Pounds 20 payment if gas supply is interrupted and not
resumed within one working day.
'The customer will get a very clear promise from British Gas as to what it
will deliver in a whole range of activities,' Mr Brown stressed. The company
will launch a Pounds 2m publicity campaign next week.
Mr Powe said the commitments were 'rather mealy-mouthed'.
He added: 'It's taken them a very long time to get to the stage the regional
electricity companies were at in 1988. It's disappointing that British Gas
is not paying compensation automatically since many customers will not know
what they're entitled to.'
