FT  27 JUL 92 / US Sprint poised to win UK international telecoms licence
THE GOVERNMENT is close to granting a licence to a US telecoms carrier,
which would break the duopoly of British Telecom and Mercury in UK
international telephone traffic.
Insiders at the department of trade and industry say that Mr Michael
Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, is 'on the brink' of giving the
licence to privately-owned US Sprint, the third-largest long-distance
telecoms carrier in the US. A decision may come within two weeks.
Sprint applied for an international facilities licence in January, but the
application was delayed by April's general election. The move to open up the
system follows last year's telecoms white paper which provided for domestic
network competition but was vague on international communications, where BT
and Mercury achieve their highest rates of profitability.
The intention was to bring 're-sale' into the international market, where
the country at the other end had an equally open telecommunications market.
If granted a licence, Sprint could lease international cable and satellite
capacity in bulk from BT or Mercury and then seek to sell usage to customers
at lower rates.
There is considerable pressure to grant Sprint's application, as ministers
believe that the international network is the market sector where prices are
most out of line with costs. The Conservatives' election manifesto promised
that 'the work of liberalising markets which were once monopolised goes on'.
But ministers are concerned that if the UK market is alone in opening itself
up to competition, British companies could be at a disadvantage, and that
foreign telephone companies could abuse their power in overseas markets to
distort competition in the UK.
The DTI regards most foreign telecommunications regimes as 'pretty much
closed' to international competition, and is even slightly sceptical about
the liberal nature of the US system. One official commented that although
the US system is apparently open to competition, in reality the way the
regulatory system works makes it difficult for foreign operators to work
effectively.
The Americans have said they will make some changes, but even those would
leave the market more regulated than in the UK.
