FT  17 JUN 92 / Irish anti-treaty group puts positive case for 'No'
THE POSTER reads: 'If you don't know, vote NO.' It is the latest in an
effective series produced by a group of anti-Maastricht campaigners in
Ireland.
Tuning into people's confusion, emotions and doubts as they prepare to vote
on the treaty tomorrow, the authors, a loose coalition of groups calling
themselves the National Platform, have emerged as one of the country's most
articulate voices against ratification.
National Platform was founded four months ago by Mr Raymond Crotty, an
economist whose name became known across Europe in 1987, when he held up
ratification of the Single European Act by dragging the Irish government
through the courts, eventually forcing it to hold a referendum.
His arguments, then as now, are that by handing more powers to Brussels,
national sovereignty in the key areas of economic, defence and foreign
policy decision-making has been, and is being, eroded.
Together with fellow Euro-sceptics from the social science faculties of
Dublin's universities, Mr Crotty has returned to haunt the Europhiles with a
low-key campaign that has sown doubts in many voters' minds about whether
European union will bring Ireland the many benefits its supporters claim.
Run on a shoe-string budget of IPounds 25,000 (Pounds 23,000), donated by
individuals, and relying on volunteers, the campaign has badly shaken the
government and party leaders, some of whom admit in private that the vote
could now be very close.
In its short life, the National Platform has evolved into an ad-hoc
'rainbow' alliance of environmentalists, peace and anti-nuclear groups,
liberal Christians organisations representing the unemployed, as well as
students and university dons, who oppose Maastricht for a variety of
reasons.
'We are not opposed to Europe, but we want renegotiation of the treaty,'
says Mr Gratten Healey, its chief spokesman. The group has steered clear of
the abortion issue, another of the big topics of the campaign, in order to
focus on what it considers the principal issues: sovereignty, Ireland's
neutrality, and jobs. As a result, he says, 'we have both feminists and
anti-abortionists working for us'.
The anti-abortionists say ratification will lead to legalisation of abortion
in Ireland. The radical women argue that the special protocol designed to
protect Ireland's 1983 constitutional ban on abortion has serious
implications for women's rights to seek information on, and referral to,
abortion services abroad.
Recent polls suggest that a high proportion of women voters are still
undecided, and so could swing the balance on polling day.
But equally crucial will be how voters view the No argument that Ireland may
be seriously disadvantaged by economic union.
Mr Anthony Coughlan, a senior lecturer in social policy at Trinity College,
and one of the Platform's leaders, pointed out several weeks ago that under
Emu 'we shall find ourselves members of a currency union that is not a
fiscal union - that is, that has no system of common EC taxes and public
services which would entail automatic transfers from the richer states to
the poorer, similar to those that exist between richer and poorer areas of
national states. . .it would be a repeat of our 19th-century experience of
economic and monetary union with Great Britain'.
His words have begun to take on a prophetic significance, in the light of
the Bank for International Settlements report, published this week, which
casts doubts on the feasibility of Emu, and the rift that has opened among
the 12 EC governments over the Delors II package of increased structural and
cohesion funding to the poorer member states, under which Ireland had hoped
to be a big beneficiary.
Doubts about the commitment to cohesion and economic convergence of other EC
members raise fears in Ireland that Emu will simply accelerate emigration
and capital flight to the economic power centres of Europe, leaving Ireland,
as one campaigner said, 'the equivalent of North Dakota in the US'.
Foreign Affairs, Page 21
