FT  20 FEB 92 / International Company News: CBA beats forecasts and climbs
to ADollars 229m
THE Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) yesterday said a reduction in bad
debts helped it record bigger-than-expected net profits of ADollars 229m
(USDollars 176.1m) for the six months to December.
The bank, which was listed on the Australian Stock Exchange in September
after the flotation of a 30 per cent shareholding by the federal government,
was expected to announce profits of between ADollars 180m and ADollars 210m.
Shareholders who subscribed to the ADollars 1.3bn flotation were rewarded
with a fully franked interim dividend of 20 cents per share, also
significantly higher than expected.
The result compared with earnings of ADollars 532m in the corresponding
period of the previous year. However, the earlier period included an
abnormal profit of ADollars 328m from the transfer of surplus staff
superannuation funds. CBA said the result should be compared with the second
half of the previous year, when the bank made net profits of ADollars 44m.
The second half also included the operations of the State Bank of Victoria,
which was acquired by CBA for ADollars 1.3bn.
The bank said bad and doubtful debt expense fell 36.8 per cent, compared
with the previous half, from ADollars 640.7m to ADollars 405.1m. The level
of non-accrual loans also fell to ADollars 2.1bn net of specific provisions
from ADollars 2.16bn.
Mr Don Sanders, managing director, said the bank's performance continued to
reflect the effects of recession. Demand for new finance was subdued, and
viable borrowers were tending to repay debt faster, while the debt servicing
capacity of many business borrowers remained severely impaired. He said this
had caused a cut in CBA's assets to ADollars 89.13bn from ADollars 89.29bn
and warned the balance sheet could contract further in the second half. 'Any
such decline would have a deleterious effect on profit, and may affect the
level of the final dividend paid in respect of the current year's profit.'
