FT  14 OCT 92 / Brussels fails to agree curb on powers
THE European Commission last night failed to endorse its radical proposals
to curb its own powers, compounding the failure of the European Community's
member states at last week's foreign ministers' meeting to define the
principle of subsidiarity.
The risk now is that the emergency EC summit in Birmingham on Friday could
magnify the impression of Community disarray.
The defining of subsidiarity - that the EC should act only where national or
local measures would not be appropriate - was the issue which Mr John Major,
the prime minister and holder of the EC presidency, had hoped to make the
centrepiece of the summit in an effort to demonstrate to sceptics in his own
Conservative party and across Europe that the powers of the Commission were
being reined in.
'John Major's problem is that everbody expects the member states to have a
good go at the Commission to demonstrate that Brussels has been tamed,' a
senior Commission official said. 'The timetable now clearly points towards
(December's summit in) Edinburgh, and it's difficult to see what people can
do in Birmingham, because there's now no real agenda.'
Concern that Birmingham will produce no substantive results was evident in
Bonn yesterday, when Chancellor Helmut Kohl met Mr Jacques Delors, the
president of the European Commission.
German officials insisted that a 'German initiative' is not being pressed by
Mr Kohl. However, they admit that he is very anxious to ensure that the
Birmingham summit does not collapse in disarray.
In addition to the delay on agreeing subsidiarity:
Debate on reform of the exchange rate mechanism in the wake of last month's
currency turmoil has been taken off the Birmingham agenda in case it
provokes new market instability.
A strategy to recapture Danish voters' support for the Maastricht treaty
cannot get under way until the power struggle between Brussels and the
member states is resolved.
Summit efforts to win EC endorsement of the emerging Uruguay Round world
trade deal are likely to be muted because of the risk of isolating France,
which is determined to protect its subsidised cereals exports.
Although there will be no agreed text on subsidiarity at Birmingham, Mr
Delors will report to the 12 members on Brussels' attempt to define the
division of powers in the EC, and the summit is expected to produce a
statement of intent on subsidiarity.
Nevertheless, although Mr Delors failed to convince his colleagues with his
subsidiarity proposals, he received a favourable reception from ambassadors
of the 12 when he presented the text to them on Monday.
One ambassador described the text as 'a useful first step' towards easing
public fears about Brussels' powers and centralisation.
But he and other EC officials acknowledged that the EC would have to wait
until Edinburgh for agreed details on how subsidiarity will work.
Mr Delors' subsidiarity plan, which would not require renegotiating
Maastricht, aims to clarify that power in the EC rests with the member
states unless specified otherwise. It would also devolve some policy and
management to the 12.
Danes head for clash with EC, Page 2
