FT  27 MAR 92 / Survey of Japanese Financial Markets (10): Centre of
European operations - Japanese financial institutions in London
WITH the domestic earnings of Japanese financial institutions squeezed by
the worst financial recession for 40 years, international operations provide
an increasingly important source of income.
For most Japanese financial institutions London is the centre of European
operations. The long-term commitment of leading Japanese banks and
securities houses to London is clear from the ambitious, and expensive, new
headquarters developments either planned or only recently completed.
For example, Daiwa Securities has commissioned Richard Rogers, the modernist
architect of the Lloyd's insurance building in London and the Pompidou
centre in Paris, to design a new office building on a freehold site on
London Wall, in the heart of the City.
Industrial Bank of Japan, is moving to Bracken House, opposite St Paul's
Cathedral and the former home of the Financial Times, another prime City
site.
The terms under which IBJ is leasing the 200,000 square foot building from
Obayashi, the Japanese property developer which paid Pounds 130m for the
site, is unknown.
However, property analysts expect the rental to be at least Pounds 70 a
square foot on a 20-year or 25-year lease. This implies an investment of
Pounds 14m per year.
Nomura International recently moved into a new 400,000 sq ft building,
having bought the freehold to the listed former headquarters building of the
Post Office in 1986.
Again the scale of the investment in the original building or the cost of
subsequent refurbishment were never made public.
The leading Japanese securities houses are also making investments to break
into new areas of business. Yamaichi, the fourth largest securities house,
is expected to begin operations as a gilt-edged market maker before the year
end, thus becoming the third Japanese firm to make a market in UK government
bonds. It is pressing ahead with the investment in spite of warning that it
will turn in a pre-tax loss of Y34bn for the financial year ended March 31.
Nomura and Daiwa are already among the 18 market makers in UK government
bonds and have been able to find a niche in the primarily domestic market.
Both operated profitably last year. Daiwa Gilts turning in a Pounds 4m
profit on a capital base of just Pounds 15m.
Japanese firms last year received permission from the Bank of England to
take lead management positions in sterling bond issues, although only for
Japanese borrowers. The move was seen as matching recent efforts to open the
Japanese securities markets to UK firms.
However, the London operations of the big securities firms have seen at
least one important area of business shrink to only a fraction of its former
size. International issues of equity-linked bonds by Japanese companies,
mostly underwritten and syndicated in London by Japanese securities firms,
were one of the great money-spinners of the late 1980s.
In addition to taking a 2.5 per cent underwriting fee on the amount raised,
the bonds invariably traded above issue price as investors scrambled to buy
paper linked to the booming Tokyo stock market. This presented underwriting
firms with a handsome premium.
But the business is now far more sporadic. At the peak of the Tokyo equity
market in 1989, a staggering Dollars 63bn was raise from warrant bond
issues, mostly by Japanese corporations and mostly underwritten by Japanese
securities firms. However, last year new issues amounted to Dollars 26bn,
and Dollars 19bn in 1990. The deals are also more likely to trade down from
issue price, eating into the return made by underwriters rather than adding
to them.
However, the big securities firms have diversified into new areas of
business. In spite of a lacklustre year for the warrant bond market, Nomura
and Daiwa were the two biggest underwriters in the international bond market
last year, with Yamaichi 6th and Nikko 7th.
With traditional sources of income under pressure, this process of
diversification is likely to continue. Mr John Howland Jackson, chairman of
Nomura International, said that the company plans to expand its investment
banking business, including primary equity market, structured finance and
securitisation activity. The company also intends to build up European
equity research, distribution and trading business.
'We have no intention of cutting back on existing lines, but we are
prioritising the greatest revenue growth areas, which we see as investment
banking and the secondary securities business necessary to support that
investment banking ambition,' he said.
Nomura's appointment as global co-ordinator to the Pounds 500m-Pounds 1bn
share issue planned by GPA, the aircraft leasing company, underlines the
determination of Japanese firms to gain lead advisory roles for non-Japanese
companies.
However, there has been a definite withdrawal by Japanese banks from
participation in syndicated loans arranged in London. Officials at big UK
clearing banks, which still have a pivotal position in the London loans
market, report that the big Japanese banks are still active participants in
large, blue-chip financings, but on nothing like the scale of the late
1980s.
In spite of the pressures in the Japanese domestic market, there is no sign
yet of an exodus from London by second- and third-tier banks and securities
firms. A survey of overseas firms in London by Noel Alexander Associates
found three new Japanese securities firms setting up in London for the first
time last year. Seven Japanese banks also opened their first London
operation in 1991.
However, there are clearly pressures on the profitability of smaller banks
and securities firms caused by the weakness of the domestic stock market and
slowing domestic economy. In March, Takagi Securities closed its
London-based affiliate, the first departure recorded by Noel Alexander,
which has data going back to the early 1970s.
