FT  18 JUN 92 / Maastricht: UK aims to prepare way for applicants
BRITAIN'S AIM during its six-month presidency of the European Community
which begins on July 1 is to complete preparatory stages so that
negotiations with the next group of EC applicants can begin, Mr John Major,
prime minister, says in the foreword to the presidency programme published
yesterday.
He argues that the EC must not be an exclusive club. 'We want to extend the
benefits of membership to our fellow Europeans who share our values of
democracy and human rights, who have already well-established market
economies and who are ready to take on the obligations.'
While appearing to warn against unrealistic expectations, Mr Major sees the
half-year presidency as 'an opportunity for Britain to help shape the future
of Europe at a time of great change'.
The programme was unveiled in Edinburgh by Mr Ian Lang, Scottish secretary,
who said the main priority would be to run a 'businesslike and efficient'
presidency which would also show Britain's willingness to take its place at
the heart of Europe.
Out of 79 events being staged in the UK during the six months, 25 will be
held in Scotland, culminating in the EC heads of government summit in
Edinburgh on December 11-12. Only a handful of events will take place in
Wales and Northern Ireland, giving substance to the view that Mr Major is
anxious to foster a greater sense of UK unity within Scotland following
recent calls for independence.
As well as the Edinburgh summit, a conference on rural development takes
place in Inverness next month, and EC environment ministers meet at
Gleneagles in September, when EC ambassadors also visit Scotland. Other
dates include a meeting of transport ministers in Hertfordshire in July,
finance ministers in Bath in September, and agriculture ministers in
Cambridge also in September.
London is to host meetings of housing, justice and immigration ministers in
November and December, and apart from the EC-Japan meeting on July 4, other
summits may be staged between the EC and 'outside' states such as the US or
Canada.
