FT  14 SEP 92 / People: Runners in the Black Horse's final furlong
The race to find a successor to Lloyds Bank chief executive Brian Pitman is
moving into its final furlong. The two front contenders - David Pirrie
(right) and Paul Brown - are to swap jobs in a move which will be seen by
many as a final testing ground for Lloyds' next chief executive.
The top management team of Lloyds Bank, the most successful of Britain's
clearing banks, has been more stable than those of its rivals. However,
chairman Sir Jeremy Morse, who has headed the group since 1977, retires next
year and Brian Pitman, who has been chief executive since 1983, is already
past the bank's normal retirement age. It is expected that he will step down
in 1995.
Sir Robin Ibbs has already been tapped as Sir Jeremy's successor as
chairman, but there has been more uncertainty about Pitman's replacement.
Michael Hepher, the chairman of Lloyds Abbey Life, was an obvious candidate
but he was headhunted at the end of last year to be group managing director
of British Telecom.
Since John Davies, the deputy chief executive, and Alan Moore, director of
corporate banking, are both in their late 50s, analysts believe that either
Paul Brown, 50, or David Pirrie, 53, are front-runners to take over from
Pitman.
Lloyds is using the opportunity of Frank Jones' retirement as director of
international banking on November 16 to reshuffle their portfolios. David
Pirrie, who joined the Bank of London and South America as a trainee in
1959, will become director of both international banking and private banking
and financial services. Paul Brown, who is currently director of private
banking and financial services, will take over Pirrie's old job as director
of UK retail banking.
Pirrie, who joined the board in 1989, is the more senior. But some analysts
believe that Brown, who joined Lloyds Bank Europe in 1960, has the edge
since he is three years younger and is being put in charge of one of the
weak spots of the group. If he can turn round the group's retail banking
business, which employs two thirds of the staff, then he might well assure
himself of promotion to the top job.
