FT  20 NOV 92 / Official is thrust into limelight: David Owen and Richard
Donkin on a key Matrix Churchill trial witness
FOR two days during the Matrix Churchill trial, a slight figure occupied the
witness box facing questions about his role in the approval of export
licences for Iraq. Mr Tony Steadman, the former director of export licensing
at the Department of Trade and Industry, was confronting every civil
servant's nightmare.
Normally shielded by the anonymity of Whitehall, he now found his every word
exposed to public scrutiny. He now works as a grade seven official at the
DTI's Enterprise Initiative division and declines requests for interviews.
Government documents released during the trial show that Mr Steadman, more
than any other Whitehall official, was involved in the initial
interpretation of the 1984 guidelines for exports to Iran and Iraq,
especially where they covered the critical 'grey' area of dual-use equipment
such as machine tools.
The arguments between ministers were often framed by officials, whose
stock-in-trade was to construct lines of argument to suit any occasion.
In the Matrix Churchill case, Mr Steadman features on scores of documents
covering 2 1/2 years. It is even possible to pinpoint the date on which he
moved offices. His name also crops up in other Iraq-related episodes such as
the supergun affair and the Ordnance Technology trial.
Mr Steadman appears to have made several crucial interventions in the
unfolding Iraqi arms drama.
November 1987
The DTI received intelligence that two Iraqi industrial complexes to which
British machine tools were being sent were 'heavily engaged in a munitions
production programme'. Mr Steadman told the Matrix Churchill trial the
information was received before the first of the export licences for the
company had been approved but that he did not see it until December when the
licence had been passed.
In January, that presented the DTI with a dilemma: should it revoke the
licences with 'catastrophic consequences' for the three companies concerned
or should it compound the subterfuge by permitting the exports to go ahead?
Mr Steadman's advice in a letter to a Ministry of Defence official was
important in moulding policy for the next three years.
It said: 'There is scope for the balanced approach of allowing existing
commitments but refusing for the present future licence applications for
munitions or other military programmes from the consignees.'
A subsequent Foreign Office memo the same month notes that in agreeing early
licences, the Inter-Departmental Committee (IDC) - a body comprising
officials from the DTI, MoD and the Foreign Office set up to review British
exports to Iran and Iraq - 'satisfied itself that the lathes and tools were,
as the companies had claimed, civilian items for general industrial
purposes'.
The retrospective pressure to make the policy fit the existing arrangements
is recognised in the memo: 'It is likely that had we known from the outset
that the machine tools would be used to manufacture munitions we would have
recommended that the licences be refused'.
One FO official who saw the memo wrote on it that 'the companies should be
urged to ship as fast as they can'.
With the knowledge that the real use for the machines was now known in the
DTI, the exporters wanted guidance about future business they knew was
available in Iraq. In January a meeting was arranged between the Machine
Tools Trades Association and Mr Alan Clark, then minister for trade.
Mr Clark advised potential exporters to Iraq to emphasise the civilian use
of dual-use equipment that they were thinking of supplying - as he later
acknowledged to the fury of Customs, whose case against three ex-Matrix
Churchill directors collapsed.
The outcome might have been different if the minister had followed the
advice of Mr Steadman in a short briefing before the meeting. The advice was
to 'assure' those present that no decisions would be taken under a
government review of machine-tool licensing until their views had been
considered and ministerial colleagues consulted. Meanwhile, the trades
association and machine-tool companies 'should maintain a low profile'.
On the whole, ministers stuck to the line provided by their civil servants.
June 1988
Potential defence implications were foremost when Mr Steadman liaised with
the MoD over a proposed contract involving the supply of massive steel pipes
manufactured by Walter Somers to Space Research Corporation of Belgium.
In April 1990, Customs impounded tubes made by Somers and Sheffield
Forgemasters and the supergun affair hit newspaper front pages.
October 1989
Lord Trefgarne, now trade minister, received a briefing prepared by Mr
Steadman ahead of a critical meeting with Mr Alan Clark, who was now
minister for defence procurement, and Mr William Waldegrave, foreign office
minister. By this time an inter-departmental tussle had developed between
the cautious Mr Waldegrave and his two colleagues after the earlier decision
to press ahead with exports of machine tools to known armaments plants.
Countering the anticipated Foreign Office line that a new batch of licence
applications should be refused because of 'strategic concerns', he argues:
'The fact that Matrix Churchill is virtually Iraqi-owned or an organisation
known to be procuring nuclear technology is not sufficient to refuse these
applications.'
He also suggests that Lord Trefgarne make common cause with Mr Clark by
supporting a 'possible proposal' for 'the review of the IDC guidelines with
a view to their removal or relaxation'. In the wake of the meeting, Mr
Waldegrave withdrew his objections to allowing the licences to proceed in
return for certain concessions.
February 1992
Mr Steadman was conspicuous by his absence. Defence lawyers wanted him to
give evidence at the trial of four businessmen at Reading Crown Court facing
charges of conspiring to supply detonation fuses for heavy artillery shells
to Iraq.
The charges arose out of a contract for Ordnance Technology, a Reading
company that exported the goods under an end-user certificate giving Jordan,
Iraq's neighbour to the north, as the customer.
Judge Stanley Spence set aside a witness summons from the defence for Mr
Steadman to give evidence at the trial. He did agree, however, to the
appearance of a DTI official.
Mr Stuart Blackledge, one of the defendants, said this week: 'With the
rapidly diminishing chances of a fair trial, the offer of a deal, and the
threat of costs, I changed my plea to guilty. The other defendants did the
same.'
