FT  09 OCT 92 / Leading Article: Filling in the policy gaps
THE CHANCELLOR'S speech to yesterday's Tory party conference was as
economically thin as it was politically disappointing. It represented a
modest step towards formulating a workable alternative policy to membership
of the European exchange rate mechanism. But it failed to tackle the flaw
which lies at the heart of British economic policymaking.
Many aspects of the government's nascent economic policy are welcome. The
commitment to low and stable inflation, broadly defined, has been
reaffirmed; but zero inflation, a policy target that is as undesirable as it
has proved unattainable, has been forgotten. The government will monitor a
broad range of monetary and credit aggregates as well as the exchange rate;
but flexibility will prevail over any pressure to replace the exchange rate
with a single domestic policy instrument.
UK monetary policy at this point needs judgment and credibility rather than
religious attachment to a single holy policy grail. The economy needs enough
policy easing, mainly via the sterling depreciation that has already
occurred, to fuel an export and investment-led recovery. But policy must
remain tight enough to prevent a consumer-led recovery or a rise in domestic
wage inflation. No one knows how much easing of policy has already occurred.
Much more work is required before the government can claim to have
constructed a workable framework in which these judgments can credibly be
made. Operationally, there is a need for more technical meat to be put on
these monetary bones.
Wage restraint
First, the competitiveness gains of devaluation will only be maintained if
nominal wages in the domestic economy grow at a sustainable pace. They
cannot be permitted to rise by more than 4 per cent a year, which means pay
settlements of no more than 2 per cent in both the private and public
sectors. If they do, the authorities may need to tighten policy. Even after
two years of recession, average earnings are still rising at 6 per cent a
year.
Second, the government must pay close attention to the gap between long-term
interest rates and index-linked gilts, the best available market measure of
expected inflation. This gap is high and rising; at more than 5 1/2
percentage points, it suggests that inflationary expectations are rising.
There should be no further interest rate cuts until this yield gap and wage
settlements are falling again.
These extra targets are necessary if the current economic policy vacuum is
to be filled. But they will still leave a gaping credibility gap in UK
monetary policy.
Carte blanche
The case for ERM membership was that it offered a check on the freedom of
action of the chancellor and his Treasury team, deemed necessary after the
errors of the late 1980s. The ERM proved too demanding a discipline for the
economy to handle. But simply to return the freedom to set policy to those
from whom it was taken solves nothing. The chancellor's underlying inflation
target range of 1 to 4 per cent during this parliament sounds sensible, even
ambitious. But the long lags between action and result in monetary
policymaking mean, in effect, that the chancellor has awarded himself carte
blanche to do almost anything he wants.
A flexible and credible UK monetary policy can only work if it is managed by
individuals within an institution whose goals and judgment are skilfully
explained and can be understood, believed and trusted - by the markets, by
wage and price setters, and by the electorate. Mr Lamont, his advisers and
the Treasury as an institution have forfeited that trust. They will not
easily regain it.
In spite of the pain of the recession, the UK is still capable of achieving
a new consensus about the need to provide low and stable inflation. But to
do so, it will need a new institutional framework in which these goals can
credibly be pursued. The power to make monetary policy decision must be
taken from the Treasury and given to an autonomous, but accountable, Bank of
England whose tasks are simple, explicit and free from the pressures of
party conferences. And the government needs a council of economic advisers
to monitor its actions and those of the Bank. The government continues to
fall short of what the crisis demands.
