FT  08 APR 92 / Ozone losses up to 20%
THE atmosphere over Europe lost 15 to 20 per cent of its protective ozone
layer during the winter but it does not have a full-scale 'ozone hole', an
international scientific team said yesterday.
The team said, however, that within a decade, winter ozone losses over the
northern hemisphere would be double the level of the end of the 1980s.
Results from the European Arctic Stratospheric Ozone Experiment (Easoe) show
that ozone levels reached a record low over much of the northern hemisphere
in January, as chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) chemicals combined with natural
pollutants from the Mount Pinatubo volcanic eruption to create 'highly
perturbed conditions' in the stratosphere.
The Easoe scientists said the ozone loss was more serious than they expected
when the Pounds 14m experiment started in the autumn.
But it does not match the most alarming predictions made two months ago when
Easoe and Nasa, the US space agency, released preliminary measurements of
ozone destruction; some environmental specialists said then that an Arctic
ozone hole could develop this spring.
An Antarctic hole started to appear annually in the 1980s because of CFCs
building up in the atmosphere. This has increased the amount of harmful
ultraviolet radiation from the sun reaching the ground in the southern
spring. However, the northern hemisphere ozone layer recovered slightly in
February and March, with levels 5 to 15 per cent down on the long-term
average.
Although no Arctic ozone hole will appear this year, according to Easoe,
'scientists have seen conditions which could lead to an ozone hole if a
future winter was longer and colder - and especially as stratospheric
chlorine (from CFCs pollution in the upper atmosphere) is expected to
increase into the next century.'
Scientists on the UK-based European Ozone Secretariat, which co-ordinates
Easoe, say their findings add urgency to United Nations negotiations to
bring forward a global ban on CFCs and related chemicals under the Montreal
protocol. A ministerial meeting planned for November in Copenhagen is
expected to agree to phase out ozone-destroying chemicals by the beginning
of 1996.
Environmental groups Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth said the latest
evidence supported their demands for an immediate ban on CFC production.
