FT  05 SEP 92 / Books: Bringing the dead back to life - Fiction / A novel
full of puzzling twists
POOR THINGS by Alasdair Gray Bloomsbury Pounds 14.99, 317 pages
ALASDAIR Gray's fourth novel is constructed so cunningly that it contains
excerpts from mock reviews on the dust jacket, one of them favourable, the
other dismissive. The former praises it as an amusing piece of 'light
fiction,' the latter slams it for belonging to the overworked genre of
Victorian pastiche. The reader (and, alas, reviewer) are thereby forewarned
 -this is not a work that will yield itself easily to a final analysis.
Poor Things pretends to be two recently-discovered historical documents
which Gray has 'edited' by providing an introduction, illustrations and
copious notes. The main body of the book comprises the memoirs of Archibald
McCandless, 'the bastard bairn of a poor peasant,' who goes to Glasgow to
study medicine in the 1880s. He befriends Godwin Baxter, the eccentric and
grotesque son of a famous surgeon.
McCandless soon learns that Baxter has inherited from his father the skill
to re-animate dead creatures, a skill which he has used upon the corpse of a
beautiful, pregnant suicide. In order to mask her identity, Baxter has
implanted her own foetus's brain into her skull, thus rendering her as
innocent and malleable as a newborn. He calls his creature Bella.
McCandless falls in love immediately with this innocent but is deprived of
her company by the jealous Baxter, who sets about educating her in the best
traditions of the liberal arts and sciences. McCandless is further
frustrated when the passionate Bella decides to elope with a callow seducer
named Wedderburn, whose finances and sexual energy she proceeds to bankrupt
with alarming insouciance. On their voyage, Bella is baptised in the cruel
ways of the world, bitter lessons brought home in an Alexandrian slum and a
Parisian whorehouse.
She returns to Glasgow to marry McCandless and dedicate herself to the poor,
only to be confronted by the man to whom she had been married before killing
herself, an heroic empire-builder named General Blessington. After avoiding
narrowly his attempts to get her back, she embarks upon a life that sees her
becoming a noted physician and socialist.
Readers who may have found all this a bit tough to stomach are immediately
handed an antacid by Gray, who appends a letter written 30 years after these
events by Bella (now referred to as Dr Victoria McCandless). She refutes her
husband's story as a 'morbid Victorian fantasy' penned by a frustrated
sentimentalist who seemingly could not bear his wife's passions and
achievements. This document is followed by a long series of annotations
provided by Gray which lend equal credence to both stories.
Poor Things is a lively and witty read, erudite without ever being onerous.
Fans of the pastiche genre will find much in which to delight, with echoes
of Mary Shelley and Shaw scattered throughout as well as telling satire of
both Victorian imperialism and early socialism. Bella herself is a fine
creation, a prototypical feminist whose 'menstrual cycle was in full flood
from the day she opened her eyes, so she has never been taught to feel her
body to be disgusting or to dread what she desires.'
In the end, however, it is hard to know what to make of the whole
enterprise. One waits in vain to find out who is telling the 'truth' and
what this 'truth' could mean. McCandless might be a slightly deranged bore
but he is no less credible than the Fabian crank, Victoria.
Although Gray claims in his introduction to believe Archie's account, he
refuses either there, or in his copious notes, to provide the decisive clue.
One is left to guess the point of it all.
Is it that men cannot think of a liberated woman without seeing her as being
some sort of monster? Or is it rather that truly socialist ideals are
destined, like the older Bella, to deny their origins, to degenerate into
crankery and insignificance?
Pastiche lovers and literary maze-walkers will enjoy puzzling over the
answer. The rest will find Poor Things to be like McCandless's mysterious
bride: something put together very well but kept alive by artificial means.
