FT  18 JAN 92 / Gardening: The unpredictable primrose - Arthur Hellyer finds
that there is more to a common flower than meets the eye
AT ONE time, I thought of primroses and polyanthuses as simple flowers which
did predictable things; but that is no longer completely true. These plants
have been cross-bred so much, and so many fine hybrids have been produced,
that a good many ifs and buts have crept into their cultivation and even
their naming.
Basically, the difference between a primrose and a polyanthus is that the
first has just one flower per stem and the second a cluster. . This could
mean a greater number of flowers per plant - although not necessarily since
there are some extremely prolific primroses.
Some varieties make a habit of producing both types of flower and seem
capable of passing from one to the other style during a season.
One theory is that they do this in response to stress, producing only the
multi-flowered stems when things are going well and reverting to the typical
primrose flowering when conditions get tough, perhaps because of lack of
food or moisture. I find this highly probable.
These days, it is customary to have primroses and polyanthuses on sale in
full flower in pots throughout the winter, but very few seed catalogues
suggest that home gardeners should grow them for November or December
flowering. February is about the earliest date recommended, with March to
May the generally-stated flowering period. This certainly is right outdoors
but seems a little unambitious under glass.
I used to think that the commercial growers of pot plants gave their
polyanthus or primrose plants special chemical treatment to bring them into
flower early, but I am assured that this is not so. They are too cheap a
plant for such expense, and they are simply grown in successive batches,
mostly in polythene houses, with little or no artificial heat until they are
wanted for market. At this stage, they are moved to a slightly higher
temperature.
I am also told that commercial growers use some varieties for which seed is
not available regularly for the home market - not because there is any
embargo but because few of the retail seedsmen have thought it worthwhile to
market it.
Saga and Eve are two such varieties that are very popular with trade
growers, and one way to get hold of them is to buy plants in garden centres
or florists' shops and either grow them on or save seed from them. There are
hazards in this, though; first, that these super-varieties are not reliable
perennials and tend to die after a year or so; second, that they are hybrids
which need to be recreated each generation from parents that are not
themselves ever distributed. There is, in effect, a built-in copyright on
them.
Many of these new primrose and polyanthus varieties are not so winter-hardy
as the old ones, mainly because much of the early breeding was done in New
Zealand and California, where the climate did not put the seedlings on trial
under any stress from cold winters.
So, undesirable characteristics - for Britain's colder climate, at any rate
 -crept in and have not been eliminated completely, although some efforts
have been, and still are being, made to do so. But the new polyanthus
Crescendo Mix is said to be completely reliable in British gardens under
average conditions, and it certainly does produce high-quality flowers in a
fine range of clear colours.
Primrose and polyanthus plants also can be affected adversely by heat and
the seed actually becomes dormant in temperatures above 21C (70F). This is
why many gardeners have difficulty in germinating it, since they sow in
heated propagators that can run well above this maximum. The ideal for which
to aim is 15-20C (60-68F).
The seed also needs light for germination, so should be sown on the surface
of the seed compost and covered with a light sprinkling of sifted compost
only when it can be seen to be sprouting. Also, there are chemicals present
naturally in the seeds that prevent germination until they have been leached
out by water, so the compost must be kept adequately moist.
Seed can be sown from March to May but the later sowing is left, the harder
it gets to keep the temperature down. It can also be sown early in autumn so
the seedlings can over-winter in a frame or unheated greenhouse before being
planted out the following spring.
Primroses and polyanthuses do not like high temperatures or a dry
atmosphere; because of this, they do not make very good house plants. They
are much more satisfactory in an unheated or very slightly heated
conservatory or on a veranda.
Many varieties are completely hardy and can be grown outdoors in beds,
borders and rock gardens. But there are exceptions, and it is probable that
those bought now in flower will be of this more tender type.
Strictly speaking, all are perennials; but there is a considerable
difference in their longevity and there is some correlation between size of
flower and the length of time a variety will survive. Very large-flowered
polyanthus types are apt to behave as biennials, blooming in the second year
and then fading away.
It is, however, always worthwhile to give them a chance to grow on. Vigour
can be maintained by splitting up the old plants into several pieces, each
with roots attached, and replanting in fairly rich, rather moist soil in a
semi-shady place. This should be done early in June. Some at least are
likely to make sturdy plants that will flower again the following year.
Primrose F1 hybrids in all their glory
