FT  01 MAY 92 / International Company News: Clones catch up on Compaq - How
two industry legends are being put to rest
Compaq Computer buried two computer industry legends this week by announcing
dismal first-quarter financial results and publicly withdrawing from
membership of the much-vaunted Ace Initiative consortium.
A long-standing Wall Street favourite that beat American records for
corporate growth in the 1980s, Compaq is struggling to come to terms with a
cut-throat 'commodity' market for personal computers in which its brand name
and reputation no longer command premium prices.
Compaq's first-quarter earnings were down 60 per cent, at Dollars 45m, while
sales revenues fell 19 per cent to Dollars 783m. Once seen as IBM's toughest
rival in the personal computer market, Compaq is losing ground to a tribe of
'clone' manufacturers. Compaq's shares were trading at Dollars 23 3/8 at
midday in New York yesterday.
Similarly, Ace, an audacious plan to map the future of large segments of the
computer industry by establishing a new hardware and software standard for
the next generation of personal computers and workstations, is rapidly
losing momentum.
A year ago, Compaq was riding high when it joined with Microsoft, Digital
Equipment, Silicon Graphics, Mips Computer, Santa Cruz Operation and other
computer and software companies to announce the Ace Initiative.
Having achieved remarkable success as a bold imitator of International
Business Machines' personal computer standards, Compaq seemed ready to plot
its own course.
The support of Microsoft, the leading personal computer software publisher,
and Digital Equipment, the world's second largest computer manufacturer,
bolstered Ace's credibility.
Mips Computer's powerful reduced instruction set computing (Risc)
microprocessor, provided the group with a strong technology base. Compaq
provided Ace with an essential ingredient of success - the prospect of high
volume production of computers built to Ace specifications.
However, since the announcement of Ace, Compaq's fortunes have been reversed
by mounting price competition. Last October, Compaq's board ousted Mr Rod
Canion, president, chief executive and a co-founder of the company. Mr
Eckhard Pfeiffer, who replaced Mr Canion as president and chief executive,
is spearheading an urgent effort to transform Compaq into a more cost and
price competitive company.
He has slashed the prices of most of Compaq's products and in June the
company will launch a lower price range. Mr Pfeiffer acknowledges, however,
it will be some time before these efforts show results and second and third
quarter earnings are expected to continue on a downward slide.
Following its earnings decline, Compaq announced it was aborting plans to
launch computers based upon Mips Computer Risc microprocessors and was
pulling out of the Ace consortium.
For Compaq, the decision was strongly influenced by a reassessment of the
ability of Intel, the leading supplier of microprocessor chips, to maintain
its technology lead. 'Two years ago we told Intel it did not have the
technology we needed to remain competitive in the high performance segment
of the personal computer market,' says Mr Gary Stimac, Compaq senior
vice-president.
Intel responded by stepping up its research and development efforts. Instead
of designing new generations of microprocessors one at a time, the chip
maker now has three generations of chips under development in parallel.
Compaq also found a 'surprising lack of interest' among its customers when
the company previewed its plans for a computer based upon Mips' Risc
microprocessor.
'Customers told us the performance benefits of Risc did not outweigh the
disadvantages of switching to a new architecture,' said Mr Stimac.
Rather than spend the Dollars 100m it would cost Compaq to put its prototype
Ace computer into production, the company decided to scrap the project.
Similarly, Santa Cruz Operation, a leader in the development of desktop
versions of the Unix system, has lost faith in the future of the Mips Risc
microprocessor and halted work on a version of its Open Desktop program for
Mips.
Digital Equipment's commitment to Ace has been brought into question by its
recent announcement of its own, higher performance Risc microprocessor
called Alpha.
Mips itself remains committed to Ace and maintains that Compaq's withdrawal,
though regrettable, will not seriously damage the consortium. Companies such
as Olivetti, in Europe, and Acer in the Far East, will bring Ace compliant
products to market later this year, Mips says.
Yet to most observers, Ace is a shadow of its former glory; an anachronism
overtaken by technology and market trends.
For Compaq, Ace was a digression that may have cost the company more than it
spent on the aborted development of a personal computer based upon Risc
technology.
Engrossed by the prospect of establishing partnerships that would fend off
potential competition from workstation manufacturers, such as Sun
Microsystems, and always keen to leapfrog IBM, Compaq was blinded to the
real challenge.
Today, Compaq is forced to compare the features and prices of its products
with those of second and third-tier 'clone' manufacturers that only a year
ago it was too proud to call competitors.
