FT  21 NOV 92 / The FT Goes Shopping (1): Couture - the sizzle not the
sausage / Young blood is being selected for top fashion houses
CUSTOMERS for Parisian couture clothes are variously estimated to number
somewhere between 2,000 and 3,000 women. The biggest spenders come from the
US and the Gulf states.
The Americans, very thin and very rich, fill the front row at the
twice-yearly press showings. Women from the Gulf wait for the show to reach
the Dubai Intercontinental where the proprieties of modesty can be properly
observed.
Whether those women buy two or 20 outfits a season it is obvious that, even
at prices which range from Pounds 5,000 to Pounds 10,000 for a daytime suit
to as much as Pounds 50,600 for a beaded, embroidered evening gown, the
economics do not work.
What this small number of women pays for its clothes cannot begin to even
chip away at the design house's investment in its couture collection: the
rich materials, the perfectionist in-house labour, the sub-contracted
specialist labour of embroiderers, button-makers, milliners,
jewellery-makers, shoe-makers and furriers, the maintenance of premises, the
salaries of sales staff, promotional staff, the fees of models,
hairdressers, make-up artists, fitters, design assistants, parties for the
press, the designer's palazzo.
Couture, the business of making extraordinarily beautiful clothes to the
exact measurements of the customer, is the sizzle, not the sausage.
Its glamour sells a meaty mixture of ready-to-wear clothing (often
encompassing many price points down to jeans and T-shirts), scarves, tights,
costume jewellery, handbags, sunglasses, cosmetics and scent.
Scent is the really chewy part of the recipe. Chanel, for instance, is
estimated to have annual revenues seriously in excess of Dollars 500m.
Probably no one but the Wertheimer family, the company's reticent owners,
knows the true figure. The company blithely pays an annual fine to the
French government as a penalty for its steadfast refusal to come clean. It
is clear, however, that a very small percentage comes from frocks or even
quilted handbags and ropes of gobstopper-sized pearls. The earner is the
perfume: Chanel No 5, No 19, Crystalle and Coco.
When Yves Saint Laurent, who, together with Karl Lagerfeld at Chanel,
probably sells more couture clothes than anyone else, went public in 1989,
priced at Dollars 500m (Pounds 322.5m) its prospectus revealed that, in
1988, 86 per cent of its sales (FFr 2.6bn) and 73 per cent of its operating
profits (FFr 439m) came from its perfumes.
Arguably it is on figures such as these that various entrepreneurs have
based their moves, over the last few years, into couture. For, looked at in
isolation, the business of the custom-built frock is a shocking anachronism,
impractical in economic terms and atavistic in moral ones.
Indeed, its almost total demise was an acknowledged fact in the 1960s.
Elderly houses may have marched staidly on servicing a core of equally
elderly customers, but fashion, glamour, excitement, the future, all lay
elsewhere, in the ready-to-wear youth and mass markets.
The late-1980s revival of couture, when the high-gloss occupants of the
fashion-show front row, women such as Ivana Trump, Lynn Wyatt, Paloma
Picasso, Joan Collins, Marisa Berenson and Carole Bouquet, became household
names, was not, however, exclusively a marketing ploy. It was equally a
media-generated phenomenon.
The resuscitation of the moribund is always a good story. In 1983, Alain
Wertheimer, grandson of Coco Chanel's original backer, appointed Karl
Lagerfeld to the post of chief designer at the house.
Chanel couture became the only story in Paris. Fashion commentators began to
write of couture as the experimental laboratory of fashion, a crucible of
creativity where, freed of economic restraints, the designer could follow
his muse. A new and now-monied clientele began to buy couture, welcoming a
chance to flaunt its wealth and get its picture taken.
The rest of the couture houses, galvanised by all the attention, took a
fresh pencil to their sketchpads and hired new, hot, ready to-wear
designers: Gianfranco Ferre at Dior, Claude Montana at Lanvin. And, as the
hype mushroomed from season to season and the column inches stretched, other
designers begged to join - Valentino from Rome, Versace from Milan.
Bernard Arnault, financial games-player, corporate predator and, as of this
year, undisputed monarch of the luxury brands conglomerate, Louis Vuitton
Moet Hennessy (LVMH), even started a new house. In 1987 he wooed Patou's
chief designer, Christian Lacroix, and gave him his head and his own label.
Doubtless, Arnault had pondered Chanel's and YSL's fragrance income.
Probably, he had taken into account the fact that launching a
non-couture-associated scent with adequate promotion and a suitable
advertising campaign costs around Pounds 30m.
Lacroix was a controversial success. Yet, when Bernard Arnault, with
eye-watering alacrity, launched Lacroix's first perfume, C'est la Vie, it
failed.
Arguably, Arnault, a man generally in a terrible hurry, had not given the
name enough time to establish an identity away from the pages of Vogue, down
at the sturdy base of the market where mass sales are made, where working
girls cruise Printemps, Harrods or Maceys in their lunch hour, courting
temptation, and everyone gets their full duty-free allowance once a year.
Since C'est la Vie's failure, Arnault has grumbled publicly about the rising
costs and falling sales of Lacroix's couture and de luxe ready to wear
business.
Similarly anxiety plagues the 30-year-old house of Yves Saint Laurent where
Saint Laurent's partner and business brain, Pierre Berge, has told Le Figaro
that 15 per cent of the company is up for sale. Arnault, labelled by Serge
'a bird of prey,' is, allegedly, extremely interested.
He probably should not be. Last year Yves Saint Laurent decided to buy back
its perfume interest from the licensee, Charles of the Ritz. Carlo de
Benedetti, the Italian industrialist, backed the move, to the tune of
Dollars 630m. When he ran into cashflow troubles soon afterwards, Berge was
forced to buy the 15 per cent share the investment had bought. It is these
shares he is seeking to sell. New finance is necessary, he told Figaro,
because of sharply declining sales.
YSL's published pre-tax profits for the first half of 1990 were Pounds
309,000, a sharp fall from the previous six month period's Pounds 4.9m. He
blamed the recession.
Other factors are also arousing anxiety. The Single European Market,
effective in two years, may undermine the duty-free market within Europe.
Challenges to exclusiveness and price control by retailers such as Superdrug
may ultimately devalue the glamour factor of couture perfumes. Protectionism
by the new administration in the US may render French imports prohibitively
expensive compared with almost equally glamorous domestic products.
A sharp fall in fragrance sales need not kill off couture. Arguably, the
smaller the cake, the harder you have to try. But there is a new mood abroad
in the world, one which rejects excess and conspicuous consumption. Arab
women may see no reason to stop spending but they do not go out much. Once
the high-profile US customers have heeded the call to the flag and learned
to shop American, the front row may lose its glamour.
Alert to this danger, the Chambre Syndicale de la Couture, which regulates
the couture industry, is revising its strict rules to permit more, newer,
younger, design houses to qualify as couturiers.
Its aim is partly to increase the sizzle factor, partly to ensure that when
the sausage pops, there is something sustaining left in the pan. A future
for the couture business and its great names will do.
