FT  25 NOV 92 / Danube under threat from toxic flood
UNITED NATIONS engineers are racing to prevent millions of tonnes of toxic
mine waste from poisoning the Danube river system after flash floods damaged
a dam in the mountains of Montenegro, a republic of the rump Yugoslavia.
Mr Hans Zimmermann, a senior official with the UN disaster relief
organisation in Geneva, said yesterday that the dam was on the verge of
collapse.
An estimated 7m tons of toxic waste - containing heavy metals such as lead
and zinc as well as pesticide residues - could then slide into the Tara
river and, via the Drina, to the Danube above Belgrade, from where it flows
through Bulgaria and Romania to the Black Sea.
The effect would be 'absolutely disastrous', Mr Zimmermann said. 'It would
poison everything that lives in the Tara and probably the Danube as well.'
Everyone who drinks water from the Danube system would be in danger, he
said. High concentrations of heavy metals would not only kill fish and other
aquatic life but also overwhelm water treatment facilities along the rivers.
Heavy metals are notoriously difficult to remove from drinking water, and
expensive new plants, using techniques such as ion exchange, might have to
be installed very quickly to make it safe.
The floods, in mid-October, washed away concrete slabs re-inforcing the base
of the 600-700 metre-long earth dam, which was built 20 years ago to hold
poisonous waste from local mines.
The full danger was not recognised until last week when UN experts visited
the site, in a mountainous gorge at Mojkovac on the river Tara. The Tara is
a Unesco-protected waterway.
The UN is preparing to fly in materials for building three jetties upstream
to direct water away from the dam and prevent further erosion of its base.
Officials hope to have the break-waters in place within a week and to build
a new retaining dam to shore up the old one by Christmas.
Although the floods have receded, Mr Zimmermann said the dam could topple at
any time. 'We cannot predict it; we can only work as fast as we can,' he
said.
The European Community has put up Ecu110,000 (Pounds 90,000) for the airlift
of urgently needed equipment and materials. A Belgian air force transport
has been chartered to fly tomorrow to Podgorica, the Montenegrin capital,
from where its load will be transported 30 miles by road to the dam.
Mr Zimmermann said the dam was on a long list of items submitted by
Montenegro to the UN last month, when it asked for sanctions to be lifted on
supplies to repair extensive damage to infrastructure from floods.
