FT  21 FEB 92 / Sixth quarterly decline for economy: Recession is longest,
but not yet steepest, since Second World War
BRITAIN'S economy showed its sixth successive quarterly decline at the end
of last year as non-oil output shrank by 0.4 per cent.
The latest three-monthly fall in output for the whole economy, excluding oil
and gas extraction, makes this recession the longest, but not yet the
steepest, since the Second World War.
Figures from the Central Statistical Office show that in 1979-81 non-oil
gross domestic product fell for five successive quarters. The fall from peak
to trough was 6.2 per cent.
So far, since the peak in the second quarter of 1990, non-oil output has
contracted by 3.9 per cent. But the yearly decline in output in 1991 was the
steepest since 1931 when output fell 5.5 per cent. GDP is provisionally
estimated to have fallen 2.5 per cent last year compared with 1990. Non-oil
GDP fell by 2.6 per cent over the year.
The Treasury blamed yesterday's poor figures on the deterioration in the
world economy and the weakness of domestic demand.
It said: 'It is clear now that the signs of recovery we saw in the summer
and early autumn were not sustained.'
GDP including oil and gas extraction has not shown the same sustained fall
as non-oil GDP because of a slight increase in output in the third quarter
of last year. This was due to extra activity in the North Sea. Including oil
and gas, GDP was 0.3 per cent lower than in the previous quarter.
supply all the significant components of GDP - including construction,
transport, banking and business services - fell, reflecting the width of
this recession compared with the recession in the early 1980s when declining
output was concentrated in manufacturing industry. Output in the service
sector was down 0.2 per cent compared with the previous quarter and down 1.6
per cent compared with the same quarter a year ago.
Within the service sector the output of distribution, hotels and catering
fell by 0.5 per cent on the previous quarter and by 1.7 per cent compared
with the same quarter in 1990.
Manufacturing output fell by 1.2 per cent on the previous quarter and by 3.5
per cent compared with the same quarter a year ago.
The only sector to grow was energy, which increased by 2.8 per cent on the
previous quarter and by 7.6 per cent compared with the same three-month
period a year ago.
