FT  30 OCT 92 / Parliament and Politics: 'Not too late for Major,' says
Tebbit
LORD TEBBIT last night stormed back into the thick of the European debate,
telling an audience of Young Conservatives that Mr John Major, the prime
minister, should not resign even if he loses next week's Commons vote on
Maastricht.
In a typically robust address, delivered in Mr Michael Heseltine's
constituency of Henley, the former Tory party chairman urged that
ratification of the treaty be postponed 'until the Danish people have spoken
in their referendum'.
Interviewed on Channel 4 News before his speech, he said ratifying the
treaty would require Britain to 'join the ERM or something so like it as to
be the ERM.'
As friends and advisers of Lady Thatcher, the former prime minister, sought
to play down the significance of her meeting this week with a group of Tory
backbenchers, Lord Tebbit called for 'whatever concessions are made to
Denmark' to apply to Britain too.
'Let us demand exemptions from any obligations to re-enter the Extend
Recession Mechanism - the ERM - or to work to create a single currency,' he
said. He sought to compare sterling's withdrawal from the mechanism to 'the
Argentinian army's withdrawal from the Falklands'.
Describing home secretary Mr Kenneth Clarke as 'the real shadow chancellor',
Lord Tebbit denied that 'an honest examination' of Maastricht was a factor
in undermining 'the authority of the prime minister'.
The blame was attributable to three episodes: the Mellor affair; the
attempted defence of sterling; and presentation of coal policy. Even so, it
was 'not too late to save the prime minister and this government'.
Repeating his call for a referendum, he hit out at the refusal of ministers
to discuss Maastricht. Unlike Mr Major - who 'says (the treaty) will reverse
the trend towards a centralisation of power within the institutions of the
community' - he believed Maastricht 'takes us further along the road to a
European state'.
Meanwhile at Westminster, advisers to Lady Thatcher strongly denied that an
'ad hoc' meeting with about six Tory MPs marked the beginning of any
systematic new Maastricht offensive by the former prime minister.
'It is not part of any lobby or campaign,' said one of those present at the
gathering, saying it was arranged at the request of MPs. Lady Thatcher would
probably 'see other people' on an informal basis.
Another MP who attended said Lady Thatcher had expressed concern that the
views of the electorate were not being properly reflected in parliament.
Observer, Page 21
