FT  08 MAY 92 / Technology: Pick of the designer crop - Victoria Griffith
explains why genetically altered food will taste better than the real thing
The US biotechnology industry is moving closer to overcoming the regulatory
barriers that keep its products off supermarket shelves.
The Department of Agriculture has said it should be ready to publish over
the next few weeks a new set of guidelines for genetically engineered food,
one of the biggest areas of biotech research.
Designer food - which is created by altering the genetic structure of fruits
and vegetables - has long been talked about, but the technology is no longer
a futuristic dream. Some companies have already developed marketable goods,
and say they are just waiting for federal approval to launch their products.
The Bush administration took a step towards setting up a regulatory
framework in February this year, when it issued a set of ground rules for
the biotech industry. The guidelines stressed that in order to block the
development of such products, strong evidence of environmental harm would
have to be presented.
'The most important thing about the document was that it seemed to support
the idea of genetically engineered food,' says Suzanne Shaw of Du Pont,
which is one of several companies working on a new tomato. 'It was seen as a
green light for the industry.'
If all goes according to plan, designer foods may become a familiar item at
grocery stores. Boasting superiority in flavour, texture and durability,
these products could change the way we eat.
Some of the foods which could soon grace our tables are better-tasting
tomatoes and melons, unbruisable potatoes and natural margarines. The
product likely to hit the market first is a new tomato made by Calgene of
Davis, California, which could be on the shelves as early as next year.
The tomatoes, already being cultivated on farms in Florida, California and
Mexico, have been genetically altered so that they no longer produce the
rotting enzyme polygalacturonase. That means the tomato can stay on the
vines longer, and vine-ripened tomatoes taste better. The technique also
enables farmers to cultivate strongly flavoured varieties which they would
usually ignore because of excessive softness.
ICI, the UK chemicals group, is also carrying out large-scale field trials
in the US of a non-rotting tomato. If all goes well, this will reach the
market in 1994-95, says Keith Pike, public affairs manager for ICI Seeds.
'Beyond that we have a follow-on programme, using other genetic constructs
in the tomato which appear to influence spoilage and flavour.'
Pike says ICI is also working on several other fruit and vegetables. 'We
believe we have the widest and deepest programme of anyone,' he says.
With the regulatory issues closer to being resolved, companies are investing
huge amounts of money into the development of designer food. 'As the
regulatory structure becomes clearer, companies are getting more excited
about it,' says Shaw. 'And there are a lot of good things for consumers
which will come out of this.'
The potential market for these products is huge. The potato business in the
US alone is worth about Dollars 1.7bn, according to Geoff Keyes, head of
business development at Monsanto.
The company is trying to develop a potato which would have more
carbohydrates and less water. 'That would mean using less oil in the cooking
process for fries and chips,' explains Keyes. 'Now, you have to use oil to
remove the water from potatoes.' The result should be lower-fat potato
products.
Calgene believes it can earn Dollars 500m a year with its new tomato.
According to Roger Salquist, the group's chairman and chief executive
officer, a patent on the product will guarantee the group a large portion of
the Dollars 3.5bn he estimates bio-engineered food will generate annually by
the end of the decade.
The company believes that sort of revenue potential will more than justify
its expenditures in the area. 'We've sunk Dollars 175m into bio-engineered
food over the last few years,' says Salquist. 'But we don't consider that a
very high figure. We put Dollars 20m into research on the tomato, and when
you consider that we may bring in Dollars 500m a year on that product alone,
the investment has been very small.'
Calgene is also developing other products, such as cooking oils which would
contain no saturated fats. That market, according to Salquist, will be even
more profitable than tomatoes, with a Dollars 700m a year revenue potential.
The US Department of Agriculture is getting in on the act, too. In
California, the USDA has put William Belknap in charge of a programme to
develop a potato which would not be susceptible to black spot bruises.
Belknap believes that the technology could save the industry Dollars 100m in
annual losses. Efforts are also under way to make soya beans, maize and
other products immune to disease.
But people in the industry say that consumers should not expect supermarkets
to fill up immediately with designer products. 'Only a few foods are ready
to be marketed,' says Belknap.
'It's not easy to get the effect you want. We have to test our potatoes in
the fields before we can be sure that it's a viable product. Because spring
only comes once a year, that's a slow process.'
