FT  01 SEP 92 / Arts: A fickle world - Sponsorship
RODGER Broad is a popular man. He controls BT's arts sponsorship budget,
which at around Pounds 1.6m a year is the largest of any British company.
Naturally he attracts offers from arts organisations anxious to relieve him
of his cash - at least 50 proposals a week.
After almost 18 months in the job he has worked out a strategy. BT sponsors
the arts to improve its image, to show its customers, which embrace
virtually the entire population, that it is doing its bit to make life more
enjoyable. BT is not interested in boosting brand awareness; it is not too
concerned with corporate hospitality, although it does entertain at arts
events. It sees the arts as a generator of goodwill.
This controls Broad's decisions. Not for him the investment in Glyndebourne
or Covent Garden. His flagship sponsorships are events that cover the
nation, ideally reaching into the more obscure and neglected corners, and
involving consumers who have never before tried the arts. At the moment BT
supports two such arts activities, Northern Ballet Theatre, which brings
popular dance to medium-sized venues, and National Touring Exhibitions,
which under the control of London's South Bank, and with more than Pounds 1m
of BT's money over three years, takes art shows to small local galleries.
What makes Broad particularly attractive at the moment is that he is looking
for a third sponsorship in which to invest up to Pounds 200,000 a year. He
is concentrating his quest on the theatre and music, with the theatre the
favourite. Renaissance, Kenneth Branagh's touring company, is an obvious
candidate, but much depends on Branagh's availability and the ability of the
company to get along with BT. Broad seeks no artistic influence, but he
insists on well managed arts organisations, alive to PR and marketing
opportunities of mutual benefit.
Attached to the three flagships Broad envisages a fleet of ancillary
sponsorships in each field. Some are already in place - the controversial
New Contemporaries touring arts show, which should get BT support for at
least one more year, nicely compliments National Touring Exhibitions, while
standing in for the missing theatrical trail-blazer is the BT Biennial, the
creation by a successful author of a new play to be performed simultaneously
by about 70 amateur theatrical companies.
Broad came from BT's PR side. Until he took on his job he had never been to
the ballet. He is now an enthusiast. He reckons that if BT can ease more
first-timers into their local theatre or art gallery, he will have done his
bit for them and for BT. Some in the arts have taken exception to this
populist approach; the RSC was upset when BT failed to renew its sponsorship
of its small venues tour and instead put over Pounds 100,000 into Witness
for the Prosecution. Broad has no regrets. BT's money enabled the play to
visit more than 40 towns, many of which had never received a fully cast,
well staged, theatrical production.
BT's commitment to the arts seems set firm. The money comes from a total
community and charity budget fixed at a half of one per cent of profits,
which currently means Pounds 15m a year. The desired format is three big
touring sponsorships supplemented by lower profile ancillary help -
scholarships, management training, and the like. BT does not imagine that
its sponsorship of the arts will significantly alter the public's attitude
towards the company, but if it can expand the audience for the arts, it will
be happy enough.
* * * The nail biting starts soon for the RSC, as its agreement with its
biggest sponsor, Royal Insurance, which is worth Pounds 2.1m over three
years, approaches its natural end in 1993. Will the Royal renew ?
It has already done so once, and in the fickle world of arts sponsorship -
made even more fickle by the recession - a six year commitment is regarded
as par for the course.
But the Royal has done well out of the sponsorship, which has made its
chairman, Ian Rushton, the spokesman for corporate sponsors everywhere. Last
week the Royal contributed another Pounds 20,000. It is paying for 15
'signed' performances by the RSC which will enable deaf theatre lovers to
follow the show. It is also supplying an audio descriptive system to the
Barbican which gives a running commentary and enables the partially sighted
to enjoy the theatre that much more.
This extra help does not mean that the Royal will sign up for another three
years. Most likely it will support the Company into 1994, giving it time to
find another big backer. Despite the recession, the RSC has been successful
in attracting sponsors this year.
Unilever is supporting the Company for the first time, putting almost Pounds
50,000 behind the Kenneth Branagh Hamlet, which opens at the Barbican in
December. Meanwhile, two performances of the acclaimed Two Gentlemen of
Verona which arrives at the Barbican in October are being sponsored by the
Royal Mail, and one by AT&amp;T. * * * Since 1987 Digital, the computer company,
has been the main sponsor of the European Community Youth Orchestra,
investing Pounds 2.5m in what has become the finest, perhaps only, example
of the EC member countries working in complete harmony. Digital used the
ECYO to ease its way into Russia last December, and is currently supporting
it on a major European tour.
But after 1993 Digital will be looking elsewhere for a sponsorship vehicle.
This offers opportunities for a multinational to pick up the baton and
become associated with the best possible ambassadors in Europe, and for an
arts organisation, probably in visual arts, to attract the support of a
leading sponsor of the arts.
* * *
The Scottish Chamber Orchestra, which received Pounds 100,000 as the winner
of the Prudential Award for the Arts, is devoting the money to two projects
 -a specially commissioned music theatre work by James MacMillan, Visitatio
Sepulchri, yet another modern composition inspired by medieval religious
drama, to be presented at Glasgow's Tramway next May, and the revival of a
'Sang School' in the Border village of Ettrickbridge in October.
