FT  26 AUG 92 / New racist clash erupts as German politicians quarrel
POLICE clashed with right-wing extremists for a fourth successive night in
Rostock at the end of a day in which federal and state leaders quarrelled
over who was ultimately responsible for the racist attacks in the east
German Baltic port.
More than a thousand police reinforcements had been rushed to the city to
try to head off the threats of renewed violence. Although most immigrants
have been evacuated, several hundred youths outside a refugee centre hurled
pieces of pavement and firebombs, at police who responded with water cannon
and tear gas. At least two cars were set on fire.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl, in his first public comment on the riots, said
outbreaks of violence against foreigners would be 'confronted with the
utmost legal firmness and strictness'. He dismissed charges that the
violence was typical for east Germany, the poorer part of the united
country.
Meanwhile, the federal constitutional protection agency in Cologne said it
feared the weekend riots, in which almost 300 asylum-seekers were driven out
of a Rostock hostel, would prompt violence elsewhere.
Although an instant poll showed 86 per cent of Germans against attacks on
foreigners, only 200 people turned out in Rostock yesterday evening for a
'solidarity' rally. Another poll, to be published tomorrow, showed Mr Kohl's
Christian Democrat party has lost up to half its support in the east since
federal elections in December 1990.
In Bonn, Mr Wolfgang Schauble, Mr Kohl's right-hand man, said Rostock had
been over-burdened because too many asylum-seekers had been housed in the
town's main collection centre. He called on the local authorities and police
in future to avoid 'shortcomings' which had done nothing to convince people
of the state's ability to cope.
He appeared to be referring to Monday night's resumption of the riots in
which a mob broke into an apartment block and set several flats alight while
police stood by. The police had been unaware that between 60 and 100
Vietnamese were still inside.
Mr Schauble, speaking after a meeting of coalition leaders, condemned the
violence, called for peaceful cohabitation, and added that east Germany
would have to continue to take its quota of asylum-seekers.
He also welcomed the opposition Social Democrats' (SPD) apparent acceptance
of the need for constitutional change. An SPD summit at the weekend reversed
its long-standing policy, saying the flow of asylum seekers had to be
'braked and controlled', and agreeing to constitutional changes 'if
necessary'.
Mr Gerd Wartenberg, SPD interior policy spokesman, claimed Mr Rudolf
Seiters, interior minister, was at fault for housing refugees in Rostock.
The minister countered by claiming the SPD had blocked solutions to the
asylum problem for years.
In Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Mr Berndt Seite, state prime minister, denied
responsibility for the worst example of racist violence since similar events
in Hoyerswerda, Lower Saxony, almost a year ago.
According to federal officials, 288 violent attacks by right-wingers have
occurred so far this year. Nine people have been killed, compared with three
in the whole of 1991.
