FT  13 APR 92 / A cautious step into the future: The prime minister has
named a consensual, rather than conviction, cabinet
It marks out a new direction. But in the cautious manner of the man who
shaped it, Mr John Major's new cabinet represents a carefully-constructed
bridge to the future rather than a decisive break with the past.
There are plenty of changes around the cabinet table. Fewer than half a
dozen Whitehall departments will wake up this morning to find the same
minister in charge.
There were the predictable departures of some of the old guard, Mr Kenneth
Baker and Mr Tom King among them. Younger ministers kept outside Mrs
Margaret Thatcher's inner circle because they were never 'One of us' have
been given their chance. Mr John Patten's promotion to secretary of state
for education gives a barely reconstructed 'wet' one of the most
high-profile roles in the new government.
With the appointments of Mrs Virginia Bottomley to health and Mrs Gillian
Shephard to employment, Mr Major has lived up to his promise to open to
women the highest ranks of his government.
Two new Whitehall departments have been established - the national heritage
ministry headed by Mr David Mellor and the civil service and Citizen's
Charter department under Mr William Waldegrave. Mr Mellor's responsibility
for broadcasting will give him oversight of the renewal of the BBC's
charter.
Overall, Mr Major's choices reflect the judgment of a politician whose own
journey to Downing Street owed everything to a calculated talent for making
friends rather than enemies right across the ideological divides of his
party.
Mr Douglas Hurd will stay at the Foreign Office. His immediate task is to
steer Britain through its presidency of the European Community in the second
half of this year. More surprisingly, Mr Norman Lamont remains at the
Treasury. Mr Peter Lilley was moved rather than sacked. So was Mr
Waldegrave.
In the background, Mr Richard Ryder retains his formidable influence as
chief whip and Mr John Wakeham's elevation to the House of Lords will give
him a continuing role as government fixer.
If the team can be given a single, if rather outdated, label it is that of
'dry on economic and wet on social policy'.
The prime minister will never again be as powerful as in the immediate
aftermath of his first election triumph. But circumstances as well as his
cautious political instincts dictated that he moved only half way to the
cabinet with which he will fight the next general election.
Mr Chris Patten, the Conservative party chairman deprived of his seat in
Bath, will be back. The message from Downing Street is that the prime
minister has assured him that as soon as he returns to the House of Commons
he will be guaranteed to one of the most senior jobs in the government.
The gossip among his colleagues is that two or three years hence, Mr Patten
will be foreign secretary or chancellor. Mr Lamont has not been guaranteed
tenure at No 11 Downing Street for a full parliament. Mr Douglas Hurd
expects to retire from the foreign office before the next election.
Two other casualties of this election - Mr John Maples and Mr Francis Maude
 -had been pencilled in for promotion. They will have strong claims on
cabinet seats if and when by-elections offer a chance to return to
Westminster.
Mr Michael Heseltine's move to trade and industry, a just reward for his
vigorous role in the election campaign, will confirm his powerful influence
in the new Major government.
Anyone who has even glanced at his books and speeches on the subject of
industrial policy will realise that he will not be content with the
minimalist role mapped out for the DTI in recent years by Mr Nicholas Ridley
and Mr Peter Lilley.
There will be a cautious start. Mr Heseltine is shrewd enough not to fall
into the trap of being type-cast as a promoter of 1960s-style corporatism.
But he is said to remain as convinced as ever that many of Britain's
competitors owe their industrial success to active - he would prefer
'enabling' - government.
The transfer to the DTI of policy towards small businesses, a new role in
forging links with the training and enterprise councils and its additional
responsibility for energy, will give him one of the most powerful bases in
Whitehall.
So too will the growing importance of European regional policy implicit in
progress towards economic and monetary union. Mr Heseltine's enthusiasm for
European-wide industrial co-operation has not diminished.
Elsewhere, Mrs Bottomley's appointment, alongside the promotion of Mr John
Patten to education, puts the two most visible departments of the welfare
state in the hands of politicians wedded firmly to One-Nation Conservatism.
They are charged with pressing on with the market-based reforms of health
and education started by Mrs Thatcher. But their left-leaning credentials
will help reassure patients and parents that the final destination is no
longer the dismantling of public-sector provision. It was no coincidence
that Downing Street was at pains this weekend to point out that Mr Patten, a
former grammar school-boy and Oxford don, sends his own young daughter to a
state school.
Mr Kenneth Clarke's move to the Home Office is more complicated. Though one
of the three great departments of state, it is often viewed as a graveyard.
Mr Heseltine turned it down in favour of environment in Mr Major's first
cabinet.
But in Mr Clarke's case, the appointment confirms rather than diminishes his
influence. A liberal on social policy, he will be expected to implement the
recommendations of the royal commission on criminal justice when it reports
later this year.
His other, more Thatcherite, persona as a self-declared enemy of the trades
unions, promises an effort to weaken the power of the prison offices and the
police federation, both largely untouched during the 1980s. Mr Clarke wants
to be chancellor, and success at the Home Office might prove to be his
route.
If there was a surprise appointment it was Mr Malcolm Rifkind's promotion to
defence. Like Mr Clarke, he backed Mr Hurd in the leadership battle which
followed Mrs Thatcher's demise.
For months before the election he was embroiled in a serious dispute with Mr
Major over rail privatisation - the responsibility for which now passes to
Mr John MacGregor.
But Mr Major is said to be impressed by his abilities. If he manages
successfully the cuts in the armed forces outlined in Options for Change,
the 45-year-old Mr Rifkind will confirm his position as a future candidate
for the party leadership.
If it is possible to identify the key figures - with Messrs Hurd, Heseltine,
Clarke and Rifkind most prominent among them - it is harder to draw a single
philosophical thread through the new cabinet.
The ascendancy of the what one right-wing MP yesterday called the 'foppish'
tendency in some of the main spending Whitehall spending departments has
been balanced by the line-up at the Treasury.
Mr Lamont's re-appointment as chancellor is a signal to the right of the
Conservative party that Mr Major means what he says about the defeat of
inflation. It ensures also that a prominent Euro-sceptic remains at the
heart of negotiations with Brussels on progress towards a single European
currency.
The promotion to chief secretary of Mr Michael Portillo, at 38 already
judged the right's most likely candidate for the party leadership in five or
10 years time, provides further re-assurance.
Mr Portillo, charged with holding the Treasury's purse strings, is a
self-confessed tax cutter rather than public spender. Mr Heseltine will not
find it easy to persuade him that the Treasury's money is better spent on
regional policy than on lowering the basic rate of income tax or reducing
the public borrowing requirement.
The same message that the Tory right will remain well represented was sent
by the promotion of Sir Patrick Mayhew to Northern Ireland and of Mr Michael
Howard to environment.
Sir Patrick's appointment is a signal to Dublin that the prime minister's
anxiety for a negotiated settlement in Ulster does not extend to undermining
the Unionist case.
Mr Howard, whose fierce attacks on Labour's links with the trades unions put
him at the heart of the election campaign, can now claim a place in the
ministerial first division.
So it is a cabinet of checks and balances, designed to allow Mr Major to set
his own agenda for the 1990s without compromising unity in his party.
