FT  27 JUL 92 / Leading Article: Dealing with Mr Saddam
THE SIGHS of relief in western capitals last night, after Iraq had climbed
down in the crisis with the United Nations over weapons inspections, were
almost audible. After Baghdad's agreement to UN demands that a team of
inspectors be allowed in to its agriculture ministry, the immediate threat
of punitive military action by the US and its allies appears to have
receded. But the west has won at best a symbolic victory; and Baghdad's
behaviour means that the danger of renewed military action has by no means
disappeared.
The latest bout of brinkmanship between President Saddam Hussein and the UN
underlines once again the challenge the Iraqi leader poses to international
order by his flouting of the security council resolutions which provided for
a ceasefire in the Gulf war last year. Unless he follows yesterday's
agreement with a clear indication that he is prepared to respect the will of
the international community on a broader front, it must be only a matter of
time before another confrontation similar to that of the past few days
arises.
If and when that confrontation comes, western governments will again have to
think carefully about their objectives. It became clear during the stand-off
in the past week that purely punitive action would have brought at best
highly uncertain benefits and would have entailed considerable risks.
Broader objectives
What can be achieved militarily in this respect has long since been done,
and as Mr Rolf Ekeus, the UN official in charge of inspection programmes,
has admitted, whatever documents or other material were being stored in the
agriculture ministry will almost certainly have been moved elsewhere.
Western government have thus found themselves inevitably focusing on broader
political objectives.
Indeed, as the confrontation over the inspection team intensified, Mr James
Baker was careful to draw attention to Mr Saddam's other acts of defiance
towards the UN: notably his continued attacks on the Shia population in the
south, his violent harassment of UN relief workers in Kurdistan, and his
renewed claims to Kuwait's territory. Whereas many Arabs have some sympathy
for Mr Saddam's efforts to build up Iraq's military strength, arguing that
at least similar attention should be paid to Israel's nuclear arsenal, there
is little admiration even within the Arab world for his treatment of the
Iraqi population, or for his invasion of another Arab state. Whatever
happens next, it is vitally important to the whole world that the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction should be halted, in Iraq as
elsewhere, and that UN resolutions should not be violated with impunity.
Aggressive actions
The latter point is more important than ever at a moment when the
international community is striving to convince the Serbian leadership of
the risks it runs by continuing its aggressive, if not genocidal, actions
against the Moslems of Bosnia. Those who violate the terms of a ceasefire
expose themselves to a resumption of hostilities, and cannot escape the
responsibility for it.
But Mr Saddam's responsibilities go even further than that; and the
impossibility of achieving peace and stability in Iraq and its surrounding
region while he remains in power has been amply demonstrated. Therefore if
renewed military action by external powers should eventually be necessary in
Iraq, it should have the clear purpose of protecting Iraqis against his
brutality, and assisting those who are brave enough to resist him.
It has already been shown that allied air power can preserve a 'safe haven'
for the Kurds in the north, simply by threatening punitive strikes against
any military forces that Mr Saddam sends into the area. There is a similar
need to protect the Shia refugees who are still holding out, against ever
increasing military pressure, in the marshes of the south.
If more of Iraq's territory were to be placed off limits to Mr Saddam's
repressive forces, the west might be seen as promoting not Kurdish
separatism but security and freedom for Iraq as a whole, and the forces
still supporting Mr Saddam might realise that their best hope of preserving
Iraq's unity is to get rid of him and to seek agreement with his opponents
in both north and south.
