FT  11 JUN 92 / Cadbury backed by Bank chief
MR ROBIN Leigh-Pemberton, governor of the Bank of England, warned yesterday
of 'a danger of too much analysis and not enough action' in the wake of the
Cadbury committee's report on corporate governance.
He said at a conference about the report, organised by the Confederation of
British Industry, that efforts by the accountancy profession and the
proposals of the committee should together 'go some way to solve the problem
that I have recently drawn attention to - the cases where accounts had
failed to give a full or accurate picture of a company's true position'.
He said it was important for the committee's proposals to be put into
practice. 'People will begin to assume that because they have thought a
little about corporate governance and understand the central principles
clearly, that is all that needs to happen.'
Mr Neil Hamilton, corporate affairs minister, said at the conference that
the committee had been correct in proposing a voluntary code of practice for
directors, accountants and auditors. He welcomed the Cadbury committee's
recommendation that the operation of the code should be examined in two
years.
'If the sponsors felt that the code needed to be streng-thened I would
expect them to . . . put forward proposals on how the government could
help,' Mr Hamilton added.
Yesterday's conference heard that a survey of fund managers and auditors by
Burson-Marsteller, the public relations company, found that a majority of
both groups felt the recommendations did not go far enough.
The survey said most of the 22 leading fund managers and auditors
interviewed had felt members of the committee had been unwilling to produce
a report that upset corporate directors.
In particular, most shareholders doubted whether the voluntary nature of the
code would be effective - the survey found that enforcement was the issue
that most divided respondents.
The proposed means of ensuring compliance with the code is that, to qualify
for a new Stock Exchange listing, companies will have to disclose the extent
to which they comply with the code, and give reasons for any failure to do
so.
Sir Andrew Hugh Smith, chairman of the Stock Exchange and a member of the
Cadbury committee, speaking at the conference, said the compliance mechanism
would be effective. Shareholders would be encouraged to take managements to
task for poor board structures, forcing companies to comply with the code.
