FT  08 AUG 92 / Tackling blight in the garden of England: Depressed east
Kent is perceived as part of the prosperous south-east
THE abandoned colliery buildings, unoccupied factories and dole queues could
be anywhere in the industrial north or the Midlands during the last
recession, a decade ago. But this is east Kent and it is 1992.
A drive around the Isle of Sheppey, the stranded pit villages and the
down-at-heel resort towns of the north Kent coast can be depressing on the
sunniest of days. Unemployment is running at more than 16 per cent on
Sheppey and more than 13 per cent in Thanet, compared with an average of 9.2
per cent in south-east England - and it shows.
There is a record number of house repossessions as people who moved out of
London to cheaper accommodation find themselves without jobs and in trouble
keeping up mortgage payments. Virtually every car in the industrial parts of
Sheppey lacks the prefix-letter registration introduced more than nine years
ago.
It is difficult to believe that the area is only 70 miles or so from London
and, in theory, part of the affluent south-east.
East Kent, although beautiful and well-heeled in parts, has many of the
troubles of the industrial north - but because of its position it is not
placed in the same category. It is seen as part of prosperous Kent, and that
perception is hard to shift.
That might be about to change, with the start of fierce lobbying by councils
and businesses for assisted-area status. That would provide investment funds
to help stem the unemployment that is set to get worse. A decision is
expected by the end of the year.
In addition to long-term unemployment caused by the contraction or demise of
traditional industries such as engineering, papermaking and coal mining, the
area faces structural change from the opening of the Channel tunnel and the
introduction of the single European market. A study last year on the impact
of the tunnel on jobs forecast a net gain for Kent, but argued that the jobs
were likely to occur mainly outside east Kent, and later than the big job
losses expected over the next few years.
Among the first jobs to go will be 500 Customs &amp; Excise officers and 600
Customs agents, mainly in Dover, Folkestone and Sheerness.
The economic handicaps are spread across east Kent, and not just the area
adjacent to Dover, Folkestone and the tunnel. North of the corridor of
prosperity the tunnel might bring lies the district of Swale - which
includes Sheppey and Sittingbourne - and Thanet, with endemic employment, as
well as the faded glories of Margate, Herne Bay, Whitstable and Broadstairs.
Many small hotels and boarding houses are now occupied by social security
clients rather than holidaymakers.
Among the few pockets of affluence are Canterbury, with its strengths in
tourism and as a regional shopping centre, and Ashford, which still expects
the Channel tunnel international rail passenger station to become a magnet
for jobs.
The six local authorities have joined Kent County Council, four government
departments, and 12 private-sector representatives to fight for more help
and recognition. They have launched East Kent Initiative under the
chairmanship of Sir Alastair Morton, chief executive of Eurotunnel.
Mr Martin Hemingway, seconded from Eurotunnel to be the initiative's general
manager, says: 'We have got to get more inward investment, but this is very
difficult with the present infrastructure problems. That is where we really
need help.'
A lot is already being done to improve roads, particularly the M20 from
London to Folkestone and the tunnel terminus. However, a big blow to the
area's hopes came this week when the government rejected a Pounds 500m
development plan for Sheppey, including a new road and tunnel.
Sheppey is the worst blackspot of all, with regeneration hampered by the
bottleneck of a narrow access road and a lifting bridge over the River
Swale.
For an average of five minutes an hour the bridge closes to let boats
through, leading to hold-ups for the 22,000 vehicles a day that cross it and
difficulties for Olau Line, which runs a ferry service from Sheerness to the
Netherlands.
The development plan, which also proposed substantial expansion at
Sheerness, the fifth-largest freight port in the country, and the
construction of factories and more upmarket houses, was turned down largely
on environmental and conservation grounds. The decision left many local
people depressed and frustrated.
Mr Bill Croydon, chief executive of Swale District Council, says the
authority felt that the benefits of the plan far outweighed the penalties,
and were vital for the prosperity of the island. 'This shows there can be a
penalty from putting green issues at the top of the agenda, and the
government must help to deal with the problems this policy creates.'
The rail network, however, is a much bigger handicap than the roads. The
Kent coast service is one of the most notorious in the country, with old
rolling stock and poor timekeeping. Prospective investors are usually asked
to travel by road to prevent them getting too negative an impression. It
takes an hour and 50 minutes from London to Ramsgate, compared with well
under half that time for the same distance from Peterborough.
With better infrastructure, improvements could be rapid. Two potential
development sites are the White Cliffs Business Park at Dover and Kent
International Business Park at Manston.
Just one company, Cohline, a German motor components manufacturer, has moved
in at Manston. It is surrounded by hay and cabbages rather than other
factories, but the operation has been so successful that expansion is
planned.
For much more to happen, Mr Hemingway says, government help is essential.
'Money is available . . . either for inner cities or for underpopulated
rural areas,' he says. 'But there is nothing in be-tween . . . that's our
problem.'
