FT  30 JUN 92 / (CORRECTED) World Trade News: Restructuring hope for
Szczecin yard
Correction (Published 1st July 1992) appended to this article.
A PLANNED restructuring of Poland's Szczecin shipyard's Zl 12,000bn (Pounds
473m) debt, coupled with a full order book and cuts in delivery times, holds
out new hope for the yard's once-bleak future.
Last week at the yard, Mr Harald Block, of Hansa Treuhand, a Hamburg-based
shipping line, said: 'I'm paying 20-30 per cent less and getting delivery
six months earlier than I could have got in Germany last year,' as his
12,380 dwt container ship, costing about Dollars 18m (Pounds 9.7m), slid
easily off the slipway into the water.
The yard is one of Poland's three major shipbuilders, the others being at
Gdansk and Gdynia, further east along the Baltic coast.
The general improvement in output at Szczecin is moving apace with
restructuring envisaging that the yard's suppliers swap debt for equity.
Bank creditors, meanwhile, are to stretch repayment times after having debts
redenominated in US dollars at appropriate interest rates. The operation
presages a general debt restructuring which the finance ministry is now
preparing for the whole economy, easing financial burdens on those Polish
companies deemed to have a future.
At Szczecin, a new management team headed by Mr Krzysztof Piotrowski, who
was forced to leave the yard in 1985 after having served on its workers'
self-management council, returned last year determined to restore the
company's fortunes. Over two-thirds of the debt he inherited came from
non-payment by Soviet clients for ships ordered and built, and the sudden
cut by the Solidarity government of the 20 per cent subsidy on ships for
western lines ordered in the late 1980s.
The Soviet clients who once took half the yard's output have now
disappeared, leaving Szczecin with orders from Germany and the PZM Polish
shipping line. The workforce has been moved on to two shifts and away from
traditional piece rates. A tightening of delivery schedules by outside
suppliers squeezed for custom by Poland's recession has made it possible to
plan an efficient assembly timetable.
The pressure to improve delivery times has also come from the 50 per cent or
more annual cost of credit, all of which means the yard is on the way to
halving its previous ship assembly times. Financial controls are also being
tightened. Mr Block's container ship has, for example, been built as a
partnership between the yard and the Warsaw-based Polish Development Bank.
It has provided guarantees for the German client's downpayment, then held
them, only releasing funds to the yard as and when successive portions of
the vessel were completed. Other vessels will be treated as separate
financial units, thus avoiding dissipation of funds. The general tightening
in efficiency is bringing results without much need for significant capital
outlays.
At present, the yard is planning to buy several heavy-duty cranes for
Dollars 6m; further capital equipment needs are put by management at Dollars
10m. This should be set against the Dollars 1.3bn worth of orders and
options for 53 vessels the yard now has on its books with delivery dates
until the end of 1995, and the Zl 800bn worth of vessels being built at the
moment.
Correction (Published 1st July 1992)
The debt of Poland's Szczecin shipyard should be 2,000bn zlotys (Pounds
77.7m), not 12,000bn zlotys, as reported in the Financial Times of June 30,
1992.
