FT  29 FEB 92 / Motoring: Hand-built for speed
FIRST, THE facts. An Aston Martin Virage is hand-made. It seats two people
in luxury and two more if they are prepared to suffer acute discomfort.
It is the size of a Ford Scorpio and weighs nearly two tons. A 5.3-litre,
330-horsepower V8 engine propels it from 0-60 mph (0-96 kmh) in a
tyre-smoking 6.5 seconds, and on to a maximum of 155 mph (250 kmh). To own
one, you must be able to write a cheque for Pounds 132,000.
In a world where - German autobahns excepted - using that performance puts
licence, and even liberty, at risk, is there any point in making such cars?
Commonsense says not but Aston Martin thinks otherwise. As though an
off-the-peg Virage was not potent enough, it has produced an even faster
version.
The engine, enlarged to 6.3 litres, develops 465 horsepower (a 40 per cent
increase), cutting the 0-60 mph time to under 5.5 seconds and raising the
maximum speed to 174 mph (280 kmh).
New brakes are the largest ever fitted to a production car and, for the
first time on an Aston Martin, they have an anti-lock system.
The suspension is modified; the wheels and tyres are new; and the price goes
up by Pounds 50,000 to Pounds 182,000, which makes a Pounds 111,364 Bentley
Turbo R seem positively cheap.
What role is the converted Virage supposed to play? Is it the equivalent of
a pit bull terrier for the moneyed motoring classes? A case of piling
superfluity upon excess? Or a classic example of ingenuity misapplied?
Not according to Walter Hayes, Aston Martin's chairman. Hayes, former
vice-president of the Ford Motor Company, told me without a flicker of a
smile that a standard Virage was potent enough for most customers. But some
 -the sort who would have chosen the V8 Vantage a few years back - felt the
need for more performance. Hence the go-even-faster Virage.
What is it like to drive? I doubt that I shall ever find out.
But service division director Kingsley Riding-Felce says reassuringly - and
apparently seriously - that the standard Virage's 'flexibility and
practicality' have not been lost. As he put it: 'We did not wish to end up
with a massively powerful and unsocial car . . . unsuitable for anything but
motorways. With the 6.3, we have . . . a high-performance, yet still
classic, sports car which is eminently suitable for everyday use and a great
pleasure to drive.'
I must live on a different planet from people who build, buy or even dream
about owning Pounds 182,000 Aston Martins, or who think seriously that a
465-horsepower, 2+2-seat car is suitable for everyday use.
Aston Martin is owned by Ford, which bought it for an undisclosed sum in
October 1987. More than the purchase price has been spent on product and
factory improvements.
About 2,300 very high-performance supercars are bought world-wide each year.
Ferrari (owned by Fiat) dominates the market; Aston Martin and Lamborghini
fight over most of what is left.
Aston Martin clearly has done well from the Ford connection. What Ford has
got out of it is less obvious, although Hayes sees Aston Martins being used
as test beds for high-tech (and high-cost) components that might one day
filter down to humbler products.
To ensure their life span will stretch far into the 21st century, Aston
Martin has just announced a 'car for life' scheme. This guarantees the
possibility of as-new restoration for all post-1950 models. Their
performance can be improved by using technology not available when they were
built.
