FT  15 OCT 92 / Japan's LDP in disarray as Kanemaru resigns
JAPAN'S ruling Liberal Demo-cratic party was in disarray last night after
the resignation of Mr Shin Kanemaru, the country's most powerful politician.
Mr Kanemaru, 78, who headed the largest of the LDP's five factions, resigned
after more than a month of protests from the Japanese public which has been
angered by his violation of a political funds law and alleged dealings with
gangster groups.
Resignations are often reversed in Japanese politics, but Mr Kanemaru has
insisted his will be permanent. It was formally accepted yesterday by Mr
Kiichi Miyazawa, the prime minister.
The resignation will leave the LDP rudderless for the next few months as it
has no other politician of Mr Kanemaru's stature or skills, which were used
to guide controversial legislation through the party and parliament.
Mr Kanemaru had hinted that he would resign but most Japanese did not expect
him to go. One reason for their surprise over his decision is that, only a
few days ago, Mr Kanemaru appeared to be beyond the law, having paid a
relatively small Y200,000 (Pounds 970) fine for an admitted offence without
having been questioned by prosecutors.
The size of that fine, imposed for his illegal receipt of Y500m from a
parcel delivery company, and the generally lenient treatment given to Mr
Kanemaru provoked protests in Tokyo and encouraged the country's business
leaders to call for him to quit.
But the Federation of Economic Organisations (Keidanren) said last night
that Mr Kanemaru's resignation alone would not change the nature of Japanese
politics. The federation has been consistently critical of the LDP's lack of
ethics and recently suggested politicians had lost touch with ordinary
Japanese.
The immediate impact of Mr Kanemaru's departure was to stimulate an already
bitter fight within his faction. Members of that faction warned last night
that it was close to splitting, which could prompt a realignment of all the
party's elements.
Mr Kanemaru's chosen successor is Mr Ichiro Ozawa, a former LDP
secretary-general, though his power has been undermined by the premature
resignation of Mr Kanemaru, who had not yet completed the lobbying needed to
ensure an orderly succession.
The Don has gone, Page 6
Bankruptcies rise, Page 6
Editorial Comment, Page 18
