FT  23 APR 92 / Technology: Making tracks - Andrew Baxter explains how
ancient and modern techniques are used in the construction of tanks
In the past few weeks, workers at the Vickers Defence Systems tank factory
at Newcastle upon Tyne have had to walk round a large hole that has opened
up in the middle of the shopfloor.
The hole might suggest that Vickers has started test firing its tank guns
indoors, but there is a more innocent explanation. It is to provide
foundations for a new Pounds 500,000 computer-controlled machining centre
being supplied by Halifax-based Butler Newall.
The machine will replace three 30-year-old Giddings &amp; Lewis horizontal
boring machines, and will do all their machining work on the tank hulls in
one setting.
For Bill McGawley, divisional operations director, the new machine is an
investment in new technology that is worth making because of the time saved
and the contribution to increased competitiveness.
A walk through the 543m-long plant - armoured plate in at one end, completed
tank out from the other end - is a history lesson in the machine tool
industry. Names long gone, such as Kendall &amp; Gent of the UK, rub shoulders
with the Mori Seikis of the modern era.
In between are venerable machines that have been given a new lease of life.
Vickers spent Pounds 90,000 last year restoring a 600-ton press, made in
Birmingham in 1936 and used for straightening thick plate after welding.
McGawley is keen to dispel the impression that the British Army's 140 new
Challenger tanks, to be built at Newcastle and its sister plant in Leeds,
will be the products of old-fashioned manufacturing technology.
But the mixture of old and new is deliberate, and intended to answer the
challenge of manufacturing tanks competitively, and profitably, in the
modern era. Vickers is the only company in the world to have been
continuously producing tanks since they were introduced in 1916, and wants
to remain so.
The critical manufacturing issue, for a low-volume product in a market where
margins have fallen and competition is now more open and international, is
reducing break-even to a minimum.
Expenditure on new machine tools is an important part of the equation.
Buying elegant machinery that shaves a few seconds or minutes off machining
times may make sense for a high-volume manufacturer, says McGawley, as the
cost of the machine can be spread over thousands of products.
In tank production, with many large pieces requiring long set-up times for
machining, a few minutes saved while the metal is cut may not be that
critical. And highly specialised machinery could reduce flexibility when the
production line switches to a new model.
For McGawley, therefore, the key question is not 'How much time can we
save?' but 'How much money can we make over time by making that part?'
This approach to manufacturing lies behind the transformation in Vickers'
tank production business over the past decade. Ancient, sprawling
manufacturing plants with long chains of command and five different levels
of dining room have been swept away, first at Newcastle in 1983 and then in
Leeds three years later.
The company now has two identical plants, each of which can produce a
complete tank - allowing for the fact that 60 per cent of each tank's
content is sourced externally.
The strategy, masterminded by Gerry Boxall, Vickers Defence Systems chairman
and chief executive, flies in the face of modern manufacturing convention,
which calls for the elimination of duplication and concentration of
different stages of manufacturing in separate plants. But Vickers does not
want to go down this route, says McGawley. Strategically, it would make the
company vulnerable to the consequences of 'upsizing and downsizing' of order
flows, and competition between the two plants can be constructive and
beneficial if properly controlled.
The result of the upheavals at the company, and its innovative approach to
manufacturing technology, is that each factory can break even on two to
three tanks a month, yet can expand to ten a month simply by adding shifts.
The wisdom of McGawley's approach to manufacturing options is illustrated by
some of its recent experiences with new equipment.
On the one hand, it has had no trouble assimilating some of the new
techniques in manufacturing developed for high-volume production such as car
manufacturing. It has bought CNC lathes and a CAD system virtually off the
shelf.
But a recent episode with robotics was another story. With financial backing
from the UK government, McGawley bought a robot to weld turrets which
Vickers makes for armoured fighting vehicles.
The robot had no trouble welding armoured plate, despite certain
metallurgical challenges, in half the time that a human welder would
require. The problem was integrating the robot and its software to ensure
that the welding torch moved to the right place. Along with difficulties
setting up large castings for the robot to work on, this made it difficult
to achieve the repeatability which is normally one of the main benefits of
robotics.
Three years after purchasing the robot, and after spending about Pounds 1m,
McGawley says it is now performing well and he looks forward to extending
the use of robots. But manual craft skills will still be required for
welding in difficult positions and, as with other parts of the manufacturing
process, old and new will complement each other.
Much of the Pounds 1m investment in manufacturing equipment at Newcastle
over the past year is linked to preparation for fulfilling the Pounds 500m
Challenger 2 order.
Building tanks is a lengthy affair, but the philosophy at Vickers, which has
brought design and manufacturing teams closer together physically and
metaphorically, has had a profound impact on product development times.
The first CRARVV (Challenger armoured repair and recovery vehicle) rolled
off the production line in autumn 1990, five years after Vickers began
concept work, and went straight to the Gulf. Formerly, says McGawley, the
project would have taken eight to nine years.
Management schools would no doubt applaud Vickers' new co-ordinated approach
to tank manufacture as a classic example of the teamwork element in
simultaneous or concurrent engineering. McGawley will have none of that,
preferring instead to call it 'sheer bloody common sense'.
'My wife in the kitchen doesn't have the kettle on one table, the tea on
another and the sugar in a different room. They are all in reach,' he says.
'Why should that have a special title in engineering?'
