FT  09 JUN 92 / Czech and Slovak leaders in key talks
THE future of Czechoslovakia was last night in the hands of the country's
two political king-pins, prime minister-designate Vaclav Klaus and the main
Slovak leader Vladimir Meciar. The two men met yesterday for crucial talks
which could decide whether their country splits apart.
Mr Klaus, whose rightwing Civic Democratic party won most votes in the Czech
republic in last weekend's election, wants to retain a strong Czechoslovak
federation and push through radical economic reforms. Mr Meciar, election
victor in Slovakia, is keen to loosen ties with Prague and slow down
reforms. Yesterday, the two met half-way between Prague and the Slovak
capital Bratislava. Talks continue today.
As leaders of the two strongest parties, Mr Klaus and Mr Meciar must
establish a working relationship if Czechoslovakia's two deeply-divided
parts are to remain together. The talks between the two will centre on the
form of the future federal government and the division of power between
Czechs and Slovaks within it.
Mr Klaus has said he will reduce the federal government to a few key
ministries - such as finance, economics, foreign affairs and defence - but
this may lead to clashes with Slovaks, who want their republic freed from
federal control.
Mr Klaus has said that fiscal and economic policy must remain unified, but
Slovak nationalists want two central banks and full control of the
privatisation programme in their republic.
After his election triumph, Mr Meciar said he would oppose President Vaclav
Havel when members of parliament vote in a presidential election next month.
He said Mr Havel's chances of re-election were now minimal.
President Havel, whose immense personal authority makes him the main
unifying force in Czechoslovakia, will pull out of the election if the
country heads for a split and political and economic reforms are
jeopardised.
Mr Meciar held talks earlier yesterday with the leaders of the two next
strongest Slovak parties in an attempt to form a regional government
coalition. Mr Meciar favours two strong republics - the Czech lands and
Slovakia - which would conclude a treaty and only then agree to concede some
powers to a central federal government.
This attitude is unacceptable to many Czech politicians who claim it would
effectively break up Czechoslovakia, born 74 years ago from the ashes of the
Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Economic stakes, Page 2
Editorial Comment, Page 18
