FT  14 JAN 92 / Yeltsin pressed to quit post of PM: Head of Russian
parliament may sack cabinet in protest at soaring prices
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin yes-terday came under strong pressure to resign from
his post as prime minister amid fierce criticism of his decision to free
prices.
Mr Yeltsin's press secretary denied rumours that he was quitting as head of
the Russian cabinet of ministers, but government advisers said he was under
mounting pressure to do so.
Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, chairman of the Russian parliament, said during a
discussion with Italian senators that now was the time for Mr Yeltsin to
replace the 'incompetent' cabinet - or else the parliament would vote it
out.
He added that Mr Yeltsin should 'distance himself' from the government,
since 'a president is a person standing, as it were, above the state'.
The cold blast of public distaste for price rises, which in some cases have
increased by as much as 30 times, is now blowing through the highest levels
of the state.
Deputies and officials have been inundated with complaints from furious
constituents, and demonstrations, the largest organised by hardline
communists, have begun to gather force.
Mr Yegor Gaidar, deputy prime minister in charge of economic reform, was
subjected to stern criticism by the presidium of the Russian parliament, the
forum in which Mr Khasbulatov made a speech calling for the government to
resign.
Mr Khasbulatov's remarks, made after a trip to provincial cities at the
weekend to gauge the level of dissatisfaction at first hand, were followed
by a an Interfax news agency report that several people were being canvassed
as prime ministerial material. These included Mr Khasbulatov himself, Mr
Anatoly Sobchak, mayor of St Petersburg, and Mr Svyatoslav Feodorov, an eye
surgeon, and formerly a candidate for the post.
Mr Alexei Trepekhalin, an aide to Mr Khasbulatov, said last night: 'The
chairman has no intention of becoming prime minister, and will stay as
chairman.' However, his defection to the ranks of the government's critics
means that two highly placed critics - he and Mr Alexander Rutskoi, the
vice-president - are in open revolt against the government.
The high prices are also provoking calls for the government's resignation in
Ukraine.
