FT  11 JUL 92 / Arts: An appealing and revealing panorama - William Weaver
enjoys a visit to the Marzotto collection
ALTHOUGH he died only 20 years ago, the Italian industrialist Count Gaetano
Marzotto seems a 19th century figure: an enlightened - by today's criteria
perhaps paternalistic - businessman, he created an ideal city for his
workers, established a chain of reasonably-priced, scrupulously clean and
well-run hotels in Southern Italy, where travel had long been a struggle
with discomfort and lack of hygiene, and set up the Marzotto Prizes to
reward merit in various fields.
For his private satisfaction, he assembled some 200 Italian paintings from
the latter half of the Ottocento, a collection that has been called 'the
greatest, the most complete, and the best chosen' of its period.
The Count had eight children and numerous grandchildren, and at his death,
the collection was divided among these heirs. Although some of the
individual pictures have been seen in exhibitions, there has never been a
public show devoted to the collection and the scattering of the works has
made the organisation of such a show a daunting enterprise.
Fortunately, the recently inaugurated Fondazione Magnani Rocca at Corte di
Mamiano (Parma) and the scholar Roberto Tassi faced the challenge and have
assembled almost a 100 pictures, which not only give a convincing notion of
Count Marzotto's taste but also an appealing and revealing panorama of
Italian painting between the mid-19th century and the early years of the
20th.
It is a period that 50 or so years ago was not highly regarded (and this low
opinion surely made Marzotto's collecting easier and perhaps less
expensive), and even now, while painters like Fattori and Palizzi and De
Nittis are in fashion again in Italy, they are largely unfamiliar outside
their homeland.
During the central decades of the Ottocento, Italy was politically united;
but socially and intellectually it remained a country of regions, of quite
different, even antithetical cultures.
Artists could travel more easily, but they carried the baggage of their
origins with them. Some, the bolder ones, eagerly went abroad and were
influenced by the foreign artists whom they encountered and whose works they
saw.
Clearly, Count Marzotto had a predilection for De Nittis, and the paintings
in the current exhibition represent a kind of show-within-the-show of
particular interest.
Born in Apulia in 1846, trained in Naples, De Nittis travelled in Northern
Italy, before going to Paris, where he settled in 1868. But he returned
often to Italy, sometimes for extended stays, and in Naples he made the
extraordinary series of studies of Vesuvius. Stark, even grim works,
solitary and usually unpeopled, they are in dramatic contrast with the
traditional (and lovely) views by earlier artists, with fishermen dancing
the tarantella on the shore of Posillipo as the volcano scatters glowing
lapilli and pours out bright red streams of lava.
In all, De Nittis painted more than 60 views, usually on small wooden
panels; the 12 works in the Marzotto collection include an almost abstract
scene of the crater and a sad and mysterious picture of the artist's
solitary horse, saddled and waiting to carry his master for the toilsome
ride to the plain.
Once united, Italy remained a military-minded country; and the collection
includes some army scenes, including Telemaco Signorini's large narrative
picture of the Tuscan Artillery at Montechiaro Greeted by the French Wounded
at Solferino (the artist was in the artillery himself).
But Giovanni Fattori's 'In Vedetta' (also known as 'The White Wall'), though
quieter in tone, is somehow more disturbing. This very famous,
much-reproduced picture, dating from around 1871, is one of the collection's
prizes. But, for that matter, Count Marzotto collected wisely, and nearly
all his pictures are of the highest quality. Also, unlike some collectors,
he was not afraid of big paintings. Happily, these large-scale works look at
home on the walls of the Magnani villa.
Luigi Magnani himself was a much more eclectic purchaser than Marzotto.
Rather than confine himself to a given period or school or country, he
simply bought what he admired; but like Marzotto, he wanted quality. So his
Goya, his Durer, his Titian and their companions are all first-rate. The
permanent collection is a perfect complement to this visiting exhibition
(which closes on 19 July). For that matter, a visit to the Corte di Mamiano
and the Magnani villa is, at any time, a rare pleasure.
The catalogue of the Marzotto exhibition (published by the Fondazione, with
texts by Andrea Baboni, Michela Scolaro and Simona Tosini Pizzetti, as well
as by the show's curator Tassi) is a valuable work of scholarship,
handsomely produced, with reproductions of paintings unavailable to the
curator but apposite to the exhibition.
