FT  21 DEC 92 / Field urges shift on welfare state
A RADICAL SHIFT in Labour's approach to the welfare state, including the
transfer of ownership of pension assets, is urged today by Mr Frank Field,
Labour chairman of the cross-party Commons social security committee.
In a move that highlights the divergence within the Labour party about the
future of universal benefits, Mr Field, in a paper for a Fabian Society
conference next month, questions whether all pensions, or just those of the
poorest, should benefit from annual uprating.
The paper is published just three days after Mr John Smith, the Labour
leader, launched the Commission on Social Justice, a semi-independent body,
to carry out a thorough review of taxation and benefits.
Mr Smith opposes moving away from universal social security benefits. Mr
Field, however, emphasises the need for change in order to alter voters'
view of Labour. 'Sticking-plaster policies won't do . . . If the CSJ is
successful, a new dawn will have broken and the voters will see Labour as
the party of the future for the first time in 13 years.'
Mr Field argues that pension reform should aim to abolish 'pension serfdom'
by giving people control over their pension assets, even if that means
forfeiting the principle of basing pensions on final salary.
Any move to money-purchase schemes would have to ensure that employers still
contribute, as some already do, he adds.
'We need to scrap the 200-year traditional approach to welfare policy . . .
The task facing Labour now is nothing less than designing policies which
lock an ever-increasing proportion of the population into an income from
work and welfare,' he says.
He sees the transfer of pension assets leading to a new form of collectivism
that gives unions the opportunity to develop a role in managing pension fund
assets.
Comparing big pension fund managers with 'medieval barons', Mr Field says
their control of funds leads to short-termism, and argues that the effective
ownership of companies by pensioners and the workforce would help to reverse
that trend.
