FT  25 AUG 92 / Rightwing riots test Bonn's policy on asylum-seekers
RIGHTWING extremists clashed with police and set fire to a refugee hostel in
the east German city of Rostock last night, as violence against foreign
asylum-seekers erupted for the third night in a row.
The rioting, evoking memories of Nazi violence against Jews, has caused deep
embarrassment in Germany. 'These events are hurting Germany's image in the
world,' said Mr Rudolf Seiters, the interior minister, who flew to Rostock
for talks with the city's leaders.
About 200 asylum-seekers, mostly gypsies from Romania, were moved out of the
hostel yesterday afternoon under heavy police escort. But hours later
hundreds of young demonstrators threw fire-bombs at the building, setting
part of it ablaze.
Dozens of Vietnamese refugees were inside the building when the fire broke
out but were rescued, according to ZDF television. Police fought the crowd
with water cannons and tear gas in a repeat of clashes that shook the city
at the weekend. A throng of local residents watched the street battles, some
of them cheering the right-wing militants.
Police said extremists had driven to Rostock from Berlin, Hamburg and other
cities in convoys and had used radio to co-ordinate their attacks.
The violence, condemned by the Bonn government, has been spawned by a
growing feeling that Germany cannot afford to keep its door open to large
numbers of asylum-seekers, many seeking a more prosperous life rather than a
haven from political persecution.
Tension has been building up for weeks in Rostock, once Communist East
Germany's showcase city but now blighted by unemployment. Many harbour and
shipyard workers have lost their jobs and feel forgotten in the united
Germany. Deprivation and resentment have turned the area into fertile ground
for rightwing extremists' xenophobic message.
The lastest trouble also partly results from mishandling of the steady
stream of asylum-seekers. The hostel in Rostock-Lichtenberg, with just 300
places, could not cope with the numbers arriving. More than 100 people, many
of them Romanian gypsies, camped on a lawn opposite apartment blocks and
sanitary conditions became intolerable.
'People who camp out in front of other people's homes arouse aggression,'
said Mr Lothar Kupfer, a minister in the state government.
His conclusion was the same as that of a growing number of German
politicians, who fear a backlash from ordinary citizens in east and west.
'Germany must quickly bar the uncontrolled entry of foreigners,' he said.
At the weekend, the opposition SPD leadership, under pressure from state
authorities, announced an about-turn in their policy on asylum-seekers,
saying that immigration must be 'braked and controlled'.
