FT  21 MAR 92 / Property: Old King Cole lived here . . . - Essex, a county
of wide contrasts behind its Flash Harry facade
A BLANK expression greeted our request for singles to Gawdelpus at London's
Liverpool Street station ticket office. 'Say again, guv,' said the chirpy
Cockney behind the glass.
The Cockney accent is alive and well, living largely in Essex; but the
dialect and sense of humour seems to be waning. Years ago, a ticket-seller
would have known instantly that we wanted to travel to Saffron Walden. Why
Gawdelpus? It derives from the ancient market town's Latin motto 'Deo
adjuvante floremus' (which translates as 'God help us to flourish' or, to be
more precise, 'With God's help we flourish').
Saffron Walden is a place of streets and alleys (called 'twitchells')
bordered by handsome jettied houses. Along with other Essex country towns,
plus the countless quaint and timeless villages, it is very different from
most outsiders' perception of the county.
Many who have the misfortune to live south of the Thames look upon Essex as
flat and uninteresting. Few have visited it and fewer still have walked,
ridden or cycled over its rolling hills and valleys. True, Essex is short on
mountains and coal mines and the front and back doors (Leyton and Purfleet)
do not appear on many chocolate boxes; but, once over the threshold, there
is Epping Forest, the 5,600-acre picnic spot for Londoners.
Essex is a county of contrasts; dead cars and other junk in fields near
Romford are testament to its proximity to the London sprawl. Further out
among the villages, though, are some of the finest timber houses in the
land, many exhibiting the best of the pargetter's art (decorative
plasterwork done originally with a concoction that included cow dung, stable
urine, grit and horse hair, all mixed or trodden by a village maiden])
In the great Essex earthquake just over a century ago, it was these timber
structures that withstood best the shaking (opponents of timber-frame
housing please note). King Cunobelin (Old King Cole) chose Colchester as his
capital; the Romans built a city there; and the Normans built their largest
castle keep.
Essex man (and, more recently, Essex woman) has become the butt of as many
jokes as vicars and parrots; most are way off the mark. Flash Harry and
Cheryl hardly reached Essex proper. Real Essex man seldom moves away; many
travel but most return. Theirs is a county of misty fishing hamlets, sudden
villages with Morris dancers and cricket greens, real pubs with real ale,
and even a few real ploughmen. It is a county with culture in plenty plus a
little candy floss at Southend, the Londoners' Blackpool.
Nature is not bountiful with rainfall in Essex (it has the lowest in the
country) but there is enough to keep Constable's beloved river Stour flowing
through the green fields of Dedham. The county is not well-endowed with
stately homes, either, but it has at least 1,000 moated country houses -
more than any other. There are also more horses there than elsewhere.
Before the property boom, many people with more money than taste discovered
that Essex offered better value, property-wise, than any other home county.
They moved with their families, their Mercedes, their au pairs and their
ponies to the green paddocks of Ongar (and the like), and the jokes started.
Now, the bubble has burst and they cannot afford the mortgage; unemployment
in Essex has risen sharply in the past year. Result - repossessions and
bargains galore (plus more than a few Dobbins for sale).
John Gibson, of Savills, says buyers have an especially wide choice of
farmhouses in Essex but only the near-perfect are selling. Mediocre
offerings have slumped in value by as much as 30 per cent. 'Curiously,'
Gibson adds, 'there are now cash buyers living in rented accommodation
because they can't find the right house; this is because many owners of
really good houses, old rectories and the like, decided not to sell in this
market.'
One of the most seasoned property men in the county is Roy Chapman, former
joint senior partner of Abbotts who now runs his own show in the village of
West Bergholt. 'I said last year things would improve out here and, sure
enough, the market is on the move; but only when people are realistic about
prices. The reduction in interest rates, coupled with the incentive provided
by the temporary removal of stamp duty, has at long last brought some
confidence to the market. Young people, first-time buyers especially, are
taking advantage of the situation. Those who have jobs now have the capacity
to buy, and sensible ones are getting in quick before the market recovers
strongly, as it assuredly will.'
Hambro Countrywide is another to have noticed a change. It says there has
been a significant increase in inquiries since the beginning of the year and
the number of prospective buyers has trebled in recent weeks.
House-builders, too, are showing signs of cautious optimism, especially
those catering for the first-time buyer.
At Grays, Alfred McAlpine Homes is offering flats and houses at Anchor
Point, a skip from the station, right on the waterfront and only a short
drive from Dartford Tunnel. They are attracting a lot of interest.
One-bedroom flats cost just below Pounds 50,000 while Pounds 59,000 buys a
two-bedroom house with two balconies facing south over the water.
Three-bedroom homes cost Pounds 70,000.
For something a little larger, Cala has homes with three and four bedrooms
beside the cricket green at Shenfield, with prices starting at Pounds
144,950. Moody Homes also reports a stir in the market, especially for more
spacious homes in a village setting; two, each with five bedrooms, have just
been sold for around Pounds 300,000 in Ingatestone.
Moving further up-market, John D. Wood suggests a price of Pounds 250,000
for the delightfully-named Cherry Garden, a Grade II-listed, 16th century
house at Burnham-on-Crouch. There is also a field with consent for six
detached houses, at Pounds 330,000.
For around Pounds 650,000 there is Gills Farm, in Epping Upland, which is
described by Savills as being in the perfect location if you like being
surrounded by rolling countryside with a healthy population of deer. There
are more than five acres, a tennis court and swimming pool and plenty of
outbuildings. Definitely something for the real Essex man.
