FT  24 JUN 92 / Survey of Indonesia (10): A base for steady economic growth
 -Agriculture
INDONESIA'S steady economic growth is derived as much from its agricultural
base as from investment in manufacturing. Indeed, one of the country's most
significant achievements in the past decade has been substantially to boost
agricultural production, both of food and cash crops.
From being the world's largest importer of rice, its staple food, in the
late 1970s, Indonesia is now self-sufficient. It has strengthened its
position as a leading exporter of commodities such as rubber, coffee, cocoa
and palm-oil.
However, the agricultural sector also provides some of the most glaring
examples of economic mismanagement. Sugar production and processing remains
within an inefficient system of state control and clove farmers have
suffered the inequities of a private trading company which has enjoyed
monopoly rights to buy and sell their crop.
About half the population is involved in rice production and marketing but
the drive toward self-sufficiency, initiated in the mid-1960s, did not meet
with immediate success. In 1979, for example, Indonesia imported a record 2m
tonnes to supplement production of 17.9m tonnes.
This year, production is estimated at 29.25m tonnes, an increase due mainly
to improved rice strains and a system of Integrated Pest Management (IPM)
which in many areas has enabled farmers to grow three crops a year, instead
of the previous two.
The IPM programme was evolved to tackle the 'planthopper' insect which, in
the late 1970s, ate its way through many million tonnes of rice. Research
showed that an excessive use of pesticide was to blame, killing the
planthopper's natural predators. This led the government in 1986 to ban more
than 50 pesticides which had previously attracted state subsidies.
The demands of a growing population, however, mean that future
self-sufficiency is far from guaranteed. This year, the country will import
about 700,000 tonnes of rice due to a drought-affected crop last year. Much
of this will be done by recalling rice 'loans' made to neighbouring
countries during earlier years of surplus.
Cash crops have seen a similar surge in production.
Rubber production rose from 1.05m tonnes in 1985 to 1.27m tonnes last year,
making Indonesia the world's second-largest producer. Coffee production has
risen from 311,000 tonnes in 1985 to a forecast 476,000 tonnes this year,
making Indonesia the third largest-exporter, accounting for about 7 per cent
of world coffee trade.
Cocoa production has soared. Indonesia produced just 18,600 tonnes in 1984
and the government planned an increase to 56,000 tonnes by 1988 but the
farmers have wildly exceeded targets. Production in 1989 hit 143,000 tonnes
and is forecast at up to 160,000 tonnes this year.
Palm oil is also experiencing a seemingly inexorable rise in production,
increasing from 1.37m tonnes in 1987 to an estimated 2.9m tonnes this year.
Industry officials say production in 1993 may be as high as 3.7m tonnes.
By boosting production, however, Indonesia has contributed to the global
oversupply of these commodities and the sharp fall in international prices.
In the face of stagnant prices, the value of rubber exports rose from
Dollars 718m in 1985 to Dollars 855m in 1990. But revenue from coffee
exports fell from Dollars 560m to Dollars 372m in the same period.
Donor agencies believe that the rubber sector will pick up - the World Bank
is still funding smallholder production programmes - but coffee may be
heading for a crisis. Industry officials forecast Indonesian supply
outstripping demand by 77,000 tonnes next year. The future of palm oil
depends on the industry countering suggestions that it contains a high
cholesterol content.
Some farmers have moved towards higher-value commodities by developing
aqua-agriculture, particularly shrimp farming. The value of lobster, shrimp
and prawn exports rose from Dollars 269m in 1986 to Dollars 704m last year,
with Japan the principal market.
Where farmers have been given a free hand, the result has mostly been one of
higher and more efficient production.
This has not led, however, to the de-regulation of the sugar sector which -
with land forcibly turned over to production, prices set by government and
80 per cent of processing capacity in the hands of the state - is a
throw-back to the centrally-controlled economy of the early 1960s.
Donors say Indonesia, like the European Community, lacks a comparative
advantage in the production of sugar and the domestic price is over 25 per
cent more than the world market price. Production has been stagnant over the
past four years at about 2m tonnes.
This year, sugar imports, also government-controlled, are expected to reach
375,000 tonnes, providing a substantial source of revenue when sold to the
consumer at the set domestic price.
The cloves sector has suffered most from government intervention, albeit
through the guise of introducing private sector participation. Cloves are
the key ingredient in Indonesia's fragrant kretek cigarettes and up to 4m
farmers are expected to produce 100,000 tonnes of cloves this year.
In January 1991, the government awarded a monopoly over the buying and
selling of cloves to Badan Penyangga dan Pemasaran Cengkeh (BPPC), a private
company headed by Mr Hutomo Mandala Putra, President Suharto's youngest son.
BPPC set a farm gate price of Rp7,900 per kilo and a selling price to
cigarette companies of at least Rp12,700 per kilo (more than four times the
world market price), giving a projected sales revenue last year in excess of
Rp1,000bn. In addition, the company received Rp759bn in low-interest credit
from the central bank.
Donor officials say most farmers received just half the ceiling price for
their crop in 1991 and in February Mr Putra announced that BPPC would be
unable to service its loans. He suggested farmers cut down one third of
their clove trees to ease oversupply.
Critics of the government say the private monopolies raise doubts about the
commitment of senior members of the administration to de-regulation.
Government ministers, however, have said privately that the issue of
monopolies will be tackled within a year, although further de-regulation of
agriculture is certain to be high on the donors' agenda when they meet in
Paris next month.
