FT  17 JUN 92 / Management: How back pain can make you lose your marbles -
Health Check
Mention back pain to a group of managers, and you will set off a deluge of
personal horror stories. Anyone who thinks bad backs are reserved for those
who make a living moving pianos should think again. According to the journal
Spine, more than 80 per cent of people in industrialised countries suffer
from back pain at some point in their lives.
The more sedentary you are, the greater the risk of severe back trouble.
Back pain does not just reduce your mobility on the tennis court and up the
career ladder, it is also expensive for your employers. In the US alone,
back ailments are the second leading cause for going into hospital (after
pregnancy), cost industry Dollars 14bn (Pounds 7.6bn) a year and 93m lost
working days.
The back is a complicated structure: 33 vertebral bodies, the boney building
blocks, are stacked on top of each other.
Between them are rubbery, fluid-filled discs, which cushion the weight of
the upper body. Then there are the muscles (roughly 140) and ligaments,
which hold the spine erect in a natural, flattened S-curve, the optimum
shape for flexibility, weight bearing and shock absorption.
As long as the concave curve in the lower back is preserved, the disc can
usually tolerate the compression that comes from the pressure of the body's
weight.
Problems begin when you eliminate that inward curve of the lower back by
habitually bending forward, thus compressing the disc backwards.
The technological advances of this century - TV, the telephone, computers
and cars - have all contributed to the current epidemic of back problems.
All involve the worst possible activity for the back: long-term sitting.
But even if you spend most of your time on your backside, there are ways of
avoiding back trouble.
Regular aerobic exercise is crucial to maintain strength of the back
muscles. Brisk walking is ideal. Complement these activities with some
night-time stretching or yoga.
Get rid of that pot belly and get your weight under control. Added weight
distributed up front will only put more strain on the back muscles. The
spine gets most of its support from the massive abdominal musculature, not
the back muscles themselves. Tone up the abdominal muscles by flexing them
while sitting on aircraft or driving.
Lift objects properly. Perform the 'marble test'. In the morning, put a
marble in your breast pocket. During the day, if the marble rolls out of
your pocket, it is because you bent over, instead of squatting to pick
something up. Let your legs do the bending. When lifting, keep the object
very close to your body.
In your car or at your desk, sit up and avoid stooping. During the day,
tense your abdominal muscles to give them them the strength they need to
support your back. Make sure your chair supports your lower back well.
When travelling or shopping, divide the weight of your bags evenly so as not
to strain one side more than the other.
While driving long hauls, keep your knees higher than your pelvis. Maintain
the natural curve of your spine by placing a cushion or a rolled-up towel
behind your lower back to lend support. Do not twist your body getting in
and out of your car. Re-align your back every hour or so by standing,
placing your hands in the lower back and bending backwards.
Sleep on a firm bed, on your side with the top leg bent and bottom leg
straight.
Women should not wear high heels, as they throw the back into an unnatural
position.
If despite all this you do develop back pain, there is a whole array of
therapies - massage, manipulation, acupuncture, ultrasound, deep heat,
traction, shoe inserts, and surgery. The bad news is that none of these is
100 per cent successful. The good news is that most back pain subsides
eventually, regardless of approach, with bed rest, aspirin and time.
The author is medical director of the Insead Business Health course.
