FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, the state of the union: Fading fervour for monetary
union
EUROPE'S industrialists see plenty of advantages from the single market. But
plans for a single currency have been dealt a setback by post-Maastricht
squabbling, according to foreign exchange practitioners at some of Europe's
largest companies.
The Commission has long viewed a single currency operated by a European
central bank as essential to a unified market. And the idea of irrevocably
fixed exchange rates appeals particularly to small and medium businesses
without the resources to manage large currency fluctuations.
But many large companies see only limited advantages in monetary union
because they already have sophisticated mechanisms for dealing with currency
changes. Some, indeed, use currency trading as a modest profit source.
More important, European businessmen know that Emu will not come about
unless Germany - the strongest economy in the EC - wants to see the project
completed. And there is little doubt about the cooling of desire for
monetary union among German public opinion in recent months.
Mr Heinrich Weiss, president of the Federation of German Industry (BDI),
caused a stir last week by calling into doubt the Emu timetable.
He said monetary union was only worth carrying out 'if it does not undermine
currency stability' - a condition which at present, was not assured.
He also cast doubt on the underlying motives for the EC's campaign towards
Emu. 'Currency union will bring some small advantages. But it is not
necessary for the performance of the single market.'
Mr Rutbert Reisch, group treasurer at the Volkswagen car company,
illustrates the fall in German support for Emu. Mr Reisch, who terms himself
'very sceptical' about chances for Emu's realisation, says the project is
'unrealistic' and could be inflationary.
The politicians have been pushing plans for Emu based on 'unsound' analyses
of its benefits for business, Mr Reisch says. He says larger companies can
benefit from a degree of exposure to currency fluctuations. Mr Reisch says
that only 'foolish' corporate treasurers would take action through 'hedging'
to cover 100 per cent of their EC currency exposure.
A more optimistic line on Emu comes from Mr Jean-Dominique Senard, treasurer
at Saint Gobain, the French glass and engineering group. Saint Gobain has
pioneered use of the European currency unit (Ecu) in its company accounts
and internal transactions.
Mr Senard is certain that Emu will take place. But he believes that monetary
union is now more likely to come about in several stages, with two or three
countries - led by Germany and France - forming a smaller union by 2000, and
others joining later. Mr John Grout, director of treasury operations at
Cadbury Schweppes, the UK food and drinks group, also believes a currency
union will be delayed until after 2000.
Emu attempts to deal with the problem of exchange rate fluctuations - even
though 'this is one of the few things that industry knows how to cope with',
Mr Grout says. He suggests that politicians might be exaggerating the
importance of dampening exchange rate changes, which have remained
relatively stable in Europe during the last five years. Instead, more
attention could be focused on the fluctuations in economic performance
caused by the strict economic convergence conditions drawn up at Maastricht.
