FT  10 MAR 92 / Export insurance premiums cut by up to 50%
UK government-backed export insurance premiums for sales to about 50 markets
are to be cut by up to 50 per cent. The move will be regarded by many of
Britain's leading exporters as a significant climbdown in a long-standing
row over the cost of export credit cover.
Mr Tim Sainsbury, minister of state for trade, revealed in a parliamentary
answer yesterday that the first annual review of insurance premiums based on
the controversial Portfolio Management System (PMS) has made it clear 'that
current premium rates need adjusting to reflect changes both in trading
patterns and in the creditworthiness of various markets'.
Under PMS, which is a Treasury model for measuring risk, the cost of
premiums ranges from an effective rate of as little as 2 per cent of the
value of a contract, up to almost 17 per cent for a country such as India.
For Malaysia, where premiums have been over 5 per cent, the cut will reduce
rates to around 3 per cent, while for South Africa rates will fall from
almost 8 1/2 per cent to around 7 per cent.
It is understood that rates for Singapore and Venezuela are to be cut by
almost a half, while rates for Thailand, Malaysia, Hungary, Colombia,
Mexico, Iran and Oman will fall by about 40 per cent. The premium rate for
Hong Kong will be cut by around 20 per cent.
Mr Sainsbury said that in the 20 main markets of exporters who most need
long term credit cover, cuts will average about 20 per cent. Mr Sainsbury
said the cuts, due to come into effect on April 5, were the result of a
normal annual procedure under which PMS is reviewed.
He pointed to four factors which have made the cuts possible: economies had
performed better than expected; economies in the Third World were being
managed better; the balance of business being done by exporters in low-risk
markets was greater than expected; export credit agencies in other countries
had moved more slowly than hoped in raising premium rates to bring them into
line with the UK.
The PMS system was imposed by the Treasury on the Export Credits Guarantee
Department in May last year. The government-controlled ECGD provides medium
and long-term insurance cover for exporters against the risk of non-payment.
PMS was aimed at imposing an even stricter discipline in linking the cost of
export credit cover with the level of risk involved in a contract.
It resulted in steep increases in the cost of export insurance, and led to a
deluge of protests from contract exporters who insisted it gave overseas
competitors an unfair price advantage.
Most affected were companies such as GEC, Rolls-Royce, Trafalgar House,
Balfour Beatty, Babcock and Foster Wheeler, which are involved in large,
long-term overseas contracts.
