FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (28): Faraway places
offer rewards and hazards - Investment Trusts / As developing countries
liberalise their economies, there should be higher investment returns. But
spread the risk
INVESTMENT fashions come and go, but one of the most recent trends has been
the appeal of 'emerging markets'.
The concept is relatively simple. The economies of developing countries tend
to grow at a faster rate than those of the industrialised nations.
Many of these countries have now discovered the benefits of capitalism, and
are liberalising their economies to encourage both the growth of stock
markets and foreign investment.
The combination of fast-growing economies and private sector expansion
should lead to higher investment returns.
That, at least, is the theory. Problems arise in practice because stock
markets in such countries are underdeveloped, and share-trading lacks
liquidity. Accountancy standards are often less rigorous, and political
instability is commonplace. The result is alarmingly volatile stock markets.
In such markets, investment trusts have an important function to play. They
(and their unit-trust brethren) will represent the only practical means of
buying shares in such markets for all but the most intrepid private
investor. And the 'closed end' nature of an investment trust means that it
is not forced to sell shares in an illiquid market in order to repay
investors; it can afford to be patient.
Of course, there is still plenty of risk involved. That particularly applies
to those funds which concentrate on a single country. The danger is that the
trust is launched at a time when that country is 'fashionable', which
effectively means that share prices have already risen substantially.
Investors pile into the issue, and since the trust represents one of the few
ways of gaining access to the market, the shares trade at a premium to asset
value.
Then, inevitably, the market tumbles, the country goes out of fashion, and
the investor faces a 'double whammy' - a falling asset value and shares
which fall from premium into discount.
These risks can be reduced by investing in one of the global emerging
markets trusts, which have shares in a wide range of countries. Except on
very rare occasions (such as the 1987 crash), emerging markets do not seem
to move in unison.
Over the three years to September 1, Templeton Emerging Markets is the top
investment trust in this small sector with a 70.4 per cent gain; over two
years, the regional Latin American Trust is top with a 65.7 per cent
increase. But it seems likely, as the decade progresses, that more funds
will be offered to investors in this field.
WHEN SPLIT-CAPITALS ARE RESTRUCTURED
THE WORLD of split-capital investment trusts is complex enough. But the
process of restructuring a split trust can be the financial equivalent of
sub-atomic physics.
The issue is nevertheless important to those many private investors who
backed trusts on the grounds of their tax efficiency and the set wind-up
date. If, when that date comes, instead of getting cash, those investors
merely get another security with a new wind-up date several years hence,
financial plans may be disrupted.
Why are the lives of split-capital trusts extended? A cynic's answer would
be that it is in the interests of the managers and directors to do so,
because they will continue to receive their fees.
The industry's defenders would counter-argue that extension can often be in
the shareholder's interests. Those who have made extensive capital gains can
postpone paying tax, if they 'roll over' their gain into a new security,
instead of taking cash. And those owning high-yielding income shares may
well wish to continue receiving the income stream, rather than invest in
lower-yielding securities elsewhere.
In any case, restructurings must be approved by 75 per cent of the
shareholders, indicating that it would be difficult to extend the life of a
trust in a way that was inimical to the financial well-being of investors.
Indeed, the restructuring of Yeoman Investment Trust failed in August when
it was clear that the proposals would not get the 75 per cent majority. A
major problem was that the income shareholders of the trust were not offered
a cash exit. Two substantial institutional income shareholders decided to
vote against the proposals.
One result of the failure of the Yeoman restructuring may be that future
deals will have to involve a cash exit for all shareholders. Only then can
deals be fair to those shareholders who were relying on the wind-up for
their financial plans.
But Yeoman's share register was dominated by institutions who knew which
levers to pull. Whether shareholder action will be as effective in the case
of some of the more recently floated split-capital trusts, whose registers
are dominated by private investors, is a moot point. But that is an issue
which will not arise until the mid-1990s.
TRUSTEE BUSINESS HELPS DIVIDEND YIELD
LAW DEBENTURE Corporation is one of the smaller international investment
trusts. But its investment performance shows that it should not be
neglected.
It was first in the international general sector over the three, five and
seven years to September 1, and second over the one- and two-year periods.
Over seven years, Pounds 1,000 invested in the trust (with dividends
reinvested) would have grown into Pounds 3,129.
Law Debenture was founded way back in 1889, as a company specialising in the
corporate debenture (in other words, asset-backed bond) market. It is now
managed by Michael Moule, of Touche Remnant, who also looks after Bankers
Investment Trust (third in the sector over seven years).
Although the fund's investment policy is relatively conventional, Law
Debenture has built up a substantial business as a trustee for loan
programmes and pension funds, which has given it a steady income stream.
When Law Debenture was appointed as trustee to the Maxwell pension fund
(after the tycoon's death), it received a sudden burst of publicity.
The importance of the trustee business, says Mr Moule, is that it has
allowed the trust to offer a relatively high dividend yield without
investing in the high-yielding stocks which have been so battered in the
recent recession.
Another factor behind the outperformance of the trust is that, while the
portfolio has been 65 per cent invested in the UK, the bulk of its overseas
holdings have been in the strong US market. The trust also had minimal
exposure to the battered Japanese market.
The success of the trust, however, has caused a problem for potential
investors. In mid-September, its shares were standing at a 10 per cent
premium to net asset value, according to County Nat West. Of course, that
move from discount to premium has helped existing investors (and improved
the performance figures). But new investors will be aware that it is not
normally considered sound investment strategy to buy trust shares at a
premium.
HOW CHARGES TAKE THE SHINE OFF PEPS
THE INCREASE to Pounds 6,000 in the annual personal equity plan limit for
most investment trusts has been good news for the sector. But investors
should still be aware of the danger that charges can easily outweigh the tax
advantages of a Pep.
For most people, the capital gains tax exemption is never going to be more
than a theoretical benefit. Only a small minority of investors can look
forward to annual inflation-adjusted gains of more than Pounds 5,800 (the
1992-93 limit).
It is, accordingly, the income tax exemption that is the key benefit of a
Pep. But the initial yield on an equity-based product will inevitably be
much lower than that available from a building society. The income tax
benefit of a Pep is thus lower than you might expect.
At the start of September, the average UK general investment trust yielded 6
per cent. So someone who invested the full Pounds 6,000 could look forward
to a gross annual income of Pounds 360, and a tax saving of Pounds 90 (for a
basic-rate payer) and Pounds 144 (for those on the higher rate).
Such savings are likely to repay charges very quickly. The problem comes if
a basic-rate taxpayer invests a smaller sum in a lower yielding trust.
Take the Martin Currie scheme, launched in September, which used a flat-fee
system of a Pounds 50 entry fee and a Pounds 60 annual charge. Higher-rate
taxpayers investing the full Pounds 6,000 in the high-yielding Securities
Trust of Scotland could earn back such charges in tax-savings within a year.
But a basic-rate taxpayer investing Pounds 2,000 in Martin Currie's European
Trust (yielding 0.4 per cent) would take around 50 years to earn back even
the first year's charges. He would be far better off investing in the trust
without the Pep 'benefit'.
