FT  03 NOV 92 / Survey of Portugal (13): Plenty in the pipeline - Peter Wise
sees the infrastructure undergo a revolution
SUCH IS the rate of motorway building in Portugal that no map gives an
accurate and up-to-date picture of the country's road network. That is the
proud boast of Mr Joaquim Ferreira do Amaral, who as minister for public
works, transport and communications is the man with responsibility for
redesigning the country's infrastructure.
After three decades of neglect and miserly investment, Portugal's
infrastructure has been undergoing a revolution in terms of expansion and
modernisation since entry to the European Community in 1986. A 15-year
programme is now roughly at the halfway mark and massive investments lie
ahead.
Private companies, eyeing future opportunities, calculate a total nearing
Es3,000bn (Pounds 13.5bn) will be invested in improving Portugal's basic
infrastructure in the coming years.
The projects abound. Pre-qualifying tenders for a new Es121bn bridge
stretching 11km over the Tagus river at Lisbon were sought last month. It
will be one of the largest bridges in Europe. The authorities are currently
studying road links with the Lisbon inner ring road and north-south
motorway.
A contract is being prepared with Sea Core International of the Netherlands
for a river-bed geological survey. Barclays de Zoete Wedd will be consulted
over project financing. In addition, a rail link will be added to the
existing Tagus bridge.
The EC Commission has approved Es18.7bn to finance a natural gas network in
Portugal. This will cover around 45 per cent of the estimated total cost
through to 1993. The main expenditure will be on a terminal in Setubal and a
Setubal-Braga pipeline. The Commission has also approved Es21.8bn to finance
regional distribution networks for natural gas.
Caminhos de Ferro Portugueses (CP), the state-owned railway company, will
invest Es300bn over the next seven years in an upgrading programme. CP hopes
to cut the rail travel time from Lisbon to Oporto to 2 hours 25 minutes,
which is more than 45 minutes faster than the equivalent motorway travel
time. Portugal has also announced that it will change some of its railway
lines to conform to European gauge standards and prepare for a high-speed
TGV rail link from Lisbon via Oporto to Madrid.
Over the next four years, state-owned Metropolitano de Lisboa will invest
Es120bn in expanding and modernising the underground network into the
backbone of the capital's public transport system. Expansion work, planned
to be completed by the second half of 1996, will transform the present
one-line system into three independent lines. The plan also involves
building five new stations and new workshop facilities.
A stretch of Lisbon's waterfront, linking the central Praca de Comercio to
the 16th-century Jeronimos Monastery and beyond, will be equipped with
ultra-modern, high-speed trams. Existing tracks will be renewed and
sub-stations modernised. International tenders will be sought for the
investment, which should reanimate and dramatically improve public transport
in a central part of the city. The new trams will be running by 1994.
The government considers the modernisation of ports another crucial area for
a country whose imports and exports, representing the equivalent of some 60
per cent of gross domestic product, are largely transported by sea.
Development will focus on improving and expanding installations, including
the construction of a new Es20bn port zone on the south side of the Tagus
estuary at Lisbon and improving port management to increase productivity,
reduce costs and provide better services. 'Efficient ports in Portugal will
provide Europe with another gateway to the world,' says Mr Ferreira do
Amaral.
Legislation reorganising the maritime sector and providing for greater
efficiency and improved linkage between shipping, harbours and fishing has
been put forward by the Sea Ministry. The aim is to improve resource use, to
end the overlapping of different authorities and to decentralise. The new
law will merge and place under direct ministerial control all port
administrations, the National Harbour Pilot Institute and the National
Stevedore Institute.
After completing Portugal's first north-south motorway linking Setubal,
Lisbon, Oporto and Braga in 1991, three years ahead of schedule, the
government has announced that the length of the national motorway network
will be almost doubled by 1996, from 436km to 753km, at a cost of Es260bn.
Further into the future, a decision will be taken on the site of a new
Lisbon airport. The government is also set to decide on a long-mooted major
dam at Alqueva in the southern Alentejo region. Local officials are lobbying
hard for the project, which they say could halt desertification and lessen
the impact of drought.
Most of the finance for the massive expansion of Portugal's infrastructure
comes from the government budget. EC funds have contributed about 15 per
cent of total spending to date. A further key source of finance is private
investment.
'Private investment will be the source of infrastructure finance that grows
most in the future,' says Mr Ferreira do Amaral. 'Because they are the ones
taking the risk, private entrepreneurs are experts in the analysis of
project feasibility. In many cases, private investment gives the guarantee
that justifies a project in political terms.'
In keeping with this philosophy the new Tagus bridge, the rail link over the
existing bridge and many other major projects will be contracted out to
private entrepreneurs on a build and operate basis.
