FT  26 JUN 92 / Career-long rival Simon will show softer touch
IN THE early 1980s, as BP was reorganised under the chairmanship of Sir
Peter Walters, David Simon tackled the losses and oversupply of BP's
refinery division. At the same time, Bob Horton was making similarly
difficult decisions at BP Chemicals.
By 1986, 25 years after joining the company, Mr Simon became BP's second
youngest group managing director. The youngest, by three weeks, was Mr
Horton.
Both were tipped to succeed Sir Peter. Mr Horton won the job in 1990, only
to lose it yesterday.
As chief operating officer and vice-chairman from 1990, Mr Simon has been in
charge of day-to-day operations while Mr Horton has concentrated on
strategy. Relations between the two have been poor, culminating in rumours
of a board room split which began earlier this year.
Mr Horton claimed public credit for the sweeping management changes at BP,
but Mr Simon is thought to have played an equally leading role in the
company's redundancy programme.
He has a reputation for being shrewd but understated. He was a Christ's
Hospital scholar, a modern linguist at Cambridge and received an MBA from
Insead, the French management school. Compared to Mr Horton, he is thought
rather bland.
He has also expressed different views about BP's future direction. While Mr
Horton emphasised that BP could go it alone, Mr Simon saw more of a role for
'strategic alliances', such as that formed last year with Statoil of Norway.
The initiative for the link-up grew from the friendship between Mr Simon and
Mr Harald Norvik, Statoil's chairman.
On the future for the oil industry, Mr Simon has taken a more conservative
view on oil prices, although some observers say it is difficult to gauge his
views. It seems likely BP will test projects more carefully and resist those
which rely on a higher oil price.
Mr Simon has been heavily involved in the oil and financial sides of BP's
business, although his early experience was in marketing. He has
concentrated his attentions on Europe, and speaks several European
languages.
Colleagues describe him as quick witted with a dry sense of humour. He is
very keen on golf and reading and once described his favourite pastime as
'watching the sun go down at Hampstead cricket club'.
