FT  16 JUN 92 / Irish PM in last-ditch appeal to waverers in Maastricht
vote: Dublin fears the Danish factor
IN AN evident show of jitters in the run-up to Thursday's referendum on the
Maastricht Treaty, the Irish government yesterday took the unprecedented
step of ordering the state television and radio network to give air time to
a broadcast by the prime minister, Mr Albert Reynolds, to argue the
pro-European case.
He made a last-ditch attempt to convince Euro-doubters that by voting 'Yes'
Ireland's sons will not be drafted into a Euro-army, that Irish women will
not be prevented from travelling abroad for an abortion, and conversely that
Irish foetuses will be safe from Godless Eurocrats in Brussels. Instead,
prosperity and national wealth will flow from European Union.
Although the weight of organised political opinion in Ireland has fallen
heavily on the side of a 'Yes' vote in the referendum, the government fears
the Danish factor.
The government, the four main political parties, the four main employers'
and business organisations, the main trade unions and farming leaders have
all come out decisively in favour of ratifying the Treaty.
The most recent opinion polls also suggest that two out of three voters who
have made up their minds will vote 'Yes'.
In similar circumstances, Danish voters proved the pundits wrong by
rejecting the Treaty by a narrow margin.
The large number of undecided voters in Ireland, almost a third at the last
count, suggests a similar outcome could occur, especially as the complacency
and divisions in the 'Yes' campaign have created opportunities for the
opposition to exploit.
Mr Reynolds said that rejection of the Treaty 'would put the whole future of
European integration at risk, and it would also put a serious question mark
over our place in Europe'.
'We cannot have our cake and eat it. It is not realistic to think that we
can reject the European Union treaty and still enjoy the benefits of full
membership.'
The government has budgeted IPounds 600,000 for its campaign, a large part
of which has gone on sending a 16-page pamphlet to every house in the
country, expounding the prime minister's message.
The four main parties have also been financing a poster campaign, although
judging by the scale of their efforts party finance bosses have evidently
been more concerned about conserving resources to fight the next general
election rather than 'squandering' part cash on what until recently had been
considered a foregone conclusion.
Surprisingly, little of the political and financial muscle that is behind
the 'Yes' campaign has actually been flexed. At a press conference
yesterday, Ireland's four main business organisations fired off broadsides
in support of the Trea - but there is little evidence that they have helped
to finance what has so far been a lacklustre campaign.
Mr Roy Donovan, the president of the Irish Chambers of Commerce, said: 'The
entire population is best served by an Irish business community that is
competitive and successful at home and abroad.'
Attacking the Euro-sceptics he said: 'By implying that the economic
advantages would fall to industry only and not to the wider community, they
are thriving on rhetoric rather than fact.'
Mr Paddy Marron, the vice-president of the Federation of Irish Employers
said: 'Rejection (of the Treaty) would have immediate consequences for
business confidence, and the prospects for growth and employment in Ireland
would be severely damaged'.
Mr Liam Connellan the director-general of the Confederation of Irish
Industry said: 'I believe we have ahead of us more opportunities now than at
any time since the founding of the state'.
While Irish industrialists continue to voice their strong pro-Maastricht
views the politicians have been bickering among themselves over the conduct
of the campaign.
The ruling Fianna Fail party has come under attack for failing to get many
of its party workers onto the canvassing circuit. A spokesman for the
opposition Fine Gael party said: 'They've been sitting on their backsides
because Fianna Fail has traditionally been a nationalist party, and is not
convinced by the federalist idea.'
The Labour party leader, Mr Dick Spring, did two U-turns on the referendum
in the space of a week, following the Danish vote; first advocating a
postponement, and then deciding to back the plebiscite.
The anti-abortion lobbyists in the anti-Maastricht camp also draw on support
from within the main parties.
A senior cabinet minister this week admitted that 'many of the
anti-abortionist lobbyists are party activists from within Fianna Fail or
Fine Gael'.
And he warned: 'They know the ropes, how to lobby, and are very dedicated.'
