FT  06 MAY 92 / Industry faults size of cut
INDUSTRIAL reaction to the cut in interest rates yesterday was mixed. All
sectors welcomed the cut but there were complaints about its timing and
size. Many said the real impact would be in terms of confidence rather than
immediate cash.
The Institute of Directors was most bullish, saying that it was the 'best
possible stimulus' for British business to pull the economy out of
recession.
The Confederation of British Industry said the base rate cut was 'not before
time'. Sir John Banham, CBI director-general, said the move reflected the
underlying strength of the economy as well as the progress on inflation.
'It will provide a useful boost to business confidence at an important
time,' he said. 'But real interest rates remain very high for manufacturers
especially. It is important the downward trend is maintained.'
In the construction sector, Mr Peter Parkin, chief executive of Raine, said:
'A slow thaw appears to have begun in the housing market. The latest cut in
base rates can only help this progress.'
Mr Colin Hope, chairman of motor components group T&amp;N and president of the
Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, emphasised the psychological
importance of the cut.
He said: 'It's a question of confidence, not cash. I detect a sense among
business people that we're moving in the right direction. People are more
optimistic. But perhaps most helpful is the extent to which we are winning
business in Germany, whose costs are going out of control. This latest cut
will help further.'
Mr Ian Coomber, Vauxhall's director of sales, said the reduction should
serve a useful role 'in transforming already reviving customer interest into
customer orders'. As a result of slowly reviving confidence, the company now
believes the UK market for new cars might reach about 1.7m units, up from
1.59m last year.
Many companies felt the impact would be negligible, however. Some have built
up exports to such an extent that a cut in domestic rates would have little
impact on demand. Others have long fixed-term loans and are unaffected in
the short term.
Many were more interested in the effect of the cut on the strength of
sterling. Mr Graham Hearne, chairman and chief executive of Enterprise Oil,
the UK oil exploration and production company, welcomed an interest rate cut
that would stimulate demand for oil, but said a weakening in sterling
against the US dollar would have a more meaningful effect on his business.
Alps Electric, the Japanese electric and electronics group, said the rate
cut affected it inasmuch as it affected the strength of sterling, since the
group directly or indirectly exported about 80 per cent of products it
manufactured in the UK.
Courtaulds, the chemicals and materials group, said the effect of the cut
would be negligible. It was simply too little.
Mr Martin Smith, finance director at Witton, a small speciality chemicals
company, agreed that the cut was too little, too late. Although the company
was not heavily borrowed, he argued the real problem was the D-Mark, which
was keeping real interest rates far too high.
Electronics manufacturers expressed limited hope that the rate cut would
have a significant positive effect by encouraging business investment and
consumer spending.
Canon, the Japanese camera and office equipment maker, has suffered from a
tendency among business to postpone investment decisions during the
recession. It said: 'Obviously it's good in that hopefully it will stimulate
some kind of recovery.'
Many electronics manufacturers do not think the 0.5-percentage-point rate
cut is large enough to boost spending significantly at once. Panasonic said:
'It means (the UK economy) is moving in the right direction.' But the cut
was not big enough to have a significant effect because people still felt
the economy was depressed and would take more time to recover.
Mr Malcolm Chatwin, chief executive of Yorkshire Electricity, said the cut
would have little impact on the regional electricity companies, which are
typically long-term investors.
