FT  04 JAN 92 / Recession fails to coolpassion for exotic pets
NOT even the recession, it seems, can deter the British passion for pets. In
fact, the worse things get the more exotic the pets they want.
News that Ariadne, the poisonous, locust-eating Guatemalan spider was stolen
this week from a London house confirms this growing trend.
Regent's Reptiles, the country's largest supplier of snakes, reptiles and a
range of creepy-crawlies, has found that far from curtailing trade, the
economic gloom has often sent hard-pressed collectors out for more pets to
cheer themselves up.
Mr Steve Parkinson, co-owner of the north London shop, says: 'People
sometimes trade down a bit, but the specialist collectors continue to buy.
They give up something else rather than their hobby.'
The shop can offer up to 3,000 species of the most uncuddly pets imaginable,
ranging from a hissing cockroach at Pounds 5 or a chameleon for Pounds 125
to a golden python for up to Pounds 2,500. The bigger pythons cost between
Pounds 4 and Pounds 5 a week to feed with a couple of rabbits or chickens or
a piglet.
Mr Dan Reynolds of Surrey Water Gardens and Pet Centre near Guildford also
finds that keen pet keepers have not changed their habits because of the
recession, but some big purchases, such as an aviary or water display, have
been postponed.
The scale of the exotic pet trade is impossible to estimate as no accurate
statistics are kept, but it is thought to be growing fast.
At least 180,000 exotic birds a year are imported into the UK, and according
to the RSPCA, the number of small mammals, reptiles and amphibians traded
each year runs into the hundreds of thousands and tropical fish into
millions.
The RSPCA frowns on the keeping of exotic animals as domestic pets. Dr
Arthur Lindley, head of the wildlife departments, says: 'We accept that some
can be kept by the right people in the right conditions, but the problems
associated with wellbeing of exotics are bound to be more than with normal
domestic pets.'
The trade argues there is no problem, provided the pets are sold through
trained dealers who are able to provide after-care service and who vet the
suitability of customers.
One of the problems the pet trade faces is legislation covering dangerous
and exotic animals, which includes a list of protected and rare species
drawn up by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species.
Anyone wanting to buy a rare animal has to get a licence from a local
authority, but the cost varies enormously. The high cost of the licence also
leads to evasion.
