FT  29 AUG 92 / Wine: Brighter Bavarian beers / A look at the changes in
Bavarian brewing
THE NEWS from Munich is not good: the Bavarians have gone over to light if
not alcohol-free beer. What is the world coming too? Soon we will learn that
the people of Munich have traded in their Lederhosen for Bermuda shorts and
that the Bavarian Landtag has put them on a collective diet.
The big changes in Bavarian beer took place a generation ago. In those days
Munich was famous for its strong, dark fruity beers. Since the 1960s they
have got progressively brighter and lighter. There is even a rumour doing
the rounds that the people are turning to wine.
Beer drinkers may be reassured, however, that there is still beer made in
Munich, and traditional beer too. Paulaner is one of half a dozen breweries
making beer above its traditional well in and around the metropolis. The
brewery was founded by Pauline monks in 1634 and continued as a monastic
concern until the 1880s. The monks made the beer for themselves and their
guests, but the word got round and soon the local inns began to serve it
too.
From the beginning, the monks observed the tradition of brewing a strong
beer for Lent, when the absence of meat called for a beer of a higher
alcoholic strength. This Doppelbock was called Salvator, or the Saviour.
In 1886 the firm of Paulaner, Salvator and Thomasbrau was set up to make the
beer on the original site. Salvator Doppelbock was still conceived to be a
major part of their production, but the local population had grown to expect
other beers too. From Pilsen in Bohemia had come the taste for bright beer
made from the local soft water. There was also Hefebier or yeast beer,
bottled with its yeast to make the fruitiest of all German beers.
Paulaner makes 16 different beers, mostly for the local market. The most
popular of these now is the light beer with only 2.9 degrees of alcohol. The
alcohol-free beer is naturally favoured by motorists. I asked the chief
brewer whether he personally drank this emasculated brew. No, he told me, he
could not stand it.
Munich beer is made from barley. Paulaner is unique among Munich breweries
in that it still malts the barley on the premises, a process which takes a
week. The sweet 'wort' is made in huge, copper-lidded backs much in the same
way as an English beer. The big difference, however, is that all Munich beer
is lager and as such bottom fermented.
Bottom-fermented beers use yeasts which ferment at far lower temperatures
than the British 'top-fermented' ones. Good bottom-fermented beer should
then be matured for several months before being put on the market.
Munich beers are only lightly hopped, and Paulaner actually uses the much
despised pellets, perhaps because hopping is relatively unimportant in south
Germany. The 'bitter' style of British beers is echoed in the more heavily
hoppy styles of the north: Dusseldorf and to some small extent the Berlin
Molle.
Most of Paulaner's output is sold in bottles or cans and only a very small
proportion leaves the brewery in casks. Cask- conditioned beer is not so
important to Germans anyway: the famous Reinheitsgebot which limits the
ingredients to water, cereals and yeast does not allow them to add sugars to
the casks to provoke a second fermentation.
The only way in which the law is occasionally loosely interpreted is in the
recycling of carbonic gas to add fizz. This gas is taken from the fermenting
process and later added back to the casks. They justify this by saying that
the beer made the gas in the first place.
I repaired with my hosts to the big inn which lies next to the brewery. It
was spring but big gobbets of snow were falling. I felt grateful for a big
glass of Salvator drunk as much to ward off the cold as to make up for the
deficiencies caused by a non-meat diet.
Information: Paulaner beers are distributed in Great Britain by Deinhard &amp;
Co, of 95 Southwark Street, London SE1. Tel: 071-261-1111.
