FT  26 MAR 92 / International Company News: O&amp;Y disposals facilitated by
ruling on investments
CANADA is to facilitate the sale of assets by Olympia &amp; York Developments,
the cash-strapped property developer, by relaxing curbs on foreign
investment in the Canadian oil and gas industry.
Although the new rules are not specifically aimed at O&amp;Y, the company has
been pressing the federal government for an early decision to enable it to
finalise negotiations for the sale of its controlling interest in Home Oil,
a Calgary-based energy producer.
A buyer is also being sought for Gulf Canada Resources, another energy
producer, in which O&amp;Y owns 75 per cent of the common shares.
Based on present market values, disposal of the two companies could raise
about CDollars 1bn (USDollars 840.3m), which would help ease O&amp;Y's cash
squeeze. O&amp;Y is estimated to have debts of over CDollars 20bn, and is
expected to sell a number of assets under the restructuring programme set in
train this week.
Mr Jake Epp, energy minister, said yesterday that the government was
dropping its requirement that Canadians own at least 50 per cent of upstream
oil and gas companies. At present, only financially distressed companies are
exempt from the threshold.
Mr Epp said that reviews of oil and gas deals involving foreign investors
would henceforth be conducted on the same basis as those in almost every
other business sector. The threshold for review by Investment Canada, the
government's foreign investment watchdog, will be CDollars 150m for US
purchasers and CDollars 5m for buyers from other countries.
The changes are widely welcomed by Canadian oil and gas producers, who see
infusions of foreign capital as necessary to help them ease their current
financial difficulties and fund future exploration and production.
The curbs were introduced in the early 1980s as part of Ottawa's National
Energy Programme, which was designed to increase domestic control over the
oil and gas industry. However, by encouraging acquisitions of foreign-owned
companies, they left many domestic producers with unmanageable debt burdens.
Two companies controlled by O&amp;Y, GW Utilities and Gulf Canada Resources, own
a total of 63.5 per cent of Home Oil. GWU said earlier this month that
relaxation of the foreign-investment rules 'could facilitate' the disposal
of Home.
