FT  21 SEP 92 / International Capital Markets: A message of hope from Dr
Doom
IN THE old days when Salomon Brothers was the most stuffily respectable
institution in New York, its senior credit analyst was Dr Henry Kaufman. He
used to dominate bond market sentiment, just as his British admirer, Mr (now
Professor) Gordon Pepper, did in London.
Those were financially disorderly and increasingly inflationary times, and
Kaufman's frequent storm warnings got him the name Dr Doom. Unfortunately,
he was right (and so, of course, was Pepper, with his dire forecast of the
result of joining the ERM). Doom is now in over-supply, so you may not wish
to read about Kaufman's latest thoughts; but read on. You may be surprised.
He was speaking only yesterday at the World Economic Development Congress in
Washington, a kind of IMF fringe meeting; and since commonsense will no
doubt be in shorter supply than ever at the main event, I wish I had space
for his whole address; but as it is, his account of how we got into this
mess, through ignorant though well-intentioned tax-cutting and financial
deregulation, most be taken as read. It is aimed at the US, but applies with
equal force to the UK, after adjusting for privatisation instead of
borrowing. It is pithy, but basically familiar.
His current comments are not so conventional, especially from a man with
such a name for austerity; but even here, some quotations will have to do.
First, monetary policy. (Quotes are Kaufman on the US, brackets a UK gloss
on them.) 'During the crucial months of 1990, 1991 and even part of this
year, the Federal Reserve failed to come to grips with the financial
impediments to a normal rebound. The very notion of a credit crunch was
ridiculed in some quarters . . . mainly because there was no direct
historical counterpart on which to base a conventional analysis.' (But while
the Fed did brood about the problem, the UK authorities simply shut their
eyes.)
'A startling number of speeches was given predicting a healthy recovery just
ahead. Such cheerleading was an obstacle to realism.' (Comment redundant.)
'The Fed continued to maintain its customary vigilance against inflation.
Central bankers must be forgiven this bias. Nevertheless, in the context of
a dispirited economy . . . this took on some of the aspects of fighting the
last war.' (The Fed may have seen itself as resisting Reaganomics, but in
the UK the elected government is more Catholic than the Pope.)
On deflation: 'In the current situation . . . the only way many businesses
can try to increase earnings is through cost reduction. That cannot work for
the economy at large . . . (it) reduces employment, lowers income, and sours
sentiment. It feeds on itself, resulting in bigger negative consequences
than expected . . . Draconian measures to reduce the budget deficit in the
short term would be dangerous.' (Wholly applicable to the UK.)
On recovery: 'Economic revival requires financial rehabilitation, and
rehabilitation requires still lower interest rates' (even in the US]). It
also requires 'modest and explicitly temporary fiscal measures'; but
monetary policy must carry the main burden because 'it has the advantage of
flexibility - the capacity for reversing course quickly.'
On Europe: 'I have long felt that an all-out defence of the ERM would be a
mistake, and that the US should urge (its) members to consider suspending
the mechanism until current divergences are able to be narrowed. That is
what has happened under pressure of an old-fashioned market crisis.
'The events of the past few weeks must seem like a bizarre replay of
something out of the 1960s. Even the role of the Bundesbank has been
reminiscent . . . German rates will have to be reduced considerably further
before there is much chance of re-establishing credible parities within the
ERM.'
On devaluation: 'Devaluations would probably be inflationary if European
economies were pushing against capacity constraints. However, the reality is
the opposite.'
And remember that Dr Kaufman's record as an anti-inflationist is impeccable.
Kaufman for Governor? Our battered national pride would hardly take that; so
what about Prof Pepper?
