FT  27 JUN 92 / Arts: 'Licht' progresses - Stockhausen's 'Dienstag' at the
Holland Festival
A WEEK can take a long time in opera. In 1977 Karlheinz Stockhausen began
working on his plan for a music-theatre cycle that would be performed over
the days of a week, and to which he gave the overall title of Licht. The
ground plan of the whole scheme was established from the very start, and
everything Stockhausen has composed since then has been related to the
cycle.
Elements of Licht have continued to emerge at regular intervals, both
piecemeal - an act, a scene at a time to fulfil specific commissions - and
then complete day by complete day. Donnerstag aus Licht was the first to be
performed in its entirety, at La Scala in 1981, and Thursday was followed in
1984 by Saturday and in 1988 by Monday, both premieres also taking place
under the auspices of La Scala, though Stockhausen's theatrical ideas have
steadily freed themselves from the constraints of opera-house performance.
Now Tuesday has been completed. The Leipzig Opera House is due to present
the stage premiere of Dienstag aus Licht next year, but the complete score
was given in a semi-staged version in Lisbon last month, and the performance
brought on Thursday to the Holland Festival. It was presented in the space
of the Amsterdam Muziektheater, not in any conventional arrangement, but
with the performers based in the front of the stalls, and the audience
seated on the stage proper and in the vast rear stage area, while performers
swarmed around and among them.
The subject matter and much of the musical material of the Licht cycle are
well established by now. Its story of the archangel Michael (portrayed by a
tenor) and his struggle with the forces of good and evil epitomised by Eva
(soprano) and Luzifer (bass) has a mythic simplicity. There is an
interweaving of elements from various traditions, but the overriding
philosophy mingles utopianism with Stockhausen's very personal brand of
religion which mingles elements of astrology with monotheism; Licht is, he
emphasises, a 'profoundly Christian' work.
Dienstag is very much the mixture as before. It is cast in two large-scale
acts (roughly two and a half hours of music) prefaced by the now standard
'welcome', Dienstags-Gruss. The first act, Der Jahreslauf, shows Luzifer
tempting Michael with all the trappings of the material world, and the
archangel successfully resisting the blandishments; the second, Invasion -
Explosion mit Abschied, is a series of battles between Michael's forces and
those of Luzifer, all brought to an end by a series of three explosions.
It sounds naive, and so it is; Stockhausen's gift for drama, indeed his
whole view of music theatre, has always been a simplistic one, strangely at
odds with the immense sophistication of his music. In a sense that is the
point, for the scenario of Dienstag seems determined by the musical
processes that underpin it rather than vice versa. There are some vivid set
pieces in the score, and the whole of the second act unfolds over a
pre-recorded tape that is as fine and imaginative a piece of electronic
composition as anything Stockhausen has written in a quarter of a century.
In the second act when battle is joined the tenor and bass portraying
Michael and Luzifer roam the auditorium with their troupes of
instrumentalists, trumpet-based for Michael, trombones for Luzifer. As they
prance around gesturing and posturing it looks ludicrous, and dramatically
it is, but the music generated by these confrontations - wild flaring brass,
synthesiser explosions and overlaid on the eight-channel tape - is
extraordinarily vivid and compelling, and through its use of the melodic
formulae that underpin the whole of the cycle, thoroughly coherent.
Some of the episodes are too extended, certainly. In the midst of the
battles there is a Pieta for the soprano Eva and a solo trumpet, Michael's
alter ego, that contains wonderful instrumental writing, and luscious vocal
lines, but it is at least a third too long; Synthi-Fou, the cadenza for
synthesisers inserted just before the final Abschied could profitably be
halved. Such are the work's longueurs; the rest of the second act in
particular is fascinating.
The greeting that opens the first act is a dense meshing of brass and
chorus, to which Eva adds her exhortations, and Der Jahreslauf itself is a
large-scale clockwork, composed in four distinct layers. It was the first
part of Licht to be completed and is already available on disc. The music
seems to me undistinguished (it was originally written for a Japanese Gagaku
ensemble, and was given here in a Westernised version), and the 'windows' in
the textures through which Luzifer tempts Michael offer no real musical
variety let alone dramatic interest.
Even here though the quality and concentration of the performances were
extraordinary. Stockhausen had worked at every detail, and took charge of
the sound projection; the singers and instrumentalists were those with whom
he works regularly, including his sons Markus and Simon who delivered the
trumpet and synthesiser solos with great panache; Julian Pike sang Michael;
Nicholas Isherwood was Luzifer, Annette Meriweather Eva; the Handel
Collegium Keuelen provided the choir. However ridiculous it sometimes
seemed, Dienstag conveys a curious musical power absolutely unlike anything
else.
