FT  20 FEB 92 / House sales hopes fading
THE BIG RISE in housing demand experienced at the beginning of the year may
already be running out of steam, according to a survey of more than 100
estate agents published today.
The survey by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors finds that the
government's attempt to stimulate the market with a moratorium until August
on stamp duty on purchases below Pounds 250,000, has increased inquiries
while generating few sales.
Mr Peter Miller, who oversees the institution's housing survey, said: 'More
government assistance is required if the government wishes to positively
lift the housing market out of the doldrums.'
The report says: 'Action taken to date has proved insufficient to give
buyers new confidence except in isolated cases where local factors serve to
buck the trend.'
Sales in Sunderland, for example, have been boosted by an announcement by
Nissan, the carmaker, that it plans to spend Pounds 200m and create 600 jobs
at its car plant there.
Agents are said in the report to find sales depressed in spite of a big rise
in the number of people seeking viewings of properties for sale. Mr Philip
Hiatt of Halifax Property Services in East Grinstead, West Sussex, says: 'A
lot of prospective purchasers are window-shopping.'
Many agents say sales are unlikely to pick up until after the general
election. This will disappoint ministers who may have hoped that increased
activity in the housing market would encourage greater optimism among voters
about recovery prospects for the general economy.
Housebuilders which reported a big increase in reservations last month will
also be concerned that agreed sales may not be completed - particularly if
people are still finding it difficult to sell their present homes.
CJ Easterbrook of Stroud, Gloucestershire, told the institution that every
eight to 10 viewings was producing only one sale, compared with a ratio of
four to one in a healthy market.
Mr Peter Veitch of Hadleigh in Birmingham said: 'Despite recent suggestions
in much of the media that there has been a dramatic change in market
conditions there is little evidence of this on the ground.
'It is true that the levels of inquiries and viewings have improved since
before Christmas, but that is from a base of next to nothing and it has yet
to be converted into sales.'
The institution says almost half the agents questioned last month told it
that prices had continued to fall during the previous three months.
Fifty-one per cent said prices had remained static and only 1 per cent that
they had risen.
AT LEAST 100,000 new council and housing-asociation homes will be needed
each year for the next 10 years, Mr Ted Watts, president of the Royal
Institution of Chartered Surveyors, said yesterday.
He said housing associations and councils were building only 40,000 units a
year. Expansion of that programme could be financed by releasing local
authorities' receipts from council house sales.
Mr Watts called at the launch of an institution report on housing needs for
a national investment bank to provide loans for low-cost homes and for a
national agency to monitor housing associations.
Housing the Nation. RICS Books, Westwood Way, Coventry CV4 8JE. Volume 1
Pounds 7.50, Volume 2 Pounds 15.
