FT  24 JUL 92 / Survey of Turkey's South East Anatolian Project (4): Water
supply a thorny issue - Downstream neighbours resent Turkey's control of
distribution
THE last time so many high-ranking Turkish government officials visited the
Ataturk Dam, it was to watch hawsers winching a massive 87-tonne concrete
plug into the diversion channel under the embankment.
On that occasion, marked by the presence of President Turgut Ozal, Turkish
engineers staunched the Euphrates for a period of 30 days, trapping the
water behind the dam for future irrigation and power generation. Syria and
Iraq, Turkey's downstream neighbours, both protested. Newspapers throughout
the Arab world took up the cry.
Strategists have made a good living predicting that water will be the cause
of the next big war in the Middle East. Turkey, controlling as it does both
the Euphrates and Tigris, has been the subject of countless studies on what
has become the region's most precious resource.
Turkey's South East Anatolian Project, GAP, and particularly the dam which
is its centre piece, is the source of continuing friction with its two
former Arab colonies to the south. In spite of technical meetings - the last
one in Ankara in June 1990 - the three sides have been unable to agree a
permanent distribution of the waters.
The issue is particularly urgent for the Syrians, who rely on water for 75
per cent of their power generation, not to mention the supply of drinking
water and water for irrigation and industrial use. Iraq can use the Tigris,
which is less directly affected by Turkey's irrigation plans. As a major oil
producer, Iraq also relies less on hydro-power generation. On the other
hand, it is the Euphrates which feeds Iraq's agricultural sector.
Much of the population in these areas is made up of Shia, and the Sunni
administration in Baghdad has been at pains to win their support.
Projections suggest the more Turkey uses the water to fill the reservoir and
for irrigation purposes, the less will be available for the Syrians and the
Iraqis.
Moreover, both downstream users face pollution and degraded supply, in spite
of assurances from Turkish engineers that irrigated water will be
controlled. Scientists predict the intensified inputs could also seriously
affect ground water quality as fertilisers and insecticides seep down into
the water table, polluting the springs on the Syrian side of the border.
Beyond these practical worries, Syria and Iraq both resent their growing
dependence on Turkey and the influence that Ankara seems likely to assert in
connection with the water issue.
For Damascus, the issue has been intimately linked with its broader security
concerns. When Turkey decided in the early 1980s to push ahead with the
Ataturk Dam, Turkish officials now acknowledge that it was this action which
prompted the Syrians to start backing Turkey's separatist Kurdish Workers
party, the PKK.
This bloody conflict has since claimed more than 4,000 lives. Syrian support
for the rebels is also seen as a lever with which to win concessions on the
long-standing bilateral grumble over the status of Hatay, a region ceded to
Turkey at the end of the French mandate.
The joint technical meetings have proved far more amicable than the
political exchanges. According to Mr Ferruh Anik of the state hydraulics
works, DSI, Syria and Turkey have even discussed joint dam projects
involving flooding the border to maximise the power generation.
But Ankara rejects calls for an internationally ratified agreement on the
waters. Instead it says the dam programme has helped regulate the flow,
providing its neighbours with constant supply - a claim consistent with the
dramatic seasonal changes in water discharge and the historical evidence of
flooding in the region.
'The Syrian approach has always been to calculate their maximum needs. If
you put Syria's needs and Iraq's needs together you will have twice the
potential of the Euphrates. Until common sense prevails in these discussions
there will not be any agreement,' says Mr Burhan Ant, head of Arab affairs
at the Turkish foreign ministry.
Turkish policy has none the less periodically sought to accommodate these
concerns. In 1987, during a visit to Damascus, President Turgut Ozal, then
prime minister, offered to guarantee a flow of 500 cubic metres a second at
the Turkish Syrian border, until a 'final allocation of the waters of the
Euphrates between the three riparian states.'
Various proposals have been made, Ankara even offering to transmit
electricity to Syrian cities in the border area. Before staunching the river
in 1990, Turkey gave two months advance warning and offered to compensate by
increasing the flows. Partly to appease international concern at the
environmental effect of its irrigation schemes, Turkey is inviting foreign
experts to assess the various canal schemes.
Yet the Turkish position remains that there is no legal case for sharing the
waters. Mr Fahri Armagoglu, a journalist and lecturer on international
relations, insists that the Euphrates and the Tigris are not international
waters. 'They both have their sources in Turkish soil,' he says.
Moreover the Turks remain extremely wary of becoming involved in any
multilateral accord, unwilling to embroil themselves in Syria's own disputes
with Iraq. Turkish officials point out that Syria and Iraq almost went to
war when Syria started construction of its Taqba Dam in the mid-1970s.
The rival riparian claims have frightened off potential donors, the Japanese
recently having pulled out of a Dollars 350m canal irrigation development,
reportedly following pressure from the Syrians. 'Until there is a permanent
agreement I don't think Japan will finance this project,' said a Japanese
embassy official in Ankara.
According to Mr Asaf Guven, then head of the Treasury, in the 1970s the
World Bank agreed to finance the Keban Dam, but only on condition that
Turkey guaranteed to supply Syria with 350 cubic metres a second for the
duration of the loan.
On both Keban and the Karakaya development, the use of international
financing gave the World Bank and other donors some control over how Turkey
used its resources and their impact on downstream users. Significantly, when
it came to finding credits for the Lower Euphrates development and the
Ataturk Dam, Turkey decided to finance.
As Suleyman Demirel, the Turkish prime minister, once put it: 'Water is an
upstream resource and downstream users cannot tell us how to use our
resources'. Whether the current tension ever erupts into open hostilities
will depend much on the extent to which all three countries manage to
realise their planned irrigation projects. Turkish water officials estimate
Syria can only make use of a third of the 500 cubic metres a second it
currently receives, yet Damascus continues to demand 700 cubic metres.
Turkey's own plans to irrigate more than 1.7m hectares may prove over
ambitious in itself, depending as it does on being able to finance the canal
infrastructure and to continue to subsidise its farmers.
Turkey's budget problems have already served to set back the completion
date. Moreover, once the dam is filled, Turkey says it will increase the
water discharge to Syria as it fires up its power turbines. The first two
units will be started tomorrow.
Officials also point out the original protocol contained an implicit
undertaking that once the dam was filled, negotiations would restart on
water sharing. Today, Turkey's desperate need for funds may persuade the
government to revive this search for a political solution to the dispute.
