FT  31 JUL 92 / Cowes in distress for want of liquidity: Fashionable yacht
crews plotting a course through perils of recession
COWES WEEK will start with a boom, a triumph of individual money over
corporate indifference.
Just after 10am tomorrow, the cannon at the exclusive Royal Yacht Squadron
(secretary: Major Robin 'I don't give interviews' Rising) will fire to set
off a week of 225 yacht races pitting skill against skill, bank balance
against bank balance.
The sharp report of the cannon will not only echo over the Solent and send a
little tremor through the benign suburbia of Cowes, where the calm of the
retired bourgeoisie obscures rising unemployment and a high illegitimacy
rate. It will also signal that tradition is alive and well: the sporting
event that fills the gap in the calendar between Henley and Goodwood, on the
one hand, and the grouse shooting of the Glorious 12th, on the other, is
surviving recession.
Britannia, the royal yacht, will be in attendance. The Royal Navy has
navigated the constraints of the defence budget to provide an escort vessel.
The Duke of Edinburgh will be donning his oilskins. The balls and the
dinners have been arranged. Everybody is geared for a splendid time. No
doubt everybody will have just that: it, too, is part of the tradition.
But Cowes Week is rather like a recession-ridden engineering company: the
margins are under pressure.
Captain Dan Bradby, who organises the regatta for the combined yacht clubs
of Cowes, expects 780 boats to enter this year. Last year, there were 850.
The total, he explained 'is governed by the number of billets to secure the
boats. We can cope with 900.' So throughput has fallen by 8 per cent and he
is operating 13 per cent under capacity.
Engineering chiefs, under present conditions, would be relieved at such
figures. But, to stay in the market, Cowes has reduced its entry fees this
year - they range from Pounds 5 a day to Pounds 70 a race - by an average of
10 per cent.
The fees are tiny compared to the cost of a boat - the proverbial drop in
the ocean. But people are 'feeling the pinch', according to Capt Bradby.
The costs of Cowes Week are nearing Pounds 150,000 and rising - not least
the price of the prizes. This is not Wimbledon-style prize money; rather it
might cover the cost of buying a handy gadget, such as a portable clothes
locker.
With income declining, costs increasing and a slender asset base, Cowes Week
cannot rely on the bank for extra working capital. It has been forced back
on the sponsor, Land Rover.
The businesses that have sprung up around Cowes Week have been less
fortunate. The town has two marinas. The one nearest the racing, West Cowes
Marina, is in the hands of the receivers. It is a victim of the classic
property company bind. Crusader Estates, the previous owner, ran up debts
and ran out of income.
Locals and yachtsmen alike have seen West Cowes Marina as rather shabby.
This year, though, after some investment by the receiver, it is looking its
best for years.
Mr John Whitehead, another former naval man, was put in as manager last
January. This week, inside the breakwater, there will be 'wall-to-wall
boats, all of which have pre-booked and pre-paid', he said. They will have
paid the same as last year - a daily charge of Pounds 1.20 for each foot of
boat.
This is the sprat to catch the mackerel. The marina has to be seen to be
working, to attract a buyer as a going concern. Over the next few days, it
will be a hive of activity, not least because more crews than ever before
will be sleeping on their boats.
Such economy measures have their downside. Mr Tim Clogg owns Marvins, the
estate agents, 'founded in 1868, patronised by royalty'. He rents out houses
for Cowes Week.
'Bookings are probably 30 per cent down, but last year was a record year for
us,' he said. Prices are down. 'Last year they were between Pounds 20 and
Pounds 25 a night. This year they are between Pounds 15 and Pounds 18.'
The more people who sleep on boats, the better the business is likely to be
at the shore installations of West Cowes Marina. Not only is the marina like
the pits at a motor racetrack, it is also a social centre.
Looking around the blue-and-white marquees on the shore, Mr Chris Troup,
whose Inn-On-The-Road is organising the West Cowes Marina festivities, said:
'This is like a huge pub - a 180-foot bar - we do more beer in a week than
the average pub does in a year.' More than 500 barrels, in fact.
Setting up the catering and the entertainment involves an investment of
Pounds 50,000, and Mr Troup seeks it in sponsorship. 'It was very hard this
year to get the financing for the site,' he said. Normally people actually
beg us to be here; it's an indication things are hard.'
Cowes Week, it is true, has never been excessively popular with the
corporate fat cats. This year it is even less so. In the shop window of
Wallace Clark, the yacht brokers, there is a special offer for chartering
Sea Lass, a motor yacht: down to Pounds 600 a day from Pounds 800.
'The better yachts get the charters. The ones not doing so well are those
where the owner says 'We've got a boat, let's charter it',' observed Mr
Rodney Barton, the Wallace Clark managing director. By contrast, his boat
sales have been doing very well since just before the general election.
There is a dichotomy between what individuals are prepared to do to get on
the water and what companies are prepared to spend to cash in on the
popularity of water sports.
For the traditionalist, tapping in to the memory of 170 years of regattas,
this is not a cause for concern. Rather, it provides an opportunity to evoke
the Corinthian spirit.
'Okay, the traders will go and make their money, and that's fine. But, as
far as the regatta is concerned, it's the fact you've got 700-plus boats -
and they're not top racers. They come together for an event where it's not
just the good racing but the atmosphere of Cowes Week,' says Capt Tony
Pearson, secretary of the Island Sailing Club which is not quite as posh as
the Royal Yacht Squadron.
