FT  10 JUL 92 / World Bank to make its first Russian loan
THE World Bank is to make its first loan to Russia, just three months after
the country was admitted as a member. The bank is preparing around Dollars
1.7bn (Pounds 890m) of loans to support the Russian balance of payments, the
first of which - a Dollars 600m loan to finance critical imports - could be
approved early next month.
Officials familiar with recent talks between the Russian government and the
bank said the Dollars 600m loan, to finance the import of priority goods
such as health supplies and spare parts, should be presented to the World
Bank board in early August before the start of its summer recess. They said
the loan, to be disbursed over a six-month period, would not be heavily
conditional on economic reform.
The bank is also working on loans of around Dollars 500m each to support the
Russian agricultural sector and the petroleum industry. These may be
approved as early as October. Work is also going ahead on smaller loans to
encourage the Russian privatisation programme and to help exports, officials
said.
The World Bank, which is playing a subsidiary role to the International
Monetary Fund in providing financial support for Russia, has also agreed
with the government the basis for their future co-operation.
A memorandum from the Russian government to the bank suggests five priority
areas for structural change:
Reform of enterprises, including privatisation and improving their
management. Competition and anti-monopoly policy.
Improving the environment for foreign direct investment, which relates to
issues such as the exit and entry of profits - the government favours
discriminatory treatment in favour of foreign investors.
Financial sector reform, including modernisation of the banking system.
Social protection and the social safety net, including reform of the
pensions system, unemployment compensation and the social safety net.
A parallel memorandum to the IMF, focusing on economic stabilisation, is
also likely to be sent to the fund's board next month.
Officials said yesterday that the proposal by President Boris Yeltsin to
swap Russian assets and goods in exchange for cancellation of Russia's
foreign debt had not been aired with officials from the two institutions.
They said that while such swaps might play a useful role in the
privatisation of enterprises - as they have widely done in Latin America -
it would make little sense to use exports to cancel debt when they could
otherwise be sold for cash.
Furthermore, the idea that assets in the former Soviet Union are owned by
the people raises the question of who owns the assets to be swapped: the
federal government, provincial or municipal governments or workers in the
enterprises?
