FT  10 JUN 92 / Prague seeks to escape deadlock
THE newly-elected leaders of the Czech and Slovak republics have agreed to
try to form quickly an interim federal government despite deep differences
over the future federal state revealed at their first meeting which ended
early yesterday.
Mr Vaclav Klaus, Czech leader of the Civic Democratic party (ODS), said the
six-hour meeting revealed 'completely different positions' on the future of
the 74-year-old federation. He said the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia,
led by Mr Vladimir Meciar, was 'not interested' in a common state.
'They are for a vague economic and defence union, a community of two
sovereign states modelled more on the Visegrad Alliance (between
Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland) or a mini-European Community than a
federation,' he said.
'We have no illusion about the chances for success and stability for such an
unusual configuration,'
At a press conference Mr Klaus reiterated that his party demanded what he
called a 'working federation', continuation of economic reforms and the
re-election of Mr Vaclav Havel as president as the basis for a reformed
federal state.
The Slovak leader has publicly refused to support President Havel's
candidature and declared his intention to proclaim a sovereign Slovakia with
its own constitution and president.  He has also expressed radically
different economic ideas, including the demand for a Slovak central bank.
Mr Klaus said the two sides had not even started to discuss economic matters
during their talks which will resume in Prague tomorrow.
However, they agreed on the need to form an interim federal government as
soon as possible and will discuss details of a skeleton administration at
their next meeting.
Mr Klaus said that the first round of talks, which took place in Brno, the
Moravian capital, halfway between Prague and Bratislava, took place in a
'calm and business-like manner'. In spite of the depth of their
disagreements neither wants to be seen as being responsible for a future
Break-up of the federal state.
