FT  17 DEC 92 / Survey of European Finance and Investment - Switzerland (5):
Few easy answers / Banking, the cantonal and regional players
THE CANTONAL and regional banks are in the front line of small-scale local
finance in Switzerland, and these days that is not a comfortable place to
be.
The serene image of solid Swiss banking projected by the big universal banks
and private banks falls apart at this more pedestrian level. Here there is
real trouble and few easy solutions.
The collapse of property prices in particular has undermined their primary
business, mortgage lending, while the squeeze on consumer spending has hurt
their small business customers. Some of these banks have also fallen victim
to dubious entrepreneurs and, in the case of the cantonal banks, excessive
political interference.
Meanwhile, competition from the big universal banks is forcing them to find
innovative ways to increase efficiency.
To appreciate the scale of the task they face, some comparative figures are
helpful. The 28 cantonal banks - one for each canton, except for Vaud and
Geneva, where there are two - had combined assets at the end of last year
totalling SFr228.3bn (Pounds 102.7bn), roughly half the four universal
banks' combined assets of SFr543.2bn. The 189 regional banks had only
SFr92.7bn in combined assets.
Mr Marc Fues, executive vice-president of the Caisse d'Epargne de Geneve,
says a general service bank now needs at least SFr10bn in assets to survive.
'Below that, life is going to be very difficult in the future,' he predicts.
The squeeze on these banks first came to public attention last year when the
Spar- und Leihkasse Thun, a regional bank in the canton of Bern, was
suddenly closed by the Federal Banking Commission, leaving depositors
bereft.
There has still not been a final settlement in that case, but the sight of a
Swiss bank going bust and depositors lining up in vain to claim their money
was enough to push the whole banking fraternity into creating a safety net.
Since then, as far as the regional banks are concerned, the safety net has
worked well. In some cases, rescues have been arranged within the sector
itself. Two weeks ago, six small regional banks in the Emmental region
merged into two, although the Association of Swiss Regional Banks insisted
that the move was preventive, in the sense that none of the banks involved
was in financial difficulty.
In other cases, one of the cantonal or big banks has had to step in, the
most recent case being when Credit Suisse rescued EKO Hypothekar- und
Handelsbank in Olten. In November, the Solothurn Cantonal Bank completed the
acquisition of Bank in Kriegstetten.
So far so good, but banking industry officials worry that, if the economy
remains depressed, the pace of failures could increase beyond the ability of
the big banks to absorb them.
Among the cantonal banks, problems tend to be less urgent, largely because
these banks are controlled by the cantonal governments, and their
liabilities, to varying degrees, are guaranteed by the cantons.
Also, reflecting the great differences in the size of cantons, they vary so
much in size that they can hardly be looked at as a group. The Zurcher
Kantonalbank (ZKB), for example, had total assets at the end of last year of
SFr48.1bn, ranking it among the universal banks and enabling it to have a
significant role in the country's financial markets. At the other end, the
Appenzell-Innerrhodische Kantonalbank, has only SFr919.1m in assets.
The main problem cases are the cantonal banks in Valais, Bern, Solothurn,
Appenzell-Ausserrhoden and Basle City, of which the worst is undoubtedly
Bern. The Berner Kantonalbank made large loans during the 1980s to the now
defunct Omni Holding group led by Mr Werner K. Rey, and there have been
charges that it did so under pressure from leading cantonal politicians.
Provisions this year are expected to be similar to last year's level of
SFr558m, exhausting the bank's capital and forcing the cantonal government
to raise new funds to cover its liabilities.
The excessive political influence in some cantonal banks, especially in Bern
and Solothurn, has brought calls from some quarters, notably the Swiss
National Bank, that something be done. Some cantonal banks have asked to be
regulated by the Federal Banking Commission. Others have found a partial
solution through partial privatisation and the appointment of directors not
connected to the cantonal governments. This has taken place in Vaud, Zug,
Jura and Valais.
Up to now, to preserve the cantonal guarantee, there have been no
privatisations beyond 50 per cent, and none are planned. However, the value
of the cantonal guarantee could decline if Switzerland chooses to move
towards harmonising its banking laws with those of the European Community.
Now that the Swiss have voted against joining the European Economic Area,
there is no pressure to do so, but the government says it intends to move in
that direction anyway. The immediate impact for the cantonal banks would be
to eliminate the 12.5 per cent abatement they are allowed from normal
capital requirements. This is given partly because of the cantonal
guarantee, and partly because they are not allowed to raise subordinated
debt (which is a meaningless form of capital when a state guarantee exists).
The elimination of this abatement would be expensive for the cantonal banks,
requiring ZKB alone to raise an additional SFr300m in capital, so it is
unlikely to happen quickly.
As they are creatures of their cantonal governments, these banks cannot
legally merge, so the response of the smaller ones to rising costs and
intensifying competition has been to co-operate in cost and service areas,
such as data processing, clearing, lease finance, venture capital and
pension fund management.
Early this year, six cantonal banks in north-east Switzerland, led by ZKB,
signed a co-operation agreement with two large German banks in neighbouring
Bavaria and Hesse, with a view to covering more cross-border trade as the
European integration process advances. Similarly, the Geneva cantonal banks
are eager to intensify links in neighbouring areas of France.
The banks are also contemplating setting up a holding company for handling
new security issues and portfolio management.
The two Geneva cantonal banks have finally agreed on a project to merge,
which will create a new bank with assets of about SFr14bn. The ownership
structure of the new bank has been designed to limit the potential for
political pressure, with the canton and local communities having equal
shares and the public having 20 per cent at the start. The bank also intends
to submit to regulation from the Federal Banking Commission.
