FT  09 NOV 92 / Asylum protesters pelt German leader
GERMAN President Richard von Weizsacker was pelted with eggs and stones by
left-wing radicals at a mass rally in Berlin called to protest at the wave
of recent right-wing extremist attacks on asylum seekers.
Riot police held up their shields to protect Mr von Weizsacker, who had to
delay his speech for nearly 10 minutes. When he finally spoke he was
repeatedly interrupted by cat-calls as projectiles thumped against the
police shields.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl, also at the rally, said later the militants had
'tried to soil the image of people demonstrating peacefully against
violence.
'The mob wanted to damage the worldwide image of Berlin and Germany. They
will not succeed,' he said.
The rally was organised to show solidarity with foreigners in Germany but it
left an impression of a country polarised over the issue of asylum-seekers
and immigrants.
The disruption was provoked by several dozen young anarchists who manoeuvred
themselves to the front of an otherwise peaceful crowd of nearly 300,000
demonstrators.
They unfurled banners accusing Mr Kohl and Mr Weizsacker of hypocrisy in
attending the rally. Acting on orders not to use undue force, the riot
police tried without much success to push them back.
At one point, Mr Hans-Jochen Vogel, the former head of the Social Democratic
(SPD) party, was thrown to the ground when he attempted to urge moderation
on the left-wingers. The police moved in with batons and encircled the
demonstrators. Ironically, the brunt of the abuse was borne by President von
Weizsacker, who has been outspoken in his condemnation of radical rightwing
violence. Yesterday he reminded the crowd that today was the anniversary of
a 'fateful German date', the burning of Jewish synagogues in Nazi Germany in
1938.
Mr Kohl, who has been criticised for not forcefully condemning the attacks
on asylum-seekers when they first took place, did not speak at the rally.
The incidents marred an otherwise peaceful display of tolerance by Berliners
and tens of thousands of Germans from east and west who came in special
trains and buses for the rally. Mr Max Streibl, the Bavarian prime minister,
was the sole state leader not to attend the rally.
