FT  18 JAN 92 / Finance &amp; the Family (Diary of a Private Investor):
Takeovers hit right key - Small companies were a boon in 1991
JANUARY is a good time for reviewing a previous year's investments and
digesting the lessons. Somewhat surprisingly, 1991 turned out to be quite
good for takeovers and I benefited from three - all small companies.
I first became attracted to Herrburger Brooks, a piano keyboard
manufacturer, in 1985. I felt that its specialist industry provided scope
for rationalisation. Also, the company was small enough for an entrepreneur
to consider using it as a 'shell' to expand into other activities. I paid
60p a share for my investment. In May 1991, I accepted a takeover offer of
220p from Kimball International.
For similar reasons, in 1988 I paid 120p for shares in Flexello Castors. In
June 1991, I accepted the takeover price of 130p from a Japanese company,
Nansin. The offer was rather miserly but there were no signs of any rival
(and better) bidders and Flexello's performance had been disappointing.
Another Japanese company, Sankyo Seiko, made a successful takeover bid for
DAKS Simpson, the up-market department store and clothing group in London's
Piccadilly. I first bought non-voting shares in this company in 1988 for
430p because I liked the store and its attentive staff. I had noted also
that it appeared to be popular with Japanese tourists. Sankyo Seiko's March
1991 cash offer was 585.5p for my 'A' ordinary shares. I accepted.
These three successful takeover bids re-affirmed my faith in small-company
investment and I shall continue to acquire shares in such concerns.
The Japanese takeover of DAKS Simpson also made me follow my wife's 1986
example and buy shares in Liberty, another retail store in London's West
End. Early in 1991, she increased her holding via a Personal Equity Plan. I
bought shares for my personal pension scheme, paying 445p for the voting
shares and 240p for the non-voting.
Like DAKS Simpson, Liberty has an up-market image, is popular with the
Japanese and also has an association with Japan - a company owned jointly
there with Seibu Department Store.
Early in September, it was announced that Bryan Myerson, a South African
stockbroker who assisted in the Japanese bid for Aquascutum in 1990, had
acquired a shareholding in Liberty. The company's voting shares are now
around 650p and the non-voting 433p. My wife and I still retain ours and
await further developments.
The year was not without disaster, though. I discussed the horrors of my
investment in Gresham House last year. Fortunately, my pension scheme's
purchase was limited to 1,500 Gresham shares (albeit at 300p) in March. The
belief was that this investment trust's assets were worth at least twice its
share price.
A number of its investments turned sour, however, and the Gresham shares now
languish at less than 20p. I should have sold them - for 60p or so -
immediately the bad news about the fall in its assets was announced at the
end of June. But I held on, hoping that the massive write-offs would attract
a takeover bid.
Gresham House has such a low market capitalisation that, hopefully, there
will be it will attract takeover attention - or, at least, changes in its
board of directors.
The Gresham experience also highlights the importance of knowing when to
sell. Another company where I missed the 'sell by' date was Premier
Consolidated Oilfields. Living in Dorset - not very far from Wytch Farm, the
largest onshore oilfield in Europe - I believed that Premier (which had a
significant interest there) ought to see its share price increase when the
field neared its full annual production level. As a relatively small
concern, I thought Premier had takeover potential and might appeal specially
to a French company.
Sadly, Premier - despite Wytch Farm's success, its overseas oil exploration
interests, and its increased profits - has fallen from a high of 58p in 1991
to around 27p now.
Some of my timing was spot-on, though; take A. &amp; C. Black, a small company
which publishes Who's Who plus many reference and childrens' books. Over the
year, I have been 'in and out' of this company several times, getting useful
profits.
Another timely sale was my pension fund's disposal in July 1991 of its
remaining shares in Television South West, for 82p. In October, the
Independent Television Commission announced it would not be renewing the
company's franchise. The shares are now around 46p.
Away from the stock market, my best-performing investment continues to be a
share in the West End musical Forbidden Planet, which is now in its third
year and is showing a profit of Pounds 1,080 for every Pounds 1,000 invested
in July 1989 - with the hope of more to come.
Investing in theatrical ventures is very risky, which is why I remain
selective as to which shows I back. Anyone considering such an investment
can obtain further information from the Society of West End Theatre, Bedford
Chambers, The Piazza, Covent Garden, London WC2E 8 HQ.
My wife and I retained our maximum Pounds 10,000 holdings in premium bonds
throughout 1991 but the returns have continued to be pathetic. I had four
wins of Pounds 50 each and one of Pounds 100 (total Pounds 300), while my
wife collected 15 prizes of Pounds 50 (total Pounds 750). Both of us would
have fared better by putting our money in a bank and drawing the interest -
but we both keep hoping for a big win. At least the returns are tax-free -
an important consideration bearing in mind the possibility of a Labour
government increasing taxes on investment gains.
We achieved one good tax-free return from my wife's Pounds 5,000 investment
in index-linked National Savings certificates. These reached their five-year
maturity in August and she got Pounds 8,258.74. Even with the lower levels
of inflation in the UK, index-linked certificates look to be a good
longer-term investment, especially given political uncertainties.
