FT  12 SEP 92 / Finance &amp; the Family: MMC to probe medical costs
HOPES ARE high that the Monopolies and Mergers Commission can bring the
escalating costs of UK private medical insurance under control.
It announced this week that it will investigate the British Medical
Association to see whether doctors are conspiring to set medical charges at
artificially high levels.
Premiums have risen rapidly over the last two years, partly because of
rising medical costs.
Bob Bycroft, the managing director of Medical Insurance Agency, who is
providing evidence to the MMC panel, welcomed the investigation. 'Anything
that focuses attention on the increasing cost of private medical care has
got to be a good thing.'
He said there was increasing evidence of multiple procedures - in other
words, to quote his example, if a patient went to hospital to have an
operation on varicose veins in one leg, the surgeon would also operate on
the second leg because 'it would need to be done eventually'.
There is also evidence that the BMA's recommended guidelines on fees,
introduced in 1989, have been treated as the norm which doctors ought to
charge, rather than the upward limit.
According to Jan Lawson, of the Private Health Partnership, a Leeds broker,
in Yorkshire the BMA guidelines led to a 60 per cent rise in consultants'
fees overnight.
An FT investigation this week also showed that BMA fees tend to be higher
than the scales recommended by the British United Provident Association
(Bupa), which for many years were regarded as the industry standard.
However, there is more to the rise in premiums than inflation in medical
costs. Nancy Saldana of Cigna, an insurer, does not object to the BMA's
scales, which mirror an exercise in the US to assess the relative costs of
different procedures. The problem, she says, is the way they have been used
and interpreted.
She believes that over-use of hospital care could have much to do with
escalating premiums. Her favourite example is the hospital extraction of
wisdom teeth, which until a few years ago was normally carried out in a
dentist's chair.
In the UK, each Briton went to hospital 50 per cent more often at the end of
the 1980s than at the beginning of the decade, according to Bupa figures.
This increased use of health care may mean premiums will continue to rise.
The best way to avoid a possible medical cartel lies with the National
Health Service. Consumer surveys suggest that the only significant problem
with the NHS is the length of time patients sometimes face before having
operations. You can combat this by shopping around between different NHS
regions, according to a survey in Which? magazine, as waiting lists vary
considerably between areas.
The National Waiting List Helpline (081-983-1133) gives details of which
district health authorities have the shortest waiting times for the
operation you require, plus information on hospitals in those districts.
Following the latest dose of health service reforms you can now ask your GP,
if he or she is a fundholder, to refer you to any hospital. If they are not
fundholding the procedure is more complicated: they must try to persuade
your own health authority to pay for you to be referred elsewhere.
