FT  20 JAN 92 / La Defense developer chargedin crackdown on corruption
ONE OF France's leading property developers, Mr Christian Pellerin, has been
charged with financial irregularities, in the latest move in a judicial
crackdown on alleged corruption in the property industry.
Mr Pellerin, who handled the development of a large part of La Defense, the
prestigious office district west of Paris, has been charged, after two days
of police questioning, with 'aiding and abetting' both the 'abuse of
corporate property and falsification'. He denies both charges.
He is the sixth person to be charged over FFr12.5m (Pounds 1.3m) of
commissions paid during the purchase and resale of an office block in La
Defense three years ago. It was acquired in 1988 from British Petroleum by a
consortium of developers - including Mr Pellerin's company - for an
estimated FFr530m and resold at a FFr230m profit to Banque Indosuez a year
later.
Mr Pellerin (47) is an establishment figure, as chairman of Societe
d'Administration et de Realisation d'Investissement (Sari), a subsidiary of
the water distribution utility, Compagnie Generale des Eaux. He was also one
of the original backers of Mr Georges Pebereau, the financier, in his failed
attempt to gain control of Societe Generale, the privatised bank, in 1988.
The developer claimed in television and radio interviews over the weekend
that he was the victim of a plot to distract attention from a wider scandal,
possibly involving the police. Sari was 'the tree which hides the forest',
claimed Mr Pellerin.
The charges, the climax of a series of financial scandals, are being taken
by Paris property developers as confirmation of the seriousness of a
campaign to clean up the commissions paid by developers to middlemen, often
in local government, to help win important deals.
Such commissions are accepted practice in most cases. But the government
decentralisation of powers to local authorities over the past six years has
created fertile ground for corruption, as shown by a separate scandal over
political party financing, which climaxed recently with a police raid on the
Paris headquarters of the governing Socialist party.
Charges have also been brought against Mr Yves Rohou, president of PII, the
original member of the consortium that set up the BP office block deal. Mr
Rohou is accused of abuse of corporate property. Four others have been
charged in recent months over the same transaction, including Mr Christian
Schwartz, director general of PII.
The inquiry has been going on for more than two years, and was given impetus
by the two suicides in 1990 of a senior police officer and an insurance
agent, shortly before they were due to be interviewed over their alleged
involvement in the transaction. Mr Pellerin has denied knowing the dead
policeman.
