FT  20 JUN 92 / Gardening: Sow now to make sure you reap - Arthur Hellyer
discusses how to propagate biennials and recommends ways to use herbicides
effectively
THIS IS a good time to sow the seeds of biennial plants such as foxgloves,
Brompton stocks, wallflowers, honesty, Canterbury bells, sweet williams,
forget-me-nots, Iceland poppies and evening primroses. As conditions are
right for rapid germination without a need for any extra warmth, the sowing
can be done outdoors or in an unheated frame. There is still enough good
growing weather ahead for the seedlings to make sturdy plants by October, at
which time they can be planted out in the places where they are to flower
the following spring.
Some of these plants will do it all for themselves. In my garden,
forget-me-nots come up wherever I scatter the old plants I have pulled up.
In recent years, this place for temporary litter has been the ditch beside
the hedge in the farm lane which runs right down my property. For a week or
so, it looks rather untidy, but the plants soon dry up and the grass and
wild flowers grow over them. The reward is a blue haze of flowers in May and
early June without any effort on my part.
Years ago, I used to spread many of these dying forget-me-not plants around
apple trees in my orchard, where they performed a similar role. Then, when I
started to use paraquat (Weedol) to keep circles of clear soil around the
trees, I found, to my surprise, that although all the grass and most of the
weeds (except the strongest perennials) were killed, the forget-me-nots were
unaffected.
One year, I ran out of paraquat at a crucial moment and used glyphosate
instead. This eliminated forget-me-nots not only for that year but for the
following one as well. But they returned gradually to normal, partly because
I scattered more fading forget-me-not plants to replace the seed but also, I
think, because of residual seed in the soil already. I still use both
herbicides: paraquat for the quick effect - especially on grasses of all
kinds, and on annual weeds - and glyphosate on ground elder, bindweed,
docks, nettles, brambles and all the more persistent weeds which are
despatched most efficiently when they are in full growth.
Glyphosate recently has become available in a new formulation known as
Roundup GC. This is different from the Roundup been sold to farmers and
commercial growers for many years, and is claimed to be even more effective.
Like other formulations of this herbicide, it acts solely through the leaves
of growing plants and is bio-degraded quite rapidly by micro-organisms in
the soil into carbon dioxide, carbon, phosphate and nitrate.
It is not poisonous to animals or human beings and there is no need to keep
children away from areas which have been treated. Roundup GC is effective
against deep-rooted weeds, especially if it is applied when they are growing
strongly and have a vigorous circulation of sap. But it is just as fatal to
garden plants as weeds, so it must be kept off their leaves.
I digress, though, from the subject of biennials. . . .
There are many garden varieties of these - improved varieties, many
gardeners say, although the improvement might be no more than a change of
colour or an increase in flower size. For example, the forget-me-nots I grow
are of the common variety: a clear, light blue with an occasional appearance
of a pink or pinkish-flowered plant.
If I bought seed, I could have a choice of several varieties such as Marina,
a deeper blue; Rosie, which is rose pink; and Blue Cloud. They are much like
what I have, but without the variation. If I introduced any of these,
though, I would have to keep each variety right away from the others or from
what I have already; otherwise, it would cross-pollinate with them and be
swamped. The same is true of all other plants raised readily from seed, as
are all biennials. If you want some particular variety, you must grow it in
isolation or buy it anew each year.
All the seedlings, whether from your own or bought-in seed, will need to be
thinned or transplanted as soon as they can be handled easily. With many -
such as wallflowers and honesty, which make quite sturdy seedlings - this is
not difficult to do outdoors, preferably in a nursery bed set apart for such
a purpose and cleared thoroughly of weeds before it is used.
With others which, at first, are very small - such as the seedlings of
Canterbury bells - it is really easier to handle them in trays filled with
special seed compost, whether it be soil-based, peat-based, coir or
something else. Then, the main problem becomes watering, which is no problem
if you are there to do it but a very serious one if you are away from home a
lot.
The compromise is to prepare a special bed for these special seedlings with,
if necessary, a good topping of pure seed compost. This will give the fine
texture needed for picking out tiny seedlings and the benefit of a
subterranean supply of water which, in emergencies, can be supplemented with
some form of trickle irrigation.
