FT  20 FEB 92 / Survey of Contracted Business Services (3): The case for
outside help - Workplace Management
WHEN THE chairman got stuck in a lift, his company suddenly acquired a
facilities manager. When it jammed again, in came a specialist contractor.
Workplace managers enjoy recounting this fable, if only for its punchline.
During the second breakdown the chairman became quite chatty with two people
in the lift whom he did not recognise. They turned out to be the facilities
manager and a maintenance contractor already taken on by the new man.
The message is that many bosses know little and care less about the
buildings in which they work. 'A recent survey threw up 100 companies where
property made up a third of their assets. Yet fewer than half used property
management systems,' says Mr Ted Watts, president of the Royal Institution
of Chartered Surveyors.
Even the more aware may dump the whole task on someone already responsible
for an operational department, often the personnel director. And if the lift
breaks down often enough to appoint a specialist, he or she will be well
down the management hierarchy, expected to keep things ticking over rather
than play a part in decision-making.
'That is asking for trouble,' says Mr John Jack, a former property director
for IBM (UK) now running Procord, his own property management company. 'It
is essential that facilities managers are brought in early enough and at a
high enough level to forecast potential problems.'
Mr Watts recalls an office building where, at the first stage of planning,
one computer was specified for every 10 desks. A year later, this had
changed to one in six and by the time the building was finished there was a
screen on every desk. 'Facilities managers have to look forward and make
allowances for such things,' he says. The rate of technological change makes
planning all the more important, and often requires the help of outside
experts.
A battalion of consultants and contractors now exists purely to take this
load off the shoulders of untrained managers and work alongside inhouse
specialists. But it took a recession to confirm this role. Companies under
pressure to cut costs are taking a new look at accommodation services.
Moving is often out of the question: with so much empty new space around,
they are unlikely to get rid of existing buildings. So it is a question of
making the best of what they have, and that often means calling in outside
help.
'Companies need to concentrate on what they are good at - their core
business. But they are entitled to expect a similar level of expertise from
contractors,' says Mr Jack. He is spreading a gospel practised at IBM, as
Procord is effectively a management buyout of the computer giant's property
management department. This includes a drastic reduction in space per
employee, recognising that many IBM staff are out of the office much of the
time.
Setting up workstations accessible from anywhere inside or outside the
building has cut space needs by 20 per cent. Consolidation also enabled
staff to be moved from high-cost central London buildings, reducing
occupancy costs by more than 30 per cent. An energy conservation plan
achieved 20 per cent savings within four years.
Energy is a clear-cut cost easily grasped by any chairman, but some figures
that contractors can achieve will startle him. Careful planning and
monitoring can reduce bills by 30 per cent, says AHS Emstar, the energy
management group formed last November when two leading UK contractors
merged. It has refurbished the 43-acre Heaton works in Newcastle where NEI
Parsons produces turbine generators, switching from oil to gas and
installing more than 5km of piping. Savings should reach almost Pounds 1.5m
over the seven-year maintenance contract, it claims. After paying back the
Pounds 650,000 capital cost - which AHS Emstar provided - Parsons will
pocket a saving of Pounds 150,000.
Cost-cutting is not the only pressure forcing consumers to seek specialist
advice. New laws spinning out of Westminster and Brussels will severely
curtail emissions, forcing reappraisal of energy systems, and facilities
managers are already having to tackle increasing red tape. Every item of
portable electrical equipment such as typewriters, kettles and screens must
be tested; all potentially hazardous substances noted; and cold water
systems must be screened for Legionella.
'Training needs to be a very high priority to keep up with all the changes,'
says Mr Mike McCloskey of Lorne Stewart, part of the BET plant services
group. 'This is costly and time-consuming. No wonder the building
owner/operator is turning to outside help.'
Health fears came to the fore following Legionella outbreaks during the
1980s which threatened companies with hefty lawsuits from those struck down
 -or their surviving families. Then the buildings themselves started to fall
sick. Staff complained of rashes, headaches and nausea.
'Two-thirds of the nation's workforce think their productivity would improve
if working conditions were raised,' says Mr John Astley of support services
group Mitie. The worst problem seems to be the quality of air in offices,
which was condemned by more than a third of workers questioned in a Gallup
poll.
Employers often brush off such claims, particularly when they have just paid
a fortune for a new building. But productivity is becoming more important as
costs rise, profits disappear and skilled staff drift away from congested
city centres. Contractors are finding their hands full creating cleaning and
engineering maintenance programmes tailored to individual buildings.
Mr Astley says that package deals more than pay for themselves. 'Mitie
estimates that multi-service building maintenance contractors can save
facilities managers up to 25 per cent compared with in-house operations.'
Considering that building management costs almost Pounds 11.5bn a year in
the UK, that is a lot of saving. Add energy management and cost reductions
can be as high as 35 per cent, he says.
This is why more companies are moving towards outside contracting.
'Facilities management is coming of age,' says Mr Jack. 'It is still a
little way off, but there are encouraging signs such as the development of
professional qualifications.' In future, contractors will play a more
integral role in management, not just cleaning and maintaining existing
space but advising whether companies should up sticks and move altogether -
then helping plan a new home.
One simple sign may indicate that the sector has attained the respectability
of the customers it serves, however. The chairman goes back to using the
lift.
