FT  17 JUL 92 / Personal View: A challenge to us all
Any assessment of plans for the future role, shape and ownership of British
Rail must start from where we are:
Today's railway is a complex, intricate, live operation involving the
movement of 16,000 trains every day, over 740m passenger journeys each year.
Half a million London commuters are carried every working day.
The 136m tonnes of freight carried annually keep thousands of lorry-loads
off overcrowded roads.
Compared with the beginning of the last decade, British Rail is now carrying
more passengers and has opened more than 100 new stations. At the same time
it operates with one-third less support in grants from government and 20 per
cent fewer staff.
My first priority is to see that today's railway continues to operate
effectively and safely - and to improve its service. Whatever other
priorities we have, our managerial eye must be kept on that ball.
To make that happen, the railway must first and foremost be safe. There must
be clear responsibilities and authority to discharge them.
The investment programme is and should be substantial. We have foreseen
expenditure annually in excess of Pounds 1bn. The refurbishment backlog is
great and it is important this momentum is maintained.
Of this year's investment programme of about Pounds 1.6bn, one-third will be
used to keep Victorian assets secure and serviceable and to maintain more
than 40,000 bridges and viaducts.
Better services are provided by electrifying lines, and by replacing old
signalling and trains with modern equipment, which is more efficient and
cheaper to maintain. Preparations for the Channel tunnel opening take up
most of the rest.
The people operating the system must be competent. The programme of
implementing a clear vocational qualification structure is vital in an
industry where demographic unevenness means that up to 70 per cent of our
drivers will retire by 2000 - in practically each case with service in
excess of 40 years.
In simple terms these are the imperatives for maintaining and developing a
railway which will tackle the problems of road congestion, pollution and
energy conservation. They are the background to the proposals in this week's
white paper on the future of British Rail.
For the railways, greater clarity about their future is good. Uncertainty is
unsettling and difficult to manage. The content is, as we have stated in the
past, a matter for the shareholder (the government) not British Rail. It is
for BR management to advise on the practicality of the proposals and to
achieve effectively their implementation.
Much has been done to divide and devolve in what was a monolithic,
technically driven organisation, and to redress the balance towards customer
need and satisfaction. The railway also has large capital requirements. The
introduction of private capital into the operation is welcome. So is the
concept of franchising, as it may unlock gains for the customers, through
entrepreneurial flair from within as well as outside the railway. The
management of change, which these developments will make necessary, is a big
task. The scale and rate of change will demand a balance between ambition
and pragmatism. The only criterion is success, and if this takes a little
longer, I would say: so be it.
For those businesses that are to be sold my advice is similar. Care must be
taken to ensure that they have competent management and a good chance of a
long-term future. If matters can be arranged in this way, then I have no
doubt a good number of our staff will look at the possibilities and come
forward as potential buyers. This, as the white paper says, will be
welcomed.
So far I have not mentioned the economics of railway operations. The
railways require up to Pounds 1bn a year of public subsidy to continue
operating a countrywide, price-constrained network - endorsed as the network
needed to meet social requirements. Privatisation will throw into relief
these facts of life; it is helpful to recognition of the reality of
transport issues that these transactions are more transparent.
The main lever in the economic operation of the railway is the charge for
access to the lines. This has the making of becoming the biggest
bureaucratic complexity since Lord Woolton set up the rationing system.
There will be anxious debate in months to come over concepts of
market-pricing versus cost-related charging and all shades in between. We
must arrive at systems that are above all practical - and lead to the most
effective use of the railway network we can engineer.
From these points of view, the white paper presents a challenge to all of us
 -to those in the private sector who have a contribution to make to a better
railway, and to all those working today to run a major national enterprise.
The challenge is to ensure there is overall national advantage. BR is
prepared to take up that challenge. The new policies require big changes,
and managing the process of change will be the key to future success.
The author is chairman of BR.
