FT  13 JAN 92 / Management: Mandela's mandarins - A course for civil
servants
The task of transforming South Africa into a multi-racial society was taken
up in London last week when 10 black South Africans began a course at the
Civil Service College (CSC).
The six-week programme, sponsored by the UK government's Overseas
Development Administration, grew out of a request last July from Nelson
Mandela, president of the African National Congress, for help in training
civil servants.
Of the participants, six have been nominated by the ANC, two by the Pan
Africanist Congress, and one each from the Azanian People's Organisation
(Azapo) and the non-political Institute for Multi-Party Democracy.
The purpose of the programme is to provide first-hand knowledge of a western
government's civil service to prospective black senior officials. Employment
within South Africa's civil service is roughly split between blacks and
whites but as Sindiso Mfenyana, an ANC member, explained: 'All the
responsible positions are manned by whites.' One supervisor described the
first day as 'a humbling experience' as the participants described their
life-histories, and set out what they expected from the course.
They are all more than 40 years old but none has civil service experience.
Josiah Jele of the ANC trained at the military academy of the former Soviet
Union, was a freedom fighter in Mozambique, and as a former director of ANC
Broadcasting, was in charge of propaganda.
The changes within South African society are mirrored by the personal
transformation of Jele from someone who 'hated authority' to being 'very
much interested in local government'.
He says of the programme that the participants will 'take those parts that
are relevant to our situation', and hopes that 'it will help us to empower
the disadvantaged in our country'.
Zithulele Cindi of Azapo is a former inmate of the notorious Robben Island
prison off Cape Town and considers trade unionists the ideal future civil
servants. 'We should adapt what is appropriate (from the CSC programme) and
design a civil-service which is development-oriented,' he says.
The course includes formal lectures and training courses, as well as
attachments in which participants will shadow senior officials and sit in on
policy commissions and departmental committee meetings.
The training courses will include financial management, accountability,
business planning, team building and interpersonal skills. In the first week
lectures included the role of the British government, parliament and civil
service.
Course supervisors insist that their intention is not 'to sell' the
Westminster political model, but to explain the framework within which the
UK civil-service operates.
The six-week course is a drop in the ocean of what is required for South
Africa, which has 748,000 employees in the civil service.
The country also has its own problems which make the task of creating a
multi-racial civil service even more daunting. Not only must antagonism
between the entrenched senior white civil-servants to new black colleagues
be restricted but the civil-services of the 10 homeland governments must
also be integrated into a unitary structure.
A spirit of compromise and negotiation is likely to be stressed in the
formal lectures, and also be in evidence in the everyday business of
government departments visited.
Indeed some observers believe the programme was designed to smooth relations
between Britain and the ANC, so ruffled by Margaret Thatcher's description
when prime minister of some ANC members as terrorists.
Whether the British Civil Service will be used as a role model for the new
South Africa has yet to be seen. But as Marianne Neville-Rolfe,
chief-executive of CSC, noted: 'South African government institutions do
have a Whitehall pedigree. A lot is transferable.'
