FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: The city that only the visitors see - The
London reserved for tourists
WE HUDDLED like sheep in the lee of the Albert Hall in west London, the wind
whipping at our legs. It was 8.45 on Saturday morning. 'Bath overnight]'
someone shouted. 'Third coach down, please]' 'Windsor and Hampton Court,
follow me]' We milled about, stamping our feet.
'West End? Tour Number One. Bus at the end.' The bus was warm and we sank
gratefully into the upholstery. Outside, a group of Japanese girls in
windblown gymslips were taking each other's photos. (Just what do they do
with all those pictures when they get home to their tiny flats in Tokyo?)
The guide was humorous and his breath smelled of drink. He ejected a group
of Spaniards ('You're Salisbury and Stonehenge, you lot'); then he counted
us.
It felt good to be counted. Now there was nothing more to worry about. All
the stresses of being in the great metropolis melted away, our brains
disengaged, and we were able to watch the scenery float by like some
half-remembered travel movie.
'All this was country, once,' the guide confided to his microphone. 'On your
left you will see Hyde Park where the kings used to hunt stags and deer.' We
thought we remembered watching, at the age of three or four, the bigger boys
sailing their toy boats on the Round Pond. But that must have been in
another life. We were seeing Hyde Park for the first time now, and we sighed
appreciatively.
It is a cliche to say that London is not one place, but many. Today, we were
discovering a London we had never encountered before, a London that only
visitors see. Its outlines were familiar but its substance was very
different.
Did you know, for example, that the city was founded in the spring of AD 43?
Or that English history ended, more or less, with Queen Elizabeth I?
A few things happened later, to be sure, like Harrods, the Duke of
Wellington and Charles and Di. There was also Downing Street where the
former prime minister, Mrs Thatcher, used to live, but no mention of the IRA
which forced her to put big steel gates across its entrance.
The statue of Abraham Lincoln in Parliament Square interested the Americans
among us. The name Jan Smuts rang no bells. Beyond Smuts was the effigy of a
large man in a bronze overcoat, staring grumpily at Big Ben: but they didn't
tell us who he was.
We were Japanese, Taiwanese, Chilean, Portuguese, Italian and American, a
tour of Babel, unencumbered by prejudice or the slightest knowledge of
England's past. However, we liked our guide a lot: he was not bossy or
greedy like the ones we had in Europe last week.
Also, you could tell he knew his stuff (he had an official badge like the
bus conductor's, and we found out later he had done two years' training). He
certainly knew enough not to weigh us down with boring detail.
He took us to Westminster Abbey, which was built on an island in the river
and is paved with the tombs of dead celebrities. 'Don't bother walking round
them,' our guide said. 'You can't help stepping on somebody.'
Oddly enough, there were no chairs or pews in the nave; we supposed they
just put those in for coronations and royal weddings. Disappointingly, the
facade was covered in scaffolding and sheeting, like many of London's famous
buildings.
The abbey was confusing, not only because of all the kings and queens buried
there but because of the one-way traffic system which kept taking us back
through the brass-rubbing cloister. But we were lucky, too, because we
arrived on one of the few days in the year when they lift the carpet from
the High Altar and show you the Cosmati mosaic underneath - 'the best
example north of the Alps,' the guide said.
Put down in 1268 for King Henry III, this pavement from Rome is studded with
porphyry, onyx, serpentine and glass, has a mystical meaning and forecasts
that the world, or primum mobile, will end after 19,683 years.
We did not have time to ponder all this. Our guide had warned us to stay
close or we would not find the coach again and would miss the Changing of
the Guard.
We were driven to St James's Palace (also covered in scaffolding) and
watched the Grenadier Guards march up to the Palace. A young policewoman,
very haughty in skintight jodhpurs, cleared the way for them.
When some of us, eager to get pictures, refused to stay on the pavement, she
gently backed the rump of her mare into them. The guide told us that this
girl stands in for Her Majesty the Queen for rehearsals of Trooping the
Colour.
The sentry outside St James's provided a wonderful photo opportunity. He was
very tall and tight-lipped and didn't seem to mind. Someone told us that
young women sometimes write their hotel telephone numbers on bits of paper
and stick them in the guardsmen's belts. Nobody did that today, so far as we
noticed.
Later, while we waited for the other detachment of guards to march out of
Buckingham Palace, we talked to the American next to us. He was pretending
not to be impressed.
'You should see Atlanta, Georgia,' he said. 'Capital of CNN Television. They
won the Gulf War]' Ah, but who did they win it for? we asked.
We hoped our friend didn't notice when the guardsmen, emerging from the
palace gates at a slow march, made a shambles of breaking into quick time.
This part of the tour was over, so we tipped the guide and repaired to a
typically English restaurant for lunch: Green's, in Duke St, St James's. On
the walls were hung some unfunny cartoons by someone called Jak. There were
no English people there.
Behind us sat a large Italian family. In the corner was a well-ironed
American businessman with a reconditioned, Ivana Trump-style wife. Beside us
sat another American, a doleful man with a very fat and spoilt son aged
about nine who made cute comments between gargantuan mouthfuls. Deprived of
real English people to eavesdrop on, we ordered native oysters, which were
very good, and fish and chips, which were a disgrace to a great nation.
Luckily, or so we thought then, we were saving our appetites for the
evening. The brochure given us by two of the smartest hotels in London
contained several suggestions: 'a rollicking evening at the court of King
Henry VIII' in the cellar of a warehouse at St Katherine's Dock; a
'spectacular cabaret in the luxury venue' of the Talk of London in Drury
Lane; and a Cockney Cabaret in Tottenham Court Road.
Fortunately, perhaps, all three were sold out that night so we plumped for
the Elizabethan Banquet at Hatfield House, 30 miles out in Hertfordshire.
And a rollicking evening it turned out to be, too.
We were a different lot on the coach that left Trafalgar Square at dusk, but
as polyglot as ever. Our driver clearly had decided we were therefore
mentally deficient, and wearied us all up the A1 with his Ladybird Book
version of Elizabethan England. But our spirits were lifted by what greeted
us on arrival: a genuine Tudor hall with vaulted roof, hung with stags'
heads and tapestries (less genuine).
Long wooden tables ran up to a red-carpeted dais in the centre, on which
stood a throne occupied by a jester in a goatee beard and red-and-white
striped tights. Opposite him sat a harpsichordist and a ruffed-and-gowned
lady who played on the recorder, shawm and crumhorn.
A prancing Earl of Leicester entered, followed by the Virgin Queen herself,
robed magnificently and punning as horribly as her Blackadder counterpart.
Wenches with big jugs (so the Queen put it) poured out mead and wine,
bouncing on our outstretched knees as they passed. Who said the English were
reserved?
By the time the juggling fire-eater had done his turn, the place resounded
with the drumming of male fists and the shrieks of their womenfolk. Then, a
small and smiling Italian named Luigi was hustled to the podium to play
Hunt-My-Lady's-Garter (more shrieks) and receive a knighthood.
A young man from our table, overcome with fumes of mead - or was it
pre-match ale? - lurched outside and tried to assault the prettier of our
wenches. Her friends overpowered him, stripped him to the waist and returned
him, daubed with lipstick but unrepentant. The climax was reached with a
general sing-song, a conga round the tables, and wenches pouring water down
each other's cleavages. So our banquet ended, at 10.45 precisely.
And the food? We nearly forgot to mention it. But who would come to London
to eat when there is so much history to gorge upon? Actually, the food was
dreadful.
