FT  01 MAY 92 / International Company News: Government Bonds: Treasuries
mark time ahead of holiday in Europe
US Treasury prices were narrowly mixed yesterday ahead of today's holiday in
many European centres and with the market continuing to react to the
previous day's confusing refunding news.
In late trading, the bell wether 30-year bond was  1/4 higher at 99 15/32 ,
yielding 8.04 per cent while the two-year note was unchanged to yield 5.43
per cent.
The Federal Reserve arranged Dollars 2.5bn in customer repurchase agreements
when Fed funds were trading at 3 7/8 per cent. The adding operation was
expected, with Fed funds trading above the perceived target of 3 3/4 per
cent.
The long end of the yield curve was bolstered by Wednesday's announcement
that Argentina would be allowed to buy non-marketable 30-year zero coupons
in the private market. The Treasury said it might also sell zero coupons
directly to Argentina.
Shorter-dated maturities, however, weakened ahead of next week's quarterly
refunding auctions.
There was little market reaction to yesterday morning's release of initial
jobless claims for the week ended April 18, which were unchanged from the
previous week. The market had expected a small increase in jobless claims
for the week.
The market reacted with equanimity to the release of the Chicago-area
purchasing managers' index for April which weighed in at 54.3 per cent on a
seasonally adjusted basis against 51.1 per cent in March.
A reading of over 50 per cent indicates that the manufacturing sector is
growing.
THE German government bond market weakened during the morning session in
generally lacklustre trade yesterday, setting the tone for markets
through-out Europe ahead of a public holiday in many countries today.
The June bund futures contract on Liffe, the London exchange, opened at
87.19, from 87.21 on Wednesday and below the important support level at
87.20. The contract quickly fell to 87.08, the low for the day.
Official data confirmed consumer prices in western Germany rose by 0.3 per
cent in the month to mid-April, for a year on year inflation rate of 4.5 per
cent. The annual inflation rate was 4.8 per cent in March.
The figures were in line with market expectations following the release of
data from German lander earlier this week.
Bund prices recovered later in the day as dealers squared positions ahead of
today. By the close, the June contract on Liffe stood at 87.21.
Volume was strong at 66,000 contracts.
Next week, interest is likely to centre on the first issue of paper by the
European Recovery Programme Fund, a body set up to fund economic
re-generation in eastern Germany.
The bonds will probably have to priced to yield slightly more than either
bunds or bonds issued by the Unity fund, another government-backed body.
Yesterday Liffe said that bonds issued by the ERP would not be deliverable
into its government bond futures contract, matching a decision by the DTB,
the Frankfurt exchange, earlier this week.
THE UK government bond market paused for breath yesterday as dealers
adjusted positions taken ahead of Wednesday's Pounds 2.5bn gilts auction.
The gilt futures contract on Liffe opened at 98.18, slipped to 98.13 in the
morning in line with the fall in the German market, but later recovered to
stand at 98.17 by late afternoon. Volume was a sluggish 20,000 contracts.
In the cash market, the benchmark 9 per cent gilt maturing 2011 was also
slightly weaker. From an opening level of 99 23/32 , the issue traded down
to 99.16 by late afternoon, for a yield of 9.05 per cent.
During April, the gilts market out-performed every other major government
bond market according to a database of 21 markets compiled by Kemper
Investment Management.
A balanced portfolio of gilts returned 4.8 per cent on the month, rising
sharply following the Conservative election victory. In contrast, a
portfolio of German government bonds returned 0.8 per cent in local currency
terms.
The Italian Treasury completed this week's funding programme with an auction
of five-year fixed-rate bonds. The authorities issued L6,000bn paper, which
was sold to the market at an average yield of 11.03 per cent, unchanged from
the previous auction in early April.
The market continued to be buoyant despite the weekend resignation of Mr
Francesco Cossiga, which has left the country without president or prime
minister. The benchmark 10-year fixed-rate bond maturing January 2002,
closed at 98.34, from 98.35 on Wednesday.
JAPANESE government bond prices continued the gentle slide which prevailed
earlier in the week, the benchmark 10-year bond moving to its lowest point
this year before recovering slightly in late trading.
The benchmark 10-year issue No 129 closed the Tokyo day on a yield of 5.71
per cent, from 5.685 on Tuesday. The markets were closed on Wednesday for a
public holiday. During the day the issue had hit a low of 5.725 per cent.
Trading volume was sluggish, with volume in the benchmark issue reaching
just Y256bn. Analysts said investors were wary of committing funds because
of the prospect of a large volume of corporate bond issues to refinance
maturing equity-linked debt. Yesterday, NEC, the electronics company, said
it would issue Y50bn of three-year bonds in the domestic market.
The next government bond auction, postponed until after the Golden Week
public holidays next week, will probably take place on May 7. Dealers are
expecting the new bonds to carry a 5.5 per cent coupon, unchanged from the
last auction. However, most said a higher 5.7 per cent coupon could be
required to attract long-term investors into the auction.
Portugal's central bank has extended a 10-month-old ban on foreigners buying
high-yielding variable interest rate government bonds until the end of 1992,
Reuters reports.
A Bank of Portugal spokesman said the ban, imposed last July, had been
extended until the end of this year. Portugal banned foreigners buying its
attractive Public Investment (FIP) variable interest rate bonds to curb
buying pressure on the escudo and dampen high local interest rates.
