FT  22 DEC 92 / Miners had right to talks, judge declares
LORD JUSTICE Glidewell said in yesterday's High Court ruling against the
proposed pit closures that it was a 'classic' case where the miners had a
legitimate expectation of consultation.
In the judgment, which took three hours to read out in court, Mr Justice
Hidden, the other judge conducting the judicial review, said he appreciated
British Coal's difficulties. But their resolution had to be within the law.
Both the decision of October 13 to close all 31 pits without consultation
and the decision, announced by Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and industry
secretary, on October 19, to close 10 pits and put the other 21 into a
review, were unlawful, the judges ruled. The second decision, which rendered
the first ineffective, was therefore quashed.
Explaining their decision, Mr Justice Glidewell said the Modified Colliery
Review Procedure, established in 1985 after the year-long miners' strike and
which includes an independent review body, remained the agreed procedure to
be used over such pit closure proposals.
British Coal had not indicated any change of attitude over the procedure
before the closure announcement of October 13. The mineworkers' unions were
therefore legitimately entitled to expect the MCRP to be used.
'The MCRP is an agreement which is not legally binding - ie is not
enforceable as a contract - but it gave the unions and their members a
legitimate expectation that the procedure would be followed unless and until
British Coal announced that it would be withdrawn and consulted with the
unions about a new machinery to put in its place,' said Mr Justice
Glidewell.
The decision to close all 31 pits without consultation was also in breach of
the Employment Protection Act 1975, he added. It might also have breached EC
directive No 75, which provides for consultation to avoid redundancies.
The two judges declared that appropriate consultation over the 10 pits due
for early closure could be provided by enhancing the statutory consultation
now being carried out by including some form of independent scrutiny.
Boyds, the US engineering consultants involved in the review of the other 21
pits, could provide that independent element, they suggested.
'British Coal shall not reach a final decision on the closure of the 10
collieries, nor shall . . . (Mr Heseltine) make available funds which would
enable British Coal to make such a decision, until a procedure substantially
the same as MCRP, including some form of independent scrutiny, has been
followed in relation to each of the 10 collieries,' they said.
Lawyers for British Coal said that it would appeal. If successful, this
would not be the first time a decision by Mr Justice Glidewell had been
overturned. He ruled that the government had acted illegally by banning
trade unions at GCHQ, only to have the decision reversed later.
