FT  24 SEP 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Nine-month zinc squeeze fades
in heavy trade
THE LONG-RUNNING squeeze that has supported zinc prices on the London Metal
Exchange and prompted some consumers to complain that the market was out of
touch with reality is fading fast.
However, traders and analysts are divided about whether the squeeze, which
has been a feature of the market since the early days of this year, is over.
In heavy trading the LME's zinc market yesterday moved back into contango,
where metal for immediate delivery is at a discount to material for delivery
in three months. Zinc for immediate delivery closed at Dollars 1,320.50 a
tonne, down Dollars 31.50, while three-month zinc was down Dollars 14 at
Dollars 1,325.50.
Early in September three-month zinc reached Dollars 1,398 a tonne, its
highest level for 22 months. 'It would take a massive investment (by those
behind the squeeze) to get the market up there again,' suggested Ms Lesley
Campbell, trader at Rudolf Wolff, the metal and commodities broker. She
pointed out that 'a return to reality' was permeating all the LME's metal
markets.
However, Mr Angus MacMillan, research manager at Billiton-Enthoven Metals,
part of the Royal Dutch/Shell group, said that, while there was some panic
selling of zinc yesterday, the squeeze might well reappear before the
year-end.
'Uncertainty and nervousness now prevail in the market - which might be to
some people's benefit. There could be more fun and games before the year is
out,' he said.
Traders suggested that a small number of zinc producers and one trader,
reported to control between them about 1m tonnes of annual refined zinc
output or about 15 to 20 per cent of the western world total, have been
using options to squeeze the market.
The LME board was forced to intervene to calm the market in June by
restricting the level of daily premiums that could be demanded, and
subsequently warned that it continued to 'closely monitor' zinc trading.
Mr Graham Deller, analyst at the Metals &amp; Minerals Research Services
consultancy group, pointed out that, even though refined zinc consumption
grew by 2 per cent to 3.2m tonnes in the first seven months of 1992 while
production was flat at 3.1m tonnes, stocks were at a five-year peak.
The market was likely to be oversupplied by 100,000 tonnes this year
following a supply surplus of 150,000 tonnes in 1991, he suggested. 'There
is no shortage of metal so the price should continue to fall until producers
cut back.'
Others remained cautious because new labour contracts have still to be
negotiated at two big Canadian smelters, Cominco's Trail (315,000 tonnes a
year) and Noranda's Valleyfield (230,000 tonnes).
