FT  27 MAR 92 / International Company News: DAF seeks capital as losses
mount
DAF, the Dutch commercial vehicle maker in which British Aerospace holds a
16 per cent stake, plunged deeper into loss last year with a net deficit of
Fl 394.5m (Dollars 212m), compared with a loss of Fl 228m a year earlier.
The company disclosed yesterday that it had begun talks with its banks and
the Dutch government with the aim of seeking a capital injection of up to Fl
300m in the next six months to strengthen its battered finances.
DAF's financial performance is the weakest of the leading European
truck-makers, largely due to its dependence on the UK truck market, which
has suffered the steepest slide into recession since the Second World War.
The heavy losses of the past two years have seriously weakened its balance
sheet. Group capital and reserves have declined to only 26.3 per cent of
total assets from 34 per cent in 1988-89, in spite of the proceeds of a Fl
250m convertible preference share issue last autumn.
Mr Cor Baan, the group's vice-chairman, said the company was 'investigating
all the options' to strengthen the balance sheet. DAF was not planning to
issue new shares, he said. However, it is understood that one option under
discussion is a subordinated bank loan possibly backed by a state guarantee.
DAF said it had reached agreement with its banking consortium led by
ABN-Amro Bank for its financing needs.
The deterioration in its financial performance last year meant that DAF had
breached covenants in its loan agreements. As a result, a number of its
banks had taken collateral security on DAF properties in the Netherlands,
Belgium and the UK.
DAF will not pay a dividend on its ordinary shares for the second year
running, and it warned that it would suffer a further loss in the first half
of 1992. However, it forecast it would be close to break-even for the whole
year.
'The result for the second half of the year is expected to largely offset
the loss for the first half of the year,' the group said. This assumed a
modest recovery in the UK truck market.
DAF blamed its heavy losses on the low level of capacity utilisation at
plants in the UK, the Netherlands and Belgium in the face of a 12 per cent
fall in truck production to only 26,373.
Truck output has fallen by 24 per cent in the past two years, while van
production declined last year by 9.4 per cent to 22,274.
The number of vehicles delivered fell by 4.8 per cent last year to 51,208.
Combined truck and van deliveries have fallen by 12.7 per cent in the last
two years.
DAF said that it was committed to 'lessening its dependence on the UK
market', but Britain still accounted for 29.5 per cent of group turnover
last year, compared with 31.1 per cent in 1990.
