FT  06 JUL 92 / Beregovoy faces up to juggernaut: Pressure is growing on
French PM to act against blockades
THE week-long national road blockade by French truckers is by far the
toughest challenge yet to Mr Pierre Beregovoy in the three months since he
became prime minister.
Yet the protests, against a new law under which drivers lose their licences
if they clock up six penalty points, are only the latest threat to public
order in recent months after the disruption of ports by a dockers' strike
and road blockages mounted by farmers in protest at European agricultural
reforms.
Opposition leaders have accused the Socialist government of losing control
of law and order. The situation is 'intolerable' and risked creating a
'breach of social cohesion', said Mr Charles Millon, parliamentary president
of the centre-right UDF and head of the regional council in Rhone-Alpes, one
of the areas worst hit.
Other opposition leaders called on the government to resume negotiations
with the truckers, which broke down on Friday night.
Mr Beregovoy yesterday took a firm stance. 'There are truck drivers who
think that blocking roads will make the government give way. The government
will not give way,' he told the Journal du Dimanche newspaper. The
government had done its best to negotiate and the new rules, which came into
effect on July 1, would be applied, he said.
All this indicates that the government and the truckers are set for a
head-on collision. Nobody in France is forecasting a clash on the scale of
1968. Yet today's chaos does have two things in common with the student
riots of that time: a surge of anarchy from the grass roots and a breakdown
of communications between the state and ordinary people.
A streak of anarchy, or at least disillusion with the political
establishment, has been developing for some time. It was seen in the large
protest vote in the March regional election.
It can also be seen in the way in which farmers' demonstrations are
organised by a recently formed splinter group, rather than by mainstream
agricultural unions. The farmers are protesting not only against the
government, but against their own establishment as well.
The truckers are the same, in that their action appears to have started as a
spontaneous outburst by disparate groups. Indeed, no union claimed formally
to represent them in the first few days of the blockage. It was only when
the government called truckers' representatives to attend negotiations on
Friday night, that a gaggle of five unions took part in what turned out to
be an indecisive meeting.
It might seem surprising that a fragmented group can mount such an effective
nationwide road block. This might be because a number of truckers are former
farmers and still have support from that sector. Fruit farmers, angered that
they were unable to deliver produce, set uo their own protest over the
weekend, blocking railway lines in the south of France and holding up 10,000
travellers. Some observers have suggested that the extreme right-wing
National Front might be lending a hand, though there is no evidence of this.
Government ineptness has also played a part. As an indication of the
inadequacy of its communications with ordinary people, today's fuss is about
a law which was voted through parliament three years ago. That it has taken
the drivers by surprise also points to the fragmented and poorly organised
nature of the truckers' unions.
Yet the fact remains that many French people are - at least for now - half
on the truckers' side. According to a poll in the Parisien newspaper last
week, 60 per cent of people approve of the protests, even if 62 per cent
also said they thought the penalty point system would improve road safety.
Yet the government jeopardised support for the plan by applying it clumsily.
The new rules came into effect just before millions of French families were
due to leave for their holidays and as France began receiving large numbers
of foreign tourists.
In other ways, today's discontent is unlike 1968. Then, France was in a
period of economic prosperity. Today the economy is growing only slowly.
This suggests that truckers, already hit by declining wages and a fall in
demand, will have few savings to support a long walkout.
Another difference is that events in 1968 were mainly a domestic problem.
France's position at the heart of western Europe, at a time when
cross-border traffic has grown fast, means the truckers today have created
an international headache.
The big question is what the government does now. Mr Beregovoy cannot afford
to let the crisis worsen. The opposition has already started to question the
government's credibility. Moreover, Mr Beregovoy has only just delayed all
contentious legislation in parliament so as to ensure a peaceful public
debate on the Maastricht treaty on European union, due for a referendum on
September 20. Clearly, that strategy has gone badly wrong.
Yet the government cannot be seen to give in. The chances are that it will
wait for public anger against the truckers to build up enough for it to be
able to use force without creating an outcry.
Despite the recent polls, the truckers are on the way to attracting real
anger in France. Four people died in road accidents over the weekend,
provoked to various degrees by the blockages, and some supermarkets say they
are short of fresh food. The pressure for action is building up.
Editorial Comment, Page 12
