FT  11 DEC 92 / Yeltsin in people power gamble: The Russian president hopes
he still has the common touch
MR Boris Yeltsin, the Russian president, looked unhappy yesterday as he
stood on an improvised podium in the Moskvich car assembly factory. Earlier,
he had thrown down the gauntlet to the country's parliament and embarked on
an openly populist campaign to win support for a referendum on who rules
Russia.
Appealing to the people is a road Mr Yeltsin, a master of the popular touch
and the first directly elected leader in Russian history, has travelled
before. But this time it is a final gamble: obtaining support for deeply
unpopular reforms, or abandoning them to a populist Congress of People's
Deputies.
His speech at an impromptu rally at the Lenin Komsomol Car Plant (AZLK), was
vintage, if somewhat subdued. Yeltsin, defiant, with a touch of humour.
'No reform . . . has ever been carried through to the end in Russia,' he
said, referring to Russian reformers Peter the Great and Peter Stolypin.
Denouncing the congress as 'full of Communist party apparatchiks' opposed to
reforms, he said that ordinary people in contrast had understood the changes
undertaken by Mr Yegor Gaidar whose rejection by parliament sparked
yesterday's declaration of war on the congress.
As he met with the people in an industrial suburb, Moscow truck drivers
lined the Kremlin with lorries and some 5,000 people attended a rally in
support of the Russian leader. But the mixed response from the hundreds of
car workers who flocked to see the president also illustrated the fragility
of the support he can expect.
Despite earning four to five times more than most Russians, industrial
workers' support for Mr Yeltsin, like that of their managers, is partly a
function of help given to individual plants by the government.
Teachers, doctors, bureaucrats and pensioners may be less generous towards
him.
The reservations attached to the supportive messages delivered by two of the
workers who spoke at the rally also echoed the message of the centrist Civic
Union with whom the government had been negotiating. 'Your aim is splendid
but change your tactics,' said Mr Sergei Novopolsky, a metal worker, who
urged the president to protect the country from the mafia and to stick to
his promise to index billions of roubles of savings.
'If life improves just a little bit, people will support you
wholeheartedly,' said Mr Anatoly Ribakov, whose attack on the street traders
who have become a daily source of irritation for Muscovites sparked the
greater applause.
Nobody dared vote against the president in a show of hands called for after
the event.
However, most of the workers interviewed in a random survey said that they
would probably opt for Mr Yeltsin if forced to choose between his reforms
and the congress. 'Since Gaidar started the reforms, let him continue them.
'We're young and we've got life ahead of us, and that gives us something to
look forward to,' said Sergei, 22.
But some workers also displayed either the confusion, or angry indifference
born of economic hardship which may outweigh traditional respect for the
country's 'khozain' (boss) in a referendum.
An older woman in the crowd who declined to be named said: 'I only rely on
myself.
'I've become so nasty with what's going on that I hope you foreigners who
are robbing the country will leave,' without substantiating her outburst.
