FT  23 MAY 92 / Not in polite circles but . . .: Dominic Lawson thinks
bankers visit the real world only occasionally
THERE ARE certain topics which I believe it is boorish to talk about in
polite company - in which category I include the readers of this column.
These include, in no particular order of preference or distaste: property
prices, the environment, and Association Football. But, on occasion, needs
must.
I was amused to read the conclusions of the experts in last Weekend FT's
residential property supplement. Lloyds Bank was quoted as forecasting a
'3.25 per cent nominal increase' in house prices over the coming year.
UBS Phillips &amp; Drew shaded its forecast down to a picky 2 per cent. The
Woolwich Building Society per contra, stuck its collective neck out, and
plumped for '4.3 per cent.'
How do all these people arrive at such incredibly precise figures? And why
is it that all these worthies year after year never forecast that prices
will actually fall in nominal terms?
They surely do not need reminding that almost exactly 12 months ago they
were all standing up to proclaim that the revival in the residential
property market had arrived.
I can only assume that they are as keen now as they were then to continue to
expand their lending in the housing market, and do not want to scare away
the punters.
I do not know any sane man who is ever sure of the current value of his own
property, let alone is willing to hazard what the price of some unknown
property will be in 12 months' time. But there seems to be a deep
psychological need to value property as though bricks and mortar were
comprised of nothing more than a pile of bank notes, and that it is simply a
matter of counting these lumped-together bank-notes to arrive at a precise
value.
A fortnight ago, a leading Sunday newspaper published its eagerly awaited
annual supplement, listing the wealth of the richest people in Britain: poor
old Lord Cadogan, owner of 100 acres of Chelsea, is now worth only Pounds
250m.
Last year, apparently, he was worth Pounds 400m. What would actually happen
if the crusty old war hero were to attempt to sell all his property, to find
out if the Sunday papers were right? He could not. The market would collapse
utterly, beyond even the forecasting ability of Lloyds Bank.
The late Texan billionaire, Lamar Hunt, used to say that, if you knew how
much you were worth, then you were not really rich.
Very droll, but in fact the remark applies to almost all of us with any
assets worth the name. I, for example, am probably richer than the Reichmann
brothers, but I do not know that I am. Late last year Fortune magazine said
that the Reichmanns were the fourth richest people in the world, worth
Pounds 7.8bn. Then I thought the Reichmanns were richer than I, and they
would probably have agreed, in their modest way. Now I read that their
assets are worth CDollars 15bn, and that their net debts are also CDollars
15bn.
By my reckoning, that gives me a greater net worth than the Reichmanns.
Perhaps, for they are, as I say, modest men, they might agree with that,
too.
I am also richer than Donald Trump, far richer. But Trump would probably not
agree. He, like his unfortunate bankers, seems to believe in what my Oxford
philosophy tutor would describe as the phenomenological concept of richness.
This states that there is no such thing as rich, but only perceptions of
richness. So to be 'rich' is merely to be believed by people to be rich. In
spite of their great tumble, the Reichmann brothers are perceived as being
richer than Dominic Lawson, so, therefore, they are richer. This means that
they still have far more chance of squeezing Dollars 100m out of a friendly
banker than I do, and, although by that act they would become Dollars 100m
poorer (still more debts), the world would think of them as Dollars 100m
richer.
Perhaps this is what lies behind the meretricious property price forecasts
of the banks and building societies. They have lent so much money on the
security of property that they must tell themselves over and over again
that, in spite of all the evidence of their eyes, their collateral is
appreciating. Mankind - even bankers - can stand only so much reality.
Dominic Lawson is editor of The Spectator.
