FT  19 JUN 92 / The Big Lie - Inside the Maxwell Empire: Nowhere to run - A
few days before his death Maxwell faced threats from US banks to sell assets
and repay loans. He was also 'knocked sideways' by allegations that he was a
Mossad agent. These were just some of the pressures that lead inescapably to
the conclusion that he killed himself
THE 10-YEAR-OLD Canadair Challenger 600 aircraft signalled its call sign
HB-VGA, and the control tower gave it permission to land in Israel.
A chilly wind was blowing off the Judean hills as the aircraft carrying
Robert Maxwell's body touched down at the near-deserted Atarot airstrip
north of Jerusalem at 9.50am on the morning of Friday November 8 1991.
Strands of barbed wire divided the runway from the nearby Palestinian camp.
A young, dark-skinned soldier with a sniper rifle patrolled the low, white
terminal.
It had been essential to get the body to Jerusalem before the start of the
Jewish Sabbath on Friday evening. The aircraft had been chartered for Pounds
40,500 the day before by Maxwell's son Ian. With eight of its 19 seats
stripped out it was big enough to handle the coffin in a 'decent and
dignified way', unlike Maxwell's own Gulfstream jet.
Dani Kosovitski, the airport manager, telephoned by Maxwell's Tel Aviv
lawyer Yaacov Ne'eman, had given security clearance for the aircraft to land
quickly. The airport staff knew Maxwell well from his frequent visits.
Maxwell's French wife Betty, his eldest son Philip, and his youngest child
Ghislaine stepped on to the tarmac. They were embraced warmly and
emotionally by Ne'eman and Aliza Eshed, the woman who had organised
Maxwell's diary in Israel for three years.
The small group waited for the heavy coffin to be taken from the hold. It
was carried to a van by 10 black-coated, black-hatted rabbis, arranged by
the Hevra Kadisha, the burial society. The body was taken to Tel Aviv for a
second autopsy. Two days later it would be carried back to Jerusalem for
burial on the Mount of Olives.
The autopsy failed to prove conclusively how Maxwell died. However, the last
two weeks of his life point to the conclusion that he took his own life.
On Sunday October 27, nine days before his death, Robert Maxwell flew to
London in his Gulfstream after a week at the New York Daily News - the
loss-making newspaper which he had set his heart on resurrecting, as he had
done with the Daily Mirror seven years earlier.
Unknown to Mirror Group Newspapers (MGN), as Maxwell flew to New York, he
had taken out a loan of Pounds 50m from Bankers Trust in the name of the
London newspaper. On Monday October 21, he had redirected MGN's money to the
struggling New York newspaper. Maxwell once told his London editors that he
wanted to be remembered as the man who saved the Mirror. But the Pounds 50m
loan stripped that newspaper of some of its hard-won financial health.
Maxwell's ability to create and transform businesses had turned to
destructiveness.
Saturday October 26, 10 days before his death, was, according to Carolyn
Hinsley, Maxwell's assistant in New York, 'the worst day of my life working
for him'. Maxwell had been drinking heavily - vintage champagne during the
day and Chivas Regal in the evening.
Maxwell was enraged about allegations in a book that he was an agent for
Mossad, the Israeli intelligence services. He spent the day in furious
transatlantic calls, instructing staff on how to 'limit the damage'.
His London aides say the allegations 'knocked him sideways' - whereas he had
shrugged off the regular sceptical attacks on the solvency of his empire.
The discussion of his alleged intelligence links in the House of Commons,
safe from legal action under parliamentary privilege, seemed to him an echo
of the judgment of the Department of Trade and Industry 20 years before that
he was 'unfit to run a public company'. It reminded him of how he felt
cold-shouldered by the British establishment.
The last loan ever made to Maxwell's companies was announced by Lloyds Bank
and Barclays Bank on Monday October 28, a week before Maxwell's death. An
extension of a long-standing loan, the Pounds 80m advanced to Maxwell's
private companies, was backed by a charge against Maxwell House, the
empire's headquarters at Holborn Circus in London - one of the last assets
to remain unmortgaged.
The next morning, Tuesday October 29, a single sheet of paper arrived at
Maxwell House from the US bank Shearson Lehman which showed that the Lloyds
money would not be enough. Lehman declared that because of failure to repay
its loans it was going to seize the collateral: shares in the language
company Berlitz, a subsidiary of Maxwell Communication Corporation (MCC),
Maxwell's largest public company. If the bank carried out its threat it
would block the imminent sale of Berlitz, needed to pay down MCC's debt.
On Wednesday morning, October 30, another fire broke out. Goldman Sachs, the
blue chip US investment bank, delivered a formal warning that unless it was
paid more than Pounds 10m owed for foreign currency by Friday it would sell
the collateral it had been given: a block of shares in MCC. If Goldman Sachs
 -the biggest buyers of MCC shares in the company's history - turned
sellers, the stock market would read it as an irreversible signal to sell,
and to keep on selling. That could trigger the meltdown that Maxwell House
had always feared: bank loans throughout the empire were backed by the value
of MCC shares, and if the price fell, the empire would crash.
The same day Kevin Maxwell wrote to Swiss Bank Corporation to say that
Maxwell House would repay their Pounds 55m loan early on Tuesday November 5
instead of giving it some collateral.
John Featley, Maxwell's chauffeur, who spent the week driving Maxwell and
Kevin to bank offices, says: 'It seemed his (Robert Maxwell's) attitude had
changed. From walking past you as if you didn't exist, he actually stopped
and talked to you.'
'By that time the rows had stopped,' says Basil Brookes, MCC finance
director, remembering Maxwell's detachment. 'Maybe it was because we didn't
speak any more by then - at least we didn't speak about business.'
Brookes had braced himself for an explosion that afternoon: he was going to
tell Maxwell that finally he was leaving. Instead he found Maxwell
sentimental and unable to grasp the problem in front of him.
Although he had told the Maxwells three months earlier that he wanted to
quit, he had stayed because his lawyers told him he had a duty to resolve
the MCC boardroom row over Maxwell's siphoning off of money from MCC to his
own private companies. That Wednesday afternoon Brookes finally felt
entitled to go. He and Peter Laister, a non-executive director, had agreed
with Kevin a formal list of procedures for deals between MCC and the private
Maxwell companies. Brookes and Laister thought it marked a huge step
forward. Brookes, deeply relieved, went to tell Robert Maxwell that he was
going.
Brookes insisted that the press release announcing his resignation must go
out by Monday November 4. He had warned Maxwell repeatedly that he would not
put his name to another set of MCC's financial results - and MCC's half-year
figures were due in three weeks.
He knew the figures would show a collapse in profits. The shares,
undoubtedly, would slump.
Maxwell summoned Neil Taberner from the auditors Coopers &amp; Lybrand Deloitte.
He telephoned Laister in his car. Laister was racing home, ready to leave
for a week's holiday - but he turned back for the office.
Taberner was told that Brookes was leaving and that MCC had no replacement.
Maxwell made several suggestions for replacements - but Brookes and Laister
told him they were ridiculous; the City would just laugh, and mark the
shares down. Laister said the company desperately needed a deputy chairman,
and was taken aback when Maxwell offered him the job. Brookes says that at
the end of the meeting Maxwell took him aside: 'He was suddenly very nice.
He said: 'You know it's disastrous for me that you're going.''
Just before 8pm that night, Maxwell saw Bob Cole - his spokesman in London
who had worked for him for 31 years. Cole says: 'He put his arms on my
shoulders and kissed me. He had only done that twice before. My father, who
was also Jewish, used to hug me like that.
'But the problem with Maxwell was that he couldn't give a compliment without
taking it away too. So he said: 'The thing about you, Bob, in all the years
you've been working for me is that you always thought your job was to aid
the press. You didn't realise that working for me your job was to hinder the
press.'' They both laughed, but the criticism left a sour taste in Cole's
mouth.
Maxwell walked up the flight of stairs from his office to the penthouse to
catch a few hours sleep. His four-seater Aerospatiale helicopter - with the
insignia of the MGN lion growling on the side - took off from the roof early
the next morning. It took him to Luton airport where his Gulfstream was
waiting to take him to Gibraltar where his yacht, the Lady Ghislaine, was
waiting.
The next morning, Thursday October 31, Charlotte Thornton, Maxwell's
secretary, told all callers: 'RM will be away about a week. No faxes, no
phones. He's tired and he's not been feeling so good.'
Maxwell left behind a empire which was within weeks of collapse, and queues
of executives waiting to present their petitions for money.
Ernie Burrington, MGN managing director, and Lawrence Guest, its finance
director, had decided that they would have a showdown with Maxwell that
morning. They had worried for two months about Pounds 47m diverted from the
MGN bank account to Maxwell's private companies - and were unaware of the
Pounds 50m diverted to New York.
Burrington says: 'Lawrence was prepared to take on Maxwell and this time I
was going to ask the other directors to do it as well.' The two agreed they
would 'hit Maxwell when he came back from his trip'.
That day Bacon &amp; Woodrow, the firm of actuaries, signed a formal report on
the value of the Maxwell companies' pension funds. They pointed out,
however, that it was provisional. 'We have not yet received an audited
statement of the assets at the valuation date from the auditors Coopers &amp;
Lybrand Deloitte,' they said. The next audit was not due until December 31 -
so neither the actuaries nor auditors knew that more than Pounds 400m of the
pension assets had been siphoned off.
That Thursday was the day of the Goldman Sachs ultimatum. The firm - famous
on Wall Street for its aggression - had begun to carry out its threat to
sell MCC shares.
Late that afternoon Citibank, the US bank, announced to the London Stock
Exchange that it had 'acquired an interest' in 5 per cent of MCC. Kevin told
Cole to give no official comment, as press calls about the announcement were
'after business hours'. Only those in Maxwell House knew that another bank
had begun to repossess the security for its loans.
Early that evening the Financial Times called Kevin Maxwell's office to say
that it had completed a month-long investigation into the Maxwell empire and
was about to publish a report that said hidden debt in the private companies
was much higher than the outside world realised.
The next afternoon, Friday November 1, Kevin Maxwell called the FT and said:
'I'm happy to talk, but the points you've raised will take some time to go
through. Let's meet on Monday at 6pm.'
By the end of that day, Swiss Bank had been told by Kevin Maxwell's office
that the Pounds 55m loan could not after all be repaid by Tuesday. The bank
told Maxwell House this was unacceptable: if the money was not in the office
by Tuesday they were going to their lawyers.
On Saturday November 2, 1,800 miles away, the Lady Ghislaine reached
Madeira. During the passage from Gibraltar Maxwell had told the ship's
captain, Gus Rankin, to contact the Gulfstream in Madeira and order it to go
back to Luton to pick up Kevin and Ian for a meeting. He cancelled the order
10 minutes later.
Arriving in Funchal, the capital, Maxwell found himself besieged by
journalists. Furious, he cut short a tour of the city and asked Rankin to
take him to the remote island of Desertas so he could swim. But he swam for
only three minutes because he said the water was far too cold and told
Rankin to take him back to Funchal.
Rankin, used to the impulses of his employer, was nonetheless puzzled at the
sudden changes.
That Saturday evening Brookes was at home in Hertfordshire at a bonfire
party with his family. He says: 'In the middle the phone rang - it was the
old man from the boat. I'd had quite a lot to drink. He said he'd be back on
Monday and: 'We'll deal with the press release about your resignation then.'
He was unbelievably charming and nice. I was in the kitchen with my wife -
the others were outside and couldn't hear - and I said to her: 'I guarantee
you he won't be back on Monday.' I called Ron Woods (another MCC director)
on Sunday and I told him the same thing - I guarantee you he won't be back.'
After calling Brookes Maxwell asked Rankin to sign out Dollars 3,000 from
the ship's funds so that he could go to the local casino. Rankin never saw
the money again.
The next morning, Sunday November 3, Maxwell asked the bemused Rankin to
drop him off at an airport in the Atlantic between Madeira and Bermuda.
Rankin told him there was nothing but open sea between the islands. Maxwell
picked the Canaries instead and asked for the Gulfstream to meet him there.
In the middle of the greatest financial crisis of his life Maxwell was
directing his yacht on an aimless cruise.
Maxwell did not seem to his crew like a man under pressure. He seemed
instead to be a man who had decided to drift. 'It was as if he'd decided to
just let everybody else get on with it,' says Rankin.
On Sunday night at 10.30pm he spoke to his son Ian and said he Maxwell did
not seem to his crew like a man under pressure. He seemed instead to be a
man who had decided to drift was not sure he would make it back by Monday
evening because he was feeling unwell.
In the Canaries that morning, Monday November 4, the Lady Ghislaine sailed
to a small bay called Polis de Abono. Maxwell asked to be taken for a ride
in a speed boat, but was brought back as the sea was rough, and asked to be
taken to Santa Cruz on Tenerife.
In telephone calls that day he was unusually considerate, apologising for
disturbing Burrington during his lunch. Burrington says: 'I thought,
blimey.' He says Maxwell said: 'I'm coming back tomorrow night, and I'll see
you Thursday morning.'
Over the phone Maxwell to his Paris lawyer Sam Pisar and his son Ian,
Maxwell drafted the speech Ian was due to give at an Anglo-Israeli dinner
that night. He gave out a 'great belly laugh' at a joke about Yasser Arafat
jumping out of a aircraft, mistaking a Jewish prayer shawl for a parachute.
Maxwell showed no recognition of the financial crisis.
That morning, back in London, Brookes signed his formal resignation. He
spoke to Maxwell three times to agree the wording of the press release.
Brookes says: 'We agreed it would go out Monday night or Tuesday morning.
But somehow it didn't'
At 4pm Goldman Sachs's formal notification to MCC that it had sold part of
its shareholding on Thursday arrived at Maxwell House. Cole asked Kevin's
office for permission to release the statement but Cole says he was told:
'No - tomorrow.'
A copy of the log of phone calls from the boat shows that Maxwell spoke to
Kevin several times. Cole says: 'It would be nearly unbelievable for Kevin
not to have told his father on the boat that the Goldmans' notice had come
through.'
At 5pm Kevin Maxwell's secretary called the FT to postpone the meeting at
6pm until the next morning.
That evening Maxwell - appearing to forget which country he was in - asked
Rankin to lend him some Portuguese escudoes to go ashore. He asked a taxi to
take him to 'the best restaurant in town'.
They drove to the Hotel Mencey, a restored colonial palace with marble
floors. The head waiter, Sergio Rodriguez, led Maxwell to table number one
where he sat on a green velvet chair with a view of the tropical gardens,
and in front of him, a statue of a Roman emperor.
Rodriguez recalls: 'He came in dressed in a summer jacket and open shirt. It
was only the next day that I realised who he was from the photographs in the
newspapers. But that night I mistook him for a cook from the Blue Star line
I had met once.' Maxwell ordered three beers, two of which he drank quickly.
He ordered spinach and asparagus mousse, cod in mushroom and parsely sauce
and a pear. Rodriguez says that throughout the meal he was sweating
slightly, but adds: 'He didn't strike me as particularly ill or agitated.'
Only later did he seem distracted, leaving his jacket at the table as he
left at 9.45pm. He had a coffee and brandy at the Cafeteria Olympus and was
taken back to the boat.
During his meal the Gulfstream had arrived at Tenerife's southern airport.
Maxwell took Rankin's suggestion that they should sail around the island to
Los Cristianos to approach the aircraft - sparing him a drive along the
winding coastal road. But Maxwell told Rankin not to take the direct route,
and instead to cruise through the night to Gran Canaria and back. He said he
would sleep better if the boat was at sea.
Maxwell said he planned to fly to London the next day, Tuesday November 5,
and that the crew would then be free to sail to New York as originally
planned.
Later that evening, around 11pm Spanish time, Rabbi Vogel, a representative
of the orthodox Jewish Lubavitch sect, called Maxwell from New York about
his project to prise religious books from Russian archives. Maxwell said he
would try to get some response from Gorbachev. That was the last phone
conversation he held.
The next day, at 9.30am, Kevin Maxwell met the FT. He agreed with the FT's
estimated Pounds 3.3bn debt for the Maxwell empire that year, but said all
was well with the private companies. He seemed cool and relaxed.
At 11am Cole released to the Stock Exchange the bald statement that Goldman
Sachs had turned seller of MCC shares. The shares began to slide. Ten per
cent of MCC's value was wiped off by by 2.58pm when all dealings in MCC and
MGN shares were frozen. Ten minutes later a second announcement told the
world that Robert Maxwell was missing at sea, feared lost.
Did Robert Maxwell kill himself? By the day he died his empire had run out
of every drop of money and would have collapsed within weeks, exposing the
raided pension funds.
To Maxwell that would, surely, have been more than just shame or
humiliation. He identified completely with his creations, the power they
gave him, the Gulfstream, the yacht. The helicopter, with the huge shaggy
lion's head on the side, disturbing the peace as it clattered on to the roof
of Maxwell House - that was Robert Maxwell. The collapse of his empire would
have been equivalent to his annihilation.
Would Robert Maxwell, who had pursued publicity for every smallest event,
choose to die alone, without telling anyone or leaving any sign? He gave no
sign to Kevin, judging by Kevin's composure that morning.
But part of the obsessive emotions that drove his constant activity was
enormous anger. He had a violent past: his family had been killed in the
Second World War, and his part of Czechoslovakia annexed by the Soviet
Union. In the last three years of his life he turned his destructiveness
against his businesses - which he neglected, abused, and in the end
destroyed.
The signs suggest that in the end Robert Maxwell destroyed himself. On the
deck of his boat, circling islands in the Atlantic in the hours before it
became light, he was alone with those emotions and had nowhere to run.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
       THE FINAL HOURS: RETRACING MAXWELL'S LAST STEPS ABOARD THE
                             LADY GHISLAINE
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1.  10.15pm on November 4, Maxwell asks stewardess to lock sliding
    doors to his stateroom.  She does this from the inside, leaves the
    key with him and goes out through the bathroom door.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
2.  He is telephoned by son Ian at 11.15pm and Rabbi Feivish Vogei at
    11.20pm.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
3.  4.10am on November 5, a crew member sees Maxwell looking over the
    stern rail.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
4.  4.45am, Maxwell telephones from his stateroom and asks for air
    conditioning to be turned off.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
5.  6.00am, approximate time of death given by Spanish pathologists'
    report.  Police believe this is the point from which he went into
    the sea.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
6.  This is where he probably went over the side instead.  The position
    given by the police (between pillar and tender) would have been a
    tight squeeze for a man of his size (6ft 2in and 21 stone).  His
    weight would probably have pulled out the tender retaining wire
    which blocked his way: this was still in place and undamaged.  He
    could not have gone through to the back of the boat because on the
    night that route was blocked by a motorcycle
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
7.  In the morning the bathroom door is locked from the inside.  The
    sliding doors to the stateroom are locked from the outside and the
    glass doors to the stern are closed.  Maxwell was no in the habit
    of locking the doors and the key has not been found.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
    WHERE WAS THE CREW? Captain Rankin and two members were in the
    soundproof wheelhouse.  One member was in the engine room.  The
    seven remaining members were in the crew's quarters.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
The FT's team of journalists has interviewed more than 150 people in 13
countries. The team led by Bronwen Maddox included: In London Jimmy Burns,
Raymond Snoddy, Robert Peston, Andrew Jack, Norma Cohen, Richard Gourlay,
Daniel Green. In Jerusalem: Hugh Carnegy. In Liechtenstein: Ian Rodger. In
Moscow: Leyla Boulton. In New York: Alan Freidman
