FT  01 JUL 92 / Management: Food for thought on the vexed question of sugar
 -Dr Michael McGannon says an inadequate diet can hamper your ability to
take decisions
The human brain is acutely sensitive to all substances that pass through it.
The quality of the food you eat will be reflected in the working of your
brain. If it is to function well, the brain needs a regular supply of
nutrients and vitamins. A diet which is inadequate can hamper your ability
to make critical decisions and colour your judgment about people around you.
After eating some foods you feel energetic and lucid, and life seems good.
On other days, you seem to be dragging your body and mind around with you.
Is it the menopause? Or have the electromagnetic fields gone awry? The
chances are you have eaten inferior food and your brain is letting you know.
There are biochemical explanations for this 'food-to-mood' phenomenon:
indeed scientific findings increasingly support a link between full blown
psychiatric disorders and inadequate food.
However most people do not know how to feed their brain. When asked to name
the most common brain stimulants, managers tend to point to caffeine or
nicotine (younger, racier ones may mention cocaine). However by far the most
widely used stimulant is, of course, sugar.
Sugar or glucose is the body's energy currency. The brain has a voracious
appetite for sugar, and even though the organ accounts for only 3-4 per cent
of the body's weight, it can consume up to 30 per cent of its body sugar.
Unlike other organs, the brain cannot convert other foods, such as fats and
proteins, to glucose when supplies run low. To keep the brain happy, the
body orchestrates all its efforts to deliver the proper level of glucose to
the brain. The entire body is geared to the survival of the brain.
The brain can get its energy supply from simple sugars (choose fruits and
honey over refined table sugar) and from complex sugars (starchy foods like
rice, potatoes, pasta and grains). It can also get energy from glycogen,
stored in the liver.
In the healthy body, a certain level of blood glucose will stimulate the
secretion of insulin by the pancreas. Insulin makes possible the shuttling
of glucose into the body's cells including those of the brain, for
generating energy.
The problem comes when you eat too much refined sugar, stripped of its
essential nutrients and vitamins. Large quantities eventually overwhelm the
body's ability to react smoothly by producing insulin. Instead the pancreas
overreacts by secreting excess insulin, violently driving the glucose level
below that consistent with proper functioning of the brain, causing a
condition known as hypoglycaemia.
Once the brain senses that its primary fuel is running low, it panics and
sends out shock waves to all systems.
These distress signals are immediately reflected in anxiety, depression,
poor concentration and loss of memory. Then the heart rate quickens,
sweating begins, you become tired and suffer headaches. If the hypoglycaemia
is severe enough it can lead to loss of consciousness.
The only natural response is to get more refined sugar into the system
quickly. This will instantly make you feel better, but by the time you get
home, you will be exhausted and anxious. A well-balance meal and a few hours
sleep will not be enough to get you right again.
A longer-term strategy is needed. You should:
Develop a healthy fear of refined table sugar and sweets. Stay away from
soft drinks, coffee, canned vegetables, salad dressings and breakfast
cereals.
Eat yoghurt, fresh fruit and unsalted nuts to provide your high-energy fuel.
Take part in decisions about what is served in your office cafeteria or
dining room. Pay attention to the sugar bombs that are served at meetings
and conferences.
Opt for fruit juices instead of sweetened caffeinated drinks or colas.
Convert your coffee break into an 'energy break'.
At a time when businesses are spending millions to improve performance, a
little maintenance of the company's most valued resource, the decision
maker's brain, would seem a wise investment.
The author is the medical director of the Insead Business Health course.
