FT  21 MAY 92 / Leading Article: Forward from Maastricht
MR JOHN Major claimed yesterday, in opening the House of Commons debate on
the Treaty of Maastricht, that the treaty 'marks for the Community an
important and vital change of direction', in that it had 'for the first time
begun to reverse the centralising trend', and to move decision-making power
back towards the member states.
He was elegant enough not to dot the i, but this was in fact a neat and
telling response to the criticisms of his predecessor, who signed the Single
European Act in 1987. 'You allowed the centralising Euro-steamroller to
continue on its way,' he was saying to her in substance, 'whereas I have not
merely stopped in its tracks but obliged it to change direction'.
Thus he made much of the fact that the provisions of the treaty relating to
foreign and security policy, justice and home affairs do not figure in the
bill now before the House, because they are not modifications of the Treaty
of Rome, do not affect the law or institutions of the EC as such, and
therefore do not impinge directly on the law of the United Kingdom. Instead
they are separate 'pillars' of the European Union, in the form of
international agreements among the member states to co-operate in certain
specific matters. Disputes arising from them, Mr Major said, could if
necessary be brought before the International Court of Justice (which can
only arbitrate in disputes between states), but not before the European
Court (whose judgments, which may involve private firms or individuals, take
precedence over those of domestic courts).
Subsidiarity enshrined
Mr Major also stressed the treaty's enshrinement of the principle of
subsidiarity in EC law, in what he believes are legally binding terms -
although these terms are in fact much too abstract for anyone to predict
with confidence how the court will interpret them when they are put to the
test. His basic message was clear: the dragon of centralising federalism has
been slain, and the way is now clear for Britain, during its presidency in
the second half of this year, to take the lead in a chastened and more
pragmatic Community, which will at last give due priority to the interests
of a wider Europe, opening negotiations with the EFTA countries and
preparing the way for the admission of those further east.
Yet Mr Major's own speech contained some clues which show that things will
not in practice be that simple. He drew the House's attention to the fact
that there could be no increase in the EC's resources without British
agreement, and he served notice that he had 'no intention of agreeing' to
any reduction in the rebate on Britain's contribution.
Cohesion fund
The fact is that the Community's southern members regard an increase in
resources as a priority. Only this week a Spanish minister served notice
that Spain will block the process of admitting new members unless it gets
agreement on the early introduction of the 'cohesion fund' agreed at
Maastricht to help the poorer member states prepare for economic and
monetary union. This entails an increase in resources, as proposed by Mr
Jacques Delors in February.
The full Delors package may not go through, but any increase will sharpen
the determination of other member states who are net contributors, notably
Germany, to insist on a reduction, if not outright abolition, of Britain's
rebate. Argument on these homely questions, not to mention predictable
hand-wringing and recrimination over the corpse of Yugoslavia, will take the
edge off any grand British design to give the Community a new lead.
It is true that in many other member states the ratification process has
produced a lively debate, which outside Britain had been notable for its
absence in the period before Maastricht; and it is true that in the process
some of Britain's anxieties about the erosion of national sovereignty have
found an echo elsewhere in the EC. But the next stage of the institutional
argument will not, as Mr Major seems to think, be about the transfer of
powers to or from Brussels. It will be about the best method of taking
decisions on matters already admitted to be of common concern, in the
context of an expanding EC membership; and the more members there are, the
harder it will be to leave any important issue at the mercy of a veto by any
one of them.
