FT  24 JUL 92 / Czechs and Slovaks take legal road to break-up of federation
CZECH and Slovak leaders will begin drafting a law on the break-up of
Czechoslovakia, after agreeing the formal abolition of the 74-year-old state
early yesterday.
Meeting for the fifth time since June's elections, Mr Vaclav Klaus, the
Czech prime minister, and Mr Vladimir Meciar, his Slovak counterpart, agreed
to propose to the federal parliament by September 30 'a law on the
federation's abolition and on settling the property and other related
issues.'
The draft law will offer several alternatives for deciding the country's
break-up. These would include an agreement between the two republics'
parliaments, a declaration by the federal assembly or a referendum.
It will offer more flexibility than the current federal constitution, which
allows a divorce between the two republics to be decided only by a
referendum.
Yesterday's agreement emphasised the intention of both sides to ensure a
constitutional and orderly break-up of the country. But unilateral steps,
such as the adoption of a Slovak constitution planned for late August, could
bring a de facto end to the federation sooner than expected.
Czech and Slovak leaders will remain faced with the difficult task of
dividing the assets and liabilities of the federation. Speaking to bankers
in London this week, Mr Vladimir Dlouhy, the Czech Industry Minister, said
the Czech republic would be ready to assume the federation's entire Dollars
9.3bn foreign debt.
According to Mr Klaus, yesterday's negotiations also focused on the
possibility of creating a customs union between the two republics based on
free flow of capital, labour and goods. But no agreement was reached on the
controversial issue of whether a common currency should be maintained.
'We were not able to come to any final solution .. It will be subject to
further study and discussion,' Mr Klaus said.
According to an earlier post-electoral agreement, the two republics will
have separate budgets from next January.
Slovakia hopes to pass a full constitution in August. The Czech republic
will follow suit and prepare its own, Mr Klaus said on Wednesday.
