FT  16 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Waterford Foods to acquire Express Ireland
in IPounds 100m deal
WATERFORD FOODS, the Irish dairy and foods group, has agreed in principle to
buy Express Ireland, a dairy offshoot of Grand Metropolitan, the UK drinks,
food and retailing group.
Excluded from the deal is Express Ireland's 80 per cent interest in Carbery
Milk Products, which is to be sold to Carbery Creameries, the minority
shareholder which is owned by four Irish dairy co-operatives.
The deal is estimated to be worth IPounds 100m (Pounds 93.6m) to GrandMet
and ends weeks of speculation over the future ownership of Express Ireland:
GrandMet last November revealed plans to reduce its dairy interests in the
UK and Ireland to concentrate on more strongly branded segments of the food
industry.
Last December GrandMet sold its Express Dairy liquid milk business in the UK
and its Eden Vale chilled products business to Northern Foods for Pounds
359m.
Since then, as many as 10 contenders have been negotiating the takeover of
Express Ireland in a battle between Irish food groups for scale and market
share.
Express Ireland comprises: Carbery milk products, the Republic's biggest
cheesemaker; Virginia Milk Products, which supplies cream to Bailey's, the
GrandMet subsidiary which makes cream liqueur; Premier Dairies, the main
liquid milk supplier to the Dublin market; and an Italian-style cheese
production plant in Northern Ireland.
Waterford's main interests are in: Premier, in which it already has a 50 per
cent stake; Virginia, which purchases about half of Premier's milk supplies;
and the Northern Ireland plant at Magheraglin, although this last may
subsequently be sold off.
As part of the deal, Virginia will continue to supply cream for the
production of Bailey's Original Irish Cream.
The deal comes at a difficult time for Waterford, which last October bought
United Co-operative Dairies in the north of England for Pounds 37.5m.
This followed the 1989 acquisition of Healds Foods, also based in the north
of England. The two deals left Waterford with a considerable debt burden of
some IPounds 45m. The Express Ireland acquisition is expected to be financed
by a rights issue of about IPounds 30m together with long-term debt, and is
likely to cost Waterford between IPounds 50m and IPounds 60m after
subtracting what Carbery will fetch, and cash reserves within Express
Ireland.
Stockbrokers in Ireland have been recommending Irish food industry stocks in
recent months, and analysts say that a Waterford rights issue would be
well-timed now, despite the company's debt.
