FT  07 MAY 92 / Survey of Switzerland (4): Worrying outflow of funds - Moves
to stem the decline of a financial centre
IF INTEGRATION with Europe is the biggest concern of the Swiss these days,
the second biggest may well be the future of their country as an
international financial centre.
Hardly a week goes by without someone worrying about or proposing measures
to secure the future of what is known in all the official Swiss languages as
Finanzplatz Schweiz.
The name itself reveals part of the problem. One does not discuss the future
of Finanzplatz Zurich or Finanzplatz Basel, or even La Place Financiere de
Geneve. The country's financial industry is typically Swiss; it is
decentralised inconveniently among three centres (not to mention Lugano) and
to propose any large-scale concentration is out of the question.
Although precise statistics are hard to come by, there is no doubt that
Switzerland has declined as a financial centre in the past decade.
The country's big corporations have gone global for their banking and
capital market needs, and the big Swiss banks have followed them. This year,
some even held their financial results press conferences in London rather
than Switzerland. While the Japanese provided a blizzard of equity-linked
Swiss franc bond issues in the late 1980s, these have petered out as Tokyo's
stock market has plunged.
Many of the 42 Japanese banks and brokerage houses in Switzerland have been
shedding staff in recent months, and observers expect more than a few to
close their doors within the next year or so.
Meanwhile, the heart of the equity market has decamped to more liquid
London, where prices for most leading Swiss shares are now set. Mr Robert
Studer, president of Union Bank of Switzerland, says that about 15 per cent
of dealing in the top 18 Swiss blue chips now takes place in London.
Dealers point out that the figure would be larger but for the reluctance of
the big banks - which dominate equity trading  - overtly to irritate the
Swiss authorities by executing more deals in London.
Ironically, Zurich is about to open a new spacious stock exchange building,
planned more than a decade ago in anticipation of expansion that has gone
elsewhere.
Zurich's foreign exchange market is also fading, as trading is increasingly
concentrated in three big global centres: London, Tokyo and New York. And
the big three banks have tended to build up their trendy derivatives
businesses outside Switzerland as well.
The only sector in which the Swiss financial centre appears to be holding
its own is in asset management, mainly in connection with private banking.
According to Mr Jean Pierre Cuoni, president of Coutts &amp; Co in Zurich,
Switzerland still attracts about half of the world's cross-border private
banking business - worth perhaps Dollars 1,500bn.
The country also has outsize institutional pools of money because of its
large insurance companies and legislation requiring every Swiss company to
have a pension fund for its employees.
Indeed, private banking is an area where even foreign banks, including
Coutts, think they have a future in Switzerland.
If that roughly is the state of play, perhaps the first question to ask is
whether it is the result of a shift away of financial activity, especially
to London, or whether things can be done to improve or restore some lost or
weakened elements of Finanzplatz Schweiz.
The consensus appears to be that some of the outflow, notably of mutual
funds to Luxembourg, could have been stopped if the Swiss government had
been more sensitive to the negative impact of some of its regulations and
taxes in this area.
Similarly, if the country's stock exchanges had combined forces sooner, they
might have created a sufficiently liquid market in Switzerland so that
London would not have snapped up so much of the dealing business. Even
today, there are still three stock exchanges in Switzerland.
However, in a book* published this week, Mr Hans-Dieter Vontobel, president
of Bank J. Vontobel, a leading Zurich private bank, suggests that the
departure of much financial activity from the country was inevitable because
of the 'opening up and vitalising process of the foreign financial centres'.
Mr Vontobel also blames the four big banks for being too willing to let the
Swiss financial centre decay. He points out that the four opened only 10
branches in Switzerland in the 1980s, while they created nearly 150 offices
abroad.
In any event, he thinks there is not much point chasing after lost business.
Instead, it would be better to concentrate on taking steps to help preserve
the competitiveness of the Swiss asset management sector.
His main argument is that competition should be allowed free rein. He claims
that despite the elimination of various conventions in the banking sector in
the past two years, there is still too much concentration and oligopolistic
practice and the Swiss generally are too afraid of competition.
But Mr Vontobel says there is not much point in waiting for the government
to take action as the process is too slow. The international competitiveness
of Swiss asset management has to be ach- ieved by the firms themselves,
notably through productivity gains. He suspects that 20 per cent of the
115,000 jobs in the Swiss financial industry could be lost in the next five
to 10 years, even if the government moved quickly to improve the regulatory
environment.
The next reform milestone comes in the autumn when a referendum will be held
to approve a government proposal to reduce substantially the 0.3 per cent
stamp duty that has been blamed for much of the weakening of the Swiss
financial centre.
Although the reform is endorsed by virtually all political parties,
financial circles fear that it will be rejected by the people. Many Swiss
see no reason why the big banks should receive a gift at a time when they
are boasting about record profits.
The irony is that more and more of the banks' profits are coming from
abroad.
*Wettbewerb als Chance (Competition as Opportunity), by Hans-Dieter Vontobel
and Lukas Morscher, Verlag Neue Zurcher Zeitung, Zurich.
