FT  10 APR 92 / International Company News: Gold Fields holds earnings in
spite of weaker prices
IMPROVED cost control at the large producers allowed the gold mines in the
Gold Fields group to maintain earnings in the March quarter, despite a
weaker gold price, but all the group's marginal producers made significant
losses.
Gold production in the group rose marginally to 29,594kg, from 29,450kg the
previous quarter, with a rise in the average grade, to 8.4 grams per tonne
from 8.1, offsetting a lower milling rate. Likewise, a 1.5 per cent drop in
the average price received, to R31,911 per kg, was offset by a decline in
average working costs to R21,246 per kg from R21,432 per kg. After-tax
profit slipped to R208m (Dollars 74.2m) from R212m.
The main influence on the results was the unchanged performance of
Driefontein Consolidated, the group's largest mine, which made after-tax
profits of R132m. Both East and West Driefontein lifted their grades and
gold production, but costs rose in the West mine while declining in the
East. The mine produced 14,614kg of gold.
Kloof, the other rich mine in the group had a good quarter, with gold
production rising to 7,521kg from 7,193 on account of a significant rise in
the grade to 14.2g/t from 13.3g/t. Unit costs declined and profits were 5
per cent higher at R111.5m. The Leeudoorn extension to Kloof produced
1,303kg of gold, but made a R9.3m loss.
Mr Alan Munro, executive director at Gold Fields, said improvement would
come when the mine, which is still in the development stage, managed to
achieve better grades and economies of scale.
The three marginal producers, Doornfontein, Libanon and Venterspost made
after-tax losses of R7m, R3.2m and R3.3m respectively, with Libanon and
Venterspost both performing worse than in the December quarter. Mr Munro
said the position of these two mines gave 'cause for concern'.
Venterspost, he said, was 'living from hand to mouth'. Attempts to increase
production from the old mine had not succeeded and difficulties had been
encountered in bringing the new No 4 shaft into production.
Further efforts are being made to rationalise activities at Libanon. Mr
Munro said the mine should break even in the coming quarter and made a
similar prediction for Doornfontein. He said Doornfontein had made
considerable progress in recovering from the dismissal of half the workforce
in December. The aim is to try to keep the mine viable until new areas, in
the south of the mine, can be opened up.
In terms of capital expenditure, Mr Munro said that on the profitable mines
they were doing what was necessary to maintain their viability.
