FT  15 JAN 92 / Russia takes control of foreign debt bank
RUSSIA HAS completed its takeover of the former Soviet banking institutions
by taking Vnesheconombank, the foreign affairs bank responsible for paying
the estimated Dollars 84bn Soviet foreign debt, under its direct control.
Under the terms of a resolution of the presidium of the Russian parliament
adopted on Monday, the bank is likely to be split into three parts - one
acting as an agency for foreign debt servicing, the second as an independent
commercial bank, and the third being merged with Vneshtorgbank, the Russian
foreign economic bank.
Mr Georgy Matiukhin, the Russian central bank chairman, said yesterday there
was no agreement between the republics on sharing the debt between them, and
that calculations about individual shares were 'very difficult, almost
impossible: after all, these debts were accumulated in the course of 74
years (the Soviet period)'.
He said the request for a postponement on any repayments of the former
Soviet debt - made yesterday by Russian negotiators in Frankfurt to a
committee of banks headed by Deutsche Bank - should be confined to at most
one year.
'It would be more useful to us to change the structure of the repayments,
giving us a longer period to repay, rather than a long postponement of
repayment. Now about half the debt has to be repaid in a year or so,' he
said.
Mr Matiukhin confirmed earlier indications that the bank and the Russian
government intend to introduce a special rate - to be set at between Rbs8
and Rbs10 to the dollar - at which foreign investors planning to buy shares
in Russian enterprises would be required to change money.
This would be far below the present market rate. Mr Matiukhin said that
unless this was done, 'they (foreign investors) could buy everything at
fantastically low prices'.
The Russian bank has fixed the rate of exchange at Rbs110 to the dollar,
roughly shadowing the market rate.
'Our task here is to increase the rate of the rouble against the dollar as
quickly as possible. Otherwise, given the rate of the rouble to the dollar,
paralysis of the economy would be inevitable.'
He said the bank was now operating a 'very tough' monetary policy,
restricting the issuing of credit to banks - including the central banks of
other republics in the Commonwealth of Independent States - to set amounts
which they could exceed only by paying 20 per cent interest.
