FT  01 FEB 92 / Passengers wave goodbye to many ferry destinations / A look
at services facing closure because of the Channel tunnel
PITY THE people down the road who did the trendy thing and bought a weekend
retreat in Normandy. By now, they must be wondering how they are ever going
to reach it.
It was bad enough when, at the end of last month, Sealink Stena Line axed
the ferry service that had linked Folkestone with Boulogne for 148 years.
Then, in the course of the last fortnight, two further blows have rained
down on cross-Channel ferry users. Societe Nouvelle d'Armement Transmanche
(Snat), Sealink's French partner, has said it plans to axe all services
between Newhaven and Dieppe, and P&amp;O has asked the Office of Fair Trading to
permit a rationalisation of services on the remaining short sea routes.
One implication of the P&amp;O announcement is that there might be a limited
future for its Dover-Boulogne route. But the big ferry operators doubt the
long-term viability of Sally Line's operations between Ramsgate and Dunkirk,
although the ferry company believes it has a niche market for people
preferring a relaxed 2 1/2 -hour crossing over the rushed 1 1/4 -hour
Dover-Calais one.
Ferry users are therefore confronted with the possibility of a sharp
diminution in the range of French destinations. Unless someone comes forward
to save the Newhaven-Dieppe route, the only surviving car ferry route east
of Portsmouth-Le Havre may eventually be Dover-Calais.
There is a simple three-word explanation for this gloomy prognosis: the
Channel tunnel.
It had always been likely that the tunnel would have a drastic effect on
cross-Channel ferries. Now, with less than a year and a half to the tunnel's
planned opening, the effects have suddenly begun to show.
The greatest threat is to the services closest to the tunnel's
Folkestone-Calais alignment. Eurotunnel, the tunnel operator, reckons it
will take 90 per cent of the foot passengers, 70 per cent of the cars and 40
per cent of the lorries from the ferries' nearby routes.
The ferry operators disagree. Even by their estimates, though, they stand to
lose 80 per cent of foot passengers, 50 per cent of cars and 25 per cent of
lorries. Rationalisation is clearly inevitable.
The big operators, Sealink and P&amp;O, believe their best hope of surviving is
to concentrate resources on the shortest and busiest sea route -
Dover-Calais. That way they should be able to retain enough traffic to fill
about half a dozen jumbo ferries going to and fro. That will give them a
cost base low enough to match the tunnel on price.
To do so, they also need to merge their operations. If the Office of Fair
Trading agrees - and it probably will - the result will be a single ferry
service operating at, say, 30-minute intervals between Dover and Calais,
with motorists simply turning up and boarding the next vessel in much the
same way as they will with the Channel tunnel rail shuttles.
The Folkestone-Boulogne route has already closed in anticipation of that
process. So too, with less fuss, has P&amp;O's Dover-Zeebrugge service.
One wild card in the pack is Hoverspeed, with its fleet of hovercraft and
SeaCat catamarans. It has announced plans to resume a Folkestone-Boulogne
service in April alongside its existing Dover-Calais and Dover-Boulogne
operations.
Doubts remain over whether those will long survive the tunnel either. The
ageing hovercraft are expensive to run and the new SeaCats have shown
themselves to be embarrassingly susceptible to poor weather. With neither
the speed of the tunnel nor the comfort and amenities of the ferries, they
look in danger of being squeezed between the two.
On a more positive note, the longer crossings on the western Channel routes
from Plymouth, Poole, Southampton and Portsmouth look relatively secure. Far
enough away from the tunnel to escape the worst of the competition, they are
benefiting from the growth in popularity of independent motoring holidays.
Then there is the tunnel itself. Even if travellers do not take advantage of
a method of crossing the Channel that is speedier and less prone to bad
weather, will they be able to look forward to the effect of competition on
price?
Probably not. So great are Eurotunnel's debts that it cannot afford to
embark on a price war; and in the event that it did, it is unlikely that the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission would stand by and see the tunnel's only
competitors put out of business. Conversely, the ferries dare not drive the
tunnel into bankruptcy for fear that someone would pick it up debt-free from
the receivers.
Ominously, the ferry companies are saying they will charge the same as
Eurotunnel, while Eurotunnel says it will charge the same as the ferries.
As the ferries are unlikely to charge less than they do already, a crossing
of the Channel - whether under or over - seems destined to remain one of the
world's more costly adventures.
