FT  29 OCT 92 / International Company News: Varity to launch public share
offer
INVESTOR confidence in Varity Corp, which came close to collapse in its
previous incarnation as Massey-Ferguson, has improved sufficiently for the
automotive, farm and industrial equipment maker to launch its first public
share offering in more than a decade.
Varity and its automotive parts subsidiary, Kelsey-Hayes, unveiled plans
yesterday to raise about Dollars 350m in equity and debt. The proceeds will
be used mainly to redeem high-cost borrowings and to finance expansion of
Kelsey-Hayes' fast-growing anti-lock braking systems business.
The company said the new funds could cut interest payments by as much as
Dollars 40m next year and reduce the debt-to-capital ratio from 56.2 per
cent to 38.6 per cent.
Varity, now based in Buffalo, New York, is a very different company to the
Canadian maker of tractors and diesel engines which was pushed to the brink
by the collapse in the farm machinery market in the early 1980s.
Thanks to the acquisition of Kelsey-Hayes three years ago, automotive
components contribute more than 40 per cent of sales and almost two-thirds
of earnings. Kelsey-Hayes has a commanding share of the market for two-wheel
anti-lock braking systems.
The parent company hopes to raise about Dollars 90m in equity by issuing
4.5m common shares, of which 3.6m will be in the US and Canada. The issue is
expected to be priced in early December. Varity's share price lost 63 cents
to Dollars 20.38 on the New York stock exchange before the close yesterday.
It also plans to spin off 50.2 per cent of Hayes Wheels International, one
of the world's largest manufacturers of car and truck wheels, in an initial
public offering of 8.2m shares. Varity said the issue would be priced at
between Dollars 15 and Dollars 18 per share, raising a total of between
Dollars 123m and Dollars 147m. Hayes Wheels is also issuing Dollars 105m of
10-year senior debt.
Varity's overall financial performance remains lacklustre. The company
suffered a Dollars 44m loss in the six months to July 31 on revenues of
Dollars 1.5bn, and cautioned recently that it saw little prospect for a
near-term recovery in its farm equipment and diesel engine business.
However, the wheel division, which is being taken public, posted operating
profits of Dollars 21m on sales of just over Dollars 200m. Demand for
anti-lock braking systems is expected to shoot up over the next few years as
they become standard equipment in new vehicles.
