FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, the state of the union: Hurdles en route to Emu
With the Danes' rejection of the Maastricht treaty, the EC's future has been
thrown into uncertainty. Today Britain takes over as president of the
Community. Can John Major give it new direction? In a special four page
pull-out FT writers assess the prospects
IF THE Maastricht treaty were ratified, which now seems to depend mainly on
French voters, economic and monetary union would appear to be certain. Not
later than January 1999 - just six and a half years from now - the Ecu is to
become the single currency of an economic and monetary union (Emu) covering
some members of the European Community.
Things are not quite that simple. Even before the Danish 'no' vote,
financial markets did not believe that an Emu embracing all members of the
European Community would be established; or, if they did, believed that
substantial realignments of some currencies were likely to occur beforehand.
The Danish vote, however, has significantly changed the markets' views of
the odds only in the cases of Denmark itself, Spain and Italy.
If Greece and Portugal, which are improbable initial participants, are left
aside, and Luxembourg is left aside as well, as a virtually certain one, the
financial markets currently divide EC members into three groups vis a vis
Germany, the country without whose presence Emu is deemed pointless:
The Netherlands, which has a long-term bond yield differential in relation
to German Bunds of three-tenths of a percentage point and thus an expected
depreciation against the D-Mark of a mere 2 per cent by 1999.
France, Ireland, Belgium, Denmark and the UK, where long bond yield
differentials range from three-quarters of a percentage point in the case of
France, to 1.1 percentage points in that of the UK. These imply overall
depreciations of between 5 and 7 per cent by 1999.
Spain and Italy, where yield differentials are 4.1 percentage points and 5.1
percentage points, respectively. These imply expected depreciations of 23
and 28 per cent.
Once markets digested the Danish 'no', Dutch yield differentials have
declined. Those in the second group have increased rather little, by most in
the case of Denmark, which experienced a jump of about three-tenths of a
percentage point. But Italy's differential has risen by almost four-tenths
of a point and Spain's by almost half a point.
Markets expect a high degree of exchange rate stability within the ERM.
Their view is consistent with an Emu covering, in descending order of
probability: Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, France, Belgium, Ireland
and the UK. Denmark would be able to join if it wished. But Spain and Italy
are deemed outside chances, like Portugal and Greece.
How do these market expectations compare with the performance of countries
against the convergence criteria agreed at Maastricht? At present, only
France and Luxembourg meet all the criteria precisely. Meanwhile, Belgium
seems to be much too far away on the fiscal criteria.
But remember the escape clauses:
The government fiscal deficit can exceed 3 per cent of gross domestic
product, provided at the time of evaluation it has declined substantially
and continuously, reaching a level close to 3 per cent.
The ratio of government debt to GDP can exceed 60 per cent, provided it 'is
sufficiently diminishing' and approaching that level at a satisfactory pace.
If the criteria are not applied too strictly, the eight countries now most
favourably judged by the markets should be able to join. Spain might be able
to join too.
It appears then that the convergence criteria, judged against current and
expected performance, would allow a move to Emu, even in 1997. What could
still go wrong?
The Maastricht treaty could fail to be ratified.
Countries could refuse to do what they are committed to do, with the already
known exception of the UK, One reason might be high unemployment, low growth
and a desire for large currency realignments. Another might be the German
desire to retain the D-Mark.
Such recantations, even just realignments, could create a serious crisis.
If, as now seems possible, the recantation would be by Germany, the crisis
could be terminal.
Yet even the end of the project for an Emu need not end hopes of greater
monetary integration within Europe. Moves towards irrevocably fixed exchange
rates without divergence bands would be possible. The financial markets are,
in fact, convinced that a high degree of stability is likely. It is up to
the governments to prove them right.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Timetable for Monetary Union
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
JANUARY 1 1994. Beginning of the second stage of Emu.
  All controls on exchange and payments are to have been eliminated.
  'At the start of the second stage a European Monetary Institute shall
be established.'
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
DECEMBER 31 1996. Last date for the first evaluation of entry into the
third stage.
The Council shall decide:
  whether 'a majority of the Member States fulfil the necessary
conditions for adoption of a single currency'; and
  'whether it is appropriate for the EC to enter the third stage;'
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
JANUARY 1 1999. Last date for the start of the third stage:
  Before July 1 1998, the Council shall 'confirm which member states
fulfil the necessary conditions for the adoption of a single currency.'
  Either after the date for the beginning of the third stage has been
set, or after July 1 1998, the European System of Central Banks and the
European Central Bank shall be established. 'The full exercise of their
powers shall start from the first day of the third stage.'
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
