FT  19 JUN 92 / International Company News: Stainless steel makers set to
forge alliances - The renewed interest in partnerships between European
producers
A NEW phase of restructuring is under way in the world stainless steel
industry. The spotlight has shifted away from foreign takeovers in the US
and has refocused on the forging of alliances in Europe.
Last month's announcement that British Steel and Avesta, the Swedish
stainless steel producer, were discussing potential collaboration raises the
prospect of a new force in the stainless industry to challenge France's
Usinor-Sacilor, which is the world's biggest producer.
Industry observers, and rivals of the UK and Swedish companies, are
convinced that a deal will soon be announced to unite what one analyst calls
'two second-division players'. This will not be the end of the
restructuring, they say, in an industry which remains plagued by
overcapacity - in spite of better growth prospects than in the
recession-torn carbon steel industry.
The restructuring in stainless began in the US before the current recession.
In the late 1980s, the US producers' relative inefficiency, poor investment
record and structural undercapacity in some product sectors turned them into
attractive acquisition prospects for efficient outsiders. Ugine, the Usinor
subsidiary, led the influx of foreign buyers and joint venturers.
The characteristics of the stainless industry make it particularly suited to
a global approach, according to Beddows, the strategy consultancy
specialising in the steel industry. This suggests that alliances will not
end with transatlantic deals:
All manufacturers share common internationally denominated raw material
costs and want to increase their purchasing power;
Grade specifications are becoming increasingly homogeneous worldwide, making
it easier to centralise research and engineering functions and then apply
the results to manufacturing facilities worldwide;
Globalisation makes the slow and expensive process of finding new
applications for stainless faster and cheaper by spreading the costs and the
benefits worldwide.
All these trends are now making their mark on European producers, which at
the same time have yet to tackle the problems of overcapacity in
manufacturing. In stainless flat products, says Mr Philippe Choppin de
Janvry, chairman and chief executive of Ugine, there is overcapacity of 20
per cent to 25 per cent, and much more in the smaller long-products sector.
Some overcapacity is necessary if producers are to respond to demand
increases, but the industry suffers from a chronic problem common to the
European steel sector generally: 'When things are going well, nobody wants
to restructure, but in bad times, no one is willing to take the pain,' says
Mr Rod Beddows, founder of the Beddows consultancy.
Short-term factors are encouraging partnerships, too. As the world stainless
industry begins to emerge from recession, European producers want to
position themselves to take advantage of the upturn. After a very poor
second half of last year, the European market for flat stainless products is
slowly improving and the US market is definitely picking up, says Mr Choppin
de Janvry.
For the medium-sized European producers, the recovery prospects, however
faltering, are a spur to salvage some of the financial strength which they
lost through the past two years of bleeding balance sheets.
Growth forecasts of 3 to 5 per cent for the stainless steel industry may
look unexciting, but dwarf the puny 0.5 per cent growth predicted for the
European carbon steel market.
Hence the needs for partnerships to produce benefits of scale that will
finance the long-term investments needed to exploit this growth, and keep up
with changing production technology trends.
There is a further reason for the renewed interest in partnerships and joint
ventures which the industry prefers to downplay.
In the summer of 1990, seven large European stainless producers shared a
token Ecu425,000 (Dollars 327,000) fine levied by the European Commission
for operating a price and production cartel.
British Steel was one of the seven, and Avesta was in the cartel but not
fined because it is based in Sweden, outside the EC. The ending of the
cartel, known as the Sendzimir Club after a stainless production process,
has increased competition in the European market.
British Steel and Avesta are staying silent about what kind of deal may
emerge from their talks, but are keenly aware of all the short and long-term
pressures on them.
A merger or joint venture between British Steel Stainless and Avesta, which
produces only stainless steel, would unite two similarly-sized, but
financially weak manufacturers to create one of the world's largest
producers with annual output of around 700,000 tonnes, eclipsed only by
Ugine, which claims output of about 860,000 tonnes.
Significantly, a link would produce a dominant player in the European
stainless sheet business, with a share of as much as 40 per cent of a market
supplying investment-intensive process-plant industries such as chemicals.
One analyst suggested this might attract the attention of the EC's
competition authorities.
For Avesta, a deal could make a big difference to the return on its new
'Steckel' mill for hot-rolling slab into coil - the first stage in the
production process for cold-rolled sheet. British Steel does not have a
dedicated stainless hot mill and is unlikely to buy one with its current
clampdown on capital spending.
For British Steel, the main benefit of a deal would be access to Avesta's
extensive overseas distribution network. Both companies, says Mr Beddows,
will gain more critical mass in the US.
The question remains whether any deal will lead to any significant reduction
in European stainless production capacity. Observers do not foresee
wholesale jobs cuts, either at Avesta or at British Steel, where more than
2,500 are employed in stainless, but some rationalisation looks likely. 'If
I were the boss, I would be rationalising,' says Mr Choppin de Janvry. 'I
know their management, it's very capable, and it will do the same.'
If a link-up between the two companies prompts further restructuring in the
industry, it could be the first step to a healthier sector. But closures,
particularly in long products, may still be unavoidable to achieve that.
 ----------------------------------------------
       WORLD STAINLESS STEEL INDUSTRY*
 ----------------------------------------------
            Production       Consumption
1981          6,374            4,496
1982          6,168            4,376
1983          6,972            5,020
1984          8,021            5,730
1985          7,915            5,970
1986          8,208            6,224
1987          9,185            6,930
1988         10,527            8,100
1989         10,192            7,820
1990         10,675            8,345
1991**       10,400            8,120
 ----------------------------------------------
* Thousand metric tonnes. Excludes eastern
  Europe and former Soviet Union.
** Estimate by Beddows.
 ----------------------------------------------
Source: World Stainless Steel Statistics, 1991
 ----------------------------------------------
