FT  19 SEP 92 / Manx plan to compensate depositors
THE ISLE of Man government is to introduce a Pounds 4.45m ex gratia
compensation scheme for depositors in the Savings and Investment Bank, which
collapsed 10 years ago with Pounds 42m of depositors' funds.
Mr Miles Walker, the island's chief minister, said yesterday the scheme
would be put before Tynwald, the Manx parliament, next month if
administrative arrangements could be agreed in time with the bank's
liquidators. Payments  - to a maximum of Pounds 5,000  - would be made to
nearly 2,000 depositors early next year.
The move was attacked by Miss Gwendoline Lamb, who had Pounds 30,000 in the
bank, as 'morally shameful'. She said the trial judge who in 1990 dismissed
fraud charges against eight bank shareholders, officials or agents because
of delays in bringing them, had suggested that Pounds 10m saved in court
costs should be used to compensate depositors.
Mr Walker said the ex gratia payments would give them the same as they would
have had under the UK's depositor protection scheme of 10 years ago. The
Isle of Man, a self-governing Crown dependency, had no scheme at the time.
Government attempts to make ex gratia payments in 1990 were thwarted when Mr
David Cannan, who had been dismissed as finance minister after political
differences with Mr Walker, persuaded Tynwald to wait until publication of
the official report on the bank crash by Mr John Chadwick QC, an English
barrister appointed by the Manx High Court.
The move was designed to force disclosure of the report, which is severely
critical of the 1982 Manx government, but publication had to wait until
associated trials in England were over last month. The report will come out
on Tuesday. Much of its criticism of government officials is already known
because of court proceedings and a parallel report on supervisory standards
by the Bank of England, published in 1990.
Those facts were not, however, available when depositors pursued a claim
against the government to the Privy Council  - the island's ultimate court
of appeal  - in 1989. The Privy Council ruled that the government had no
duty of care to depositors, and the action failed.
Mr Cannan said yesterday: 'Once the Chadwick report is out, it will be up to
depositors to consider whether they should return to the Privy Council and
ask for another hearing on the grounds of new evidence, which they may well
feel the report provides.'
The crucial element of the report is likely to be that the Savings and
Investment Bank was insolvent on several occasions during the last 16 months
of its life, but that the island's Treasury allowed it to carry on trading.
Attempts to bring the SIB's principals to trial and disclose the background
to the collapse started only after a new Manx government, under Mr Walker,
took office in 1987. Manx supervision has since been tightened and is now
regarded as among the toughest.
