FT  03 JUL 92 / Kurdish attacks follow Turkish security extension
KURDISH separatists killed six villagers in attacks on two villages
yesterday.
The villages came under attack for their apparent loyalty to the Turkish
government, according to local officials quoted by news agencies.
The attack adds to the escalating violence in recent weeks and follows last
week's decision by the Turkish parliament to extend the state of emergency
in the Kurdish region. The vote, 222 to 36, is clear backing for the
security forces on policy towards the country's Kurdish minority and puts
paid to prime minister Suleyman Demirel's reform programme aimed at winning
back moderate Kurdish opinion.
Mr Demirel's approach envisaged a diplomatic and military offensive against
the rebel Kurdish Workers Party (PKK), at the same time as economic and
social reforms for the impoverished south-east region. On both counts,
western diplomats say the prime minister is behind.
His first 200 days in office have seen an increase in the number of deaths
in police custody and an unprecedented escalation in the fighting.
According to Mr Unal Erkan the super vali, the senior government official in
charge of 10 emergency provinces, in the last two months more than 200 PKK
rebels have been killed in clashes. Over the same period, around 90 security
personnel have died.
On paper, this corresponds to the highest monthly death toll since the
troubles began in 1984. But the military has an interest in inflating the
casualty figures. Firstly, by exaggerating the rebel threat the military
serves to justify its own heavy handed tactics. In addition the generals may
have their eyes on a number of key military procurement contracts for
helicopters and night-sighting equipment.
The military also has a stake in seeing the government's human rights reform
delayed. The draft currently awaits President Ozal's signature. Legislators
have already made a special case for the south east where a 16 day maximum
detention period is to be applied for those suspected of terrorist crimes,
twice the period elsewhere.
Human rights activists have long urged a reduction in the detention period
as a way to combat the problem of torture, seen as a blight on Turkey's
image abroad.
The government takes heart from having thwarted a popular uprising which the
PKK threatened following Newroz the Kurdish New Year. But the repression
that ensued had its cost.
According to local officials in Sirnak, where the PKK came close to
overrunning the town, around 5,000 people have fled since the disturbances
either to join the rebels or across the border into Iraq.
