FT  02 MAR 92 / Survey of North Oxfordshire (2): The magnet of the motorway
 -Communications
FOR HUNDREDS of years Banesberie, the Saxon town, was a major crossroads
between southern England and the Midlands. Its importance as a wool trading
centre made it a communications hub used by farmers and traders.
In later centuries, communications improved - first with the arrival of the
Oxford canal and then with the railways - as industry demanded better
transport links. For years, communications to north Oxfordshire and Banbury,
as it is now known, were updated and renewed to meet the needs of local
industry.
This tradition of communications growing in response to industrial
development was reversed a little over a year ago with the completion of the
M40 between London and Birmingham. Industry is now expected to grow in
response to improved communications.
Local politicians regard the motorway as a magnet for new investment and
want businesses to migrate into the area. As an incentive, about 300,000 sq
ft of new industrial and commercial premises has been built near the M40 and
the district council has set up the Cherwell-M40 Investment Partnership to
promote the region.
Launching the initiative in London, Mr Grahame Handley, chief executive of
Cherwell district council, painted a grandiose picture of the motorway's
potential. 'Cherwell and the M40 are poised to become the focus of the UK's
communications-based industries,' he said. The region has already attracted
companies such as Alcatel Network Systems and Philips, but the recession has
slowed the pace of further investment.
The council, however, remains committed to promoting light industry at
business parks such as the Banbury Cross Business Centre and Bicester's
Talisman Centre. It wants to improve access to these sites with a new
motorway junction south of Banbury and improvements to the A43
Oxford-Northampton trunk road north of Bicester.
Mr Handley also envisages the M40's first motorway service centre at Ardley
near Bicester, which will include a hotel and tourist office. Such proposals
and the planning involved have convinced the Cherwell chief executive that
the council should take control of highway planning from the county council.
'We'd like to be the unitary authority for North Oxfordshire with our own
highway authority,' says Mr Handley. 'We know the local situation better
than the county council.'
Cherwell's increasingly ambitious plans for the M40 corridor have irritated
county planners, who have reminded district councillors that the M40 is
regarded by the government as 'a centre of movement, not a centre of
growth'.
Mr David Young, director of planning and property services at Oxfordshire
county council, says Cherwell is too small to take on responsibility for
highways and criticises moves towards rapid development of the region.
Environmental concerns and fears of traffic congestion persuaded the county
to oppose Coca-Cola's planned plant at Banbury. Mr Young hints that any
similar developments encouraged by the district council could be blocked.
'This motorway is not designed for junction development and any plans for a
new junction are unlikely to win government approval.'
The county council's concerns have been echoed by planners at South
Northants Council who have criticised Cherwell for not telling them about
their junction proposals.
All local politicians, however, welcome the M40 as an important artery for
through-traffic between the south-east and the Midlands. It has eased
congestion on secondary roads and diverted freight traffic away from rural
villages.
For its part, the Freight Transport Association (FTA) says although journey
times are now faster, 'there is considerable commuter use in North
Oxfordshire which leads to congestion at peak times'.
The number of heavy goods vehicles using the motorway would be reduced, it
adds, if rail freight offered a better service to industry. The FTA says
there would be a greater mix of road-rail haulage if British Rail invested
in a new freight terminal south of Birmingham to handle Channel tunnel
traffic.
At present, rail freight through North Oxfordshire is dominated by bulk
goods such as coal and motor vehicles shipped between the Midlands and
Southampton. Diesel-hauled trains rumble through Banbury and Bicester but
rarely stop to load or unload in the region.
These diesel services should be replaced and the twin lines to London via
Oxford and High Wycombe electrified, according to the Transport Users'
Consultative Committee. The watchdog says existing rail services for both
goods and passengers are sub-standard.
The group claims North Oxfordshire will not benefit from the Channel tunnel
without rail electrification. Its criticisms are flatly rejected by British
Rail.
Electrified services from Marylebone and Paddington are unlikely even to be
considered until well into the next decade. BR, meanwhile, is investing
Pounds 260m on new rolling stock and improvements to track and stations on
the Oxfordshire routes. Journey times to Marylebone have been cut following
the introduction of new Network Turbo trains.
As a communications corridor, however, the region's rail routes are of minor
importance compared with the development of the M40.
The motorway has successfully attracted new investment, though not on the
scale originally envisaged, and it has improved access to airports at
Heathrow and Birmingham and to the south coast seaports. This six-lane road
is regarded by Cherwell district council, at least, as the catalyst for the
region's prosperity. The council's critics say Cherwell is in danger of
overdosing on the M40's potential and point out that many of the business
parks remain unfilled.
Mr Handley is unfazed. He regards the M40 as the means 'to change local
towns like Banbury, Bicester and Kidlington. We want the area to benefit and
we want developments that will create jobs.
'The M40 is changing the road geography of Britain.'
