FT  06 AUG 92 / Book Review: Haunted by history
THE YUGOSLAV CONFLICT By John Zametica
Adelphi Paper 270. IISS/Brassey's, Pounds 9.50
The western response to the war in Bosnia-Hercegovina has so far been marked
by its overriding sense of caution. Because of their lack of decisive
action, the US and European governments may ultimately bear a big share of
the responsibility for the republic's destruction.
Military attaches in London and Washington repeatedly have argued against
involvement in the Yugoslav conflict. The goals of military intervention are
not clear, they say. They fear getting bogged down in a conflict which could
drag on for years. Now that the cold war is over, the international
community has few interests in the Balkans, they claim.
But western interests in the region are becoming increasingly apparent as
the war drags on. As the conflict moves from republic to republic, the
threat to stability of the entire Balkan peninsula looms larger. The vicious
circle of violence in the region is ever-widening, a fact the west cannot
ignore.
In his pamphlet, John Zametica examines the origins of this circle. He is
reluctant to place blame on the Serbian president, Mr Slobodan Milosevic,
the late President Tito or the 1974 constitution, which effectively reduced
Serbia's powers in the former Yugoslav federation. Instead, he argues that
during the late 1980s 'the processes which had politicised Yugoslavia almost
beyond reason were almost all connected with historical experience and
awareness'.
If Mr Zametica blames the current conflict on historical awareness, then
perhaps it can be argued that the very establishment of Yugoslavia  - the
Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes - was fundamentally flawed.
The cultural antagonisms between the three ethnic groups were too great to
be resolved, as were the mutual suspicions about who should control the
political agenda.
Indeed, the distrust between (Catholic) Croats and (Orthodox) Serbs was
evident in the 1921 Vidovan Constitution which stated that the king must be
an Orthodox Christian. Moreover, the debate during the 1920s, during the
Tito era and in the 1980s hardly shifted. It continued to focus on the
extent to which power should be centralised or decentralised in the
multi-ethnic federation.
But there can be little doubt that the rise of Mr Milosevic in 1987
radicalised the debate, because he used the nationalist card to consolidate
his power. By forcibly reintegrating into Serbia the southern province of
Kosovo and by toppling the leaderships of Montenegro and Vojvodina, he
reawakened latent nationalism in Slovenia and Croatia. Both those republics
had seen how Mr Milosevic was keen to shape post-Tito Yugoslavia with a more
confident Serbia at the helm.
Although Mr Zametica gives little attention to this point, Slovenia and
Croatia opted for independence for this reason, but only after they tried to
negotiate a loose confederation of republics within Yugoslavia.
It is evident why Mr Milosevic was not interested in a looser confederation.
It would have reduced the power of Serbia. The realisation that Croatia
would eventually secede encouraged Mr Milosevic to question what status the
Serb minority would have in an independent Croatia.
Mr Zametica is right to argue that the Croatian president, Mr Franjo
Tudjman, played into Mr Milosevic's hand by effectively making second-class
citizens of the ethnic Serbs in his republic. Indeed, Croatia's treatment of
the minorities set the stage for Belgrade's fears about the status of Serbs
in an independent Bosnia.
But it is difficult to sympathise with Mr Zametica's assessment that the
Bosnian president, Mr Alija Izetbegovic, was intent on creating a Moslem
state at the expense of quashing the rights of the minorities. On the
contrary. Mr Milosevic and Mr Tudjman were intent on carving out of Bosnia a
greater Croatia and Serbia at the expense of any status, or homeland, for
the Moslems. It is hardly surprising that the subsequent expulsion of the
Bosnian Moslems by Serb forces served to radicalise a once moderate
community.
Moreover, it is difficult to agree with Mr Zametica that the Moslems 'in
many cases went out of their way to antagonise' the Yugoslav federal army
(JNA). Anyone who was in Sarajevo last spring was impressed with the way in
which Mr Izetbegovic established good relations with Gen Milutin Kukajnic,
head of the JNA's garrison there.
However, Mr Milosevic sacked Mr Kukajnic and promoted Gen Ratko Mladic, who
had a reputation as a hardliner, in a move that led the way to an
intensification of the siege of Sarajevo.
The destruction of Bosnia will likely continue. The debate about whether the
EC contributed to the crisis through the recognition of Slovenia and Croatia
will also continue. But the growing consensus among the inhabitants of
Sarajevo is that the US and EC have betrayed them in their reluctance to
become involved militarily. That reluctance may come back to haunt western
leaders.
