FT  06 APR 92 / Leading Article: A protest vote in Germany
FOR 40 post-war years, successive West German chancellors have been able to
count on almost automatic support from domestic public opinion for policies
aimed at extending west European integration. That era of comfortable
certainty has now come to an end. For German voters, the kind of Europe
which Chancellor Helmut Kohl signed up to deliver at Maastricht four months
ago appears to be increasingly unpopular. There are deep implications for
the new governments taking shape in Paris, London and Rome.
Because united Germany is Europe's pivotal power, Europe will move forward
only at the pace to which Germany agrees. The Maastricht blueprint for a
united Europe was condemned by many Euro-federalists as being too
half-hearted. But in the area of chief German concern - establishing a firm
timetable for proceeding to economic and monetary union - the Maastricht
programme may prove to be too ambitious.
Yesterday's protest vote against Mr Kohl's Christian Democrats in two
important regional elections was not, of course, simply a sign of
dissatisfaction with Europe. The outcome was a signal of the general
political strains caused by German unification. In Baden-Wurttemberg,
disquiet about record numbers of immigrants seeking asylum was an important
factor behind the improved showing of the far right. Yet a general reason
for the anti-CDU swing was undoubtedly disquiet that, at Maastricht, Mr Kohl
made a commitment towards eventually abandoning the D-Mark - without
securing agreement for anything approaching political union across what
would become a unified European currency area.
Mr Kohl and his advisers have been taken aback by the emotional German
debate over the consequences of Maastricht. While keeping to his overall
pro-European rhetoric, the chancellor is now likely to use every means
available to ensure that the hurdles for proceeding to monetary union will
be as tough as possible.
The decisive factor will be whether the Bonn government makes a success of
the economic integration of the two parts of Germany. The large fiscal
deficits caused by the need for enormous public sector transfers from west
to east Germany will be neither politically nor economically tenable for
much longer.
If the Bundesbank is called upon semi-permanently to bear too large a share
of the burden of keeping inflation under control, prolonged high German
interest rates may lead to several years of slow growth throughout the whole
of Europe. Even the few EC countries that are trying hard to keep their
budget deficits under control would then find it difficult to achieve the
targets set down at Maastricht.
Mr Kohl always stresses that German unity and European unity are 'two sides
of the same coin'. Now, both sides of the coin are starting to look
tarnished at once. The German chancellor bears the main responsibility for
seeking to restore the shine.
