FT  08 JUL 92 / Parliament and Politics: Rifkind calls for 'rethink' on EFA
GERMANY was urged to reconsider its decision to withdraw from the consortium
that commissioned the European fighter aircraft (EFA) and back attempts to
'drive down the costs of the existing design' by Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the
defence secretary, in the Commons yesterday.
He strongly underlined the economic case against embarking on a new project
which he put to Mr Volker Ruhe, the German defence minister, in London on
Monday.
Mr Rifkind warned that the acceptance of Germany's view would result in the
taxpayers of all the countries concerned - Spain and Italy are the other
members of the consortium - losing any benefit from the substantial sums
already invested.
Mr Menzies Campbell, Liberal Democrats' defence spokesman, called for an
assurance that savings would not be made at the expense of the aircraft's
'inherent capability'.
Mr Rifkind said 'substantial cost savings' had already been identified, and
emphasised that Britain wished to continue, as part of an effective
partnership, towards the production phase of the project.
Embarking on a smaller version of the EFA as proposed by Mr Ruhe would
involve total redesign of the airframe, engine and the installed equipment,
and delay the aircraft's entry into service by up to eight years.' The
operational performance of the aircraft would inevitably be substantially
inferior to the EFA, and the cost of changing our minds halfway through the
existing project would add at least 20 per cent to the price,' Mr Rifkind
said.
While not disputing the legal right of Germany to withdraw from the
production phase, he pointed out that it was committed to investing a
further Pounds 1bn in the development phase.
Mr Martin O'Neill, Labour's shadow defence secretary, underlined the extent
to which the future of Britain's aerospace industry was dependent on the
revenue raised from the EFA project.
He said: 'The replacement of ageing aircraft with anything other than this
cost-effective European collaborative project will leave us at the mercy of
American suppliers'.
Mr O'Neill went on: 'We don't want our pilots to go to war or to go into the
air in anything other than the most effective aircraft available to us, and
at the moment EFA is that only option.'
He spoke of the narrowness of the UK's technological base compared with
other European countries and said the country could not afford to lose the
'competitive technological edge which EFA represents'.
Mr Rifkind told him that Italian, German and Spanish industry attached equal
importance to the project.
Tory MP Mr Winston Churchill said: 'This House must never let down the very
few who man our front-line defences by letting them go into future battles,
should there be any, with second-rate equipment.'
