FT  31 OCT 92 / Fashion: In hard times it pays to be a second-hand rose -
Sasha Jensen scours the racks and rails for some designer bargains
IF THE price of a new autumn wardrobe seems liable to cause irretrievable
damage to your bank account then perhaps you should consider buying
second-hand.
Not only does it make economic sense; it also fits in with these
recessionary times. Whereas it used to be smart to buy a glamorous, glitzy
and dramatic suit, nowadays it is much more subtle to create a less
manufactured, more individual look.
Many clothes these days are designed to look second-hand before they leave
the shop. Seams and stitching have been purposely carved to create a warm,
worn feeling. Besides which, designer pieces can be given a lift and new
life by mixing them with second-hand items.
There are a few second-hand shops in London which specialise in only the
very best high fashion designer labels. But second-hand clothes shopping is
difficult - you have to know where to go and how the system works. It is not
the same as buying something from a store that has several different sizes
of the same outfit. If you see a design you like it is a matter of chance
whether it comes in your size or not.
Second-hand clothes shopping is a business in itself. The name of the game
is recycling. People with clothes to sell bring them in to the shop hoping
to receive a decent price for their once-loved garments. Shop managers
inspect the garment for any marks or stains. If the item has been worn
before, it must be cleaned.
Most second-hand clothes shops operate a cash-on-sale policy. Mark-ups vary.
Some managers will discuss with the customer how much she/he wishes the
articles to sell for and then agree a mark-up.
The most important feature of the second-hand trade is the quick turnover
that it demands. Clothes can change hands from one owner to the next in a
matter of minutes. The best buys are usually found by those who pop in often
to their favourite shops.
Pandora, at 16-22 Cheval Place in Knightsbridge, is a good place to start
looking for top designer labels at second-hand prices. Its clothes range
from cat-walk couture to Levi's 501's and T-shirts, from hats to two-piece
suits.
The shop has a clear, organised layout which makes it easy for the shopper
to find her way around. Clothes are organised according to particular
designers, types of material or season of the year.
There is a section for Chanel, for example, a silk group with blouses and
skirts, a rainwear and coat section (with names such as Valentino and
Georgio Armani), a waistcoat section and many more.
Pandora has been in business for more than 40 years and has a wide circle of
customers; buyers and sellers.
'The customers rummage through their wardrobes and bring anything they think
is in good condition and is worth selling and will no longer be missed,'
says manageress Fay Hutchcroft. This keeps the shop constantly busy. As the
larger department stores move into autumn shades and patterns, so does
Pandora.
Items available this month included a Karl Lagerfeld tweed two-piece suit
(last season's); a Nichole Farhi navy blazer and skirt that you might wear
to work; a Nichole Farhi wool and fake fur coat which is in other shops this
year but is half the price at Pandora.
Designs, at 60 Rosslyn Hill, Hampstead, north London, is a second-hand shop
which caters for everything that looks designerish but does not necessarily
sport a known label. The clothes are all in excellent condition with blue
tickets for the new clothes and white for the nearly-new ones.
There are lots of blazers and coats. This month, for example, there was a
beautiful tweed, black check jacket with matching trousers by YSL (Pounds
199.00); a Donna Karan silk trouser suit (Pounds 199.00); Giorgio Armani
herringbone tweed jacket (Pounds 169.00). There are some cheaper buys by
names such as Whistles and Joseph. There are waistcoats and skirts, shirts
and trousers - a whole rail for each. Designs also stocks some exciting
evening wear: gowns for balls, frocks for dinner parties and cocktail
dresses for elegant Hampstead soirees.
Sometimes clothes brought in in the morning are sold by the afternoon.
Manageress Dominique Cussens says that with the recession there is much less
stigma attached to buying second-hand. 'Why spend Pounds 100 on a Next suit
when you can quite easily have your always-dreamed-of high quality Yves St
Laurent suit for Pounds 150?'
The Dress Box, Cheval Place, Knightsbridge is next door to Pandora's. This
small but captivating shop specialises in haute couture clothes and big
designer names. It is sophisticated and more expensive than most.
'Many people don't even realise that we are a second-hand shop until they
see the shoes,' says Michael Lynn, the manager. Most of the clothes are in
remarkable condition. Some look as if they have never been worn at all.
Nothing over one year old is accepted and everything is impeccably cleaned.
Alterations can be made.
Pamela, of 93 Walton Street, London SW3, has been around for 20 years and is
a legend in the business. Pamela's policies for selling clothes are much the
same as those of The Dress Box: designer labels only, not more than 18
months old, kept no more than six weeks and the prices depend on the seller.
Some clients have a price in mind, others rely on the shop's advice. At
Pamela you are likely to find all the currently fashionable labels:
Valentino, Chanel, YSL (which usually lasts no more than half a day once on
the racks), Ungaro and plenty more.
It is round about now that the second-hand shops are at their busiest, when
those who wish to sell are sorting out their wardrobes and deciding what can
go and what should stay while those who are looking to buy come nosing
around for bargains. So, if your wardrobe needs a lift and you cannot afford
full retail prices, there is no time to lose.
Additional research by Hannah MacGibbon.
