FT  01 JUN 92 / Estonia to bring in own currency this month
ESTONIA plans to phase out the rouble and join the D-Mark zone when the
Baltic state later this month becomes the first part of the former Soviet
empire to introduce its own currency.
Detailing a move which brings full circle 52 years of tortuous history, Mr
Siim Kallas, president of the Bank of Estonia, said he intends to carry out
the long-awaited currency reform before the end of June.
'The desire to have our own currency is so big that the advantages outweigh
the possible disadvantages,' he told the Financial Times. The Estonian
currency, the kroon, suppressed in August 1940 in the Soviet takeover, will
be allowed to fluctuate 3 per cent either side of a central D-Mark rate.
The link has been closely discussed with the German Bundesbank. Although the
Bundesbank will be under no obligation to support the kroon, 'the Germans
have nothing against the link,' Mr Kallas said. The Bank of Estonia has been
given an independent statute closely modelled on the Bundesbank Law.
Estonian leaders stressed at the weekend that the kroon's reintroduction
marks an important step towards recovering the country's still-restricted
sovereignty.
The kroon will be backed primarily by 11.3 tonnes of gold in Estonia's newly
reconstituted monetary reserves. New kroon banknotes, to replace the
estimated 3bn roubles in circulation, are stored in strategic spots around
the country. They have been printed by the British banknote company, De La
Rue.
Total roubles, including deposits, to be replaced amount to Rbs13bn -
Rbs14bn.
Speaking of the coming currency switch, Mr Arnold Ruutel, the Estonian
president, said: 'We can no longer remain in the rouble zone. It has no
value. People have no incentive to work.'
He warned, however, that Estonia was 'aware of the problems' of suddenly
introducing a convertible currency. Unemployment in the 1.5m population
state was likely to rise to 100,000 by the end of the year.
The currency reform is being worked out in close collaboration with the
International Monetary Fund, which Estonia has just joined. An IMF team is
due in Tallinn at the end of this week. A delegation of trade ministers and
state bank chiefs from the Commonwealth of Independent States is also coming
on Friday to discuss the new arrangements.
Mr Kallas, just back from a trip to the IMF, said he hoped the reform would
psychologically boost Estonia's depressed economy. 'The whole economy is
waiting for the kroon.'
The IMF is predicting a 20 per cent fall in real gross domestic product this
year, but Mr Kallas said there were signs the worst of the collapse was
over.
Estonia would negotiate a standby credit from the IMF, and was discussing
mobilising its gold through 'swap' credits through the Bank for
International Settlements.
Total monetary reserves are about Dollars 120m, of which all but about
Dollars 10m represents gold. Mr Kallas hoped part of the Dollars 250m in
foreign currency deposits held abroad by Estonian individuals and
enterprises would return to the central bank after the reform.
The freshly printed kroons are ready to be handed out by 22,000 helpers in
700 exchange points around the country.
The exact date and conversion details had not been decided, but Mr Kallas
said the exchange rate to the D-Mark could be similar to that of the
Austrian schilling. The operation might take place on the weekend of June
20-21, the 44th anniversary of the introduction of the D-Mark in western
Germany on June 20, 1948.
Mr Kallas visited Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank vice-president, in
Frankfurt a month ago to discuss the conversion. Mr Tietmeyer warned him
that the operation was not comparable to the dramatic entry of the D-Mark
into eastern Germany on July 1, 1990, which paved the way for reunification.
'Then we just took over,' Mr Kallas quoted Mr Tietmeyer as saying. On this
occasion - for the first time for half a century - the Estonians will be in
charge.
