FT  31 OCT 92 / Women in Christian bondage: Truth of the Matter / Philip
Crowe describes the taboos which divide women from the priesthood
IT IS a curious fact that the creator of Narnia, C S Lewis, who filled his
imaginary land with such an amazing assortment of creatures, had a phobia
about insects. Into a vivid paragraph describing this, 'The works, that is
the trouble, all on the outside,' Lewis gratuitously drops this sentence:
'In the hive and the ant-hill we see fully realised the two things that some
of us most dread for our own species: the dominance of the female and the
dominance of the collective.'
In spite of, or perhaps because of, this dread, Lewis was fatally attracted
to extremely dominant women, but with women as with insects, he was capable
of rationalising his phobias with startling clarity. He wrote a brief essay
called 'Priestesses in the Church', a diatribe against the ordination of
women priests.
This month, 72 years after the debate officially started, the Church of
England hovers on the brink of a momentous decision.
The arguments in favour of women being ordained priests are not only clear,
but overwhelming. Discrimination against people, solely on the grounds of
race or gender, is generally held to be a bad thing, which the church
resists everywhere except in the church. Men and women are equal in the
sight of God, but unequal in the life of the church. Justice for women
everywhere, but not in the sanctuary.
The practical arguments, too, would rapidly convince any personnel manager.
An organisation which resorts to desperate expedients to meet its core
commitments, while ignoring over half its available people, must be either
strange or incompetent.
Yet opposition to the ordination of women, among women as well as men, is
passionate, vociferous, and deep-seated. Of course the opposition is similar
to that prejudiced resistance to women which has afflicted London clubs and
company board rooms.
On the surface, it is rational: 'We couldn't possibly admit women - we have
no toilets for them.' But what is going on beneath the surface? As with
Lewis, there are undercurrents of dread.
Society in general sorted out this issue long ago. We are, in theory at
least, an equal opportunities society. The church as usual comes lumbering
up to the finishing line puffing and panting long after everyone else has
gone home. But what society states in theory, and what happens in practice,
are not the same.
True, we have had our first woman prime minister. Was she not the best man
in the cabinet ? Is there any way of distinguishing, except by voice, the
speeches of a female politician from those of a male?
The language of public discourse is the language of power, the male
language. The women who get on are the women who perform best as imitation
men, in a society where human beings are called Man, the only respectable
God is male, and the only direction is upwards, towards success.
Female language is the language of weakness, of vulnerability, the language
of fulfilment and of relationships. No, this is not a tired piece of
stereotyping. The point is that we should all be bilingual. The language of
public discourse should be both masculine and feminine.
If the church were to ordain women to the priesthood, it would be inviting
and welcoming this bilingual discourse at the very heart of its life. The
fact that it has been such a long and hard struggle may mean that the church
will understand, more deeply than society, what it means to be both male and
female.
But why is it such a desperate struggle? Where does such passionate
opposition to women priests come from? The former Bishop of London once
remarked that if he saw a woman in the sanctuary, he would want to hug her.
His predecessors would have behaved with marginally less subtlety.
There is some extraordinary correspondence dating from the 1930s, a Bishop
of Durham, no less notorious for the extreme liberalism of his views than
his current successor, laying down precise rules about where a woman may
stand in church if she is to read the scriptures. The sanctuary is, beyond
question, out of bounds.
Social anthropologists argue persuasively that gender issues are not simply
about physical differences. They are also an indicator of social
differences.
Sanction-laden rules about what constitutes appropriate behaviour are a
means of identifying social boundaries. They preserve the identity of the
group.
Within the church, boundaries marked by gender have contracted so much that
the few which remain are invested with dreadful significance. The last
remaining preserve of the male priest is the authority to speak those most
powerful words of remembrance, of forgiveness, and of blessing. The male
priest is the representative of the very tradition which gives him
authority. If the gender of the priest can be changed, nothing is sacred. If
the tradition is flouted, we no longer know who we are.
Worse still, we no longer know who God is. The male priest, representing
Jesus the man, evokes powerfully the image of the male God, and that image
has dominated Christian worship and teaching for generations. More than 100
drawings of God, done for me by children in a village primary school,
contained only one hint of the feminine, a wonderfully colourful figure with
two heads, the male smoking a pipe and the female a cigarette.
Just below the surface lurk questions of human sexuality. The Christian
church has maintained a tradition which holds that even an ideal sex life is
inferior to no sex life at all. This tradition tells that the ideal priest
is male and celibate. An elderly lady said recently to a woman deacon, 'You
won't help with Communion, will you, when . . . you know . . . it's that
time of the month.' And there is something shocking about the idea of a
pregnant woman celebrating the Holy Communion.
All the rational arguments barely conceal deep and primitive fears which
bear all the classic features of cultural taboo.
Earlier this year, the men in a church choir hissed at a newly-ordained
woman deacon as she walked through the chancel and in to the sanctuary. She
was the first woman ever to do so in that church. Had she turned into a
pillar of salt, it would have been less than they hoped for. The sound of
their hissing evoked in her a primitive kind of horror.
It is these primitive fears, these cultural taboos, which are recognised in
Christian faith as 'elemental spirits' from which people are set free by the
liberating truth of the gospel. If the church decides not to ordain women as
priests, it will not simply make injustice an official part of its own life.
It will also declare itself to be in bondage to primitive fears. No doubt
the Church of England would still have a great deal to say; but would it
have any credibility at all?
Reverend Philip Crowe is principal of Salisbury and Wells Theological
College
