FT  08 FEB 92 / Books: Strange obsessions
HIDEOUS KINKY by Esther Freud Hamish Hamilton Pounds 14.99, 186 pages
EVE'S TATTOO by Emily Prager Chatto &amp; Windus Pounds 8.99, 194 pages
LOVE AND EMPIRE by Erik Orsenna Cape Pounds 15.99, 487 pages
IN THE hippy heyday, footloose families were found in odd places and Esther
Freud's autobiographical first novel, Hideous Kinky, tells the story of one
of them. A five-year-old girl is whisked off from London to Marrakesh and,
as five-year-olds will, more or less comes to terms with the exotic. She
does squirm, though, when Mum buys a prayer mat and squats down to pray in
public, and wishes she could adopt any one of Mum's lovers as a father,
particularly the street acrobat Bilal, who tries to train her as a small
fellow performer. Money troubles and itchy feet at last take them home to
London.
Briskly written in short sentences, it makes an easy read, deftly implying,
never stating, dismay or disapproval and as sweet in its portrait of the
child as the tender drawing on the jacket by the author's father, Lucian
Freud. Too sweet? Almost but not quite. Humour saves it, and the dottiness
of events. What seems technically a bit askew is the eye-level of the
narrative, which seems to imply a five-year-old's stature but is far above
the eye-level and vocabulary of any five-year-old I know. An attractive
debut, all the same.
To suggest that the horrors of the Holocaust are trivialised in Eve's Tattoo
may seem an insult to a writer as good as Emily Prager. That she feels them
with passion is clear, and that she has researched things deeply. One is as
appalled as her fictional listeners to hear, over and over, stories of what
women in Nazi Germay suffered. But the settings for her telling of them are
too glitzy, and the coincidences and coups de theatre too blatant. The
brilliant author of A Visit from the Footbinder still shows her gifts but
has picked an impossible format.
Eve, New York columnist with a dazzlingly attractive French lover she
adores, has her arm tattooed with the number of a woman in Auschwitz whose
photograph she has seen: thus she hopes to keep her memory alive.
Thereafter, whenever anyone notices the number, she says it belonged to a
woman called Eva, who had such-and-such a background and final, terrible
end: each time, a new tale. These stories are presumably true of someone,
but not of the woman in the photograph. Nor was she called Eva. She turns
out to have been a rabid Nazi, suitably named Leni.
Charles, the lover, has left Eve in horror. A Catholic, he appears in Eve's
fantasies as a Vatican cardinal. But, she realises from his reaction to the
tattoo, he is also Jewish, and with a wartime secret too shameful to share.
While she wears the tattoo he cannot touch her. So (lucky Eve, who need make
no decision about it), a convenient street accident involves an operation on
her arm, during which the tattoo is removed.
Even in fiction, fact and invention should be defined and respected. Eve's
Tattoo has moments of a kind of double-talk; literary, even philosophical
devices to suggest ambiguity and duality. Much harder to take is the
straight telling of tales as if they were fact, and belonged to a particular
woman. Perhaps they did, perhaps not: it gnaws at belief to know that their
teller doesn't say.
Gabriel Garca Marquez has a lot to answer for. Anyone who writes a long
unclassifiable novel with oddities of time, place and viewpoint, with
unconventional swirls of tense and syntax and visits a tropical rainforest,
suggests his name. Certainly the blurb of Love and Empire does.
A fictional Gabriel, mysteriously given the same surname Orsenna as his
creator, small, fat, a quarter Mexican and the rest French, everlastingly
shifting from first to third person, deals with the concerns and
surroundings rather than the facts or sequence of his own life. A series of
vignettes, ironically connected, takes him from 1882 to the 1950s, with
chance and passion plaiting events into a kind of pattern, and the century's
history looming over all, though he claims to be free of it. The tone is
gently amused, tender and idiosyncratic, particularly about family
relationships (Gabriel is with the grandmother and father who brought him up
after his mother not surprisingly bolted); and there are excursions into
motor racing, sex and books, South America, sea voyages, and Gabriel's
life-long devotion to a pair of English sisters.
Jokey interjections and even documents about this and that inserted here and
there make it seem like artfully chaotic jottings rather than narrative.
There is much in the detail to recommend it, good dialogue, quirky interest,
a lively translation (by Jeremy Leggatt) and (for Londoners) a good deal of
accurate observation in London. But the power and originality of Marquez or
anything like them? No.
