FT  03 MAR 92 / Wellcome shares hit by sell-off plan
SHARES in Wellcome, the UK drug group, fell 60p to Pounds 10.66 yesterday as
the stock market digested the news that the Wellcome Trust is to reduce its
stake in the company from 73.6 per cent to as little as 25 per cent.
However, fund managers and analysts said they thought the fall was
temporary.
The sale could raise as much as Pounds 4.5bn making it the largest
non-privatisation issue yet seen in the UK.
Mr Roger Gibbs, chairman of the Wellcome Trust, which funds medical
research, said that no decision had yet been made on how much would be sold.
He said that it would be wrong to make a series of sales, and better to do
it in one move. The trust will keep at least 25 per cent of Wellcome's
shares for the long term, which he defined as a minimum of five years.
The sale depends on approval from the High Court to reduce the trust's stake
below 50.1 per cent. Mr Gibbs said: 'We believe we have a reasonable
prospect of a judgment in our favour.'
The money raised will be reinvested, Mr Gibbs said, in a broadly spread
international portfolio yielding 4 1/2 per cent to 4 3/4 per cent, rather
than the 1.2 per cent yield the trust is receiving from its Wellcome shares.
He said every Pounds 1bn raised would increase the trust's annual income by
Pounds 35m.
Mr John Robb, chief executive of Wellcome, said that the shares had had
scarcity value, but 'I do not think it is a good thing to have a scarcity
value in a share price. Removing it will be positive rather than negative'.
Fund managers said that a number of institutions had decided not to buy
Wellcome shares because it was difficult to acquire sufficient stock to make
a meaningful holding. 'This will make it a company institutions can look at
as a sensible one to invest in,' said one manager.
Details of the sale, which is likely to take place in the summer, have yet
to be agreed. However, it is expected that the sale could be arranged on a
basis similar to that of the BT sale late last year.
Advisers to the Wellcome sale are hoping for the price to be set at a
premium to the prevailing share price. There may be plans for existing
shareholders to have priority in the sale. A large part of the issue is
expected to be sold in the US.
Lex, Page 24
Background, Page 22
