FT  16 JUN 92 / International Company News: Foster's rejects merger with SA
Brewing
FOSTER'S Brewing Group (FBG), the Australian brewer, yesterday rejected a
merger proposal from SA Brewing (SABH), the beverages and manufacturing
group, Reuter reports from Sydney.
Mr Nobby Clark, Foster's chairman, said: 'On balance, we do not believe that
the SABH merger proposal would be advantageous for Foster's Brewing Group
shareholders.'
Mr Clark said Foster's strategy was to become a single-purpose brewing
company and it did not believe the SA Brewing proposal offered benefits to
justify a reversal of this strategy.
'FBG believes that the non-beer businesses (of SABH) are incompatible with
the current FBG businesses and that the SABH proposal offers minimal
synergies, while exposing FBG to substantial downsides with continued
instability, costs and implementation issues,' he said.
SA Brewing announced in May a plan to merge with Foster's via a cashless
share swap, creating a company with assets of about ADollars 10.6bn
(USDollars 8bn)
Following that announcement, S&amp;P-Australian Ratings placed the credit rating
of Foster's on creditwatch. S&amp;P currently rates Foster's unsecured debt at
BB and its commercial paper at B1.
Turning to Foster's overall financial position, Mr Clark said: 'While FBG is
sound with a strong cash-flow, we recognise the benefits that would flow
from a better credit rating. Options to address this matter are being
carefully examined.'
Carlton and United Breweries (CUB), a unit of Foster's Brewing Group unit,
and Power Brewing plan to form a joint venture company to buy Power's
brewery and beer brands for about ADollars 90m, Reuter reports from
Brisbane.
Power and CUB said that the 50-50 joint venture, Queensland Breweries, would
have equal representation by Power and CUB on its board.
Power and CUB said that under the joint venture proposal Queensland
Breweries would brew beer for Power and CUB but each company would maintain
control of marketing and distributing its own brands through supply
agreements.
They said CUB would eventually relocate its Queensland production from an
inner-city site in the Queensland state capital of Brisbane to Yatala, about
40 km south of Brisbane.
Power's brewery is at Yatala. 'This will ensure that the Yatala facility
will be fully utilised,' the companies said.
The arrangement is subject to the approval of Power shareholders and the
Australian Foreign Investment Review Board.
The companies said production would continue at both sites until the
relocation and the effects of rationalisation would be subject to
discussions with all relevant parties.
Mr Mike Pelly, CUB's regional director of northern states, said: 'The Yatala
site has considerable potential for expansion to meet increasing demands for
our products in an area where the nation's biggest population growth over
the next decade or more is projected.'
Mr Bernard Power, Power Brewing chairman, said the deal ensured the
continuing strength of Power's brands.
Foster's shares ended unchanged yesterday at ADollars 2.06. Power shares,
which last traded at 85 cents, were suspended ahead of the news.
