FT  04 JUL 92 / Anti-whaling nations claim IWC success
ANTI-WHALING nations and conservation groups last night claimed success in
preventing the International Whaling Commission (IWC) from approving the
resumption of commercial whaling, which has been banned since 1985.
Although the anti-whaling countries, among which the UK is prominent,
pointed to success in blocking the resumption of commercial whaling under
the auspices of the IWC, whales are less safe than they were a week ago and
the future of the IWC is somewhat less certain.
The meeting, in a Glasgow hotel whose entrance was permanently picketed,
ended in disarray, with both of the whaling members of the Commission -
Norway and Japan - expressing their dissatisfaction with the delays in
progress towards implementation of a scientific model for calculating limits
to future whale catches.
A wrangle over the model dominated the closing session of the conference.
Attempts by Japan and Norway to secure implementation of the method - called
revised management procedure (RMP) - were defeated.
The method would form part of a new system for managing and monitoring
resumed commercial whaling which has been developed over the past seven
years.
However, attempts by Japan and Norway, to secure the actual implementation
of this calculation method as a preliminary stage to introducing the RMP
were defeated by 16 to five, with seven abstentions.
The resolution adopting the new model, or algorithm, was approved by 16 of
the 28 members attending the meeting, with one voting against. However, 11
countries, including the UK, abstained on the grounds that further studies
needed to be made before the calculation formula was adopted.
Mr Jan Arvesen, the Norwegian commissioner, concluded his closing speech by
saying: 'Should Norway continue to be a contracting member of the
International Convention on Whaling?' He did not answer the question.
Mr Kazio Schima, the Japanese commissioner, warned that it would be
increasingly difficult to secure political support in Japan for continued
adherence to the moratorium on whaling.
Mrs Gro Harlem Brundtland, Norway's prime minister, announced on Monday in
Oslo that her country would resume commercial whaling next year, a move
which it had hoped would encourage the IWC to implement the RMP. Both Japan
and Norway will, in the meantime, continue limited whaling for scientific
purposes, despite being requested at the IWC meeting to reconsider this
policy.
Pro-whaling organisations from Norway, Iceland and Japan indicated they
believed the battle to resume whaling was gradually being won. They point to
the fact that Iceland this year carried out its threat to leave the IWC,
although it has yet to decide whether to resume whaling.
They also argue that Norway's decision to resume whaling has drawn attention
to the belief of the IWC that there are 114,000 minke whales (the smallest
of the great whales) in the north Atlantic and 760,000 in the Antarctic Sea.
'Conservationists can no longer use the phrase 'the last whale',' said an
Icelandic spokesman at the IWC meeting.
The fact that Japan is to host next year's meeting of the IWC does not
necessarily secure the organisation's future as the regulator of whaling,
which it has done since 1946, some observers believe. Iceland announced its
decision to leave the IWC after a meeting of the Commission in Reykjavik,
even after Icelanders witnessed the strength of anti-whaling protests.
They believe Japan could do the same if it fails to make more progress next
year.
Japan and Norway could form a separate body of anti-whaling countries, a
move which IWC officials concede would seriously damage the IWC's
credibility.
