FT  04 FEB 92 / Appointments: The compliance merry-go-round
Bernard Rouget, who has been in charge of compliance at County NatWest in
the aftermath of the Blue Arrow affair, moves to become director of group
compliance at National Westminster Bank.
Rouget, 54, who had earlier been a senior inspector at NatWest, was plucked
from the St James's Street branch of the UK clearer after the 1987 stock
market crash to help sort out auditing procedures after a trainee accountant
client of County NatWest had managed to run up losses of over Pounds 1m in
traded options positions.
Rouget initially reported to Elizabeth Brimelow, who later became embroiled
in the Blue Arrow investigation. Rouget took over her job, as head of
compliance as well as audit, in September 1988.
His primary task, he says, was to establish the independence of the
compliance function. 'We were all feeling our way somewhat,' he recalls,
referring to the early days of the implementation of the Financial Services
Act.
Reporting lines were to the chairman and chief executive of County as well
as to the director of group compliance, the job he moves to on the
retirement of John Fraser, who had been at NatWest for 44 years.
Rouget is replaced by Keith Palmer, a 'natural fit' from his previous job as
deputy group compliance director at Midland as well as head of compliance
for Midland Montagu. Palmer, who is 46, joined Midland's legal department in
1975.
While Rouget acknowledges that compliance is easier in the current sombre
environment - a marked contrast to the frenetic deal-making that
characterised the latter part of the 1980s - he emphasises that compliance
officers cannot afford to rest on their laurels when business is scarce -
'that is when commissions are hard to come by'.
*****
Barclays de Zoete Wedd has promoted three Frenchmen from its Paris corporate
finance operation to the positions of managing director, previously a title
within the Barclays group inhabited largely by British nationals.
Bertrand Poplu, Michel Tirouflet and Thierry Varene are all at Compagnie
Financiere Barclays de Zoete Wedd.
The move reflects a further effort to internationalise top management as the
UK clearer pursues its ambitions on the continent. Barclays recently
announced Carlos Martinez de Campos as its new director of European retail
banking and Jacques Rambosson as director of European corporate banking.
Other managing directors of corporate finance announced by BZW are Richard
Mews, based in Hong Kong, John Plaxton in Toronto, and Richard Gillingwater,
Malcolm Le May and Philip Remnant in the UK.
*****
Sir John Cuckney has announced that he will resign as chairman of 3i at the
agm in July. He had originally planned to steer the company through its
flotation and then step down in 1993.
However, those plans were made in the belief that the flotation would take
place in March. Since it has now been postponed until after the election,
Sir John thinks it would be preferable for his successor to be in place for
the flotation.
*****
Simon Thorp, who recently left Salomon Brothers, has now joined NatWest as
head of gilts trading. NatWest claims it has beefed up its gilt trading
operations during 1991 and is 'currently trading profitably' after showing
pre-tax losses in the four years after Big Bang. It claims to have a market
share of between 6-7 per cent in gilt-edged market making.
*****
Jonathan Custance Baker is appointed md and director of European business
development, PUTNAM's new London office.
*****
Michael Balfour (not Michael Bond) is director and head of emerging markets
department of EDINBURGH FUND MANAGERS.
*****
Ceris Williams has become a director of ROTHSCHILD Asset Management; he
moves from Midland Montagu.
*****
Trevor Thomson is appointed director and head of SWISS BANK Corporation's
service products group in London; he moves from First National Bank of
Chicago (UK).
