FT  29 AUG 92 / The curious business of male exploitation: Antony Thorncroft
researches the beefcake niche
IT IS becoming unbearable. We have been reduced to basics, our bodies used
to sell everything from jeans to fragrances, or spread across the pages of
garish magazines, or forced to strip off on the West End stage so that the
audience can whistle and bray at us like over-heated lemmings. Exploitation
of the male has gone too far.
Not since the heroic world of classical Greece, apart from a blip at the
time of the Renaissance, has the masculine body been so exposed, so open to
view. Visit the cinema: advertisement after advertisement depicts a
succession of beautifully-muscled youths.
Escape to the theatre: there are the Chippendales, a score of equally
perfect men, paid well to show their all-but in public. Stay at home with a
magazine: it could well be For Women or Women on Top or another of the raft
of glossies that strip men bare. Even the Tate Gallery is planning an Images
of Masculinity show next year.
Why? Why has the male body replaced the female as an object of desire?
Explanations are as facile as the expression on the face of a Chippendale.
Fear of feminism, or perhaps a genuine distaste for projecting women as
sexual objects, has gripped the marketing world. Men are invariably
displayed in the media as wimps, and women as the superior breed.
Think of the Mercury commercial with the female executive, power-dressed to
her provocative pigtail, sorting out the telephone bill, or the car
advertisements which always feature women at the controls. Male nudity is
role reversal taken to its logical conclusion.
Or it could be the obsession with the perfect body - aerobics, health clubs,
all that Jacuzzi. A well-toned male, pectorals glistening, thighs firm,
hairless and hunky, can suddenly seem attractive, and thanks to the fitness
craze there are many more of them available. Men feel more beautiful. Then
there is the gay element. Plenty of rich homosexuals are in the market for
jeans, and for soft porn magazines.
Alternatively, perhaps it is because women have always wanted to gaze at
men's bodies but until now have not had the confidence or the cash to pursue
their requirements. That is the view of Nicki Pope, publicist for the
Chippendales. She sees the current exposure of the male body as fulfilment
of a secret want. But do women really get sexual excitement from gazing at
perfect men?
A good place to start researching this question is by sussing out the
Chippendales, the troupe of American beefcakes which is packing London's
Strand Theatre, and which has spawned a shoal of imitators. A visit suggests
something different. For a start, it is quite difficult for a man to
infiltrate the ritual. Somehow the management ensures that in an audience of
1,000 there might be just three men. Being made to feel an outsider, a
foreigner, is chastening.
The women were operating at full throttle. There was one group keeping up a
non-stop chorus of 'Off, off, off'. There was another going 'Ugga, ugga,
ugga' or so it sounded. There was the odd individual screaming 'Show us your
willy' - to no avail, for a Chippendale never goes all the way. There is
plenty of well-oiled bottom and pelvic thrusting. But a limp air pervades
the show.
Not that the girls mind. They are there for a good time, not for sex. They
are mainly gathered into the protective security of hen parties, enjoying
that important new social event, the girls' night out, when they can egg
each other on, let their hair down, get drunk, fall over - behave just like
men.
For all their exuberance, it is mainly bluster. When three girls are allowed
on stage to sit on chairs while a Chip strips before them, they turn to
stone. 'Rip it off,' shouts the audience.
But the trio looks sheepish, bemused, almost despairing. An evening at the
Chippendales allows women to assume a role, to enjoy a tease, to indulge in
the safest of safe sex.
Mind you, they make the show. The Chips are completely lacking in stage
presence. They take their glistening, oiled, hairless bodies extremely
seriously and do not join in the joke. They act as if the women share their
obsession with their bodies. They tease to order, strip for themselves.
If women go to the Chippendales for a laugh, they tend to have a more sombre
approach to the men in Women on Top, the most explicit of the new magazines
and one modelled very much on girlie equivalents. Pages of men, with their
knickers around their ankles, arouse more disdain than giggles. The deadness
in the faces and the roundness of bodies which suggest a life-style based
around the gym and the locker room, have little appeal. Women might buy a
copy out of curiosity but not one in my selective survey would subscribe.
The traditionally desirable male characteristics - sense of humour,
kindness, personality - keep their grip on women's affections, and these
cannot be conveyed on the screen, on the stage, or on paper.
The revival of interest in the male body is a salutary corrective, a
marketing development, but its niche in the market seems set to be small and
selective.
