FT  12 SEP 92 / Finance &amp; the Family: The Week Ahead
KINGFISHER, the retailing group, is unlikely to add much cheer to the debate
about the state of the economy when it reports its interim results on
Tuesday.
Nigel Whittaker, the group's corporate affairs director, is likely to be
humming the same tune as he frequently sings as the CBI's retail sales
front-man: depressed levels of consumer spending with little sign of any
uplift.
While the B&amp;Q chain has faced pressure from a price war in the DIY trade,
Woolworths, Comet and Superdrug should have benefited from productivity
gains. However, Kingfisher has a knack of exceeding expectations and may
report pre-tax profits above the Pounds 61m consensus forecast and last
year's Pounds 62.5m.
On Monday, Dalgety reports profits for the year to end June. Forecasts
centre on Pounds 115m pre-tax, up from Pounds 110.9m, with petfoods and
snacks leading the way. Tougher trading conditions in milling, baking, food
ingredients and animal foods are expected though. With the finances sound,
the company is regarded as more solid than many in the sector.
Inchcape, the international motor distribution, services and marketing
group, is expected to announce interim pre-tax profits of about Pounds 110m,
compared with Pounds 91m, on Monday. The figures are helped by the first
inclusion of Tozer Kemsley &amp; Millbourn, the motor company acquired with the
help of a Pounds 376m rights issue last December.
Tuesday sees interim results from MB-Caradon, the building products and
cheque printing group which has a quarter share in CarnaudMetalbox. Pre-tax
profits are expected to have risen from Pounds 47.2m to Pounds 60m, helped
by the use of the rights issue money raised last year and substantial
cost-cutting measures.
Arjo Wiggins Appleton, the Franco-British paper group, also reports on
Tuesday. Estimates for interim pre-tax profits range from Pounds 92m to
Pounds 100m, compared with Pounds 135.5m. Analysts will ask about the extent
to which AWA, a pulp buyer, has suffered from rising pulp costs and falling
paper prices.
First-half results from Guinness on Thursday are expected to reflect
economic weakness in its international markets. After reports of tough
trading conditions from several other drinks companies, analysts have
trimmed forecasts of pre-tax profits to between Pounds 360m and Pounds 365m,
an increase of 4 per cent on the 1991 interims.
Guinness has indicated that growth will be more than usually biased towards
the second half this year because of the phasing of capital spending.
Full-year profits are still expected to top Pounds 1bn for the first time.
RMC, one of the more stoical of the building materials company and so far
helped by the buoyancy of its German operation, is expected to announce
interim pre-tax profits of about Pounds 60m, down from Pounds 69.9m.
Apart from questions about margin pressure on ready-mix concrete in the UK,
analysts will also be interested in whether RMC has any rationalisation
plans for its block plants. Both Tarmac and Marley have announced closures
in this field.
