FT  06 MAR 92 / Management: Sum total adds up to more than figures
It may seem a naive question to ask in a newspaper such as this, but should
finance necessarily be the common language of a company? You would certainly
think so from the horrified reaction of some people last week to a study
which demonstrated the ignorance of many non-financial managers in Britain
about a series of basic tools and concepts: such fundamentals as
depreciation, discounted cash flow and even the difference between a
balance-sheet and a profit and loss account.
Paradoxically, the conclusion that finance is all-important has probably
been drawn by most people from a sustained correspondence in the FT over the
past month about Akio Morita's declaration that accountants should not run
manufacturing companies in Britain - or, presumably, anywhere else.
The bombastic chairman of Sony complained that too much of British industry
is in the hands of accountants who do not understand the engineering that
goes into their own products. Quite so.
Predictably, the resulting correspondence has ranged the accountants against
Britain's downtrodden engineers. Between these two extremes, the seemingly
level-headed centre of the debate was epitomised by a managing director who
wrote last week that 'the only real common ground between disciplines in any
business, whether in engineering or not, is finance'.
On the face of it, his argument may indeed appear sensible. But I beg to
differ with it.
Finance need not be the common language of a company - certainly not the
only one. Have we struggled in vain through our various business experiences
of the past decade, learning nothing from 'In Search of Excellence', Total
Quality Management, and various versions of the maxim 'put the customer
first'?
If 'Excellence', the best-selling business book of the 1980s, taught us
anything other than that good management is a lot more complicated - and
short-lived - than many people thought, it is this: that successful
companies have a powerful set of beliefs (or 'values') that are shared
across the organisation, from top to bottom and side to side.
Few, if any, of these beliefs are financial: they are certainly not
expressed in financial terms.
Then there is TQM. Many aspects of it are expressed in financial terms, but
by no means all of them are. It also involves various non-financial
measures: of quality performance, of customer satisfaction, and so on.
And what about Customer First (or 'Close to the Customer', if you prefer
that version of the jargon)?
For a value such as this really to permeate a company, what is needed is not
so much financial literacy as an understanding both of consumer psychology
and of basic marketing concepts such as positioning and segmentation.
Yet many people in such companies - including accountants and even some
sales executives - are woefully ignorant of the real meaning of such
terminology.
Is this any more serious than the ignorance of financial concepts shown by
the respondents to last week's study?
My answer would be no, they are both equally serious: that marketing should
be just as much the common ground between disciplines as is finance.
So, too, in a manufacturing company, should be engineering, electronics,
chemicals or whatever. Can anyone imagine, say, a Sony or Apple manager who
does not understand electronics - regardless of his or her background?
Which brings us to the question of whether specialists of one sort can be
expected to learn another's language, and embrace it as a real part of their
thinking processes.
That engineers can, given the right training, live and breathe finance - and
marketing - is patently obvious from the accomplishments of so many of them
at and near the top of successful companies in Japan, Germany, Sweden and
also the United States.
The same almost goes for marketing people: once trained, they are certainly
adept at thinking finance, though they find engineering a bit harder.
But accountants? With notable exceptions, there is only limited evidence to
suggest that the fraternity can really learn to 'breathe' either marketing
or engineering.
In part, this is because accountancy is essentially a control discipline,
whereas marketing and engineering are at least partly creative - or should
be.
Arch controllers who have plumped at an early age for the safe (well,
safe-ish) waters of accountancy find it harder to think creatively - in the
proper sense of the word - than creative people find it to master the skills
of control.
All of which leaves us with the conclusion that finance is important, but
not all-important. Just like marketing and engineering, in fact.
Hence, the idea, advocated in the current issue of the Harvard Business
Review, of a 'balanced score-card' of measures, which complement a financial
perspective with ones on customer satisfaction, internal company processes,
and the organisation's innovation and learning activities.
The only totally common ground between disciplines in business is not
finance, but people.
But that does not mean that everyone in a company should understand the
often arcane language of personnel any more than that those unfortunate
personnel managers in last week's survey - a quarter of the sample - should
lie awake worrying about the proper definition of DCF.
