FT  22 MAY 92 / Leading Article: Inspecting schools full time
IT IS disconcerting that Professor Stewart Sutherland, appointed last week
as Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Schools in England, intends to combine
the post with his current one of vice-chancellor of the University of
London. The role of chief inspector was greatly enhanced by this year's
Schools Act, which rightly made regular and rigorous school inspections a
guarantor of standards and an underpinning for the Parent's Charter. With
the devolution of funding and control to head teachers and governors, and
the progressive weakening of the tutelage of local education authorities,
the inspectorate ought to become the linchpin of the new schools system. Its
leadership should not be considered a part-time job.
The Chief Inspector has three demanding tasks in hand. First, he has to
launch the new national inspectorate, as yet no more than a page of statute
enacted at the tail end of the last parliament in a messy compromise between
the House of Lords and the then education secretary. Second, he needs to
establish the modus operandi of the new inspectoral regime. Third, he must
ensure that the inspectors' work gives due attention to school management -
and not only to the quality of teaching.
The Schools Act set out to create a semi-privatised inspectorate. The Chief
Inspector is to license inspection teams, which may include existing local
authority teams (provided they are financially self-supporting); he will
seek tenders for each inspection and appoint the inspectors in each case,
but the school will foot the bill; and he will retain a small inspection
team of his own, which will intervene directly as the chief inspector sees
fit. He will also issue an annual report, and may make other public
recommendations, without the prior consent of the education secretary.
Licensing powers
Given the Chief Inspector's powers to license and appoint, the financial
link between schools and their inspectors should not cause undue concern.
More problematic is the supply of inspectors and the future of local
authority inspectorates. Teachers, like all professionals, are wont to
believe that only long-serving colleagues possess the requisite
understanding needed to judge their performance. Yet of all the professions,
there is none of which this is less true than teaching. The Chief
Inspector's task is to balance the necessity for inspectors to have a
thorough grasp of legal, curricular and financial facets with the attraction
of fresh faces.
Talent pool
Local authorities are one source of inspectors. But not the only one, and it
is to be hoped that dynamic teachers, management consultants, indeed parents
with a talent for the job, will find the rewards sufficiently attractive to
come forward. Provided the Chief Inspector takes seriously his
responsibility to train inspectors, and does not expect them to come
ready-made, direct classroom experience need be no bar.
The inspectorate will inevitably encroach on areas currently the preserve of
local authorities. One area of great importance is ensuring an adequate
supply of school places. Ministers hope that with funding more closely
related to pupil numbers, and capital funding directed towards the most
popular schools, market forces will do a large part of the job. They may do
so - but will not invariably succeed in raising standards in
poorly-performing schools, and will only rarely succeed in closing those
whose performance - or size - merits such drastic action. Consider the 17
per cent of primary schools which have fewer than 90 pupils. The recent
'three wise men' report on primary education stressed that every primary
school ought to have direct access to specialist expertise in all nine
national curriculum subjects. If they don't or can't, what should be done?
Closure, merger or joint provision  - without, perhaps, a local authority to
organise it? Inspectors will need to say.
Providing curriculum leadership and monitoring the quality of teaching is
only part of the job of today's head teachers. Along with the governors,
they also have to manage budgets which may run to several million pounds.
Inspection teams must include individuals with expertise in financial
management, and they need to inspect a school's governors as closely as its
teachers.
