FT  13 NOV 92 / Embassy faces questions over Matrix
BRITISH embassy officials in Washington are facing demands for an
explanation for their intervention in 1989 to stop a US senator adding the
name of Matrix Churchill to a list of companies that had exported items
listed under the British Missile Technology Control Regime.
The demands have been made after a document recording the UK government's
response at the time was released to defence counsel at the Matrix Churchill
trial which collapsed this week.
The document, dated October 19 1989, is a note between two UK embassy
officials discussing their response to a request for assistance from Mr Bill
Triplett, the chief Republican counsel to the Senate foreign relations
committee. At the time he had read a report in the Financial Times about
Matrix Churchill's arms-related exports to Iraq and he warned that the
company's name would be included on his list of offending companies unless
the embassy could convince him otherwise.
The note from Mr John Neve, an embassy official, said that he had assured Mr
Triplett that 'the company had not breached UK export control regulations
and the equipment which they had legally sold had not been destined for
end-users which raised missile proliferation concerns'.
Last night Mr Triplett said he was concerned about the implications of the
communique on the British-US special relationship. He said: 'We took his
word for it. I would not have taken the word of somebody else, probably.'
He appeared particularly angry about the tone of one comment in the note
which states: 'I made it clear to him (Mr Triplett) that, if Matrix
Churchill or any other British company appeared on his list he could expect
a sharp reaction from HMG.'
Mr Triplett said: 'The bottom line is we accepted the assurances of Her
Majesty's government based on the special relationship. Frankly I wouldn't
have taken the word of another embassy.
'The problem we have now is that we have that document and there are other
documents that have shown up in the Matrix Churchill case that indicate
other knowledge they (the Department of Trade and Industry) had.'
He had been passed a second, previously secret document, dated February 1
1989, also released at the trial. The earlier note clearly states it was
seen by Mr Eric Beston, a senior Department of Trade and Industry official.
The earlier document, signed by Mr Stephen Lillie, an official on the Middle
East desk at the Foreign Office, discusses intelligence information that
linked Matrix lathe exports to Iraqi munitions establishments.
It also makes clear that the UK government was aware of Iraqi attempts to
develop technology for uranium enrichment using a procurement network under
Dr Safa Habobi, the Matrix chairman.
Another internal government memo prepared by the DTI to discuss the FT
report, on the same day that the article appeared, and also seen by Mr
Beston, makes further refernces to the military uses of Matrix Churchill
lathes in Iraq.
