FT  24 JAN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Saudis strive to retain Opec
dominance
SAUDI ARABIA'S cut in oil output this week as a prop for crude prices is as
much a signal of its intention to remain dominant within the Organisation of
Petroleum Exporting Countries as it is a concession to its Opec fellows.
It also reflects Saudi Arabia's emergence from the costly Gulf war in a
straitened economic condition - and politically tougher.
Although trimming 100,000 barrels a day from output of 8.5m b/d entered the
communautaire spirit of voluntary cuts by six other Opec members, Saudi
Arabia announced its reduction only after others volunteered theirs.
The kingdom recognises cuts are necessary with crude prices faltering, and
that more must be agreed at the next Opec summit on February 12. But it is
determined not to bear the brunt of such cuts. Saudi Arabia's days of being
Opec's swing producer are over, officials insist.
Once Venezuela, Libya, Nigeria, Iran, Qatar and Algeria announced their
reductions - later followed by Qatar and the United Arab Emirates - Saudi
Arabia felt that this showed a willingness among Opec's historically
fractious members to share the burden of any further reductions.
The Saudi budget will not bear a return to the wide swings in oil output in
earlier years. Faced with war-related costs of Dollars 60bn, a prospective
budget deficit this year of Dollars 8bn, plans under way to upgrade its oil
industry both upstream and down at a cost of Dollars 34bn over the next 10
years and continuing heavy defence spending, the kingdom has no choice but
to maximise revenues.
Economically, it has been forced into putting its own interest first - in a
more emphatic way than at any time since the first oil price explosion in
1973. Politically, Saudi Arabia's emergence unscathed from the Gulf war has
spawned a more assertive foreign policy and a determination not to cede
ground to regional rivals, such as Iran.
The Saudi delegation in Geneva will therefore insist that all further Opec
cuts should be made on a pro-rata basis and related directly to production
capacity. This will safeguard the kingdom's augmented share of Opec output
since the Gulf war - which rose to 36 per cent from 24 per cent after the
kingdom filled 60 per cent of the hole left by lost Iraqi and Kuwaiti
production.
Saudi officials insist they will brook no alternative to this, or some
formula very like it, in Geneva.
However, Kuwait will also demand exemption from any Opec cuts and Iraq, once
it feels the terms are right, is equally determined to re-enter the market.
Iran, ever one of Opec's price hawks and one of Saudi Arabia's fiercest
critics, would prefer higher prices on lower output and has its own
ambitious development and foreign policy plans, most recently including the
newly independent Moslem republics of the former Soviet Union.
Saudi Arabia's ability to get its own way in Geneva will therefore be an
early test of what government officials profess to be new-found muscle. But
when Kuwait and Iraq both re-enter the market and add a powerful depressant
to oil prices, the kingdom will face some much tougher arm-wrestling if it
is to sustain its high oil output.
Whatever the war medals Saudi Arabia has pinned to its chest, they are
unlikely to impress Kuwait, Iraq or Iran, all of which have suffered far
greater war damage to their oil industries and economies than the kingdom
within the last decade.
Saudi Arabia may, in Geneva and at subsequent Opec summits, be forced to be
politically belligerent because it believes it has no economic choice. But
then, neither do its rivals.
