FT  15 APR 92 / Survey of Monaco (8): A pivotal role - Tourism
GONE are the days when the Grand Dukes of Russia would while away the summer
months in Monte Carlo, commandeering whole floors of the Hotel de Paris
where they spent their days scoffing salmon pojardy and blinis doused down
with magnums of the finest champagne.
The Monte Carlo of today still plays host to Europe's old and new wealth
when they descend on Monaco for the Bal du Rose in March, the Tennis Open in
April or the Grand Prix every May. It is for these visitors that most of
Monte Carlo's hotels are still in the luxury category and that the Place du
Casino is littered with the glossy shopfronts of Chanel and Cartier.
But the bulk of the principality's 3.5m annual visitors have more mundane
tastes. More than 3m of them are day trippers. These tourists have their own
attractions. The Societe des Bains de Mers (SBM), which owns the opulent
Hotel de Paris and the Monte Carlo casino, has renovated the Cafe de Paris
with its al fresco tables and ranks of gaming machines for them. Meanwhile
the Societe Monegasque de Tourisme Sous-Marine has sunk an aged tug-boat and
a replica Roman galley to entertain the passengers on its new Seabus
submarine during their 45-minute sub-aquatic tour of the harbour among the
seaweed, sponges and sea anemones.
Tourism is still a pivotal part of Monaco's economy, representing roughly 25
per cent of GDP. Monaco, like other tourist centres, was affected last year
by the impact of the Gulf war on international travel from the US and Japan
in the early months of 1991. The number of visitors staying for at least one
night fell by 20 per cent in the first half of 1991 but rallied in the
second half to produce an overall reduction of just 2 per cent to 239,043
for the full year.
The market has since recovered. 'Tourism started to pick up last August and
since then demand has been very healthy,' said Mr Gilles Noghes, managing
director of the Monaco Tourism Board. 'So far everything suggests that 1992
should be a very satisfactory year.'
Although day trippers, mainly from nearby France and Italy, now represent
the majority of Monaco's visitors, the 240,000 or so people who stay
overnight in the principality each year are much more important in terms of
revenue.
Until relatively recently, Monaco's tourism market was dominated by leisure
travellers rather than those on business. The principality's social calendar
 -from the charity balls to a new Jazz Festival, the first of which will be
held this June - aims at this market.
But in recent years business travel has become increasingly important,
providing 30 per cent of the principality's overnight visitors last year
compared with 10 per cent in the early 1970s. Business travel is seen as a
big growth market for the future. Monaco is already established as a centre
for management conferences - such as the TV Festival earlier this year - but
the government is now investing heavily in the construction of new
exhibition facilities, the Centre Culturel des Expositions, scheduled to
open on the Avenue Princess Grace in three years' time.
This project will be accompanied by an extension of Monaco's hotel
facilities. Two new hotels have already opened. The luxury Metropole, with
its marble floors and tapestry-draped walls, opened two years ago on the
Avenue de la Madonne near Place du Casino as a joint venture between Mr
Nabil Boustany, a Lebanese businessman, and the Conrad International arm of
the Hilton group. At about the same time the Abela Hotel also opened as a
200-room complex near the Fontvieille industrial development. In three
years' time, yet another new hotel will come on stream when the SBM
completes its new 400-room luxury hotel and casino complex near the Sporting
Club.
Mr Noghes is convinced that the market can withstand this increase in
capacity. 'This is an expanding market,' he said. 'The Metropole and the
Abela are both doing well as are the older hotels. The fact of the matter is
that at certain times of the year Monaco still does not have enough hotel
rooms and it will need even more in the future when the new exhibition
centre opens.'
The projected growth in business travel also ought to help alleviate the
problem of the seasonality of Monaco's appeal. Conferences and exhibitions
can, after all, be held at the times when the social calendar is quietest
and leisure tourism is quietest. The principality's sunny climate means that
Monaco is still attractive to visitors even at those quieter times of the
year. The SBM plans to invest in new services for business visitors in its
luxury hotels, such as faxes in rooms, to meet the needs of this market.
However, as the local tourist industry is well aware, it would be
counter-productive to boost business travel to such an extent that Monaco
was relegated to the ranks of the year-round conference centres. Much of its
appeal, even to people visiting the principality for exhibitions,
conferences or business meetings is its leisurely ambience.
The tourist board is also investing in the leisure travel sector. It
recently introduced a 'Passport to Monte Carlo' package of weekend breaks
intended to fill the big hotels during off-season weekends after the weekday
conference visitors have gone home.
It is also seeking to develop new national markets. Most of Monaco's
visitors come from Italy (30 per cent) and France (19 per cent) followed by
the US (12 per cent) where Monaco still has a special cachet thanks largely
to the legacy of Princess Grace. The tourist board now has marketing and
information offices in Japan and the US, as well as in Europe. Last year it
opened its first office in Madrid to try to develop the Spanish market.
Mr Raoul Biancheri, executive chairman of the SBM, is convinced that the
southern Mediterranean will be increasingly important as a source of custom
in the future. 'This region must be a key growth market for us,' he said.
But there is one group of tourists that Monaco will probably never attract.
The tone of the principality may be a touch lower than in the days when the
Russian Grand Dukes drank the cellars dry at the Hotel de Paris, but Monte
Carlo is still well beyond the means of the budget traveller. So much so
that the 'Let's Go Budget Guide to France' advises its impecunious readers
to eschew the hotels and hostelries of Monaco in favour of 'exile in Beau
Soleil' just across the French border 'where hotels are slightly cheaper'.
