FT  02 SEP 92 / World Trade News: EC, US agree to seek end of oilseeds row
SENIOR EC and US trade officials agreed yesterday to try for a solution to
their long-running dispute over oilseeds subsidies by the end of this month.
The move confirmed the truce they agreed at the end of July is still
holding, and raises hopes both sides still have their eye on the greater
stakes of an end to the Uruguay Round world trade talks under the aegis of
Gatt.
Washington is delaying a hit list of Dollars 1bn (Pounds 502m) in EC food
and drink exports which would bear punitive tariffs under US trade law. But
the EC would almost certainly retaliate if it felt the US were acting
outside multilateral accords, with the risk the worsening row could scupper
the Uruguay Round.
The oilseeds dispute began in a 1990 Gatt ruling finding that the EC
discriminated against US oilseed exporters, who were guaranteed duty-free
access to the Community during the 1962 Kennedy Round of Gatt talks. The EC
amended its regime in August last year, in line with the reforms to its
Common Agricultural Policy finally pushed through in May.
In April, a reconvened Gatt panel rejected the EC changes as insufficient.
Brussels insists the panel exceeded its brief by basing its judgment on the
'final act' of the Uruguay Round published last December, which as yet has
no agreed status, aspects of which the EC is seeking to negotiate.
The EC responded to one of two options suggested by the April ruling,
offering to negotiate compensation for the US. Washington and the US
soyabean lobby say this does not address damage to soya producers.
Brussels says the EC is acting within Gatt dispute rules, while refusing to
change its oilseed subsidy regime. 'If no deal comes by the end of
September,' one said, 'that doesn't mean the US is entitled to retaliate
unilaterally.' The EC hopes to settle the matter at a Gatt council meeting
on September 29.
The question is whether Gatt and the US will accept that the EC's farm
reform, which switches emphasis from price support to direct income payments
to farmers who must take land out of production to win compensation, will
restrain EC output of all farm produce including oilseeds.
Brussels says it will, and these payments should be allowable in a final
Uruguay Round deal, where it is hoped to include a definitive oilseeds
settlement.
