FT  17 MAR 92 / Arts: City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra - Royal Festival
Hall
A decade of war and revolution is the subject of this year's arts events in
'Towards the Millennium'. The festival, which is surveying the cultural
legacy of the 20th century on an annual basis up to the year 2000, is
presently engaged on the decade 1911-1920. When concerts are arranged by
chronology in this fashion, it is fascinating to reflect on how posterity
has selected what it wants to hear. For there is a clear dividing-line. The
orchestral concerts, being given by Simon Rattle and the CBSO, include a
good proportion of present-day favourites; while the smaller-scale events
feature music that is still liable to be looked upon as new and difficult.
There was certainly nothing to frighten people away from Friday's concert,
although even the lure of Rattle and his orchestra in a programme for which
they are superbly well equipped had not succeeded in drawing a full house. A
pity, as the invigorating opening of Nielsen's Third Symphony announced that
the team was on good form. Their performances of the big showpieces from
this period are rarely flashy: the musicians rather give the impression of
having worked assiduously with their Music Director and produce accounts of
each score that are musically penetrating, exciting where appropriate, but
never in a superficial way.
It would be quite possible, for example, to find a performance of Ravel's
Daphnis et Chloe that gave a more scintillating expose of precise sounds or
an uninhibited display of orchestral muscle. What would be difficult is to
equal Rattle's expressiveness and feeling for atmosphere - a heady
sensuality, often seducing the ear with ravishing quietness on the part of
the CBSO musicians and Chorus.
There was some exquisite playing in the evening's novelty, too. This was
Szymanowski's Songs of a Fairy-tale Princess, three miniatures in which a
high soprano floats away on stratospheric cadenzas over lush and exotic
tinkling from celesta and piano, a sound-world shamelessly borrowed from
Stravinsky's opera Le Rossignol. Eileen Hulse was the effortless soloist and
Rattle the chivalrous accompanist who let her every phrase be heard.
