FT  21 NOV 92 / International Company News: Ice-cream ambitions take a
licking - The rapid rise and fall of Clarke Foods and its colourful founder
HENRY CLARKE landed in Britain three years ago with a mission. The colourful
American, with a flair for promotion, legendary in the ice-cream industry,
aimed to teach Britons the delights of quality mass market ice-cream.
A firm fan of maple walnut, Mr Clarke was horrified to discover most Britons
using ice cream as a mere moistener for apple pie.
Yet it was precisely his aim to upgrade British eating habits during a
recession, and the manner in which he set out to achieve it, which many cite
as a substantial reason for the demise of his company, Clarke Foods.
Nestle, the Swiss-owned foods giant, earlier this week was able to snap up
the assets and business of what had become, in just 20 months, Britain's
second largest ice-cream manufacturer.
The problems behind Clarke's demise appear to have been manifold.
They include personality clashes with Mr Clarke, whose impish face and cosy
Henry Fonda voice mask an iron will, and inflexible financing arrangements.
Finally, sheer bad luck dogged the company through its most crucial summer.
Mr Clarke was known to be a shrewd dealmaker in the US, where he built up
two companies covering nursing homes, guns and the inevitable ice cream over
some 20 years.
When he was ousted from the second, he packed up his family and came to the
UK to start again. Here, he and his three sons, Robert, David and Michael,
set about building up Clarke Foods from a series of disparate loss-making
and largely ignored companies.
Even the most critical industry observers give Mr Clarke credit for making
tight deals. For example, in 1991 he swapped a 16.75 per cent stake in his
company, Yelverton Investments - then an untried investment vehicle - for
Hillsdown Holdings' ice cream businesses, including the Hortons and Fiesta
brands.
'He was virtually given the assets,' said one industry analyst.
When he bought Lyons Maid for Pounds 12m, one of Britain's best known
ice-cream's names, Mr Clarke got a discount to offset redundancy payments
planned for later in the year.
Yet it was with the Lyons Maid purchase that Mr Clarke's dreams began to
melt. Arguments over the use of the Lyons name delayed the deal by five
months until February 1992. The delay eventually played a key part in the
company's final difficulties, when problems with the installation of
equipment dragged on into the crucial summer months.
Few disputed that Lyons Maid was a golden opportunity. However, many doubted
whether the small family-run company could meet the Herculean task thrust
upon it. It had to focus on maintaining the successful turnround of the
Hillsdown businesses while reviving the long-ignored Lyons Maid brand name.
To add to the task, Mr Clarke had his own private agenda. The man credited
with transforming a chocolate covered vanilla square into America's
best-selling novelty ice-cream, the Klondike bar, he planned to repeat that
success in the UK. The launch of the Clarke bar and a take-home premium
ice-cream brand under the Clarke's flag, was added to the timetable.
Finally, a mammoth capital investment programme was begun to install
high-tech manufacturing equipment.
'He was trying to fight on five fronts with inadequate financing and
marginal resourcing,' said Mr Michael Landymore of the company's former
brokers, Henderson Crosthwaite. 'Basically, he wanted to be in Berlin before
landing the tanks at Omaha Beach.'
The fifth front was the longest recession in Britain since the 1930s. 'He
was also trying to launch a premium brand at a time when the consumer was
trading down,' another analyst said. 'Everything had to go well for him to
achieve his targets.'
Unfortunately it did not. The installation of the equipment was plagued by
setbacks. Instead of churning out ice cream in February as planned, the
factories were not fully operational until the middle of July. By that time,
Britain was being drenched by record rain levels.
August, normally one of the best months for ice-cream sales, was the wettest
in 53 years.
Mr Clarke, who has a home in Florida, then appeared to make a crucial
mistake. He believed that the rain in Britain could not continue for ever.
Factories worked round the clock to produce record amounts of ice-cream
which never left the freezers.
Insiders claim Mr Clarke refused to heed warnings. 'He grew increasingly
autocratic,' said one. 'He would not listen to advice, nor to his own
management team.'
Mr Clarke insisted on carrying out a Pounds 6m advertising campaign over the
summer. This included Pounds 1m on the Clarke's premium brand, featuring
photographs of himself and his three sons, when the product was not getting
to the shops.
Industry observers said that at the very least, the Clarke brand should have
been shelved. The premium sector is minute in the context of the overall
Pounds 750m UK ice-cream market and highly competitive.
Mr Clarke's sons, however, are proud of the work completed in the rainy days
of July and August. American through and through, their fondness for unions
is less than warm. However, they cite the super human efforts of the
unionised Liverpool factory to save the company.
The decision to build stocks was justified, they said, because Clarke was
under pressure to deliver to retailers who had been let down by the long
delays and sporadic service in the early summer. And they point to the
successful relaunch of Lyons Maid, when accused of ignoring the impulse
brands.
Yet without the proper financing the outcome became increasingly inevitable.
The company funded its working capital with a restrictive invoice
discounting facility which provided cash only after sales had been achieved.
The drop in demand due to production problems and the wet weather meant
Clarke had only used Pounds 2.5m of this Pounds 8m facility by the time
National Westminster called in the receivers in October. The bank's total
exposure to Clarke was less than Pounds 6m, including a Pounds 3m loan which
industry observers suggested was secured against a disproportionate amount
of collateral. The company's total debts came to about Pounds 25m.
Approaches in August to convert the facility into an overdraft had been
rebuffed after six weeks of negotiation. NatWest has been criticised for
taking so long at a crucial period and opting for receivership, which meant
an asset sale, rather than administration which could have protected
shareholders.
However, the bank says it acted on the advice of professionals. 'Clarke's
faced acute liquidity problems,' it said. 'The scale of their additional
needs was very large.'
Part of the problem seemed to many to be that Clarke owed too little to the
bank. 'If it had owed Pounds 50m, it certainly would have been put into
administration,' said one company insider.
But Mr Clarke himself sees a more basic flaw contributing to his company's
collapse: The simple question of equity. 'You can't slug it out with
Unilever with only Pounds 17m of net worth,' he says. We probably needed to
raise another Pounds 8m, but it would have been better for Pounds 15m.'
At the end of the day, Mr Clarke has no regrets. He has a different
interpretation of what many will see as his failure.
'Yes, I could be criticised for trying to do too much,' he said, 'but we
took companies that were an absolute collection of nothing . . . and turned
them round.'
If Mr Clarke is certain of anything, it is that ice-cream will continue to
play a part in his life and that of his family. 'We are not leaving the
ice-cream business,' he said. And just in case you wondered, he plans to
stay in the UK as well.
