FT  21 APR 92 / Wider choice in the marketplace: John Willman examines the
shake-up in the provision of UK public services
With the election of a fourth-term Conservative government, Britain's public
services look set for the biggest shake-up since the post-war Labour
government created the modern welfare state.
In the last parliament, fundamental reforms were launched in services such
as health, education, housing and care of the elderly. Plans were laid for
contracting out more of the work of central and local government to the
private sector. The Citizen's Charter promised a new relationship between
users and providers of public services.
But progress in most of these measures was slow - not least because many
working in the public services were waiting to see whether they would be
reversed by a change of government. Now, the return of a Tory government
with a majority clears the way for the pace of change to accelerate.
The reforms will revolutionise the provision of Britain's public services.
By the time of the next election, most services will largely be delivered by
independent, competing providers under contract to central and local
government.
Government will play a strategic role, acting as a regulator rather than
being closely involved in the management of services. The customer will be
encouraged to use new rights and entitlements to choose between competing
providers and to demand better services.
The government will continue as the main source of funding for Britain's
public services. But in the debate over the quality of those services, the
individual user will increasingly be in the driving seat.
The reforms are most advanced in the National Health Service (NHS) and
education, where opposition has been deeply rooted among the professionals.
In the NHS, there will be a surge in the numbers of hospitals seeking
independent trust status. An additional 99 trust hospitals joined last
year's first-wave pioneers on April 1 and the Department of Health is
already preparing further hospitals, community and ambulance services for
trust status in 1993. Within the next two to three years the self-governing
trust, operating with its own board outside health authority control, can be
expected to become the normal method of local management throughout the NHS.
GP fundholding, under which family doctors hold budgets and purchase
hospital care on behalf of their patients, is also growing. The 300
practices which became fundholders in 1991 were joined by another 250
practices on April 1, so that fundholding already covers 15 per cent of the
population.
Currently confined to big practices, the minimum list size needed for GPs to
qualify as fundholders will drop from 9,000 to 7,000 patients from next
year. The services covered by the fundholding scheme will be extended next
year to health visiting and district nursing. And with experiments designed
to allow even the smallest practice to purchase services on behalf of
patients, fundholding will become the norm within a few years.
Once that happens, it will be the family doctor who becomes the linchpin of
the NHS, commissioning health care and choosing hospitals in the internal
market. The district health authorities will wither away, leaving the
regional health authorities to dispense money to the fundholders and provide
finance for trusts where needed.
In education, only 200 schools have so far opted out of local education
authority (LEA) control for grant-maintained status. But many of the 5,000
secondary schools in England and Wales are now likely to follow suit. At
present, the incentives to opt out are considerable. Apart from freedom from
LEA interference, grant-maintained schools are allocated a share of the
LEA's administration budget to spend on extra teachers, buildings, materials
or whatever the governors wish.
With individual schools now receiving resources largely in proportion to the
number of pupils they attract, schools will increasingly compete as
independent units in the marketplace for pupils. More schools will opt for
selective entry or specialise in other ways, such as the city technology
colleges.
The LEA will shrink to an 'educator of last resort' and local education
ombudsman. Functions such as inspection, which it now provides to schools,
will be bought in from the private sector.
In local government, services such as refuse removal and street cleaning are
already subject to compulsory competitive tendering (CCT) where the council
workforce has to compete against bids from private contractors. But CCT is
to be extended to core town hall functions such as collection of local
taxes, architecture and planning.
At present, four out of five contracts put out to tender are won by the
council workforce. But even when the work stays in-house, the process of
tendering for it is revolutionary, for it turns the council workforce into a
semi-independent organisation, which needs to win contracts to survive.
Much more council housing is likely to pass out of local authority ownership
through transfers to housing associations and action trusts. Councils may
retain the right to nominate people for tenancies, but will surrender the
management of rented housing to the voluntary sector which can more easily
raise finance for ation.
The separation of purchasing and provision is set to be extended next year
into the care of the elderly and handicapped, with the introduction of the
community care reforms. Local authorities will become responsible for
purchasing care, but will buy services from a wide range of providers: the
voluntary and private sectors, as well as their own social services
departments.
The cumulative effect of all these developments will be to turn the local
authority into a purchaser of services on behalf of the community,
increasingly distanced from their provision. This will allow it to
concentrate on improving standards rather than on its responsibilities as an
employer or landlord.
A similar revolution in separating purchasing and provision of public
services is under way in central government. Many Civil Service functions
have been reorganised into executive agencies - separate organisations with
management autonomy which contract with government departments to deliver
services such as the payment of benefits and running jobcentres.
Competitive tendering will expose more of the Civil Service to the pressures
already the norm in local government. Some government support services such
as security, photocopying and cleaning have been contracted out. But a much
wider range of clerical, administrative and professional functions is to be
opened to competition.
All government departments have now submitted to the Treasury details of
work they intend to put out to tender in the summer. In the Inland Revenue,
for example, this covers more than one in four of its 65,000 jobs.
By the next election, the slimline government departments which will be left
could concentrate on policymaking and managing the contracts under which the
work is done.
Perhaps only in public transport are such initiatives lagging behind. But it
is possible to discern the emergence of a similar outcome from the
government's watered-down plans for privatising British Rail. With outright
privatisation now rejected, only BR's freight operations will be sold off.
However, private sector operators will be allowed to run trains on BR's
tracks, and train services will be franchised out to the private sector.
Ultimately, BR could be left with little other than the tracks, which
private operators pay to use.
If road pricing were introduced so that road transport operators also had to
pay for the use of the infrastructure, all services would effectively be in
the private sector competing on all fours. Public transport would be
provided by private operators who would receive subsidies to run loss-making
but socially desirable services.
Over the next five years, public services will be increasingly bought in
from private contractors; public sector organisations will increasingly be
expected to behave like and compete with private companies. The divide
between the public and private sector will blur and become largely
irrelevant.
Government's role will also change, as it withdraws from the day-to-day
management of public services. Instead it will assume a regulatory role,
guarding the public interest on matters such as service quality, prices
(where there are charges) and competition.
It will encourage the establishment of a direct consumer relationship
between the users of public services and the providers through the Citizen's
Charter. This requires each service to provide its customers with details
about quality. Information will be published on the performance of services
through league tables and other means. And they will be forced to offer
redress - including cash compensation - when targets are not met.
The aim is to turn the user into a consumer operating in a public services
marketplace with competing providers to choose between and the power to
punish them when performance falls below standard.
It is an ambitious programme. If it succeeds, it could lead to a
depoliticisation of the public services, in the same way that the
privatisation of utilities such as gas, water and BT has taken them out of
the political arena. Just as voters no longer appear to hold the government
responsible for the service failures of the utilities, they may feel that
shortcomings in health and education are the fault of individual hospitals
and schools, rather than the health service or state education.
Such hopes may be premature, attractive though they would be from the
government's point of view. While there is scope to improve the quality of
public services within their existing budgets, significant improvements in
some services will require additional resources. In the end, the government
cannot abjure responsibility for public services so long as it is the main
source of their funding.
None the less, the reforms will change the UK's public services beyond
recognition as well as the terms of debate over those services. The argument
will now move on from who is to provide public services to the nature and
quality of the services to be provided.
Additional reporting by Andrew Adonis, Alan Pike and Richard Tomkins.
