FT  14 SEP 92 / Survey on Mauritius (6): Buy-and-hold persists - Stock
market needs bigger players
IN THE three years since its launch in mid-1989 the Mauritius stock market
has come a long way. It has 20 quoted companies, compared with six only
three years ago, and another seven applications are being processed. Market
capitalisation has increased from MR3bn (8 per cent of GDP) two years ago to
MR5.1bn (10.7 per cent of GDP) today. Average turnover is running at MR2m a
week - four times the figure for 1989. Semdex (the Stock Exchange of
Mauritius share price index), having peaked at 179 (July 1989 = 100) in
August 1990 now stands at 162.
Impressive though these growth indicators are, market development is
constrained by structural and cultural considerations; government incentives
are unlikely to change these in the short run. In three years, only MR162m
(Dollars 11.5m) has been raised in the new issue market - less than 0.5 per
cent of total investment in the economy.
One explanation is the concentrated structure of business ownership in
Mauritius, where family-controlled firms dominate. Owners are reluctant to
go to the market to raise new funds - this would bring 'outside'
participation.
Traditionally, Mauritian business has relied on retained earnings and bank
borrowings to finance its development. The recent reduction in interest
rates and excess liquidity in the local capital market seems likely to
facilitate dependence on the banks rather than pushing firms to seek
long-term funds via the stock market.
The government uses tax breaks to encourage firms to go public. Until
recently, stock market-listed firms paid corporate tax of 25 per cent as
against a basic rate of 35 per cent. But this was not attractive for EPZ
companies or hotels, which pay a 15 per cent rate of company tax. In this
year's budget, Mr Sithanen cast his net more widely, seeking to attract EPZ
companies by announcing a 30 per cent tax credit, so that EPZ firms which go
public - none, to date - will now pay 10.5 per cent. Some EPZ firms are
considering a listing, while indirect investment in the largest EPZ company,
the Floreal Group, will be possible later this year when the Ciel Investment
Trust, which has a 67 per cent stake in Floreal, is quoted on the Mauritius
market.
The danger with fiscal incentives is that they encourage firms to make the
minimum number of shares available to satisfy listing requirements - 25 per
cent of their equity - purely to benefit from the reduced rate of profit
tax. This has happened, with the result that several quoted stocks are
seldom traded and overall turnover at 2 per cent of market capitalisation is
low. In part, this also reflects the buy-and-hold culture of individual and
institutional holders.
On the investment side, the government is trying to foster a stock market
investment and trading culture among small savers, by exempting from income
tax dividends received from listed companies a 10 per cent tax credit on
investment in Unit Trusts and a tax credit on investment in new shares
issued by a listed company.
In the 1992 budget, in a move designed to foster the bond market, tax
exemption was broadened to cover loan interest on traded bonds, while the
minister announced plans to create a National Investment Trust company that
will mobilise savings by selling its shares to the public and recycling the
proceeds into investments in parastatals.
The exchange wants greater institutional and foreign participation. But in
so tiny a market - 60 per cent or more of the quoted securities tightly held
 -there is little room for big players. An estimated 40 per cent of turnover
is in one counter: the Mauritius Commercial Bank, the most liquid stock by
far.
