FT  31 JUL 92 / Survey of Power Generation Equipment (6): By-products of the
jet age - Gas turbines are now utilities' preferred choice
GAS turbines have been at the cutting edge of turbomachinery technology for
more than a decade, and are likely to remain so, although the giant strides
made in recent years have already been superseded by a more gradual process
of change.
The relatively new position of gas turbines at the heart of the utilities'
equipment arsenal is due partly to the availability of gas for power
generation, facilitated by the development of combined cycle gas turbine
power plants which use the waste heat from a gas turbine to power a
secondary steam turbine.
The attraction of the system is clean, efficient, and relatively cheap and
quick-to-build power generation, but the advances in gas turbine technology
have involved a hard slog to reach current levels of efficiency and
compactness. In the early 1960s, the thermal efficiency of combined cycle
plants was about 28 per cent, rising to about 40 per cent by 1975 - much the
same as for the most efficient coal-fired steam turbine plants now
available.
Currently, the thermal efficiency of the best gas turbines in combined cycle
has reached 55 per cent. The industry, prompted by its customers, believes
it can raise the figure, but is not promising that it can be done quickly.
'We are still on a rising curve of development in gas turbines,' says Mr
Charles Shields, general manager for sales and marketing at John Brown
Engineering in Clydebank. 'I expect combined cycle to reach 56-57 per cent
efficiency in the next few years, and 60 per cent in the next 20 years.'
Equipment suppliers are not expecting to be able to produce what would
normally be thought of as a 'quantum leap' to propel combined cycle's
thermal efficiency ahead quickly. 'We can see ways of achieving 60 per cent
efficiency thermodynamically,' says Mr Chris Buck, managing director for
Aero and Technology at GEC Alsthom's European Gas Turbines unit. 'How we get
there will be dictated by success of a number of discrete improvements, and
could take a decade or more.'
Manufacturers, in turn, have long recognised that the key route to improved
thermal efficiency is higher firing temperatures in the gas turbine, thus
increasing the exhaust temperature and maximising the application of the
reheat steam cycle.
General Electric's Frame 9F, developed jointly by GE and EGT and claimed as
the world's hottest gas turbine at 1,260 degC, is more than 500 degC hotter
than Frank Whittle's first gas turbine. Its exhaust temperature is 583 degC.
Raising temperatures has been a steady process of advance via 50 degC jumps
as new models are introduced, according to Mr Buck, suggesting that 1,500
degC could be reached in a decade.
The achievement has involved a constant quest for better cooling techniques
within gas turbines. These are often derived from aero-engine practice, and
have passed on to the power generation world many of the sophisticated
prediction methods enabling better design and use of materials in crucial
parts such as turbine blades.
Another way to enable higher temperatures, again handed down from the
aero-engine world, is the use of new heat-resistant materials. In
particular, EGT is looking at single crystal technology which can 'grow' a
turbine blade from a single crystal of a very heat-resistant alloy.
Hitherto, the size of the components in power generation gas turbines has
been a major obstacle to this process, which has been applied in military
aero-engines and is now available on commercial aero-engines. Mr Buck
believes the obstacles to what would be a true quantum leap for combined
cycle technology are close to being overcome, although he warns that such
individual innovations can only be introduced gradually so as to maintain
reliability.
Raising firing temperatures also risks creating a 'two-step forward, one
step back' problem for manufacturers by exacerbating the potential NOx
emissions problem - although carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide emissions
are reduced. This requires a compromise between improving the combustion
process and increasing the firing temperature.
The other main area of interest in combined cycle power generation is in
harnessing different fuels to the process, thus reducing the consumption of
gas for power generation - although most estimates suggest it could be as
much as 15 to 20 years before gas supply will become a real issue.
The most important development is coal gasification, and in particular the
Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle, which combines coal gasification, a
more sophisticated version of the old coal-derived 'town gas,' with combined
cycle gas turbine technology.
The process has been shown to be commercially viable, under certain
circumstances, and has a number of advantages and disadvantages. In terms of
thermal efficiency, it is better than conventional coal-fired generation but
still lags behind natural gas-fired combined cycle at about 44-45 per cent.
But the expected improvements in gas turbines should lift efficiency to 46
per cent in two years or so, according to Mr Shields.
As for emissions, the gasification takes the sulphur out of the coal, thus
removing the need for flue gas desulphurisation equipment that can be
retrofitted to conventional coal-fired plant. Otherwise, emissions are worse
than for natural gas-fired combined cycle.
Perhaps the biggest problem for IGCC in the current power industry
environment is the extra capital cost, which could be prohibitive over the
lifetime of the plant unless there is a source of cheap coal. For the
manufacturers, this provides a spur to develop processes that can reduce the
subsidy such a system might require, says Mr Buck.
The equipment industry is betting that IGCC will feature strongly wherever
coal is an important element of a country's power strategy. In the UK,
studies have assessed the technical performance of both large and
small-scale IGCC, while in the US the Dollars 274m Cool Water project in
California began operating as long ago as 1974.
Last month General Electric announced details of three IGCC projects in the
US which are intended as examples of how full-scale applications of the
technology will be in operation in the late 1990s. GE says numerous IGCC
projects are currently being planned or studied in North America, Europe and
Asia.
In contrast to IGCC which is being targeted at medium- to large scale power
generation, small scale combined cycle generation - up to 10MW - is also
being developed using biomass, an organic vegetable substance which can be
pulverised to produce methane to fuel the gas turbine. Similarly, commercial
exploitation of other fuels for combined cycle such as wood resins and
landfill gases are likely to be concentrated in smaller plants, whether for
power generation alone or in combined heat and power (CHP) projects.
