FT  21 OCT 92 / Republicans struggle to woo women voters: Contentious issues
are being played down
PRESIDENT George Bush, trailing badly in the polls, is faring even worse
among women voters. As a result the Republicans have been struggling to
recast their appeal to women - or, some say, repair the damage they have
already done.
Not only do women constitute the majority of the population but they vote in
greater numbers - up to 10m more, by some estimates.
Mr Bush was at pains in Monday night's final presidential debate to rebut
charges that he, along with his presidential rivals, surrounded himself with
white men. 'We've a good record of appointing women in high positions and
positions of trust and I'm not defensive at all about it.'
His running mate, Vice-President Dan Quayle, has also found a new coyness on
the divisive issue of abortion, and backed away from the more strident
'family values' rhetoric so much a feature of the Republican convention in
August. It was, he said last month, 'a very complex issue' and his concern
was 'to get more of a national reflection on the tragedy of abortion'.
Even some of Mr Bush's supporters concede that the Democrats have appeared
more responsive to women's concerns. Ms Linda DiVall, the Republican
pollster, says 'women tend to look to the government to take a more active
role in solving the problems in their lives'. She cites issues such as
health care, day care, parental leave and the fight against job and pay
discrimination as areas where the more interventionist Democratic approach
appeals.
In many respects women have borne the brunt of current US economic problems,
the central focus of the Democratic campaign. Of families headed by single
women, 45 per cent live in poverty; nearly two-thirds of workers on the
minimum wage are women. A recent survey of women's attitudes showed that the
economic security of their families was the overriding concern.
It also indicated that financial pressures have pushed more women into the
workforce - 57 per cent of the total population - but that working mothers
still feel they are mainly responsible for keeping their families together.
The early emphasis on 'family values' seemed at times wildly out of touch
with these realities. 'I believe the message to working women that came out
of the Republican convention was enormously harmful,' said Ms Page Gardner,
who handles women's issues for the campaign of Governor Bill Clinton. 'What
women want is something that will make it easier for them to juggle work and
family.'
Mrs Marilyn Quayle, the vice-president's wife, took to the pages of the New
York Times to remedy the impression left by her assertion at the convention
that 'most women do not want to be liberated from their essential nature as
women'. She wrote that, far from attacking working women, she believed that
'making choices concerning work and family has become a constant in women's
lives'.
It is not only in the context of family values that women's role and status
in society have been widely discussed.
A series of scandals has drawn attention to the problem of sexual abuse in
the armed services. More significantly, last year's confirmation hearings
for Judge Clarence Thomas, the Supreme Court nominee - and the all-male
Senate judiciary committee's aggressive questioning of Prof Anita Hill, who
accused him of sexual harassment - continue to cast a long shadow.
This spectacle, reinforcing the perception that Washington's institutions
are old-fashioned and insensitive, gave impetus to the record number of
women running this year for high office. Eleven women (10 Democrats) have
been nominated for the Senate, which has now only three women members, of
whom one is a temporary stand-in. These include strong Democratic contenders
in California, Illinois and Pennsylvania, important battleground states in
the presidential election.
Analysts believe the female candidates will help draw women into the
Democratic camp in these states. Ms Harriet Woods, a women's rights
activist, notes that Mr Clinton has made an effort to associate himself
publicly with them - both at the Democratic convention and on the campaign
stump. The Republicans, in contrast, have tended to use surrogates, such as
Ms Lynn Martin, the labour secretary, or the candidates' wives.
The question of abortion is a wild card in the election.
The Supreme Court recently upheld its guarantee of abortion rights by the
narrowest of margins, indicating that another Republican justice could tip
the balance against it. Under the influence of the right wing the Republican
platform in Houston included a strong anti-abortion position, which still
dogs the attempts of Mr Bush and his running mate to play down its
significance.
Polls show economic issues rating higher than abortion with women voters -
but strategists from both parties believe the issue has hidden force. It is
clearly a factor for many upper-middle class Republican women, who may be
deserting the party in significant numbers.
Ms Woods points out that the threat to legalised abortion may reinforce
financial concerns. Ms DiVall argues that Mr Bush can regain women's votes,
but only if he confronts this concern by redefining the debate over economic
opportunities. 'He must make it clear that an activist government is, in
fact, the enemy of choice,' she says.
