FT  11 AUG 92 / Technology: A bitter pill to swallow - Despite strides in
asthma treatment, death from the disease is on the increase
Every year, 4,000 people in the US die from asthma, and a further 500,000
are hospitalised. The news gets worse. Asthma incidence and mortality appear
to be escalating. In 1984, 3,600 died of the disease, while in 1977 the
figure was only 1,700.
The causes of this soaring mortality rate remain unclear. But a medical
controversy has broken out over whether the drugs most widely prescribed to
treat asthma - known as beta2-agonist bronchodilators - may have contributed
to the swelling death totals. Two studies, one in New Zealand and one in
Canada, have suggested beta2-agonists - which include some Olympic athletes'
preferred drug, Clenbuterol - could increase the risk of death from asthma
by more than twofold.
Doctors are grappling to discover an optimum treatment for this debilitating
disease. The question is whether they should switch from existing therapies
to alternatives, of which the most important are anti-inflammatory
cortico-steroids. Their conclusions will shape the fast-growing asthma
treatments market, worth at least Dollars 3bn (Pounds 1.5bn) a year.
Any increase in asthma mortality caused by beta2-agonists is likely to be
small. More significant factors include: changes in the classification of
causes of death; declining access to healthcare in the US, particularly
among poor urban blacks; and, most importantly, increased prevalence of the
disease.
The reasons for increased incidence also remain obscure. But about half of
cases in the UK are directly linked to allergies and the prevalence of these
is rising, according to Richard Fuller, director of respiratory medicine at
Glaxo, the British pharmaceuticals group.
The growth in allergies is linked directly to greater industrialisation.
Modern western houses act as perfect breeding grounds for house-dust mites,
a known cause of asthma. And pets, plants and central heating provide an
ideal environment for the bugs to grow, explains Giovanni Della Cioppa,
medical adviser for asthma in central medical affairs at Ciba-Giegy, the
Swiss pharmaceuticals group.
However, about half of cases cannot be explained by allergies, admits
Fuller. Some cases are related to pollution, smoking and possibly childhood
viruses, he says.
The mechanism causing asthma is only partly understood, says Fuller.
Asthmatic effects are generated when the lungs become hyper-sensitive to
outside stimuli, causing inflammation in the lungs and narrowing the airways
almost to a point of closure. This process makes exhalation difficult,
creating shortness of breath, cough and a sensation of suffocation.
In the allergic type of asthma, the immune cells within the lungs mistake
the allergen, such as a dust-mite, for a dangerous particle. The immune
cells repond by calling in defensive cells, known as mediators, which have
the dual role of killing bacteria and repairing wounds.
To allow the defensive cells to reach the site of apparent infection, the
blood vessels expand, creating the inflammation that obstructs the bronchia
in the lungs. Beta-agonists deal with asthma by dilating the bronchia,
providing almost immediate relief for sufferers. Fuller says it is unclear
how they work, but they are highly effective.
'They were once considered a wonder drug,' says Della Cioppa at Ciba-Geigy.
'They are extremely powerful. But they are not a cure for asthma. They only
treat the symptoms, not the underlying inflammation.'
Francis Cuss, vice-president of clinical research at the Schering-Plough
research institute, says the problem with beta2-agonists is not their
side-effects, which are rare. Rather, patients with a deteriorating
condition tend to rely on the bronchodilator too much, failing to tell their
doctor about their deteriorating condition.
However, the Canadian study has been heavily criticised. Della Cioppa says
there are two possible conclusions to be drawn from it. First, that
beta2-agonists increase mortality. Or second, that people with severe asthma
take more of the drug, and that people with bad asthma are more likely to
die of the disease. He says that otherwise it is like saying aspirin causes
headaches.
Nevertheless, Della Cioppa says the New Zealand study, which had more
limited conclusions, was useful in drawing attention to inappropriate
medication. It has helped trigger important changes in clinical practice.
Hakan Bjoklund, asthma president of Astra Draco, the Swedish group,
explains: 'What has become clear is that moderate or serious asthma should
not be treated by beta2-agonists alone, but also with cortico-steroids to
treat the underlying condition. The beta2-agonists remain highly useful for
treating acute attacks.'
Steroids work by reducing production of the factors that promote
inflammation, according to Fuller at Glaxo. The great advantage of
cortico-steroids is that they treat the underlying inflammation, although
they must be taken continually for a number of weeks before they work.
However, steroids have potential systemic side-effects. In high doses they
can generate Cushing's Syndrome, creating moon-faced features, hunched
shoulders and increased hair growth. In children, the largest asthma
population, they can also inhibit growth. Normally large doses are not used
to treat asthma, so such complications seldom occur.
Nevertheless, while Swedish and British physicians have been willing to
prescribe inhaled steroids - they had 43 per cent of the Swedish and British
markets last year - doctors in the US have been far more reticent. In
America, inhaled steroids have only 11 per cent of the asthma treatment
market. But that reluctance is beginning to change. In 1991 inhaled steroid
sales grew 56 per cent.
One alternative therapy to steroids, used particularly in children, is
Intal, an anti-inflammatory product distributed by Fisons, the British
group. Both Intal, and Fisons' more recent drug, Tilade, produce few
side-effects. They also work by inhibiting the release of the mediators that
cause inflammation.
Meanwhile, pharmaceuticals groups are pouring hundreds of millions of
dollars into asthma drug research and development. The asthma market remains
highly attractive to the pharmaceuticals groups, explains Linda Bilmes at
the Boston Consulting Group. She says this is because:
Asthma is a chronic illness that often requires continual therapy for life.
The market is unsettled with a wide variety of available therapies but no
ideal treatment.
The market is likely to continue to increase at above-average growth rates.
Frost &amp; Sullivan, the market research group, estimates that the world market
will increase by up to 20 per cent a year by value during the 1990s.
There is little competition from low-priced generic manufacturers. This is
because the inhaling devices used to deliver the drugs are patented. Since a
failed device can lead to death, doctors have proved unwilling to trust
generic ones.
The high cost of under-treatment of asthma. The price of asthma is colossal,
explains Bilmes. In 1990, the disease cost the US economy Dollars 6.2bn,
equivalent to 1 per cent of all health expenditure. The largest proportion -
Dollars 1.6bn - was generated by in-patient hospital care.
Given the likely growth in the asthma market - spectacular even by
pharmaceutical industry standards - there is little surprise that the
industry is looking to gain competitive advantage through new, safer and
more effective products. Different routes have been taken to achieve this.
'One aim is to discover steroidal drugs which are more potent, but have a
wider safety margin. To achieve this you need a drug that finds it more
difficult to make its way from the lungs into the body,' says Cuss.
'Alternatively, researchers are looking to find drugs that the liver can
metabolise more quickly, reducing the drug's distribution through the body.'
However, Keith Widdowson, international product manager for allergy at
Ciba-Geigy, argues that the pharmaceuticals groups are a long way from
finding a cure for asthma. The race is likely to be long and expensive.
An article on cancer drugs will appear shortly.
