FT  17 OCT 92 / Private View: The modest face of heroism
WHEN 36 old soldiers dine tonight to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the
battle of Alamein, they will doubtless be transported back to the smoke and
roar of the desert campaign. But does war change a man's whole life?
Among the Rifle Brigade veterans at dinner in Winchester will be Tom Bird, a
retired architect. Four times wounded and three times decorated, he survived
an extraordinary incident during Alamein which the regimental historian has
called 'the most famous of our war.'
The battle at 'Snipe' began with a tricky advance to Kidney Ridge on the
night of October 26 1942. When dawn broke, the 300 men of the 2nd battalion
Rifle Brigade, plus a detachment of Gunners, found themselves with their 19
anti-tank guns and 22 bren carriers in a shallow depression, an enemy dump
occupied by corpses, excrement and flies. They were in the wrong place, too
far forward and virtually surrounded.
From dawn till dusk, with nothing to eat and little to drink, the sleepless
riflemen and gunners were attacked by wave after wave of German and Italian
tanks. Twice during the day they were mistaken for the enemy and mercilessly
shelled by their own side.
They shot 16 tanks before breakfast, and morale was lifted further when a
sergeant hit another at over 1000 yards. But, as the day wore on, the battle
became frantic: men and officers were jumping to the guns to replace the
dead and wounded and ferrying ammunition under terrible enemy fire. At
times, tanks outnumbered guns by 10 to one and were being stopped in their
tracks only yards from the muzzles.
When they were finally able to withdraw at 11.15pm, with one gun in tow, the
defenders of Snipe had lost 70 men killed or wounded. But they had destroyed
or disabled 60 enemy tanks and guns and broken the back of Rommel's
counter-attack. Such was the devastation, a special committee was appointed
to check the score.
The fame of the battle spread quickly. The battalion commander, Lt Col
Victor Turner, badly wounded in the head while acting as a loader, was
awarded the Victoria Cross. Tom Bird, commander of the anti-tank company and
also wounded in the head, won the DSO. Four other officers and 11 men were
decorated.
It was not the first of Bird's exploits. In January 1941, he had been sent
with a carrier platoon to create a diversion behind Italian-occupied Tobruk.
Finding modest resistance behind the wire, he pressed on through the
defences, capturing 2,000 prisoners and 49 guns. He won the Military Cross.
At Sidi Rezegh in November, he was wounded in the ankle. The next year, he
led a night raid on the Italian lines at Gebel Khalakh. Crossing 2,700 yards
of moonlit desert under fire, he captured a dozen prisoners and an anti-tank
gun with the loss of only one man. He was given a bar to his MC. He was not
decorated, however, for getting a supply convoy into - and out of - a
besieged Free French garrison at Bir Hacheim, nor for his frequent night
patrols behind enemy lines.
I asked Bird if he had known in advance how he would behave under fire.
'No, I don't think you do know. It's rather a relief to find, however
frightened you are, that you can appear reasonably calm. Creeping around
behind the enemy lines in the middle of the night I found far more
frightening, really, than trying to remain calm under attack.'
Did you think Snipe was your last day on earth?
He laughed. 'I think probably, yes. No, you never really think that. It did
appear we were being fired at all day from every direction. At the end I
looked upon it in a rather different light than people do now. My second in
command, Hugo Salmon, had been killed. Four of my officers and I had been
wounded and we'd lost all our guns. So it didn't seem like much of a
victory.'
Because of his wounds, and through a family friendship, the young major was
appointed ADC to General Wavell, now commander-in-chief, Far East, in Delhi.
Leaving behind the heat, sand and flies, he found himself in a house with
113 servants. 'But I found the change not difficult to adjust to.' He
smiled. 'Within a week or so, you were just rather indignant if your martini
wasn't ready when you wanted it.'
After briefly rejoining the battalion to command a dash to Beirut to quell a
riot, Bird was given home leave. His father, who had been seriously wounded
in both legs at Gallipoli in the first war, was ill. The son became an
infantry instructor at Barnard Castle, Yorkshire. But after seven months,
and with the army now in northern Europe, Bird felt he should be fighting
again.
He joined the 8th battalion on the Albert Canal in Belgium. Two days later,
driving through a village under heavy fire, he got out of his vehicle to
help a wounded bren gunner. He was instantly pierced through the back, chest
and leg by a shrapnel burst. Rescued under cover of a smokescreen, he joined
the critical list.
Bird was lucky. He ended the war as ADC to Field-Marshal 'Jumbo' Wilson at
the British mission in Washington. There he fell in love with Alice
Hunsaker, daughter of a distinguished Bostonian aeronautical engineer, and
married her.
Gentle humour, not heroics, is what distinguishes Tom Bird. He is a man
whose eyes seem always alight; when his voice slows and tails off, it is a
sure sign that a joke is coming up. But there is nothing artificial about
his singular brand of humorous understatement.
As a Winchester schoolboy (many Rifle Brigade officers were there or at
Eton, as most of the men were from London's East End), he learned to draw
and thought of becoming a painter. He seemed to take after his uncle
Kenneth, nom de plume 'Fougasse,' the cartoonist and former editor of Punch.
But he also opened the batting for his school cricket team. 'I suppose my
Walter Mitty dream would be to open the innings for England against
Australia,' he said slowly. 'At Lord's' He went climbing and skiing in the
Swiss Alps. 'It was supposed to be about 'the majesty of the mountains' and
so on. But I think there is no doubt that what I enjoyed was taking the
risks.'
After school he studied architecture in London, joining the Rifle Brigade
reserves because he was convinced after Munich that war was imminent and his
father advised him it was best to sign up early. His elder brother, Edward,
had chosen the same regiment. But Edward was killed at Calais early in the
war. Tom was in the desert when he heard.
'You asked what changed my life most,' he said. 'I think my brother being
killed changed my life the most. We did everything together. I hadn't been
able to imagine life without him . . . I think for a time after that I
didn't mind too much what happened to me, either.'
After the war, Bird went back to architectural school; he described how the
student-colonels would intimidate the lecturers from the front row. Then he
went into partnership with another young architect, Richard Tyler, a sapper
who had lost a leg at the battle of Sidi Rezegh and whom he had met in
Heliopolis hospital near Cairo.
I asked Bird if peace had come as an anti-climax after wartime celebrity.
'Snipe wasn't that famous then. It has become famous in a way because it was
the turning point of Alamein, which has been regarded as the turning point
of the war. But I didn't suffer from being a celebrity, I can assure you of
that.'
He likes talking about the war and has felt more free to do so as he has got
older. (He is now a very fit-looking 74). 'I remembered about old soldiers
binding on about the war. So I hope I don't. It helps to have a wife with a
different background - who was not brought up as a Wykehamist.' He laughed.
'And then to have children who don't mind what they say to you. I hope they
have prevented me from becoming too pompous.
'Nonetheless, even now, I suppose most of my most interesting experiences
were during the war. Therefore, when I reminisce it tends to be about them.'
Bird has two sons, Tony and Nicky, and a daughter, Sarah. I asked: do your
sons feel they missed something?
'I should be very surprised indeed if they thought that.'
Do you think they missed something?
'No. They missed an experience, but there are lots of other experiences.'
Were you never tempted to criticise the peacetime generation?
'That is not how I felt, no. One of the things I'm grateful for is that,
when it came to the point, most of us didn't have any trouble in deciding it
was a war worth fighting. But I don't think we felt that entitled us to have
any particular views about what the next generation should do . . . or I
certainly didn't'
Was the war the high point?
'No, I think I have been very fortunate in my life. I had a job which I
enjoyed doing, a partner with whom I got on very well, and a wife and family
with whom I continue to have a lot of fun.
'There were things I told myself during the war: I'll never go camping
again, I'll never get up before dawn again, and I'm absolutely never going
to put on a white tie and a boiled shirt again. I remember promising myself,
even during Snipe: If I live through today, I shall never, never go to a
dance again.
'But it isn't true of, course, because since then I have rather enjoyed
going camping and enjoyed seeing the dawn - though I certainly haven't
enjoyed going to dances.'
Do war veterans share a secret incomprehensible to the rest of us?
'Well, they are probably among my best friends, and we do have a nice time
together.'
But is your experience incommunicable?
'I doubt it. I suppose if you have been on an adventure, then that adventure
will always be special to those people, like a party climbing Kanchenjunga.
But it wouldn't have to be a war.
'Mostly, we did what we were told. I just happened to be somewhere where I
did what I was told. And it just happened I was told to do something rather
unpleasant and risky. But I don't think I went far beyond the call of duty,
which I think Vic Turner did. He always had to be in the middle of
absolutely everything.'
What about the feeling of having done one's bit: that you have earned that
extra bottle of wine at dinner?
He laughed. 'No, that's not why I have the extra bottle of wine. I don't
feel that I have deserved anything special. It was just something that
happened in my time.'
