FT  10 JUL 92 / MacGregor plans levy toprotect holidaymakers
THE GOVERNMENT moved swiftly last night to protect British holidaymakers
after the travel industry warned there was a strong possibility that a tour
company could collapse this summer, leaving customers stranded abroad.
Mr John MacGregor, the transport secretary, said he would seek parliamentary
approval to bolster the fund which returns customers' money and brings them
home if their travel company collapses.
Mr MacGregor intends to impose a levy on the travel industry to replenish
the Air Travel Trust Fund, administered by the Civil Aviation Authority. The
fund was depleted by last year's collapse of the International Leisure Group
(ILG).
The levy is likely to be passed on to consumers. The Association of British
Travel Agents (Abta), yesterday suggested that a Pounds 1 levy be paid by
every purchaser of a charter package holiday.
Mr MacGregor said that, until legislation was introduced to provide for a
levy, the government would offer a guarantee to enable the fund to borrow
money.
Mr MacGregor acted after the CAA's accounts, published yesterday, showed
that the fund stood at Pounds 5.1m at the end of March after provisions,
compared with Pounds 26.7m a year earlier. Tour company failures since the
year-end will result in further calls on the fund of about Pounds 1.5m.
The CAA warned: 'There have been failures already in the present year, and
the market prospects for summer 1992 are unsettled. It is possible that
either a single failure of a relatively small company in the peak season, or
a number of small failures at the end of the season, could exhaust the
fund's assets.'
Abta said yesterday that 12 relatively small tour operators had collapsed
this year.
The two largest travel companies, Thomson and Owners Abroad, have warned
that continued price discounting could lead to the collapse of another
holiday company this summer.
Mr Charles Newbold, Thomson's managing director, said: 'You can't continue
to sell holidays at a large discount without losing money, and some people
haven't got money to lose.' Mr Howard Klein, Owners Abroad's chairman, said
that, if the current overcapacity in the holiday market continued into the
high season, a medium-sized company would probably collapse.
The fund is part of the system of consumer protection established in the
wake of the collapse in 1974 of Court Line, and its Horizon and Clarkson
Holidays subsidiaries. All providers of charter-based package holidays have
to arrange a bond, equivalent to between 10 and 15 per cent of their annual
turnover, to ensure payments are returned and holidaymakers repatriated if
the company collapses.
The trust fund is used if the bond is insufficient. The fund is more likely
to prove inadequate if a company fails during the summer, as this is when
the largest number of its customers require repatriation.
The CAA said it had made provisions in this year's accounts to cover
uncertainty over the final cost of the ILG collapse, currently the subject
of litigation.
CAA plans curb on airport fees, Page 9
