FT  26 MAY 92 / The Lex Column: Private hopes in Paris
Last week's surprise announcement that the French government plans to sell
most of its remaining stake in Total puts privatisation firmly back on the
financial markets' agenda. With FF2bn already in the kitty from Elf
Aquitaine, the FF8bn-FF10bn which might flow from lightening the state's
holding in a second oil company and the FF2bn-FF3bn expected from the sale
of a 24 per cent stake in the CNP life insurance company will take aggregate
privatisation proceeds this year well beyond the government's revised FF10bn
target (set just one month ago). The questions now are who will be next, and
what impact will the new paper have on equities and bonds?
The legendary vicar of Bray might well have been proud of the numerous
changes in French Socialist industrial policy over the past decade, which
have owed much to the triumph of pragmatism over principle. Mr Mitterrand's
famous ni-ni pledge, for example - neither nationalisation, nor
privatisation - has now clearly been modified through the government's
willingness to reduce its stake in some public companies to 51 per cent. The
speed with which this will be pursued in the short term will depend on the
success of the Total operation, and the extent to which asset sales rather
than a widening budget deficit are used to finance prime minister
Beregovoy's assault on unemployment in the run up to next year's poll.
Longer term, the prospect is for an ambitious privatisation programme of up
to FF300bn over the life of a government if the conservative parties are
elected, or a more modest one of perhaps FF50bn if the Socialists get back.
Total always looked a plausible choice given its healthy share price, its
appeal to international investors, and its status in the market as a
commercial rather than a state entity. Betting on the next candidates is
more tricky. The big insurers - UAP, GAN and AGF - are the favourites in
some quarters and enabling legislation permitting the government's stakes to
be reduced below 75 per cent will soon be in place.
A possible complication - as with some of the industrial companies which
expanded outside France in the second half of the 1980s - is that they may
want to keep too much of the new capital for themselves. Shearson Lehman
believes Rhone-Poulenc and Pechiney (with government stakes of 57 and 56 per
cent respectively) meet most of the criteria, although the former does not
have listed ordinary shares and the latter's restructuring is not yet
complete.
Since longer-run privatisation proceeds will be used mainly to repay debt,
the impact on French fixed-income markets hardly be negative. The shares of
those companies in line for partial privatisation should benefit as the
perception grows that state involvement will be cut, although the shares of
the insurers have already outperformed for this reason. As for the market as
a whole, much may depend on whether French investors can be persuaded to
load up with equities, given a reduced supply of bonds.
