FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (1): End of a long dark
winter - The collapse of Soviet hegemony offers the Baltic countries an
opportunity to restore historic connections
THE Cold War which chilled the Baltic region for nearly half a century is
over, and with it the sterile balance of fear which turned many Baltic
harbours into naval bases and reduced east-west trade to a trickle.
Instead of a highway, like the Mediterranean, this northern inland sea
became a backwater: a cordon sanitaire between the Nordic world and the
Slavic hinterlands. It was divided between the flourishing market economies
of its northern and far western shores and the impoverished,
Soviet-dominated south and east.
Now, the disappearance of these artificial divisions has created a sudden
and unexpected opportunity to restore old connections and establish new
networks for the 95m people, with an aggregate gross national product of
Dollars 600bn, who live in the lands which drain into the Baltic sea.
Optimists such as Mr Carl Bildt, the Swedish prime minister, believe that
'liberation of the economies of north western Russia and the Baltic states,
and the entry of Finland, Sweden and Norway into the emerging European
Union, is a powerful combination that promises to turn northern Europe into
a growth region in the decades ahead.'
Like others who dream of a revitalised north which is no longer on the
periphery, but an integrated part of Europe, he accepts that its future
depends largely on what happens beyond the Baltic shores.
A more assertively nationalistic Russia could jeopardise the first tentative
moves to Baltic integration. A westward-looking Russia, by contrast, would
play a vital part in the re-emergence of northern Europe. Above all, it
would stimulate the full development of St Petersburg as that window on the
west decreed by Peter the Great in 1703, when he ordered Italian architects
to build a granite city on the frozen marshland won from Sweden at the
battle of Poltava.
With nine different languages, no obvious central core, a variety of
religions and cultures and the lack of any common identity, it is doubtful
whether the states which border the Baltic will ever create over-arching
political institutions. 'Historically the peoples round the Baltic have seen
themselves as being part of a common area,' explains Mr Ivo Iliste, head of
the Swedish based Baltic Institute. 'Outer forces, particularly Russia, have
made them realise there may be a point in coming together.'
Thus far Baltic history has been more a struggle for supremacy than
co-operation, as Sweden, followed by Russia and Germany, sought hegemony
over the disparate countries of the region. 'The area has been the recipient
not the creator of civilising influences,' says Professor David Kirby of
London University. The Baltic region idea remains 'flimsy,' with 'many
interests pulling against it,' but a 'flexible Baltic identity' could
emerge, he believes.
The re-unification of Germany means that the most powerful economy in Europe
is now back with a more solid presence in the western Baltic. Once the
economy of the five eastern Lander recovers, and Berlin resumes its full
role as Germany's capital, the Baltic ports which traditionally handled
trade from this region, including those such as Szczecin and Gdansk, which
are now in Poland, will benefit from renewed prosperity in their German as
well as wider central European hinterland.
Such a prospect inevitably invites comparison with the Hanseatic League,
which stimulated Baltic trading from the 13th century on. Mr Pehr
Gyllenhammar, Volvo's executive chairman and Mr Bjorn Engholm, Schleswig
Holstein's Social Democratic prime minister, have spoken up enthusiastically
for a revival.
Meanwhile, the three Baltic states, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, have
already established a Baltic Assembly - and the Nordic countries all belong
to the loosely organised Nordic Council. But these are not embryonic
supranational bodies with wide powers and responsibilities.
Last March, in Copenhagen, a Council of the Baltic Sea States was
established by Danish-German initiative as a regional forum to intensify
co-operation and co-ordination based on free market principles and
commitment to democratic institutions. Its initial declaration points to a
range of issues for co-operation including economic and technological
assistance, environmental protection, transport developments and cultural,
educational and tourist exchanges. But the Council lacks a secretariat or an
office and is very much inter-governmental.
Other tentative organisations are emerging. Chambers of commerce have
established a common body. So have the Baltic ports. The universities of the
area are developing exchanges and scholarships. Cultural contacts are
growing.
But economic convergence over the Baltic area looks as if it will take a
long time. The transition from the Soviet command economy to the free market
on the eastern side of the Baltic will be painful and slow. A variety of
international and bilateral assistance is being provided at government
level, but so far western private companies have been more cautious. The
Nordic recession has meant leaner times at home, and greater reluctance to
develop corporate strategies in the Baltic area without credit guarantees.
In the longer term, however, many manufacturing companies - faced with high
labour and other costs in Scandinavia and Germany - are likely to invest in
low-cost production plants close to the southern and eastern shores of the
Baltic in preference to southern Europe or distant Asia.
Over the last two traumatic years the foreign trade of Russia and the newly
independent Baltic states has actually declined. But all three Baltic states
are re-orientating their economies and trade westward. Longer term, the
reconstruction of European Russia, especially the greater St Petersburg
region, should revive the cross-Baltic trade which flourished before the
first world war as Russia industrialised and urbanised at full speed.
Much depends on long term infrastructure projects such as the proposed Via
Baltica which would plug both sides of the Baltic into the European motorway
network and stimulate the economic development of the Baltic hinterland.
Modernising the ports like Kaliningrad, Gdansk, Riga, Tallinn and St
Petersburg to take fuller advantage of low cost sea transport is also a
priority.
Environmental concerns demand prompt action to clean up the heavily polluted
Baltic and the air contaminated by the heavy industries of the former
communist states. Nordic technology is already helping to repair nuclear
power stations in the east.
At present, however, turning dreams into reality is hard. This winter north
west Russia and the Baltic states are struggling to maintain energy and food
supplies. Anxieties remain over the continuing Russian military presence in
the Baltic states and Kaliningrad. Discriminatory nationality laws in
Estonia and Latvia threaten to stir up ethnic tensions as Russians feel they
are treated as second class citizens.
Politically, the re-emergence of a vibrant Baltic region could help Poland,
together with Hungary and Czechoslovakia, to speed up entry into the EC
behind the Nordic states, whose expected entry, by 1995, will help tilt the
balance of economic power and influence in the Community northwards.
But Professor John Hiden and Patrick Salmon warn in their recent book, The
Baltic Nations and Europe, that the lessons of history suggest the need for
caution. Efforts to translate pan-Baltic dreams into reality between the
first and second world wars were a 'gloomy story of mutual mistrust and
frustrated hopes,' they write.
This time such a denouement may be avoided. Mutual self-interest, backed by
the Helsinki accords on cooperation and security in Europe. argues for the
emergence of a new region of economic prosperity and political co-operation
to replace the rivalries of the past.
