FT  25 NOV 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: 'Green' pound cut lightens
farmers' blues - David Blackwell explains an EC currency move that has
lifted UK support prices
THE DEVALUATION of the 'green pound' by 7 1/2 per cent last week, added to
the cut in interest rates and increase in capital allowances announced in
the chancellor of the exchequer's autumn statement, has taken some of the
gloom out of November for UK farmers.
They feel, however, that any extra money coming their way is no more than
their due. The workings of the European Community's common agriculture
policy are such that the prices they have been guaranteed under EC
intervention schemes have remained virtually unchanged since the UK pulled
sterling out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism in September. But, as the
National Farmers' Union has been quick to point out, the price of imported
farm inputs rose immediately sterling was devalued. Regular spending on
imported feeds and fertilisers has risen as well as the cost of tractors and
other farm machinery.
At the same time food suppliers have been sounding warnings of rising
consumer costs. Mr Alan Chandler, of the UK Provision Trade Federation,
predicts 'continuing upward pressure' on food prices.
This arises not only from last week's devaluation, which halved the 14.4 per
cent gap between the green rate and the real exchange rate, but from the
further devaluation of the green pound which must follow on January 1 when
the European Single Market comes into force.
The system of green rates was designed to remove the uncertainties of the
volatile currency markets from the agriculture sector. It is used to convert
EC support prices, which are set in Ecus, to national currencies. In the
past the green rate has usually been set each year by EC farm ministers.
Cross-border, intra-community trade, however, continued at currency market
rates, so a system of 'monetary compensatory amounts' (MCAs) was designed to
iron out the difference between green rates and real exchange rates.
In simple terms, MCAs operate as subsidies or taxes on imports and exports
to eliminate the competitive distortion that would otherwise be caused by
'green' currency gaps. In Britain's case the overvaluation of the 'green
pound' has kept support prices low in real sterling terms, so MCAs have
taken the form of subsidies on imports and taxes on exports in trade with
community members with stronger currencies. But the European Single Market
will abolish border controls at the end of the year, leaving no way of
operating the system.
After last week's devaluation the UK's MCA rate, which was 12.9 per cent, is
down to 5.4 per cent. In the simplest cases this has raised the UK
intervention price (which sets a floor to the market) for common wheat from
Pounds 125.85 a tonne to Pounds 135.32 a tonne, while cutting the MCA for
cheddar cheese from Pounds 263 a tonne to Pounds 118.59.
But the actual rates applied depend on the source of the imports or
destination of the exports. Each EC member has its own MCA (unless its green
currency rate is very close to the real rate) and the MCA tax or subsidy on
a particular trade is determined by consolidating the rates applying in the
exporter's and the importer's countries.
Overall, the agriculture ministry said, the devaluation was expected to
increase food prices by less than 1 per cent. The NFU argued earlier this
month that a full green pound devaluation on January 1 would lift retail
food prices by only 'about 1 per cent.' This was because agricultural
wholesale prices, which make up only about 30 per cent of the retail price
of food, would rise by 3 per cent 'at most'.
Mr Sion Roberts, an NFU economist, also pointed out that there were plenty
of foodstuffs for which EC did not have price support regimes and were
therefore unaffected. He cited potatoes, other fruit and vegetables, and the
pig and poultry sectors.
But Britain's Food &amp; Drink Federation last week stood by its prediction
earlier this month that a full green pound devaluation in January would lift
the price of a loaf of bread by up to 2 pence, a pack of butter by 10 pence
and a bag of sugar by 6 pence. 'Unfortunately these increases are completely
beyond our control and will have some impact on high street prices,' said Mr
Michael Mackenzie, director-general of the FDF.
The NFU welcomed last week's devaluation and said it would continue to press
for the green pound gap to be fully closed by the end of the year. 'The New
Year will herald the introduction of the Single Market so it is essential
that any agrimonetary anomalies should be ironed out by then,' said Mr David
Naish, NFU president.
However, the EC's plan next year to align the green rate and the real
exchange rate at the end of each month will introduce further uncertainty
into the agricultural industry. As Mr Roberts pointed out, if the pound were
to strengthen against other European countries, the resulting revaluation at
the end of the month would be bad for farmers and good for consumers.
