FT  09 APR 92 / Management: Brewers move ahead in Tokyo
When Dirk Enters began marketing Heineken beer in Japan 15 years ago,
foreign labels were an exotic oddity. After years of alliance-building and
gradual expansion, overseas brewers are getting an intoxicating taste of
what may lie ahead.
Each of the four imported beers established in Japan has tied up with one of
the big four domestic brewers. Of the American groups, Budweiser has linked
with Suntory, Coors with Asahi and Miller with Sapporo, while Heineken of
the Netherlands has been working with Kirin.
In the past four years, both imports and foreign beers brewed under licence
locally have increased their share of a growing market, although they still
have only 2.3 per cent, compared with about 5 per cent held by imports in
other beer drinking countries.
'This is an immature beer market,' says Heineken's Enters. He notes that
while consumers are inundated with new labels and advertising campaigns,
Japan lacks Europe's variety of large and private labels and price
competition.
The US competitors appear to be setting their sights particularly high, with
their pricing and marketing strategies aimed at the mass market. Only
Heineken is sticking to the premium segment.
Budweiser, the world's best-selling beer, is already Japan's top import
label - its distinctive all-American label and fun-loving sales pitch seems
to appeal to image-conscious young adults.
While beer may appear a popular tipple at Japanese social occasions, per
capita consumption remains less than half the average in many European
nations. Cultural factors are one reason, with sake and shochu highly
popular. But so too is the heady cost, given the lack of price competition
and the higher tax on beer than on other alcoholic drinks.
Whether foreign brewers proceed alone or with partners who have mixed
feelings about their success, they will have to expand sales in bars,
restaurants and discos, which still account for most of their turnover. They
must also grab more shelf space in liquor shops and the growing ranks of
supermarkets and convenience stores being permitted to sell beer.
The tight reins that tax collectors and local brewers have held on pricing
for decades are being loosened. Last year Japan's Fair Trade Commission
launched an investigation into price-fixing by the big domestic brewers. It
concluded no illegal activity had occurred, but urged brewers to run ads
telling retailers that their published prices were recommendations only.
The small family-run liquor shops that still dominate the retail trade
remain reluctant to discount local brands, although large retailers
regularly cut prices for foreign labels.
The Japanese palate seems sensitive to price.
Budweiser sales soared 80 per cent in the first half of 1990 when local
brewers increased their prices. The Americans' production cost advantage has
helped them narrow the gap.
Foreign brewers have one other trump card: as the beer industry becomes a
global business, Japanese brewers are keen to develop their own export
markets. To do so, they will need close industry allies abroad.
