FT  29 MAY 92 / Canary Wharf: What Now For Docklands - Property market is
jolted
CANARY WHARF'S insolv-ency has severely dented the already battered image of
London's property industry. The banks' decision not to support the project
is a striking vote of no confidence in the property market's future over the
next ten years.
Even if the consequences are fundamental for Docklands the impact on the
rest of London's property market may be rather less dramatic than feared.
Although the market's reputation among banks and investors has been severely
tarnished by Olympia &amp; York's problems, these have been apparent for many
months.
As a result, shares in property company which were knocked sharply when the
scale of O&amp;Y's problems first became known in the spring, were little moved
yesterday.
Canary Wharf's problems could even have a beneficial effect on the market in
the rest of London. If Canary Wharf is no longer seen as a rival to the West
End and the City, the position of Central London landlords may improve.
'The impact could be quite positive in six to twelve months time if the
Jubilee Line is not built and tenants start moving back to the City,' says
Mr Graham Stanley of County NatWest, the brokers.
Canary Wharf's move into administration has large implications for tenants
who have not yet moved into the project. Only 11 per cent of the buildings
are occupied, although leases have been signed on 57 per cent of the space.
The problem is that the costs of the incentives offered to tenants such as
fitting out buildings and taking on the space left vacant in central London
could exceed the economic benefit from the rents paid on the office space.
These obligations to the tenants are not binding on the administrators,
unlike the company. The result may be that a number of Canary Wharf's leases
are cancelled.
In particular, it is possible that large tenants such as Texaco and American
Express, which are due to move to Canary Wharf, will not move from central
London.
American Express's building at Canary Wharf is not yet finished. Moreover,
the cost of the office space rented by American Express in Canary Wharf is
exceeded by the costs of the old space it occupies in central London - in
particular the 240,000 sq ft of space let by its Shearson Lehman subsidiary
in Broadgate in the City. The administrators could decide to seek to cancel
American Express's lease at Canary Wharf to limit the costs of paying rent
of about Pounds 40 per sq ft on the take-back space.
American Express declines to comment, except to say that it is monitoring
events.
The costs of rents and rates on Canary Wharf tenants' old space is likely to
exceed Pounds 20m a year. O&amp;Y took responsibility for about 500,000 sq ft of
tenants' second-hand space at a time when it expected to be able to relet
the property.
Apart from American Express, the companies that had most space taken back by
O&amp;Y are thought to be KPMG Peat Marwick - for which O&amp;Y took back 66,000 sq
ft in Queen Victoria Street, Fleet Street and Stamford Street - and
Manufacturers Hanover Trust, for which O&amp;Y also took back 40,000 sq ft at 7
Princes Street.
If some of these tenants returned to Central London and others were deterred
from taking space in the Docklands, it would have a beneficial effect on the
core London office market.
But the impact should not be overstated. Docklands accounts for just 4.1m sq
ft of empty space out of 34m sq ft in central London according to a survey
published by Debenham Tewson &amp; Chinnocks.
