FT  05 DEC 92 / Property: Secondary uses for second homes
PEOPLE buying holiday homes in Portugal are looking increasingly for
property that will generate rental income to cover annual outgoings. In the
past, they bought more for their own sole use.
The move towards lettings is just one of the changes in today's
cash-strapped market, says Jennie Pinder, director of Euro Property Advisers
in Salisbury, Wiltshire.
Pinder says the popular price for Britons purchasing second homes is now
between Pounds 80,000 and Pounds 150,000. The person who paid Pounds 200,000
two years ago is unlikely to spend more than Pounds 150,000 now.
Pinder believes people are also more concerned with value for money. Those
buying new want to see exactly what they are getting and may be reluctant to
purchase in advance of a property being completed.
This philosophy is giving a boost to resales, where prices are also lower
and homes often come fully furnished. Many of the homes on the agency's
books are resales, with 80 per cent of the vendors being British.
New homes for sale often find themselves competing with resales at lower
prices on the same site. Agents say property prices on Portugal's Algarve
coast are down 30 per cent on those of 1989.
The choice on Euro Property Advisers' resale list (available from
0722-413636) is, however, wide enough to suit most pockets. It starts at
around Pounds 40,000 for a two-bedroom house on a half-acre plot, 15 minutes
from Faro airport.
Towards the top end of the market is a six-bedroom/six-bathroom villa at
Quinta do Lago for Pounds 680,000. It has a lounge, dining room, games room,
wine cellar, gardener's quarters, swimming pool, double garage and
landscaped grounds.
A number of properties on sale are owned by companies, formed by a
consortium of buyers to purchase as a tax-saving exercise. New buyers could
take over the company.
Many second homes are being sold fully furnished, such as a four-bedroom,
three-bathroom villa near Loule, with summer and winter lounges, pool and
garage, for which Pounds 220,000 is asked.
Where families have decided their second home no longer fits the family
budget, the holiday car may also be thrown in to the bargain for a quick
sale.
A two-bedroom house at Bordeira includes an acre plot, irrigation system,
solar heating, garage, swimming pool, all the furniture and a 1980 mini for
Pounds 130,000.
A three-bedroom villa with a similar amount of land at Almancil, 10 minutes
from the sea, brings with it the furniture and a Renault 5 car for Pounds
165,000. A modern resale villa on an acre of hillside near Loule has four
ensuite bedrooms, lounge-dining room, marble floors, air conditioning, a
heated pool, tennis court, double garage, the furniture and a four-wheel
drive Mercedes wagon for Pounds 410,000.
But a sprinkling of new properties in the Algarve is being offered by
Hamptons (London tel: 071-493-8222).
Work has just begun on the first show house at Vila Sol golf course
development near Vilamoura. The course is completed and hosted this year's
Portuguese Open.
The show property, one of four, will probably sell for about Pounds 400,000.
But plots overlooking the course have already succumbed to the market and
are being offered at reductions of 15 per cent, with the cheapest now about
Pounds 65,000.
Under construction is a five-bedroom crescent-shaped house on an ocean-view
site of nearly two acres at Funchal Ridge near Lagos, priced at Pounds
425,000. Hamptons also has a newly-built five-bedroom property with pool at
Penina golf course, a short drive from the coastal town of Portimao, at
Pounds 290,000.
But Hamptons also has a wide range of resales on offer, albeit pricey ones.
A 20-year old seven-bedroom house in five acres on Funchal Ridge, with
swimming pool and staff cottage, is Pounds 525,000, while Pounds 500,000
would buy a four-bedroom villa with pool on the residential estate of Quinta
das Salinas, or a similar sized house with pool, tennis court and staff
accommodation between Vale do Lobo and Quinta do Lago. Both are about 20
minutes from Faro airport.
Of a style which sets it apart from many of the properties offered is Turtle
Creek, which overlooks the 12th green at Penina golf course.
It was designed to reflect 18th century Portuguese architecture. Two sets of
ornate exterior steps lead to first-floor level terraces. Inside, a circular
marble staircase sweeps around the entrance hall.
It has five bedrooms, swimming pool and an acre of ground. It came on the
market in 1989 at Pounds 750,000 and the asking price is now Pounds 695,000.
Agents tell you that even in the depth of a recession there is a select
circle of buyers who are always able to find the money for something really
special.
And that, says Hamptons' international department manager, Naomi Greatbanks,
is what they will soon have to offer in Sintra, near Lisbon. Hamptons has
been assembling a collection of spectacular properties there - palaces
around the Pounds 2m mark, a royal shooting estate and much more - which it
is soon to put on the market.
