FT  04 SEP 92 / Labour anger as Major rejects recall of parliament
THE LABOUR leadership reacted angrily yesterday when Mr John Major dismissed
the party's formal request for a recall of parliament to debate
international affairs and the state of the UK economy.
Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, said he was astonished and angry that the
prime minister had rejected the call for MPs to reassemble to discuss the
civil conflicts in Bosnia, formerly part of Yugoslavia, and Iraq, the famine
in Somalia and the British recession.
When the leader of the opposition asks for parliament to be brought back
from recess, the request is usually granted, although there are a few
examples in recent years when it has been turned down.
The rejection of the call was seen at Westminster as a blow to Mr Smith, in
the short term at least. He has already come under fire from some Labour
backbenchers for not having been tough enough in attacking the government
since he became leader in July.
However, Labour frontbenchers argued that the prime minister's refusal was a
mistake which the government would find hard to explain.
While there would have been clear political risks for the government in
agreeing to an emergency debate on the economy, there was surprise among Mr
Smith's aides that Mr Major had not taken the opportunity to bring
parliament back solely for a foreign affairs debate.
Responding to Mr Smith's letter, Mr Major said he had briefed the Labour
leader after he made the decision to offer UK troops which would offer
support to the United Nations' humanitarian relief effort in Bosnia and to
establish a no-fly zone in southern Iraq.
'You agreed then that a recall of parliament was not appropriate and I fail
to see what has happened since then to change that view,' he wrote.
Labour argued that it had not wanted to detract from the London peace
conference last week, but deployment of British troops was now so imminent
that the matter merited debate by MPs.
The opposition's request coincided with speculation that British troops
could join the UN peacekeeping force in Bosnia shortly.
The Liberal Democrats, who have been asking for parliament to be recalled
for the past three weeks, said that in not making a formal request more
quickly, Labour had enabled the government to avoid its responsibilities to
Westminster.
Editorial Comment, Page 18
