FT  22 JUN 92 / France (3): The pains of recovery - The economy is fighting
its way out of a tight corner
AFTER A YEAR of precipitous slowdown in the rate of growth, the French
economy is starting to show signs of recovery. The government is now
forecasting an increase of 2 per cent this year. But just as the slowdown
was much more severe than anyone had predicted, so the recovery promises to
be painfully modest.
The government repeatedly declares its urgent desire for a faster rate of
growth to arrest and, if possible, reverse the the creeping rise in
unemployment, which has now passed the 10 per cent mark. But the existing
constraints of its long-standing anti-inflation policy, reinforced by the
future imperatives of the European programme for Economic and Monetary
Union, have deprived it of virtually all margin of manoeuvre for influencing
the speed of the recovery.
The downside of the slow recovery is the prospect that unemployment may go
on rising for the rest of this year. But there are two important
compensating factors: French inflation remains more firmly under control
than in most of the country's main trading partners; and as a result of the
accompanying improvement in French competitiveness, the trade balance has
started to show a fairly spectacular improvement.
In the end, the recession proved fatal for the premiership of Mrs Edith
Cresson. No sooner was she appointed, in May 1991, than her popularity and
that of her government began an uninterrupted decline which eventually
reached catastrophic depths. After the humiliating popular rebuff of the
regional elections of March this year, President Mitterrand was forced to
replace her by Mr Pierre Beregovoy, whose popular standing has improved with
every passing week.
No doubt Mrs Cresson suffered heavily from personal errors of style and
judgment. But hindsight also suggests that the main reason for her fall from
power was the unexpectedly steep recession, which happened to coincide with
the period of her premiership. In December 1990 the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development was forecasting a 2.3 per cent growth
rate for 1991; by the middle of 1991 this prediction had been scaled back to
1.4 per cent; the final out-turn seems to have been no more than 1.2 per
cent.
Neither in absolute nor in relative terms was this a particularly deep
recession. It was certainly less severe than the one in the UK. But it was
much more difficult than the French people had been led to expect. Mr
Beregovoy is benefiting partly because of his contrast with the personality
of Mrs Cresson, but also because his appointment has coincided with the
first signs of economic recovery.
One of the first consequences of the slowdown has been a sharp increase in
the size of the budget deficit. Up to and including 1990, the Socialist
government had followed the pattern set by its conservative predecessor, of
steadily cutting back this deficit by around FFr10bn each year. But the
passive effect of lower tax revenues last year swelled the deficit from the
planned level of FFr81bn to FFr132bn, and the government is planning this
year for a further small absolute increase to FFr135bn (though the rise will
be less than the rate of inflation).
The government's acquiescence in an easing of budgetary policy has come in
for criticism from the conservative opposition on the grounds that the
deficit has swelled from 1.4 per cent of GDP in 1990 to 1.9 per cent in
1991. Yet the new higher borrowing requirement is still rather modest
compared with the deficits of many other industrialised countries, such as
the UK with 4.5 per cent of GDP or the European Community average of 4.3 per
cent. Moreover, it remains inside the 2 per cent ceiling set for the
completion of EMU and should start to decline again this year.
In any case, France is continuing to set new benchmarks with the success of
its fight against inflation. Last year the rate was reduced to 3.1 per cent,
and for the first time since the early 1970s slipped below Germany's. The
gap has continued to widen as a result of the impact of German unification,
and is now more than a full percentage point. This year, despite the
emerging recovery, the government is forecasting a further decline in
inflation to 2.8 per cent, a rate which it expects to maintain in 1993 as
well.
The fight against inflation, coupled with the success of the strong franc
strategy in the context of the European Monetary System, has also started to
pay impressive dividends in the foreign trade balance. In each of the first
four months of this year France has recorded a surplus. The monthly record
in April of FFr7.8bn brings the cumulative total surplus this year to
FFr12.8bn, compared with a deficit of FFr16.5bn in the same period last
year.
There is no doubt exporters have enjoyed a transient advantage from the
effects of German unification. But the government claims a solid improvement
in competitivity which has convincingly overcome the traditional weakness of
French industry in international markets.
The black spot in the French economy, and the central anxiety for the
government, remains unemployment, which in April grew by 1.4 per cent or
over 39,000 to a new peak of 2,897,700. The economic recovery is evidently
too slow to create enough new jobs for the increasing numbers of young
people on the labour market, while at the same time lay-offs are still
adding to the unemployment queues.
One worrying feature is that unemployment is growing faster than average
among men of prime working age, between 25 and 49. Another is that nearly a
third of the total (917,000) have been out of work for over a year. The new
prime minister has promised that every one of these long-term unemployed
will be offered a job, training or community service by the autumn. And the
government has embarked on a partial privatisation programme to help fund
this programme.
As the economic recovery gathers momentum, France should be well placed to
take advantage of it with its low inflation, stable currency and competitive
industry. It is an achievement which has been often praised by independent
economists, starting with the OECD. It will be an enviable start for whoever
wins the general elections in March 1993.
