FT  26 FEB 92 / The Mood of Britain: Shhh . . . Margaret Roberts slept here
 -From Grantham to Willoughby's farm, Lincolnshire businesses are
questioning rampant entrepreneurialism / Michael Cassell moves on to
Lincolnshire in his pre-election trip around the country
PAUL NESBITT doesn't shout about it, but he can arrange for people to sleep
in Mrs Thatcher's bedroom for Pounds 19 a night. 'Some are delighted but
others might be horrified at the prospect. You have to play it carefully,'
he stresses.
Nesbitt owns the corner property at the junction of North Parade and Broad
Street in Grantham, home for Margaret Hilda Roberts during the first,
formative years of her life. He runs the Premier restaurant from the former
grocery shop and offers bed and breakfast above.
He says: 'The Thatcher connection, like the woman herself I suppose, has
been a bit of a mixed blessing. As far as I am concerned, a Tory Pounds 5
note is as good as a Labour Pounds 5 note but some people certainly stayed
away because of her. We've been busier since she lost the job.'
The business community as a whole might share Nesbitt's mixed feelings after
a period in which entrepreneurialism was given its head, only to be reined
back by all the old, familiar problems of recession.
Even so, with 50,000 businesses failing last year, the Tories cling to their
mantle of the party of business. Their corporate supporters may feel badly
let down but many will still find it hard to endorse a Labour party bloated
on prawns in its search for acceptability.
The chatty proprietor of the Premier is not particularly impressed with the
Conservative record as the party of small business. 'They are meant to be on
our side but they have taken decisions which hardly suggest they understand
the pressures we face.' he says.
Paul Hodgkinson, a Lincolnshire businessman on a grander scale, is much more
complimentary. His private property and construction group - chosen by the
Duke and Duchess of York to build their royal ranch-house in Windsor Great
Park - has grown by more than 10 times in as many years.
But he continues to resist the temptation to float Simons Group, his Pounds
120m-turnover business. 'Too many middle-sized companies were lured during
the 1980s into getting a 'get-rich-quick' quote and have been forced to doff
their cap to their share price and to short-termism.'
Such businesses, he suggests, provide the bedrock of economic success in
countries like Japan and Germany but too many in Britain were swallowed up
during a period of 'free-market euphoria'. But as he looks from his window
towards Lincoln cathedral, a medieval monument to an earlier age of
enterprise and wealth, he praises 1980s progress in 'freeing up the entire
thought process which permits business to succeed.
'We were a risk-averse nation but a new generation has been taught to go for
it. Companies will always go bust in a capitalist system but there should be
no stigma attached to it. People should be encouraged to pick themselves up
and start all over again.'
He suggests that, even now, insufficient numbers of people understand that
wealth creation is the principal plank on which everything else depends.
Derek Lee, headmaster of King's School, Grantham - where the young Isaac
Newton carved his name on the windowsill - considers a good education
equally important.
Lee has recently emerged, like Lincolnshire itself, as something of a
pioneer in the changing world of education.
In 1989 his school was one of the first in the country to achieve
grant-maintained status. The first primary and secondary schools to opt out
of local authority control were in the county.
According to Lee there was some initial apprehension among the parents at
the decision, but few subsequent regrets. 'Within eight months of winning
our new status we doubled the funds going directly into the classroom,' he
says.
The decision has given the school a highly prized freedom of action. 'It
must make sense for us to decide our own priorities and allocate resources
accordingly.' Lee expects many others in the publicly funded sector to take
advantage of the sort of freedoms previously reserved for the realms of
private education.
Many teachers on the front line, however, are quick to criticise the drive
to spread grant-maintained status as an irrelevant diversion from the real
challenges facing education.
In the windswept hamlet of Wasps' Nest, to the north of Grantham, Cathy
Ward, a former primary school teacher who now runs adult education classes,
says opting out is 'just another example of the two-tier approach to the
provision of essential public services'.
The change, she says, may well hand greater discretion over spending to
good, middle-class schools but the real issue is the level of resources
itself. 'It's fashionable to say you can't solve problems by throwing money
at them. It would be nice, just once, to give it a try. Let's have less talk
about a revolution in education and more textbooks in the classroom.'
All around in tiny pockets of habitation such as Sotts Hole and Stixwould
another revolution is under way. Striking east across Nocton Fen towards the
'calm and deep peace' of Tennyson's Lincolnshire Wolds, or south-east over
ancient marshlands which once hid Hereward the Wake, lie some of Britain's
richest soils. In such parts 40 well-farmed acres would once provide a good
living for a hard-working family. Not any more, it seems, with real incomes
here and throughout the farming community judged to have fallen to their
lowest in the post-war period.
In one of the most efficient agricultural areas in Europe the notion of
family farming appears to be under threat. Old dynasties have been replaced
by remote, institutional owners employing extensive farming methods across
expanding agricultural empires.
Richard Willoughby, who farms more than 400 acres near Alford, under the
gentle slopes of the Wolds and a few miles from 'bracing' Skegness, is not
an institutional squire. He knows the jokes about Volvo-driving farmers
pleading poverty but says there is real cause for complaint.
He bought his farm with his brother in the mid-1980s but says he would have
been better off remaining as a tenant, given production surpluses, falling
crop prices and escalating interest rates.
He accepts the farm is looking a bit run down and he cannot replace
machinery. Some of his neighbours are packing it in. 'There are more rules
and regulations every year and now farmers are encouraged to let good,
productive acreage lie idle. It's madness. I won't be encouraging my two
sons to follow me into such madness,' he says.
Nigel Lindsay, director of the Community Council of Lincolnshire, a
voluntarily funded organisation which aims to keep alive community life,
says some farmers are pinning hopes of financial salvation on building
houses or golf courses. Village life, he believes, is increasingly under
strain, with jobs on the land disappearing and retiring newcomers dislodging
the locals. badly in the wake of bus deregulation and rail services have
deteriorated. Some places are now effectively cut off,' he says. It is a
claim denied by the county council.
Naome Cottrell, a nursing home worker, is waiting in Sleaford, a neat market
town on the western edge of the fens, for a lift back to Boston, the
700-year-old seaport on The Wash where the docks are now promised a
brighter, privatised future.
She says: 'They say it should bring more jobs into town but it won't make up
for those lost. Anyhow, getting there without a car is bad news. If we are
all so much better off, why do we have to wait longer for everything from
buses to hospital beds? Answer me that.'
The last two articles in Michael Cassell's series will appear later this
week.
