FT  18 MAR 92 / Arts: Picasso et la Danse - Opera de Paris Garnier
In recent years the programme planning for the Paris Opera Ballet has been
commendably imaginative. Themes have been explored in triple bills, which
have ranged from American choreography or the traditional Lifar repertory to
the aspirations of the new French dance and the prowess of the young
generation in the troupe. These compilations have been illuminating,
challenging, to dancers and public, and nowhere more so than in the latest
evening: Picasso et la Danse.
Picasso's involvement with ballet began under Diaghilev, with the creation
of Parade in 1917, and was confirmed by his marriage to the Ballet Russe
dancer Olga Khoklova in 1918. For the next seven years he made varied
collaborations with the dance, notably in the glorious Tricorne of 1919. Two
works, Le Rendezvous of 1945 and Icare in 1962, marked a late revival of
interest. The new Garnier programme brings Le Tricorne into the repertory
with the two ballets for which Picasso paintings provided a front-cloth:
Roland Petit's Le Rendezvous and a re-creation of Nijinska's Le Train bleu,
made for Diaghilev in 1924.
The reconstruction of Le Train bleu was undertaken by the choreographer's
daughter, Irina Nijinska, and the American scholar Frank Ries. The current
fashion for rescuing long-lost ballets from textual sources and dancers'
memories is curious, commendable, but ever-open to question. Scrupulous
though the research may be, the loss of a direct performance tradition means
that what we see today as Nijinsky's Sacre, or Balanchine's Le Cotillon - or
Nijinska's Train bleu - is more optimistic than actual, and the more
ephemeral the piece, the more delicate its fabric, the more likely we are to
see a ghost rather than any theatrical flesh. The recent restorations of two
major Massine pieces - Choreartium and Les Presages  - seem to me valid in
that they are sprung from the direct performance experience of their
producers (and members of their first casts have given the stagings their
approval).
Le Train bleu was a Cocteau-inspired capriccio about the brightest of goings
on in the heyday of holidays at Deauville or Eden Roc. Diaghilev identified
its lack of substance by calling it une operette dansee when he presented it
during the 1924/25 seasons, with the athletic, magnetically beautiful
presence of Anton Dolin its justification as the darling of the plage, le
Beau Gosse. Without Dolin's panache - he left Diaghilev in 1925 - the piece
was dropped.
Cocteau had hoped that Nijinska could identify the hieratic force of
sporting gesture through classic dance - there are evocations of Suzanne
Lenglen and of Edward, Prince of Wales, dressed pour le golf in the
characters - but in this staging the frivolity lacks any aesthetic or
physical conviction. The fun has gone, and the Blue Train has not run for
years. The Nijinska dances lack savour, and the Opera's gifted casts are at
a loss.
The Milhaud score is delightful; Henri Laurens' architectural set is
interesting, and the Chanel clothes are exact, while across the front-cloth
Picasso's two Amazons (hugely magnified from the painting 'La Course')
energetically thunder. How revealing that Les Biches, which explored
something of this same territory and pre-dated Le Train bleu by only six
months, should still convince utterly in the theatre. Nijinska's post-war
revivals preserved both the life and the spirit of the choreography, and
life and spirit are missing in Le Train bleu.
Le Train bleu typifies its age, and so does Le Rendezvous. Roland Petit made
it for his Ballets des Champs Elysees in 1945. It breathes the existential
bleakness of the war's end, with its Jacques Prevert scenario about a young
man who thinks he has cheated Fate, until fate duly catches up with him in
the guise of the Most Beautiful Girl in the World, who kills him. Prevert's
cinema associates provided other elements - Brassai, the photographic
blow-ups of Paris streets; Kosma, the score; Mayo, the costumes - and Petit
responded with choreography in which realism and romanticism combined
marvellously. Le Rendezvous was one of the key early works of the Champs
Elysees seasons - and we have imperishable memories of Petit as the
hero-victim and Jean Babilee as a hunchback who is chorus and companion.
But after 47 years could it still convince? This revival by Petit, on the
hugeness of the Opera stage, was proof that it could. A superb cast  - Kader
Belarbi as the Young Man; Cyril Atanassoff as Fate; Marie-Claude Pietragalla
as the Girl; Fabien Roques as the Hunchback - found exactly the intensity,
the melancholy poetry, that is evoked by the nocturnal streets against which
the tragedy plays itself out. The scene in which the haunted Belarbi is
faced with the menacingly deliberate Atanassoff (a chilling figure) is
superlative dance-theatre. The Picasso front-cloth - a candle, a mask  - is
oddly apt.
Le Tricorne must always ravish eye and ear, and the glowing accuracy of the
Opera workshops' reconstruction of the designs, (though where is the Dandy's
kite?), and the vibrant account of the score from the Spanish conductor
Edmon Colomer, are grand achievements. The ensembles were lively, and were
better at the second of the two performances I saw at the week's end, but
the ultimate success of the piece depends on the playing of the Miller and
his Wife. We were fortunate just after the war to see Leonid Massine in the
part he created for himself as the Miller, alert, vital; and no less
fortunate to see Violetta Elvin (in performance at Covent Garden) finding a
ravishing sensuality and wit for his wife. On Friday night, Patrick Dupond
and Monique Loudieres went through various motions associated with these
roles, and were inalienably themselves as etoiles.
It was at the next day's matinee that Le Tricorne came fully alive. Jose
Martinez is young, tall, with an elegant physique and bright technique (he
was impressive in last season's evening for the Opera's Young Hopefuls). And
he has Spanish blood. In an exceptional debut - which started rather coldly,
but took fire with the Miller's Farucca solo - Martinez claimed the role.
His feet and body seized on de Falla's (and Colomer's) rhythms, stamped them
out crisp and bold. The outline of the dance was taut, ideal. Greater
dramatic passion will come with experience, but not since Massine's
performances have I seen a reading so acute in physical understanding, and
so true to the music.
Martinez was most happily paired with Clotilde Vayer as the Miller's wife.
The lovely curves of the dance as her body yields to it, the fluttering
hands, and the character's flirtatiousness were all warmly, touchingly
shown. Le Tricorne was once again a masterpiece in the theatre.
