FT  14 AUG 92 / Setback for BR on Channel freight trains
BRITISH RAIL will have no freight locomotives capable of pulling trains
through the Channel tunnel when it opens late next year, it emerged
yesterday.
Delivery of the 46 electric locomotives being built for Channel tunnel
freight services has been held up because design modifications have become
necessary.
As a stop-gap measure French national railways (SNCF) has agreed to adapt a
number of its electric locomotives so that they can pick up freight trains
at Folkestone, near the British end of the tunnel, and pull them through.
This will be the first time that French locomotives have gone into regular
service on British tracks.
As a result of this arrangement BR will still be able to offer an
international freight train service when the tunnel opens by using existing
diesel locomotives to run freight trains to the tunnel before handing them
over to the French.
The development will anger people living near the freight routes because
diesel locomotives are much noisier than electric ones. Many of the freight
trains will travel at night.
The need for locomotive and crew changes will also jeopardise BR's ability
to fulfil the journey times it has promised its international freight
customers.
The freight locomotives are being built by Brush Traction, part of the
Hawker Siddeley engineering group which was taken over last year by BTR, the
industrial conglomerate.
BR's Railfreight Distribution subsidiary said modifications had become
necessary because of difficulties in accommodating all the equipment needed
to cope with different voltages and signalling systems in Britain, the
tunnel and France.
The delay is the latest in a series of embarrassing setbacks for BR in the
delivery of its Channel tunnel rolling stock. It seems unlikely that any
passenger trains will be ready for at least six months after the tunnel
opens, and the sleeper trains will not be delivered until 1995.
BR said no new delivery schedule had been set for the freight locomotives,
but it had made contingency plans for the first six months of Channel tunnel
operations.
