FT  29 SEP 92 / International Company News: Abeles hands over helm at TNT
TNT, the Australian transport group, yesterday said Sir Peter Abeles had
resigned as managing director after 25 years at the helm of the company he
co-founded in 1967. He will be replaced by Mr David Mortimer, finance
director.
Mr Fred Millar, chairman, said Sir Peter wanted to concentrate on running
Ansett Transport Industries, the loss-making Australian airline group
co-owned by News Corporation, Mr Rupert Murdoch's media group.
However, officials said Sir Peter, 68, was 'immensely tired' after guiding
the group through a difficult period in which it has reported two
consecutive annual net losses of almost ADollars 200m (USDollars 145m).
Analysts said the surprise announcement would help remove uncertainty about
the group's operational and financial strategy. Mr Mortimer was widely
regarded as Sir Peter's most likely successor.
Sir Peter said six months ago that he planned to resist pressure from the
markets for a change of top management, which began after the group's shares
slipped to a low of 75 cents in January last year.
The shares recovered to nearly ADollars 2 early this year but have fallen to
around ADollars 1 recently as concerns about the group's debts and recovery
prospects have re-emerged.
Mr Millar said Sir Peter would retire from the boards of all TNT's overseas
companies and associates, including GD Net, the express mail joint venture
formed this year with a number of European post offices. He will remain
deputy chairman of TNT and joint chairman and managing director of Ansett.
Mr Millar said Sir Peter had spent 'an immense amount of time and effort'
during the past 18 months attempting to steer TNT through economic recession
in its main markets in Australia, North America and the UK.
Sir Peter played a key role in refocusing the group's activities around
express deliveries and commercial distribution, which required significant
rationalisation and the disposal of non-core activities, including
significant stakes in Foster's Brewing Group and Normandy Poseidon, the
Australian resources group.
Sir Peter was also involved in negotiations on the formation of the GD Net
joint venture, which the group hopes will stem losses incurred by its
European air express operations.
TNT lost a net ADollars 195m in 1991-92, but claimed it was 'in a strong
condition to return to its previous profitability', in spite of the gloomy
international economic outlook.
Sir Peter, who emigrated to Australia from Hungary after the Second World
War, started his first transport business with one truck in 1950, and was
appointed managing director of TNT when the group merged with his company in
1967.
The group grew rapidly during the 1980s, from revenue of ADollars 1.7bn in
1984 to a peak of ADollars 6.6bn on an equity accounted basis last year. It
employs 52,000 staff in 182 countries.
However, the group ran into trouble in 1989 when investors began to worry
about debts incurred to finance expansion. There were also concerns about
the group's entrepreneurial nature and its close relationship with News
Corp, which was then struggling to cope with severe financial problems.
Sir Peter made several dramatic moves into new markets such as express
delivery and logistics.
In his most spectacular deal, Sir Peter bought five years' production of the
British Aerospace 146 Quiet Trader, amounting to 72 aircraft at ADollars 30m
each, effectively cornering the market in the aircraft, regarded as most
suitable for European air express operations.
Sir Peter was also happy to take risks with political and labour relations -
TNT's biggest breakthrough in the UK came when the group's trucks carried Mr
Murdoch's newspapers through the picket lines at News Corp's non-union
printing plant in London.
