FT  07 NOV 92 / Markets: Taking money out of the frying pan - Serious Money
THE most important issue facing UK savers at the moment is this: where to
put their money once they take it out of the building society?
Everyone should keep some rainy day savings in an instant access account to
cover immediate commitments such as a leaky roof, a car breakdown or a
holiday. But, now that interest rates have tumbled, building societies
simply do not represent a sound investment for long-term savings.
This is a theme which the Weekend FT will emphasise over and over again
during the coming months. The message needs to be rammed home, in part
because high real interest rates have given savers an easy life over the
last few years. But if the UK is ever to recover from its present economic
difficulties, the level of real interest rates must fall.
It takes time for a change in the economic climate to feed through into
savers' perceptions. Save &amp; Prosper commissioned NOP to ask 1,000 adults
their perception of the net rate of interest on Pounds 1,000 in an instant
access account.
The most popular answer - given by 34 per cent of those questioned - was 7
to 9 per cent and 12 per cent of respondents thought the net rate was over
10 per cent. Only 20 per cent correctly estimated that the net rate was
between 4 and 6 per cent.
In other words, many people are wildly over-optimistic about the returns
available from building societies. Eventually they will realise the truth;
the education process could be painful.
The advantage of building society investment is that it is simple to
understand. The alternatives are more complex. With the aim of guiding
readers through the new world, I offer a few simple rules.
You are on your own.
Do not assume that the financial services industry has your best interests
at heart. Companies are keen to get their hands on your money, so they will
highlight the most attractive elements of their products and downplay the
drawbacks.
In the vast majority of cases, the adviser or salesman will be paid by the
financial services companies, and not by you. It is in their interest to
recommend products which earn them commission; and it is against their
interest to recommend products which are commission-free. Some will be
scrupulously honest and resist these temptations - your problem is that is
hard to tell the honest recommendation from the hard-sell.
You should remember that advisers and salesmen have to earn their living,
just as you do. There can accordingly be no such thing as 'free' advice. It
is better that you pay a fee, so that it is clear the adviser is working for
you. This means giving money up-front, but it will probably be the cheaper
option in the long run.
Nobody knows the future.
Do not assume that there is some secret pool of knowledge shared by all
those who work in the financial services industry. Certainly, those who
advise you should be aware of all the rules and regulations which apply to
their field.
But they do not know the rate at which the economy will grow, where the
stock market will move, or the level of interest rates in one year's time.
Who could have predicted, at the start of 1992, that Britain would leave the
exchange rate mechanism, base rates would rise to 12 per cent and then fall
to 8 per cent, and that President Bush would be defeated by the governor of
Arkansas? Nobody who contacted this office.
The same strictures apply to journalists, of course. If I was so smart, I
would have made my fortune and be lying on my yacht in the sun, instead of
trudging over Southwark Bridge every morning. So treat newspaper share tips
with caution, and be highly suspicious of those who tell you, after careful
analysis, that the investment of the future is Taiwanese smaller companies.
Greater reward means greater risk.
This is the most important rule of finance. Too often, investors demand 20
per cent annual returns with no danger of loss of capital. It cannot be
done.
The gross yield on long-dated gilts is currently between 8.5 and 9 per cent.
The first option bond from National Savings is offering a gross 8.67 per
cent over one year.
Any product which offers a higher rate than this must involve some risk, if
only the credit risk that the company offering the product will fail. You
must decide what level of risk you can live with.
Spread your investments.
It is tempting, since it involves less effort, to give all your money to one
company. Frequently, institutions will offer premium rates to those
investing bigger sums. But the above rules highlight the flaws of this
policy; no one has the sure-fire recipe for investment success (and, even if
they did, they would be unlikely to share it with you). So hedge your bets.
Indeed, this rule takes us back to the premise of the article. Investors
were taking a risk by keeping all their savings in the building society,
even if they did not realise they were. The risk was that interest rates -
their income - would fall while their expenditure - as reflected by the
Retail Price Index - would continue to rise. That possibility has now
occurred.
For the foreseeable future, investors need to think of their savings as a
portfolio, with building society deposits forming only one element alongside
gilts and shares.
