FT  10 JUN 92 / The Earth Summit: British business left in the cold - Diary
BRITISH businessmen hoping to promote their wares at the Earth Summit in Rio
de Janeiro are grumbling about lack of support from the UK government. A
band of exporters have put up their stalls 300 miles from Rio in Sao Paulo,
Brazil's commercial capital, which is staging an exhibition of environmental
technology.
Talk that Mr John Major, the British premier, might pop in has fallen
through. Downing Street thought he should spend time on the way to Brazil
talking to Colombians about drug control; Mr Michael Howard, the environment
secretary, would go to Sao Paulo instead. Now he has cancelled as well,
because of negotiations in Rio.
So Britain's gallant few had to do with Mr David Maclean, the environment
minister, who slipped into Sao Paulo for a few hours on his way home to
London yesterday. The Germans, by contrast, will be visited today by
Chancellor Helmut Kohl. 'Typical,' mutters a disgusted Brit.
*****
Everyone is relying on Japan to provide the money and technology to
implement the summit treaties. But it is the great polluters, the Chinese,
that are bringing a smile to the faces of delegates.
Chen Wen Yii, an enterprising Chinese immigrant, has set up a flower shop
inside the conference centre from which he is distributing red roses free.
'For people to save the planet it is important that they are happy,' he
explains.
*****
Mr John Major will be met by a sleek green Jaguar when he arrives in Rio
tonight. He may never know how close he was to hitching a lift.
Brazil, still one of the world's most protected economies, only recently
allowed the importation of cars, and no suitable British vehicle was
available in the country. The closest armour-plated car was in Georgetown,
British Guyana, and had to be shipped down the coast, suffering considerable
damage en route.
Until a few days ago the Jaguar was in pieces in a mechanic's shop in Rio
waiting for new parts - including a bullet-proof windscreen - to be flown
in. Mr Brian Brown, the mechanic and a British former naval engineer, had to
postpone leaving Brazil to finish the task.
