FT  15 APR 92 / Cautious response to manufacturing figures
FEBRUARY'S surprise jump in manufacturing output was greeted cautiously by
economists yesterday.
Although the seasonally adjusted 1.1 per cent monthly increase was the
biggest rise since March 1990, this set of data is notoriously erratic on a
monthly basis and Central Statistical Office statisticians prefer to look at
quarterly trends.
The rise also comes after January's extremely weak figures when
manufacturing output fell by 0.6 per cent.
Mr Gerard Lyons, chief economist at DKB International, said: 'I think there
could be a lot of misplaced optimism. High interest rates and debt overhang
still remain a problem.'
A breakdown of the production industries  - manufacturing plus energy and
water production  - shows that in the latest three months the only sector to
increase output was consumer goods. Here output rose by 0.8 per cent on the
previous three months, prompting some economists to suggest the recovery
would be consumer-led.
Output of the energy industries fell by 2 per cent. The CSO said this was
because February's weather was much milder than last year.
Production of plant and machinery suffered the heaviest year-on-year
decline, falling 6.6 per cent in the latest three months compared with the
same period a year ago. On the previous three months, sector output fell by
1.9 per cent.
Output of metals fell 1.3 per cent in the latest three months. Production of
chemicals, up 6.5 per cent on the year, fell by 0.7 per cent in the three
months.
The engineering sector suffered the heaviest annual decline among
manufacturing industries. Output fell 6.9 per cent compared with the same
three months a year ago. On the latest three months it fell by 1.1 per cent.
Within engineering, however, output of cars rose by 1.5 per cent. The CSO
suggested this was because carmakers reduced stocks during the winter which
they were now rebuilding.
There was a modest rise in output in the 'other manufacturing' component of
the data.
