FT  11 NOV 92 / Compulsory local tendering to widen
THE GOVERNMENT intends to press ahead with plans to extend compulsory
competitive tendering of local-authority services to the white-collar
sector, but the procedure will be more flexible than previously announced.
Mr Michael Howard, environment secretary, said his department estimated that
tendering had generated cost savings of about 6 per cent for blue-collar
services 'while standards have in general been maintained or improved'.
He told the annual conference of the Association of County Councils at
Winchester, Hampshire: 'It is vital that we do not underestimate what can be
achieved in the white-collar services.'
However, three changes are to be made to the proposals set out in an earlier
consultation paper. Library support services are not to be subjected to CCT.
For construction-related services - architecture, engineering and property
management - the proportion of council spending to be subject to tendering
will be reduced from 100 per cent to 90 per cent.
For all services, the so-called 'double envelope' procedure, under which
councils were to be obliged to set a quality threshold and then determine
contracts on price alone, will be made voluntary.
Mr Howard said: 'Local authorities will be able to set in place their own
procedures for making judgments about the trade-off between quality and
cost. We do not want to lay down from on high the detailed rules underlying
(the) framework. We want to work with local government and other interested
parties in developing a system that will work well.'
For services not related to construction, the proportion of spending to be
subject to tendering will be as laid down in the consultation paper - 15 per
cent of spending for corporate and administrative services, 33 per cent for
legal services, 25 per cent for personnel and finance, and 80 per cent for
computing.
Councils will be required to publish accounts for each of their main areas
of work and will be obliged to set up a system of internal trading accounts.
Mr Howard also announced that a committee will be set up next year to advise
on the implications of new single-tier authorities for local-authority
employees.
He said he expected 90 per cent of local-government staff to be unaffected.
Support services for the police and fire services are to be put out to
tender, Mr Kenneth Clarke, the home secretary, announced yesterday.
Tendering will apply to 40 per cent of the annual value of police vehicle
maintenance and repair and 90 per cent of the cleaning of police buildings.
The maintenance and repair of fire service vehicles will not be contracted
out immediately.
Council spending, Page 12
