FT  21 MAY 92 / Lamont entered BCCI row
MR NORMAN LAMONT, the chancellor, was forced to intervene in a dispute
relating to the defunct Bank for Credit and Commerce International between
members of the Bank of England's board of banking supervision, it was
disclosed yesterday, Robert Peston writes.
The lay members of the board were concerned that Mr Robin Leigh-Pemberton,
the Bank's governor, was likely to breach banking secrecy standards when
being interviewed last year about the collapse of BCCI by the Commons
Treasury and Civil Service Committee.
After widespread criticism, Mr Leigh-Pemberton wanted to give a detailed
account of the Bank's role to the committee.
The board's lay members felt that Mr Leigh-Pemberton was proposing to
disclose more than was allowable under the Banking Act.
The board's function is to review all aspects of the Bank's supervisory work
under the act. The chancellor was called to adjudicate on the issue. In the
event, he backed Mr Leigh-Pemberton, who on July 26 submitted to questioning
by the Commons committee.
It was the first time in the board's four-year existence that the chancellor
had been called to settle such a dispute.
The incident is alluded to in an annexe to the Bank of England's Banking Act
report - in which every year it discusses its role as a supervisor - which
was published yesterday.
In the Bank's annual report, also published yesterday, Mr Leigh Pemberton
said he believed the Bank's decision not to close BCCI till last year - and
all its other actions over the years as supervisor of UK operations - were
'correct at the time they were taken'.
The annual statement of the Deposit Protection Board, which is linked to the
Bank of England and provides insurance against possible losses to holders of
bank deposits, was also released.
The board said it had increased its borrowing powers to Pounds 125m in order
to meet claims for compensation from depositors at BCCI's UK offshoot.
The Bank expects the board to have to pay out no more than Pounds 95m to
BCCI depositors.
