FT  25 AUG 92 / Technology: A show called vested interest - A Swedish group
has come up with a digital HDTV standard that casts doubt on the EC's plans
Europe is in danger of falling behind the US and Japan in the emerging
market for high-definition television. While the prospects for the planned
European HDTV programme remain uncertain, the Japanese public broadcasting
corporation, NHK, has already started broadcasting weekly programmes in high
definition while the US has forged ahead with plans to introduce a digital
HDTV standard.
Now a Scandinavian group  - which includes the Swedish Broadcasting
Corporation, the Swedish Television Company, Swedish Telecom Radio and Telia
Research, the R&amp;D subsidiary of Swedish Telecom  - has been working on a
digital HDTV system that could cast further doubts on the wisdom of pursuing
a two-step gradual approach based on an analogue standard, known as Mac
(multiplexed analogue components).
The group has developed a prototype system for digital terrestrial HDTV
called HD-Divine (digital video narrow-band emission). The system, which was
demonstrated at the International Broadcasting Convention in Amsterdam last
month, has aroused considerable interest in the US as well as in Europe.
'This could very well mark the turning point in European thinking concerning
HDTV transmission,' commented George Waters, director of the European
Broadcasting Union's technical department.
But Per Appelquist, head of research and development at Swedish Television,
does not expect the HD-Divine standard to be adopted by the EC. 'It is
politically difficult for a Scandinavian system to be adopted in Europe,' he
says.
Having invested huge amounts of money and time on the Mac standard, European
consumer electronics companies, specifically Philips and Thomson, are
unlikely to want to adopt a different system.
While Philips and Thomson are both involved in developing digital systems,
through EC programmes such as Race (the EC's R&amp;D programme in advanced
telecommunications), they have relegated those developments to the back
burner and say they do not expect digital television to become a reality
until well into the 21st century.
Europe's plan for a step-by-step approach to improving TV picture quality
using a partly-analogue system has met with industry resistance.
Broadcasters are reluctant to invest the huge sums needed to adopt the
European standards and consumer appetite for expensive new electronics
products is at a particular low.
Unlike the EC's Mac standard, which would be introduced gradually, the move
to digital television proposed by the HD-Divine project would mean one big
leap forward to a completely new standard.
HD-Divine also differs from D2-Mac (the standard adopted for wide-screen
broadcasts) and HD-Mac (to be used for high-definition broadcasts) since it
was designed specifically for terrestrial broadcasts rather than for
satellite. This would make it less expensive for broadcasters to transmit
programmes and for viewers to receive them.
Like the analogue standard, digital HDTV offers clear, crisp pictures. But
it would also provide CD-quality sound and would make more efficient use of
channels.
The system developed by HD-Divine, for example, could increase the number of
channels to about 40 from the current four on the existing Pal standard for
terrestrial broadcasts. This is possible because the digital signals would
be constructed in such a way as to minimise the interference between
signals.
Although there are 44 UHF channels used for broadcasting on the Pal system,
they cannot all be used due to the possibility of signal interference
between one channel and another. By sending the signals over hundreds of
carriers, digital television can make use of so-called 'taboo channels',
which would normally need to be kept free to avoid interference.
Digital television could lead to further developments based on the capacity
of digital signals to hold vast amounts of information. For example,
multimedia applications which allow the viewer to manipulate the material on
the television screen is one possibility.
Instead of turning the channel to find a news programme, viewers could do a
'news search' in the same way that CD players offer a 'track search' to
receive information on what news programmes are being broadcast on what
channels, says Henry Price, head of engineering information at the BBC.
Since telecommunications and computers are also based on digital technology,
a digital television system would also allow easier access to these
communications systems.
If digital television offers so many advantages, why have European consumer
electronics manufacturers backed a partly-analogue system that is likely to
become obsolete?
The main reason is that digital technology is still considered to be many
years away. European manufacturers, feeling threatened by Japan's head-start
in HDTV, wanted a system that could be introduced in a relatively short
amount of time.
One of the main difficulties faced in developing a digital television system
is to compress a vast amount of information into digital signals. HD-Divine
has achieved this by doing away with 98 per cent of the information,
explains Appelquist.
This is possible because much of the data sent down the line are redundant.
If there are several picture frames in which the sky is blue, for example,
it is not necessary to keep sending the signal for a blue sky for each
successive frame. By using techniques which enable the receiving end to
'guess' the content of a subsequent picture on the basis of the previous
picture, the HD-Divine project has been able to reduce significantly the
amount of information that needs to be transmitted down the spectrum.
Another hurdle that needs to be overcome in digital terrestrial broadcasting
is multipath propagation  - or echoes which result from signals reflecting
off various obstacles along their path, such as buildings and bodies of
water.
Normally, in analogue systems, signals that are reflected in this way cause
'ghosts' which appear as white shadows on the television screen. This
happens because the reflected signal arrives later than the other signals
and is interpreted as an 'echo' to the main signal.
HD-Divine overcomes this problem by inserting what it calls a guard interval
between each of the data symbols. This ensures that the time interval
between signals is levelled out so that signals are read simultaneously.
After the successful demonstration in Amsterdam, the HD-Divine group has
already been approached by a number of parties interested in participating
in the project.
It is not looking to the EC for funding, as this would only lead to
unnecessary bureaucracy and inevitable delays, it says.
But digital television still faces stiff tests before it can be considered a
viable alternative to conventional TV. 'It shows enormous promise but a lot
of testing needs to be done,' says Price. Digital TV is probably possible in
a laboratory environment but more tests need to be carried out to see if it
works in a commercial environment.
'It will take eight to 10 years before digital TV standards are set. By that
time D2-Mac and HD-Mac will have firmly established themselves,' says a
Philips representative. Philips believes digital television is more suited
to mobile applications, such as portable televisions in the car and
'watchmen,' or plugless TV receivers.
However, the longer the European HDTV programme remains stalled, the greater
is the appeal of taking one big leap forward to an advanced television
system that not only looks further to the future but also addresses the
predominantly terrestrial audience in Europe.
