FT  21 MAR 92 / Arts: Characters do furnish the play - A starry Heartbreak
House
YOU CAN see why George Bernard Shaw thought Heartbreak House was his best
best play. It is even more evident from the preface than from the piece
itself. The former is all about the state of England, Europe and the theatre
before and during the first world war. The play was written during the war,
but performed only afterwards.
The preface explains why. The last act features a German bombing raid, the
exhilaration of which is almost welcomed by some of the performers. Shaw
wrote that on any night the Germans might have turned it 'from play into
earnest, and even then might not have waited for their cues.'
The preface is a very serious piece of writing. 'Only those who have lived
through a first-rate war, not in the field, but at home, and kept their
heads, can possibly understand the bitterness of Shakespeare and Swift, who
both went through this experience.'
The play takes a long time to build up. Shaw is writing about what he called
the 'cultured leisured Europe before the war.' He claimed that 'power and
culture were in separate departments', though with the occasional overlap.
Heartbreak House, the place rather than the play, is where the overlap
sometimes happens. The family is eccentric, living beyond its means, with
servants but no money. Meals have become a problem. The family entertains a
businessman cum cabinet minister. He, too, turns out not to have any money
and, what is worse, to be lacking in social graces. He runs away, and is
killed in his shelter when the bombs fall.
Where the play excels is not in the portentousness of an image of old
England, but in the collection of characters. They are all marvellous parts,
and that is largely what Trevor Nunn's new production at the Haymarket is
about. Almost everyone is a star and if they were not already established,
they would be after this show.
Vanessa Redgrave plays Hesione, the elder and more eccentric of the two
Shotover daughters. She can have enjoyed few greater pleasures on stage than
when she speaks the line: 'You are the most uninteresting man on earth.' Ms
Redgrave is devastingly good throughout. Felicity Kendal plays her younger
sister, Ariadne. For my taste, her voice has become too high for the part.
That shows when she comes to the famous lines about the house lacking
horses. She seems more accustomed to the salon than the saddle.
Nevertheless, she looks terrific and moves superbly.
Even the smaller parts glow, down to Joe Melia who has wonderful 10 minutes
in the second act as ther burglar. The disappointment is Paul Scofield as
the 88-year-old Captain Shotover. I do not think that it is his fault. It is
just that this is the part where the play shows its age: the sententiousness
and the excessive length of the piece begin to obtrude. In the old days it
might have been the central role. Nowadays nobody is much interested in the
old man's experiments and bum philosophy any more: Heartbreak House seems
more a play about the women, including the young Ellie Dunn (Imogen Stubbs)
as well as the two sisters.
Trevor Nunn does not just stick the stars on the stage; he also directs, and
never more so than in some of his stage groupings. Shaw said that the play
harked back to King Lear and his three daughters. Nunn's production and his
handling of the women reminds one much more of the witches in Macbeth;
certainly not hags, but dangerous when let loose and even more so when
conspiring together.
