FT  04 JUL 92 / Serb ethnic cleansing continuing
THE Serbian authorities under President Slobodan Milosevic have not
abandoned their policy of ethnic cleansing in Croatia or Bosnia-Hercegovina,
and Belgrade continues to militarily support Serbia's proxy army in Bosnia,
a report issued by the International Society for Human Rights yesterday
concluded.
In a grim account of cases occurring in the last five weeks, the ISHR shows
how the Serb irregulars under Mr Radovan Karadzic and General Ratko Mladic
have done nothing to stop killings, torture and forced migration of Bosnia's
Moslems, Croats, and those Serbs who refuse to collaborate with the
irregulars.
Ethnic cleansing 'almost invariably entails expelling people from their
homes, either by rounding them up and forcing them to leave, or by driving
them away with a campaign of terror,' it says.
It cites, among many accounts, how on June 12, 22 Moslem men, women and
children were rounded up and killed by a Serbian militia group in the
central Bosnian town of Visegrad.
It describes how Serb irregulars have pulled civilians from their homes in
the Sarajevo suburb of Dobrinja. Some have been killed, some have
disappeared, others have been used as hostages in exchange for Serb snipers
captured by Bosnia's defence units.
The ISHR, in common with other human rights organisations and international
aid agencies, often has to rely on secondary sources because the Serb
irregulars - and in some cases the Croatian authorities - have prevented
agencies from travelling unhindered throughout Bosnia.
Contrary to official statements that the Milosevic regime has distanced
itself from the war in Bosnia, the ISHR cites many examples in which it says
Serbia still supplies weapons to the irregulars in Bosnia.
For example, on June 16, it reported that trucks loaded with ammunition for
army and militia units had arrived from Serbia and Montenegro to Visegrad.
'Before returning, they were filled with goods looted from the houses of
Croats and Moslems.'
