FT  24 JUN 92 / Leading Article: Health care in London
THE PROBLEM of London's hospitals has taxed health administrators for the
better part of a century. Great monuments to a long-faded imperial glory,
hospitals such as Guy's and Bart's swallow a disproportionate share of
health service resources. Successive governments have backed away from
closing any of these well-loved and skilfully defended institutions.
Now Mrs Virginia Bottomley, the health minister, is determined to cut the
Gordian knot. She has commissioned an inquiry on future health provision in
the capital from Sir Bernard Tomlinson who is due to report in the autumn.
Yesterday's report on London's health care from the King's Fund - commended
by Mrs Bottomley - appears to be a stalking horse for Sir Bernard's
recommendations.
The most urgent cause of Mrs Bottomley's welcome initiative has been the
consequences of the government's health service reforms. Hospital treatment
is now commissioned by health authorities and family doctors spending
limited budgets. They find that treatment in London's specialist and
teaching hospitals is often more expensive than in general hospitals
elsewhere. Some family doctors have set up mini-cottage hospitals in their
health centres, carrying out minor surgical procedures previously provided
by hospitals. As the internal market begins to bite, London's hospitals are
losing contracts to their competitors.
Higher overheads
The reasons for this lack of competitiveness are several. London's overheads
are higher, especially the cost of hospital sites. The training
responsibilities of the teaching hospitals require additional staff and
resources. The specialist hospitals argue with some justification that, as
national institutions, they attract the most complex cases from across the
country. Whatever the reasons, the development of competition between
providers means that such cost disadvantages will grow.
At the same time, inner London is losing population, as the people these
hospitals grew up to service move out to the leafy suburbs. The process of
reallocating health service resources away from the capital began in the
1970s. But it has been given added impetus by the allocation of funds to
regions and districts more closely in line with population.
In most other markets, losing market share in this way leads to closure (in
the absence of scope to increase competitiveness). For large and complex
organisations such as hospitals, the question of 'exit' is less simple:
apart from the loyalties which many command in local hearts, there are
life-saving resources and skills which cannot be squandered like surplus
plant and machinery. If the demand for health care in London's hospitals is
to contract, a planned decline is preferable.
Plausible strategy
Yesterday's report from the King's Fund sets out a plausible strategy by
which this could be achieved. A task force should be set up to carry out a
fundamental review of the capital's needs - in consultation with the people
of London and their doctors. This review would inevitably lead to two
further steps: a reshaping of hospital-based acute services in London; and
the reorganisation of medical education and research.
The report also makes out a powerful case for diverting the resources
consumed by the prestigious inner London hospitals to improving the quality
of the capital's health care overall. Family doctor and community health
services have been neglected, the report argues: too many Londoners are
served by over-stretched single-handed family doctors working from decrepit
lock-up premises. And the provision of hospital services in much of the
capital has suffered; the quality of accident and emergency services, for
example, often leaves much to be desired.
Inevitably the headlines will concentrate on the recommendation that 15
hospitals be closed. Campaigns of greater or lesser speciousness will
agitate to save particular favourites. But the task of sorting out London's
hospitals is too important to fall victim to such pressure group tactics. It
is time for a fundamental review followed by determined political action to
implement its recommendations.
