FT  29 MAY 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Malaysian tin mine brought back
to life - The third incarnation of the Sungei Lembing operation in Pahang
MALAYSIA'S Sungei Lembing tin deposit has demonstrated once again that you
cannot keep a good mine down.
Once the world's biggest single sources of tin, it was flooded and abandoned
during the Japanese occupation in the Second World War. It was reopened at
the end of the war but flooded again in 1987, after the operating company
was forced into liquidation as a result of the slump in tin prices.
Undaunted by its chequered history, however, a Chinese-Malaysian partnership
has reopened the mine, partially pumping out the workings to resume hard
rock mining, and has longer term plans to bring the entire complex back into
operation.
The recent recovery in tin prices, with LME quotations reaching an 18-month
high and Kuala Lumpur Tin Market prices at their highest levels since August
1991, has come too late to save many of the higher-cost producers. The
closure on May 1 of Gopeng, Malaysia's largest hydraulic tin mining
operation, is the latest casualty in a lengthy list of mine closures brought
about by the collapse of the International Tin Council's buffer stock
operation in October 1985 and the subsequent slump in prices as more than
100,000 tonnes of stockpiled tin were released on to the market.
High-cost, hard rock mining - including the whole of the Cornish industry,
the Kelapa Kampit mine in Indonesia and, briefly, Australia's Renison, the
world's largest underground tin mine - fell victim to the slump. Low-cost
Brazilian operations added to the pressure on tin prices, forcing much of
the traditional source of supply in south-east Asia - dredges and gravel
pump mines - out of business. Last year, Malaysia mined less tin than in any
year since the Second World War, producing 20,710 tonnes, 27 per cent down
on 1990's 28,468 tonnes and less than a third of average annual output in
the 1970s. The most spectacular victim of the tin price slump was the Sungei
Lembing mine, Malaysia's only hard rock mining operation, which was run by
the Pahang Consolidated Company.
Before the advent of the first dredges at the turn of the century, the mine
had employed more than 5,000 lode miners and produced in excess of 4,000
tonnes a year from more than 800km (500 miles) of workings. It was the most
extensively developed underground tin mine in the world.
The mine was still producing more than of 2,000 tonnes a year up to 1977.
But output then began to decline steadily with only 744 tonnes produced in
1986, the last full year of operations.
In 1987, PCC was forced into liquidation, the pumps were switched off and
the workings flooded. All the mining equipment and infrastructure -
including headframes, dressing sheds and the rail network - was dismantled
for scrap and among those who came to purchase PCC's salvage were two mining
executives from a recently worked-out Perak tin mine.
The two men, Chinese geologist Sia Hok Kiang and Malaysian businessman Dato'
Haji Nasir, current president of the Pahang Malay Chamber of Commerce, found
out that while the fire sale of PCC's equipment was proceeding some of the
mine's former face workers were covertly recovering valuable ore from the
abandoned mine. Disguising himself as a miner, Mr Sia joined the illegal
operators to explore the abandoned workings and concluded that, given
sufficient venture capital, it could be brought back to life.
In July 1989, the Chinese-Malaysian business partnership decided to take an
option on the mine. Mr Sia flew to the UK to discuss the viability of
reopening Sungei Lembing with PCC's former general manager, Mr Henry Hodding
and, given sufficient encouragement from Mr Hodding's extensive knowledge
and first-hand experience of the mine, he approached the World Bank in
Washington for aid. Although the Bank offered to put up 50 per cent of the
costs of a feasibility study, the scale of the Dollars 4.1m project to
reopen the mine was too small to meet the Bank's minimum project criteria.
Mr Sia then approached the Commonwealth Development Corporation, which
agreed to put up Dollars 1.5m in return for a one-third stake in the venture
and, with local financing subsequently secured to raise the minimum initial
Dollars 4.1m operating finance, the decision was taken to reopen the mine on
a 15-year lease to 2005.
By mid-1990, when tin prices were about MDollars 16 a kilogram, half the
level obtaining prior to the 1985 crisis, and with an accelerating closure
of much of the world's tin mining capacity, Sungei Lembing became the first
lode tin mine to reopen and start operations since the market collapse.
Widespread industry scepticism greeted the move, the venture being dismissed
as undercapitalised and doomed to failure.
Some two years later the new operating company, Sungei Lembing Tin, is
gearing up to increase output from an initial 1.5-2.0 tonnes a month 7
tonnes a month, and has established proved and probable reserves of 757,000
tonnes, grading 1.34 per cent tin, or 7,200 tonnes recoverable metal.
Of Sungei Lembing's three major mining sections, only Cakak is currently
being worked but the company's goal remains to make the entire mine fully
operational by pumping out and reopening the other two sections, Willinks
and Myah. The headframe is back in place at the Cakak section and the mine
has been dewatered for development down to the first level, 120 ft (40m)
below the surface. Dewatering continues and, by the end of 1993 the company
hopes to be operating down to the 15th level.
The rehabilitation of Sungei Lembing flies in the face of conventional
wisdom that tin is a sunset industry, a view most recently voiced by no less
a person than Malaysia s minister of primary industries, Datuk Seri Lim Keng
Yaik, who advised tin miners to get out of the business, export their
technology and diversify into alternative employment.
With world tin stocks expected to be down to 25,000 tonnes by the end of
this year, the lowest level since 1982, and tin prices rising in response to
near equilibrium in the supply/demand balance, the entrepreneurial courage
of a Chinese geologist and Malaysian businessman is being rewarded.
Some 100 miners currently employed at the lode mine have breathed new life
into the small township of Sungei Lembing, some 50km north of the Pahang
state capital, Kuantan. The town was wholly dependent for its livelihood on
the fortunes of the tin mine and was left for dead when PCC went into
liquidation in 1987. Business has now returned to the small shops and street
traders, and Sia Hok Kiang and Dato' Haji Nasir are being hailed as the
saviours of the local community.
