FT  27 FEB 92 / Egypt hoists 'full up' signs as tourists come in droves:
Tony Walker writes on growing investment in the holidays business
DR FOUAD SULTAN, Egypt's minister of tourism, is a happy man these days.
Well he might be, with Cairo's hotels full to overflowing and some Dollars
1bn earmarked for investment in the tourism sector.
If Dr Sultan has a worry it is that Egypt's tourism infrastructure will not
be able to cope with tourist numbers this Easter. He confidently predicts
that receipts in 1991-92 will exceed the Dollars 3bn earned from tourism in
1989-90 before the Gulf crisis.
In 1989, the peak year, some 2.8m visitors came to Egypt, compared with
about 2m in 1990, and a similar figure last year. This does not include
domestic tourism which Dr Sultan estimates adds one-third to receipts,
making the sector easily Egypt's largest money-earner, ahead of workers'
remittances, oil and Suez Canal dues.
All this activity is attracting new investors. The tourism sector together
with the oil industry has become Egypt's biggest magnet for investment in
new projects, including the refurbishment and enlargement of existing
hotels.
Dr Sultan, who hardly disguises his impatience with the government's
faltering steps towards de-nationalisation, sees tourism as a model for new
private sector investment, and for the beginning of a divestiture programme
of state-owned businesses.
When he was appointed minister six years ago, Dr Sultan began leasing some
of Egypt's government-owned grand historic hotels to private companies which
were obliged to spend money re-furbishing seedy relics such as the Cataracts
Hotel at Aswan.
In 1990, the minister moved on to the second phase of his plan which is to
begin selling off hotels to private investors, provided they undertake to
enlarge hotel capacity to make better use of prime sites. Thus the Meridien
Hotel on the Nile was sold to Saudi investors who plan to increase the
hotel's capacity to about 1,000 rooms from the present 260 at a cost of some
Dollars 250m.
Dr Sultan's planned third phase is to begin offering clusters of
government-owned hotels, which are good money-earners but are what he
describes as 'mature properties' and not suitable for further expansion, to
local institutional and smaller investors who would be guaranteed an
immediate return.
He sees this as way of helping to encourage a revival of public confidence
in the equity markets and to 'build awareness of the value of
privatisation'. Finally, he wants to offer for public sale, state
institutions such as Misr Travel which is involved in a range of tourism
activities, but he says such a step will be 'a little way down the track'.
The minister has also identified four main areas for development outside the
population centres of Cairo, Alexandria, Luxor and Aswan.
These are the Red Sea coast south of Hurghada; Sharm el-Sheikh and Dahab in
Sinai; and Egypt's oases in the Western Desert towards the Libyan border.
Among the more ambitious planned projects on the Red Sea coast is one being
promoted by the Abu Soma Development Company which is proposing to transform
10m sq metres of barren Ras Abu Soma headland into a tourism centre with
12-15 hotels, a golf course and several marinas.
Dr Farid Saad, chairman of the Cairo-based Egyptian Finance Company (EFC),
which is behind the Abu Soma development, hopes that work will begin this
year on two hotels at a cost of about Dollars 50m. The virgin site is some
40km south of Hurghada.
Dr Saad is also the moving force behind the creation of an investment fund
specialising in tourism, to be called the Egyptian Tourism Investment
Company. Initial capital of LE53m (Dollars 16.1m) would come from
debt/equity swaps.
Dr Saad has been wrestling with the government over the rate at which
debt/equity swaps will be permitted, but pending approval he has already
identified several new projects, including a hotel development in Luxor.
Dr Sultan's recent success in persuading the government to prevent oil
exploration encroaching on prime tourist sites in the Red Sea, south of
Hurghada and in other marine regions, is regarded by environmentalists as
promising.
The minister is also planning to use the newly-established Tourism
Development Authority, with backing from the World Bank which is offering up
to Dollars 200m in loans, to help pioneer tourist development in remote
areas, especially on the Red Sea coast and in South Sinai. The authority
would contribute initial infrastructure support for such projects.
Barring fresh Middle East turbulence, Dr Sultan sees no reason why tourism
receipts should not double by the end of the century.
