FT  13 JUN 92 / Finance &amp; The Family: Trusts can help to cut the risk
INVESTORS for income on the stock market would be well advised to dilute
their risk through a collective fund such as a unit or investment trust
rather than to try individual share-picking.
As discussed in the article above, investors who go hunting for high
yielding shares are engaged in a risky business because their chosen
companies might cut dividends or, in the worst case, even collapse. But
dividend cuts in shares held by a collective fund will have a less
pronounced effect on investors because of their wide spread.
There are more than 100 income funds to choose from in the UK equity income
unit trust sector, and six in the high income sector of investment trusts.
For inclusion, a unit trust must have a yield above 110 per cent of the
yield of the FT All-Share index; for investment trusts, the figure is 125
per cent.
Unit trust income funds have done well over the long term, even
outperforming the growth sector over periods from three to 10 years if
income is re-invested. But the growth in distributions has fallen since the
recession began and has barely increased over the past year. Many fund
managers have adopted a defensive strategy.
Most unit trusts pay out income every six months, but there are many that
pay at quarterly intervals. These include Newton's Income fund, which is top
of the sector over a period of three, five and seven years to June.
Its manager, Jonathan Powell, says his priority is to guard the capital by
buying companies with strong balance sheets rather than chasing income with
companies on high yields. He has put food firms, utilities and
pharmaceuticals as well as convertibles into the fund.
'These companies won't be cutting dividends but they won't be raising them,
either,' he says.
The Buckmaster Income fund, which has been a consistently good performer
over to seven years in the year to June, distributes every six months but
its High Income fund pays out every month. The initial charge on the High
Income fund is 3 per cent instead of the industry norm of 5.25 per cent, but
the minimum investment is Pounds 10,000 compared with Pounds 500 for the
Income portfolio.
Alternatively, investors can choose to buy into a number of good-quality
unit trusts with different distribution dates. Selecting two which pay at
different six-monthly intervals would ensure quarterly dividends for the
investor, but this steady flow of income would have to be balanced against
paying two lots of front-end charges.
Investors worried about the future of unit trust income funds can take heart
from Chris Rodgers, manager of the Schroder Income fund. He argues that
although dividend growth has slowed this year, the market thought dividends
would come under threat last year; thus, it has fallen already in response
to this expectation. So, he expects this year to be better than last for
income funds.
He is also running the fund defensively by targeting companies with
middle-range yields of about 7 per cent. These include, P&amp;O, ICI, British
Gas, Rank, Scottish Power, Shell and BAT.
Investors who are seeking income above a combination of income and capital
growth over the longer term would, however, be better off at the moment to
hold bonds rather than equities. Long-dated gilts are yielding more than 9
per cent and are expected to run into double figures over the couple of
years, compared with a yield of 4.5 per cent in the stock market and an
inflation rate of 4 per cent.
Other products designed to produce income include National Savings' income
bonds, which pay a variable rate of interest at monthly intervals. The rate
on a minimum deposit of Pounds 2,000 is now 10.25 per cent.
The life industry also has a number of products geared towards producing
income. Guaranteed income bonds pay a fixed rate of interest at regular
intervals. The rate depends on the amount invested and the length of time
the capital is to be tied up, usually one to five years.
Annuities also pay a fixed sum regularly, sometimes over a specified period
(temporary annuity) or until death (immediate annuity). Effectively, a large
part of the return is the repayment of the capital. Single premium insurance
bonds also can be used to produce income because investors can withdraw 5
per cent of the original value of the investment tax-free each year.
There is no prospect of capital growth with annuities, NS income bonds and
guaranteed income bonds. Similarly, the capital value of income shares of
investment trusts dwindles as trusts move towards their expiry date.
Perhaps the greatest attraction of equity investment for income is the
possibility of capital growth along with regular income payments.
