FT  30 OCT 92 / Broking firm fined under capital rules
OLLIFF and Partners, a stockbroking firm specialising in investment trusts,
and its directors have been fined a total of Pounds 46,000 by regulators for
disguising the fact that it did not have enough capital last November to
meet minimum regulatory standards.
It is the first time that any City firm has been reprimanded over its
declaration regarding capital adequacy.
The firm, which was recapitalised last May, has been 'severely reprimanded'
by the Securities and Futures Authority, the self-regulatory body for
stockbrokers.
Under the new name of Scaleoption Plc, the firm has been ordered to pay
Pounds 25,000 to the SFA, while three of its directors have been fined
Pounds 7,000 each.
Of the three directors, Mr William Cole, finance director, has left the
firm. The other two, Mr Barry Olliff, managing director and Mr John Howson,
remain. Another executive director, Mr Peter Jones, former head of
institutional sales, has been reprimanded but not fined for failing to
inform regulators about the situation after he became aware of it.
With the recapitalisation a new company called Olliff and Partners has
become the owner of Scaleoption and it is continuing to trade under that
name.
Mr Rodney Yates, chief executive, declined to give details about the affair,
except to say that the firm had voluntarily reported the matter to
regulators and that clients' funds had not been put at risk.
He declined to give details of the recapitalisation except to say that
clients were made aware of it and that the firm now has enough capital to
meet regulatory requirements.
Market sources said the firm's financial difficulties stemmed from two
public offerings of investment trusts in November 1991 which Olliff was
unable to place with investors.
One of the issues was for Sphere Investment Trust and Olliff was said to
have been left with as much as 80 per cent of securities.
In both issues the firm carried the securities on its books at sale price
and failed to reflect the far lower market value in filings to the SFA.
Had the market value been accurately reflected regulators would have quickly
become aware that the firm had a capital shortfall and could have forced it
to stop trading.
The SFA said that the directors failed to notify it that false statements
had been submitted, in spite of professional advice to do so. When the
positions were revalued correctly, the SFA said, the firm had sufficient
regulatory capital.
Subsequent investigations showed that insufficient capital had obtained on
two previous occasions and in the month after the overvaluation.
