FT  15 MAY 92 / International Company News: Options exchanges worried by
over-the-counter trading - The IAOECH annual meeting in Chicago believes
they are losing business to customised deals
RISING competition from over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives markets topped
the concerns this week at the annual meeting of the International
Association of Options Exchanges and Clearing Houses (IAOECH).
Options exchanges believe that a vast amount of money is slipping away from
their trading floors into unregulated, customised derivative deals. The 43
exchanges from around the globe that gathered in Chicago wrestled with the
question of whether this competition was a threat or an opportunity, and
decided at the end that it was both.
While they would prefer that the OTC markets be regulated in the same way
that they are, the risk of such customised deals is frequently laid off in
exchange-traded products, which provides a certain amount of business for
the exchanges.
Association officials said it is impossible to quantify precisely the
dimensions of the OTC derivatives markets. Some indication could come from a
plan for regulating the OTC market in the Netherlands, which goes into
action next month.
Despite the lack of figures, association officials remain convinced that OTC
markets are mushrooming. The same cannot be said of their own trading
volumes, at least in the more mature markets in industrial countries. Newer
markets tend to experience several years of extraordinary growth and then
see a significant slackening of pace.
US markets in particular are affected by a general decline in trading
volume. The most dramatic decline has been in traditional equity options.
According to the US Options Clearing Corporation, which handles all US
clearing, the average daily trading volume of equity options has dropped
from its peak of 650,000 in 1987 to 414,000 last year, though it has risen
to 449,000 so far in 1992.
According to a recent study by the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, the decline
in equity options activity derives in large part from a widespread lack of
knowledge about options.
The five American options markets and the US Options Clearing Corporation
Such plan to wage a joint advertising campaign to bring back the retail
customer.
Mr Alger 'Duke' Chapman, chairman of the Chicago Board Options Exchange and
president-elect of the IAOECH, said: 'There's a whole new generation of
customers to be educated and a whole new generation of brokers to be
educated.'
Education for regulators is also badly needed, the IAOECH officials said.
While regulators have increasingly consulted each other across borders in
recent years, the association officials complained that they frequently do
not consult with the markets themselves.
Tjerk Westerterp, president of the Amsterdam-based European Options Exchange
(EOE), said: 'We have been astonished in Europe at the kind of regulation
they (the EC) had in mind for derivative markets.' The association is
pressing for greater international co-operation by regulators, in part to
stem regulatory arbitrage and to speed the approval of trading products
across borders. It took, for example, two years to get the EOE's Eurotop
options registered with the US Securities and Exchange Commission.
The IAOECH would also like to see unified clearing, though a single European
clearing house was deemed at least the first stop on that journey. Evidence
of that need came just last week when four European exchanges, the EOE,
Soffex, OM London and OM Stockholm, agreed on co-operation in the form of a
strategic alliance. Called First European Exchanges (FEX), it will provide
cross-market access, but with the goal of enhancing home markets.
