FT  29 MAY 92 / UK Company News: Cost cutting behind 15% advance at Scottish
Power
SCOTTISH POWER, one of the two large Scottish electricity generation and
supply companies, yesterday reported profits before tax and exceptional
items of Pounds 259.9m for the year to March 31, an increase of 15 per cent.
Turnover was up 11.5 per cent at Pounds .38bn, although unit sales were
slightly lower, reflecting the closure of the Ravenscraig steel works and a
mild winter. Prices rose approximately 6 per cent over the year.
But the main factor behind the improvement in profits was cost cutting.
The company cut some Pounds 13m off its wages bill by losing 770 jobs,
reducing the workforce to just over 8,700. It also cut its fuel bill, which
represents about 60 per cent of costs, by burning cheap oil.
The company also enjoyed some one-off benefits last year. It would normally
have paid tax and dividends for the year to March 1991 this year, but
because it was floated that year, it did not incur these charges.
This meant it had cash to set against its debt, and the net interest charge
fell from Pounds 35.2m to Pounds 21m.
Last year's profit was also depressed by exceptional and extraordinary items
relating to the company's privatisation and restructuring, including
provisions for job losses.
Earnings per share advanced to 25.2p, and a recommended final dividend of
6.75p brings the total to 10.13p.
Net debt fell to Pounds 123.9m compared with Pounds 284m, giving gearing of
18.3 per cent, against 51.4 per cent.
Mr Murray Stuart, formerly chief executive of Berisford International, is to
become chairman in July, when Sir Donald Miller retires.
Mr Ian Preston, chief executive, said he believed the board now had an
excellent mix of experience, and considerable financial expertise.
COMMENT
Scottish Power is a true utility, and as such can do little to excite the
City. Its core business will grow slowly but surely through a mixture of
careful cost-squeezing and unit sales growth. Next year, sales should be up
1.5 per cent, while the Pounds 50m left in the provisions for restructuring
implies that more jobs will go. Fuel costs will also fall next year, when
the Miller gas field comes onstream, providing the company with cheap gas.
In the longer term, it will have to look for additional growth from non-core
businesses. The retail side is doing nicely, with sales up 30 per cent and a
small profit after two acquisitions. Time will tell if more will come from
the infant gas marketing business, or application for a telecoms licence.
Current year forecasts are in a Pounds 265m to Pounds 295m range pre-tax,
giving earnings of between 24.9p and 25.6p, and a prospective p/e between
8.8 and 10.2.
