FT  07 DEC 92 / International Bonds: Bank tries to boost prospects for UK
securitisation
SECURITISATION, touted as the latest growth market in Europe for the past
few years, has so far failed to live up to high expectations.
The largest market in Europe, the UK mortgage-backed market, totals around
Pounds 9bn, or 3 per cent of total mortgage loans outstanding. It is dwarfed
by the massive Dollars 1,000bn US mortgage-backed sector, which accounts for
40 per cent of all residential mortgage debt, according to Bank of England
figures.
The prospects for securitisation in the UK have recently had two boosts.
Last week, the Bank of England rescinded its plans to increase the risk
weighting of mortgage-backed securities from 50 per cent to 100 per cent,
effective January 1, 1993.
The threat of a 100 per cent risk weighting had driven many banks, a
mainstay of the market's investor base, away from the market.
In November, the Accounting Standards Board, the UK accounting regulators,
gave in to pressure to change proposed rules that could have stopped banks
and companies from securitising assets.
The ASB proposed last year that all securitised assets - where a bank or
other entity passes assets to a special purpose vehicle, which then issues
bonds against them - should remain on the originator's balance sheet, thus
removing a significant attraction of such arrangements.
While still requiring companies to record assets, the new system allows them
to express a net asset figure reflecting only the residual risk left with
the company from a securitisation.
These two changes are not, however, enough to kick-start the market. In the
US, large size and homogeneity of asset pools facilitates securitisation.
Pools of receivables in Europe are generally much smaller and more diverse.
Securitisation is designed to allow banks and companies to remove assets
from their balance sheets and repackage them as bonds which are then sold to
investors.
The theory is that the current squeeze on bank capital and the lack of bank
financing available for companies will encourage both to take this route.
But the process of securitisation is often prohibitively expensive, or is
only viable if a company or bank has large amounts of assets to securitise.
The latest trend for securitisation involves assembling different
receivables in a single pool.
'A number of companies do not fit the pattern for a single origination
programme: Pounds 50m is a lot of funding to raise in the current market,
but not enough to justify its own programme,' said Mr Bruce Gaitskell, an
executive director in charge of securitisation at UBS Phillips &amp; Drew.
The solution: your bank sets up a vehicle which funds your trade receivables
by issuing asset-backed commercial paper. This technique can be used to fund
other assets, such as leases.
As well as a Barclays special-purpose company - called Sceptre
(Securitisation conduit for the enhancement and purchase of trade
receivables across Europe) - other banks involved include Deutsche Bank,
Westdeutsche Landesbank and Warburg, and UBS Phillips and Drew.
The US asset-backed commercial paper market has expanded rapidly, on the
back of a huge and mature commercial paper market.
For the moment, issuance of commercial paper backed by European receivables
may well be concentrated in the larger market. Several European CP markets
are still highly regulated, restricting issuance, and the European investor
base for these products is not yet well developed.
Meanwhile, bank regulators in Europe will be watching developments. In the
US, the Federal Reserve has come down on the banks which were providing the
liquidity guarantees for these programmes.
They were concerned these liquidity guarantees created substantial credit
risk for the banks and asked banks to set more capital aside against them.
Since then, many programmes have been restructured so that, for example,
specialist insurance replaces liquidity guarantees.
As for the rest of the market, there are signs of life. UBS is believed to
be preparing a Pounds 180m five-year issue of floating rate notes backed by
Leyland-Daf leases and dealer finance plans. The issue, called Truck
Funding, will have an average life of 3 3/4 years.
But the mortgage-backed market, despite the Bank of England move, is still
on hold.
The Centralised lenders such as The Mortgage Corporation and National Home
Loans, which were once the mainstay of the market, are no longer churning
out deals - or mortgages, for that matter.
However, the building societies are looking more closely at securitisation.
Although they are originating few mortgages, the decline of retail funds, as
investors shift funds into higher-yielding investments, is creating
potential funding difficulties.
A number of societies are close to the 40 per cent ceiling of public debt
funding permitted under the Building Societies Act. Some have already set up
auxiliary mortgage companies, a process required of building societies if
they wish to tap the market.
Although only a handful of building societies are likely to issue next year,
once the process has begun, others are expected to follow suit.
Several UK clearing banks, including Barclays and Midland, are already well
advanced in their preparatory work for mortgage securitisation, and may
bring deals next year. Barclays is also considering securitisation of
consumer loans and credit card receivables.
