FT  12 FEB 92 / Recovery still expected this year but little evidence yet:
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin
THE Bank of England still believes the UK economy will recover this year but
its latest quarterly bulletin offers very little evidence that the upturn is
at hand.
It stresses that the outlook is surrounded by risks, especially in
connection with the private sector's high level of borrowings from banks and
building societies.
Six months ago the Bank said that the UK economy was 'bumping along the
bottom' of recession. Yesterday's bulletin acknowledges that there has been
no recovery in the level of activity.
Instead manufacturing output has continued to decline since the summer.
Service-sector output, which appeared to stabilise in the third quarter,
might have been displaying a 'false dawn'. Construction continues to be
weak.
About the only signs of recovery identified by the Bank are the leading
indicator measures compiled by the Central Statistical Office. These, it
says, 'point firmly to an upturn in output in the course of 1992'.
However, the UK's leading indicators have yet to be taken seriously by most
City analysts or private-sector economists. Moreover, both the longer and
shorter leading indices have turned down in recent months - a fact the Bank
chose not to publicise yesterday.
Perhaps because the Budget and a general election are in the offing, the
bulletin offers no new ideas about policies which might help boost the
economy.
It is cautious about the prospects for an early cut in interest rates,
noting that recent tensions in the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) of the
European Monetary System 'have made further easing of monetary policy
difficult'. It adds that, in any case, interest-rate cuts take time to have
an impact.
The bulletin contains a guarded warning to Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor,
not to indulge in too expansionary a Budget or to adopt short-term
palliatives.
It notes that fiscal policy is already playing a role in reviving the
economy through the automatic stabilisers and through the decision in
December temporarily to suspend stamp duty on house purchases up to Pounds
250,000.
However, it adds: 'But the basis for sustainable growth remains a credible
commitment to the ultimate goal of price stability. This is bolstered by
membership of the ERM and a medium-term target for public spending and
borrowing.'
In its analysis the Bank says two factors have frustrated earlier hopes of a
recovery:
Prospects for growth in the world economy 'have deteriorated sharply over
the last quarter'. The Bank now expects growth in Britain's six main trading
partners to fall to around 2 per cent this year from 3 per cent previously.
Domestic business and consumer confidence has fallen. This, the Bank says,
is 'perhaps the more significant deterioration'.
The Bank believes consumer confidence may have been adversely affected by
sterling's membership of the ERM as individuals realised that monetary
expansion and devaluation were no longer policy options.
The high level of household debt may be an additional brake on confidence in
the circumstances of ERM membership and low inflation. Consumers may be less
ready than before to borrow to finance higher spending because the principal
of the debt will stay high in real terms and new debt will be relatively
costly to service.
The weakness of the housing market could also be sapping confidence while
consumers' expenditure might stay depressed if house prices fall further and
turnover - which is at its lowest level since 1977 - stays low.
Electoral uncertainty and the associated worries about future taxation are
also affecting confidence.
The Bank believes that consumption was flat in the second half of last year
because total income from employment has been flat or falling in real terms
since mid-1990.
A rise in the volume of consumption will require a fall in the savings
ratio, it says. Although the ratio fell in the third quarter it is not yet
clear that it is firmly on a downward path. This would probably require 'a
clear and sustained improvement in consumer confidence'.
Falling inflation is one of the few bright spots highlighted in the
bulletin. The Bank also argues that the narrowing of regional disparities in
house prices and unemployment should assist labour mobility and improve the
quality of the eventual recovery.
In addition it says there is no sign of a credit crunch and banks should be
able to provide sufficient credit to fund recovery when it appears.
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, February 1992. Vol 32, No 1.
Subscription details from Bulletin Group, Economics Division, Bank of
England, London EC2R 8AH. Tel 071-601 4030.
