FT  26 OCT 92 / Fall in pay rises may be ending
THE RAPID decline in pay settlements from the beginning of last year may
have bottomed out, according to the latest quarterly figures from the
Confederation of British Industry.
The figures show that the average pay settlement in the third quarter of
this year was 4.2 per cent, the same as in the second quarter and only
slightly down on the 4.4 per cent rise in the last quarter of last year.
Manufacturing pay settlements continue to hover just over 4 per cent, where
they have been for the past 12 months.
Both the government and the CBI will be disappointed by the latest figures,
especially since the discipline of the European exchange rate mechanism has
been lifted from pay bargainers and the public sector has been exhorted to
follow the example of the private sector.
Mr Howard Davies, director-general of the CBI, said there were strong
indications that the next move on manufacturing pay would be downwards.
He pointed to the fact that one in seven of the CBI pay databank companies
had deferred a pay rise for six months.
He also cited a Gallup survey that found that 65 per cent of employees
expected their next settlement to be at or below the level of the last.
He added: 'Lower pay increases over the next year would help to control
inflation and put companies in a better position to take advantage of the
opportunities for exports and import substitution opened up by devaluation.'
CBI settlements in the service sector in the first half of this year are
slightly higher, at 4.4 per cent, but have fallen more rapidly, down from
7.1 per cent a year before.
Productivity growth for manufacturers settling in the third quarter was
estimated at 2.2 per cent - reflecting a downward recessionary trend -
giving an increase in unit labour costs of about 2 per cent.
That compares with a fall in unit labour costs of about 0.6 per cent in the
last quarter of last year, when productivity rose 5 per cent.
Average earnings in the economy as a whole continue to rise at about 5.75
per cent but that figure looks back over 12 months, including settlements
from summer last year, when inflation was higher, and includes overtime and
bonus payments not included in raw settlement figures.
Government ministers are arguing that public-sector employees should take
more of the strain on pay and are threatening a pay freeze and the possible
suspension of the pay review bodies which make recommendations on pay rises
for more than a third of public-sector workers, including nurses and
teachers.
Ministers point to the pay spurt that has taken average pay in the public
sector above that in the private sector for the first time since 1986. They
also point to the greater job security of most public-sector workers.
Critics of those arguments, such as Incomes Data Services, the independent
pay analysts, point to the fact that the public sector always does better in
a recession while the private sector pulls ahead in periods of rapid growth.
IDS also says that in spite of higher average pay in the public sector, both
blue-collar and white-collar workers are better paid in the private sector.
The higher average arises because the public sector includes a higher
proportion of white-collar workers, who are generally better paid than
manual workers.
