FT  05 DEC 92 / Books: From King Tut with love - Archaeology
HOWARD CARTER by T G H James Kegan Paul Pounds 24.95 443 pages
HOWARD CARTER BEFORE TUTANKHAMEN by Nicholas Reeves and John H Taylor
British Museum Pounds 12.95, 201 pages
AT LAST, 70 years after he found the tomb of Tutankhamen, Howard Carter is
receiving the acclaim he deserves - a major biography, a fascinating
exhibition at the British Museum and a lively book and television series to
accompany it. Why so long? Probably because he was difficult, litigious and
somewhat greedy - in short, 'a troublemaker'. Yet this archaeologist, who
never received an honour from British royalty and never went to university
but was an honorary doctor of Yale, resurrected the 14th century BC teenage
king of Egypt with a patience, determination and skill that still leave
professionals gasping.
How did Carter come to be the man who raised Tutankhamen from the dead? The
short answer is that he was well respected but out of work in 1909, when
Lord Carnarvon hired him to dig in the Valley of the Kings on the West Bank
of the Nile opposite Luxor. TGH James, retired Keeper of Egyptian
Antiquities at the BM, gives the long answer in his judicious, leisurely
biography, which fits many strange details in to their context (even if it
omits Almina Carnarvon's re-marriage within nine months of the Earl's
death.)
James's book will delight those eager to learn about archaeology abroad in
the days when Carnarvon ordered Jackson's of Piccadilly to send out curried
fowls and tabasco sauce to the Winter Palace in Luxor. And it will bring wry
smiles of recognition to any digger who has suffered prickly colleagues,
permit problems with host officials, and money disputes with committees in
London.
Carter came from a family of journeyman-artists. Aged only 17, his fine
watercolours of birds and wild animals gave him an extraordinary break when,
with a subvention from Lord Amherst, he went as a 'tracer' to record the
spirited paintings in the tombs at Beni Hasan in middle Egypt. The country
caught him. He lived in a tomb on a cliff overlooking the Nile and worked
from dawn to dusk.
His drawings and pictures, on view at the BM, show he was a prodigy with an
exceptional eye, a firm but lively line, and the humility and patience to
look at every little bit of what the ancient artist had created and
reproduce it. (He even includes the cracks and flaking.) As bland
photographs never can, his pictures take you straight back to how the world
saw itself 4000 years ago.
Two months later he had a dig of his own - for Amherst, but under the
direction of the great Flinders Petrie. Within three years (and still a
minor) he had changed for ever how draughtsmen drew Egyptian tombs. In the
meantime he started a lifelong career of part-time dealing in antiquities,
using his keen eye and knowledge of Arabic and the Egyptians which today
would be quite improper for a field archaeologist. It repaired his modest
circumstances, a constant nag to which patrons and grand friends did not
respond.
Later, he bought for Carnarvon and the American museums, and died in 1939,
comfortably off from commissions and lecture fees. He had come up in the
world, dressing with a touch of the rakish like Carnarvon, and had taken
elocution lessons.
At 25 he was chosen by the Director of Antiquities to be Inspector of Upper
Egypt at Luxor - an astonishing but perceptive testimonial to the excellence
of a self-taught man. Carter tackled the job practically, fitting gates and
installing electric light in the tombs in the Valley of the Kings so that
visitors at last could see them. He lived in 'Castle Carter' among the ruins
on the West Bank, where he kept a menagerie that included a pet gazelle.
Promotion to Lower Egypt was not so happy. In 1905 a fracas erupted with a
party of drunken French visitors at Saqqara. Carter's men used their sticks:
Carter he rushed off a telegram to Lord Cromer to explain. This revealing
incident strained the Entente Cordiale, a touchy thing in Egypt. The press
was fervid in both languages. Rights and wrongs are unclear. An apology from
Carter would have let it pass, everybody told him. He refused, and became
known as a difficult man. Soon after he resigned his job, thinking he would
make a living from his watercolours, dealing and high-class guiding.
A grim few years followed which Carnarvon, who had come to Egypt to recover
from a motor accident, broke by offering him a job to dig for him on the
West Bank (as well as buying antiquities). The two men became good friends.
In 1911 Carter built himself a second 'Castle Carter', with bricks from the
Earl's own brickworks stamped 'MADE AT BRETBY ENGLAND FOR HOWARD CARTER AD
THEBES 1910' - just as the Pharoahs used to do. In 1914 Carnarvon secured
the concession for the Valley of the Kings, where it seemed that only one
royal tomb had not been found. The First World war then interrupted the
proceedings, and Carter worked intermittently for Intelligence in Cairo.
In the Valley, Carter mapped everything that he - or anybody else - had
found. By autumn 1922 the only place left to look was under some huts. He
moved them and on November 4 found the entrance of the sealed royal tomb.
Carnarvon left Berkshire at once. On November 26 the two peered in through a
small hole. 'Can you see anything?' 'Yes, wonderful things.'
Troubles began forthwith - with the press, officials, visitors who thought
they deserved privileged access, and the scholars. 'Gold always maddens
people', Petrie wrote later. Nerves were at breaking point: was the tomb
really intact? Yes] and although there had been a break-in a very long time
ago, the tomb had been resealed. Carter faced the most difficult and most
spectacular task that archaeology has ever seen. The pressure was colossal.
Thank goodness for his cool determination. He assembled a first-rate team
and took ten years to clear the tomb. It was all worth the effort, the rows,
and suffering from ill health. If in doubt, go to the Egyptian Museum in
Cairo, and in the BM exhibition look at Carter's catalogue cards and records
to see with what superb professionalism this awkward and, I assume,
resentful man did the job.
From Earl's Court in London and Swaffham in Norfolk it is a long way to the
Valley of the Kings. It was his eye that carried him forward, both by what
he drew or bought and, figuratively, because he recognised what was really
important. To grasp fully his achievement, visit Howard Carter Before
Tutankhamen at the BM (till May 31), and look at his watercolours, his
plans, and the wonderful pieces he bought for his collectors. An entrancing
video, slowed down to cut out the jerky movements of 1920s film, shows him
at work. Tut brought blessings, not curses.
