FT  26 OCT 92 / Management: Why customers must come first - Paul Taylor
finds problems with Total Quality schemes
Total Quality programmes have, at best, led to incremental improvements in
companies' performance and customer satisfaction; at worst, they have made
it more difficult to increase organisations' competitiveness.
These findings, which come from a critical examination of European corporate
experience due to be published by the Economist Intelligence Unit shortly*,
indicate that companies may need to rethink their approach to TQ.
The research, conducted by a team from Ashridge management school led by
George Binney, concludes that TQ has often failed to deliver hoped-for
results because of the way it has been approached. In many cases, it has
been internally focused and 'lacks a clear link to customers or business
results'.
After looking at companies which have made a sustained effort to apply TQ,
the authors say two conclusions stand out. First, that rigid, pre-determined
TQ programmes, in particular those imposed from outside an organisation, do
not work. Second, companies which have gone furthest in applying Total
Quality have never had a TQ initiative or programme - in them 'TQ has
developed organically.'
In spite of the difficulties of implementation, organisations are warned
that they ignore TQ principles at their peril. The report cites the results
of a study of more than 3,000 businesses in Europe and North America which
indicates that every 2 per cent improvement in a company's quality rating by
customers is associated with a 1 per cent increase in its return on
investment.
Companies in Europe also need to discover how to achieve systematic,
continuous improvement, because the competitive challenge from Japan and
other Pacific Rim countries grows ever more intense. The authors note
'continuous improvement . . . is becoming a condition of survival in
internationally competitive markets.'
The authors also insist that TQ, as a management philosophy, has value
because it focuses attention on targets like customer satisfaction and
encourages companies to 'benchmark' themselves against world-class
competitors. 'TQ defines what companies need to do in order to improve
continuously the value they provide to customers.' Where it is working,
'continuous improvement, customer delight and people empowerment are a
reality . . . not a management consultant's buzz-words'.
The buzz-words are only too easy to mouth, as are the principles of TQ. But
translating the principles into actions is another matter, the report points
out. In particular, it says, top management must have a 'gut commitment' to
quality.
Programmes which are imposed from above and bolted on to existing procedures
do not work because they are ineffective and can even 'inoculate'
organisations against real change, say the authors. 'Managers and staff can
emerge after two to three years of time-consuming work, familiar with all
the concepts and jargon of quality, yet without a real improvement in
performance. People will then become cynical. Any later attempt to organise
a true quality effort will be made more difficult.'
Senior management needs to take responsibility for quality, rather than
delegating it. 'They should begin by understanding the TQ principles,
assessing where their organisation is and where it wants to be and then
deciding what place TQ can, or should, have in their philosophy and
strategy.'
Just as important, the route taken by individual companies to improve
quality should be 'home grown' and internally developed. 'Companies need to
be objective but also to value the things they inherit from the past which
may differentiate them in the future.' For this self-assessment to be
effective, a company needs to benchmark its performance against worldwide
best practice, as Xerox and Motorola did in the US, and to listen carefully
to customers and employees.
The report concludes that, for most organisations, the ISO9000 and BS5750
standards are not the best way to launch a Total Quality programme. Although
the authors accept that the quality systems which they codify are important,
they suggest that starting a TQ programme with them is 'begining a process
of change with the bureaucracy of quality: it puts the cart before the
horse'.
As part of the year-long research programme, the Ashridge researchers
completed six case studies. These covered: Grundfos, the Danish group which
holds half of the world market in domestic water pumps; Nissan Motors'
Sunderland manufacturing plant; Club Med, the French holiday and leisure
company; Ciba-Geigy's Italian marketing, sales and distribution group; the
UK-based parcels operations of Federal Express; and ICL Product
Distribution, based in Stevenage, Hertfordshire, which is responsible for
the storage and distribution of the computer group's hardware, software and
literature.
The authors note that 'few areas of business activity suffer from as much
hype, exaggeration and confusion as Total Quality'. But while it would have
been easy to produce a damning report 'pointing to the gap between
aspiration and reality in many companies with TQ initiatives', they argue
this would have been a mistake, for an understanding of how TQ can be best
tackled is still developing.
The authors argue that there is 'a rich vein of experience' in companies
which have worked with TQ, from which others can learn how better to
implement TQ principles and improve competitive position.
Making Quality Work - Lessons from Europe's Leading Companies; Pounds 100
from EIU 40 Duke Street, London WIA 1DW.
