FT  09 DEC 92 / Personal View: The ultimate opt-out
The UK's decision to postpone the parliamentary vote on the Maastricht
treaty makes this week's Edinburgh summit an important occasion for
examining how other EC members interpret the proposed agreement.
A good starting point would be the EC reaction to Denmark's decision not to
ratify the Maastricht plan. Although the Treaty of Rome - which created the
European Community - explicitly provides that all treaty revisions must be
unanimous, some continental politicians now assert that Denmark does not
have the right to block the treaty revision proposed at Maastricht. Denmark
should therefore be forced to leave the EC if it does not accept Maastricht,
they say.
If Britain decides not to ratify the treaty, or rejects some future proposed
treaty revisions, would it be forced to leave the Community?
Edinburgh provides the opportunity to reconfirm that, even if Britain does
ratify the treaty, it not only has the legal right to maintain its own
currency, but could expect to do so without penalties or recriminations.
That is important because the benefits of participating in monetary union
would be outweighed by the adverse effects on UK unemployment and inflation.
A single currency would simplify UK business dealings within the EC. But
such gains are small in comparison with the higher average cyclical
unemployment in Britain that would result from the loss of a national
monetary policy and of a currency that responds to market forces to maintain
competitiveness. And contrary to the claim of the European Commission, there
is neither evidence nor logic to suggest that a single currency is needed to
benefit from the trade gains of a single European market.
Despite talk of an independent European central bank committed to price
stability, Maastricht gives the Council of Ministers the power to tell the
proposed central bank how to manage the external value of the common
European currency and thus the power to set a more-or-less inflationary
monetary policy for Europe as a whole. Is that what President Mitterrand
meant when he told the French public that European monetary policy would be
determined by politicians and not by central bankers?
The political consequences of the Maastricht treaty would be even more
important than its economic effects. Maastricht anticipates that all
decisions about foreign policy and military actions would eventually be made
at the Community level. The Edinburgh summit might clarify what would happen
if Britain did not want to participate in some future military action. Could
Brussels nevertheless conscript British subjects to fight in a war?
Brussels has come under strong criticism for excessive involvement in the
domestic matters of member states. Subsequent assertions by the Commission
that Brussels would in the future be more accountable to the elected members
of the European Parliament did little to reassure those people who were
concerned about losing national self-determination.
The principle of subsidiarity - assigning decisions to the lowest
appropriate level of government - has therefore been emphasised in an
attempt to reassure people that they and their national governments will not
lose control over important issues. There is, however, so little practical
content to the idea of subsidiarity that it cannot provide comfort to anyone
who worries about a European federal government's assumption of authority
for rules affecting local lifestyles and national fiscal policies.
As an American, I am accustomed to the drift of authority from state
governments to Washington. Despite the US Constitution's unambiguous 10th
Amendment (which reserves to the individual states all powers not
specifically vested by the Constitution itself in the central government),
Washington now determines things such as the maximum speed limit on state
roads and the minimum age at which people can purchase beer.
The issue of subsidiarity involves domestic fiscal policy as well as
personal lifestyle issues. The original Delors plan for the Maastricht
treaty would have constrained national budget deficits. National tax
authorities are already restructuring value added taxes to conform to
European guidelines. Although the EC has little revenue of its own, is there
anything in the treaty to stop a flow of fiscal power and resources to the
centre if a European majority wants to do so?
The ultimate protection of national sovereignty is the right to withdraw
from the EC. It is significant therefore that the Community treaties contain
no provision for unilateral withdrawal. What would happen if a country felt
that its national interest and way of life were so threatened by the rules
of a centralised European government that it wanted to leave? Could it be
compelled by force to remain?
These questions are as difficult as they are important. The success of the
Edinburgh meeting will be measured by the extent to which it provides clear
answers.
The author is a professor of economics at Harvard University
