FT  04 DEC 92 / World Stock Markets: France fails to live up to expectations
 -An economic slowdown and pressure on the franc are to blame
This time last year if any analyst had been asked to predict which European
stock markets were likely to be the best performers in 1992, Paris would
almost certainly have been at, or near, the top of the list.
So much for predictions. The CAC 40 index now stands just below 1,800,
almost the same level as at the start of the year. The French economy has
grown faster than many of its European counterparts, notably Germany, but
not quite as fast as even the most sceptical analysts expected.
In retrospect the analysts appear to have been hopelessly over-optimistic in
their initial forecasts. But at the time they had every reason to expect
1992 to be a robust year, both for France's economy and for the Paris stock
market.
The French economy had slowed down in 1991, reflecting the impact of high
real interest rates on domestic demand and the effects of the global
recession on France's export markets. The same trends seemed set to continue
into 1992. But analysts - and the French government - harboured hopes of an
improvement in exports as, thanks to years of low inflation, French
companies had become cost-competitive in the international marketplace.
There also appeared to be little risk of an economic volte face from
France's socialist government which, led by Mr Pierre Beregovoy, first as
finance minister and then as prime minister, continued to cling to its rigid
fiscal policy, despite the continuing increase in unemployment and the
steady slide in its popularity in the approach to next spring's elections.
The CAC 40 index rose rapidly in the first five months of 1992, just as
analysts had expected. By the second week of May it had reached 2,077,
nearly 20 per cent higher than at the start of the year. But that was the
peak. Since then the Paris stock market has fallen fairly steadily, dipping
down to 1,611 in early October.
Growth is the problem. The domestic economy has been stubbornly static, both
in terms of consumer spending and corporate investment. Meanwhile exports
have slowed down, initially because of the global economic slowdown and
latterly due to the strong franc.
The latest analysis from Paribas forecasts growth of just 1.9 per cent for
1992. The prospects for 1993 could be worse. Societe Generale warns that
France could fall into a vicious circle whereby confidence crumbles, thereby
stopping companies from making the investments needed to regenerate the
economy.
Meanwhile, the French economic scene is now dominated by one overwhelming
issue - what will happen to the franc?
The critical question is whether the franc can continue to resist market
pressure to devalue. Both the Bank of France and, its new best friend,
Germany's Bundesbank, have been forced yet again to bolster the franc in
recent weeks.
The government insists that it has no intention of abandoning its franc fort
policy of protecting the franc. Indeed to do so before the elections next
March would deal a devastating blow to Mr Beregovoy's credibility, even if
it would seem to be the easiest way of avoiding a slowdown in exports and
reviving the rest of the economy.
Most analysts suspect that, although the pressure will persist, the franc
will probably pull through. The market will then have to bide its time until
the elections to see whether the next government has same attachment to the
franc.
