FT  12 MAY 92 / Bonn questions British rebate on EC budget
GERMANY yesterday questioned Britain's big European Community budget rebate,
sending an official signal that a new front may be about to open in a battle
over ambitious EC budget plans, Reuter reports from Brussels.
Ms Ursula Seiler-Albring, deputy foreign minister, was quoted as saying that
decisions on budget proposals by Mr Jacques Delors, European Commission
president, should wait until issues such as the British rebate had been
studied.
'We think other subjects must be looked at, such as the change in (EC) own
resources, Britain's rebate and the evaluation of structural funds,' a
German spokesman quoted Ms Seiler-Albring as telling EC foreign ministers
meeting in Brussels.
The Commission said last week it would soon unveil a report on the future of
Britain's refund, won by Mrs Margaret Thatcher, former British prime
minister, in 1984 after long and hard bargaining. Britain is the only member
state to get back part of its net annual contribution to the budget - a
refund worth Pounds 2.4bn in the last budget year.
The German comment was the first time the issue of the rebate had been
raised officially during three months of inconclusive debate about Mr
Delors's five-year budget plan, known as the Delors II package.
The package, designed to fund Community projects as the EC prepares for
economic and monetary union, has already divided member states. Mr Delors
wants EC annual budget commitments to be allowed to rise to around Ecu88bn
(Pounds 61.6bn) by 1997 from Ecu67bn now.
Germany and the Netherlands are also concerned Delors II would overstretch
member states' resources, but Spain, Ireland, Portugal and Greece are keen
to get promised new funds to help their poorer economies catch up with rich
EC neighbours.
Diplomats said Spain had called for a firm political decision on the Delors
budget package for the years 1993-1997 to be taken at the next EC summit,
due in Lisbon next June. But several richer countries argued for more
information before any firm decision can be taken, diplomats said.
