FT  18 JUN 92 / Technology: Water power used for fire-fighting
Tragedies such as the fire on a British Airtours Boeing 737 at Manchester
airport in 1985 have underlined the need for novel approaches to ensuring
aircraft safety.
The disaster, in which 55 people died, was one of the worst in British
aviation history. Seven years later comes the launch of a range of products
powered by a technology that gives new meaning to fighting fire with water.
The spearhead of the new approach, developed by Hull-based Fenner Water
Hydraulics, is precisely that - a Fire Spear which drills through an
aircraft side in seven seconds, and then switches to a high-pressure water
spray. The system is based on innovative water motors, which use water both
as a power source and a lubricant.
The spear is an apt first application for a revival of commercial interest
in water hydraulics, neglected since the development of hydraulic oils but
now making a comeback.
The Fire Spear, now being evaluated by a number of European civil aviation
authorities, creates a 'water curtain' - a fine mist which can envelop toxic
gases and drop them to the floor, preventing the sudden spread of fire in an
effect known as flashover.
The key to the system is the broad application of Fenner's pump and motor
technology. With water as the power source, a fireman can quickly run a hose
out to the fire and then decide whether to use the Fire Spear or attach a
cutting tool or saw, says John McCullough, Fenner project director.
The rotary equipment such as the spear and saw developed by Fenner are
water-lubricated, but its water intensifier pump for linear equipment - such
as the cutters known by firemen as 'Jaws of Life' - will be able to handle
water or oil-lubricated tools.
According to McCullough, the new system has a number of advantages other
than speed. It is quieter than the petrol-powered oil power pack currently
used for fire-fighting equipment, reducing stress for the accident victims.
And, in contrast to pyrotechnic processes used to start much fire-fighting
equipment, it can be turned on and off at will.
The package of mobile fire-fighting equipment is being marketed worldwide by
Warwick-based Godiva. Andrew Thompson, sales and marketing director, intends
to develop the UK market first for the linear hydraulic tools, and has won
the first order from a UK fire brigade. But he sees the Fire Spear as having
immediate international appeal.
McCullough, meanwhile, has been investigating other applications for
Fenner's water motors, which are one third the size of equivalent electric
motors. In particular, he sees an opportunity in replacing sprinkler systems
currently using halon, an ozone-damaging gas which, according to the 1989
Helsinki declaration on CFCs, should be phased out as soon as feasible.
Other applications could include subsea work, where only a single line would
be needed. 'In diving, you don't need the water back,' says McCullough. In
modified form, the system could run on salt water.
