FT  08 JUL 92 / 3i sees rise in net asset values despite impact of recession
INVESTORS in Industry (3i), the UK's largest venture capital group that has
delayed its planned flotation, yesterday reported a small increase in net
asset values in spite of the impact of two years of recession.
Mr Ewan Macpherson, chief executive, said the performance of 3i, which
invests in about 4,000 small British companies, was linked with the economy
which was 'experiencing only patchy signs of economic recovery'.
However, net asset value per share - the most useful measure of the
performance of investment trusts - increased 3.2 per cent to Pounds 5.38 in
the year to March. Over the same period, the FT All Share Index fell 1.8 per
cent.
There was an improvement in economic confidence between the first and the
second half as measured by the size of investments. In the first six months
the group invested Pounds 141m while in the second it invested Pounds 283m.
Mr Macpherson said the trend had not been maintained this year. Last year's
average monthly investment had been about Pounds 40m-Pounds 50m, while
during the first three months of this financial year investment had fallen
to Pounds 35m-Pounds 40m.
As a result of the recession, the pre-tax revenue surplus fell from Pounds
55.99m to Pounds 40.08m on total revenue that fell from Pounds 263.12m to
Pounds 231.88m. The group is paying a increased dividend of 10.9p, up from
10.43p.
3i also took further steps to improve the understanding of the group among
investing institutions before flotation. Last month 3i and its chief
shareholders, the main UK clearing banks, postponed the flotation because of
the slowness of the economic recovery and the condition of the London stock
market.
'People know what 3i does,' said Mr Macpherson. 'What is not known is the
quality of 3i as an investment.'
As part of this campaign 3i has disclosed a changed valuation policy for the
investments in its portfolios after a review showed it was consistently
realising more on the disposals than the book values of its investments. The
group has reduced the discount it applies in valuing its non-quoted
investments. These two changes in accounting policy led to an increase in
net asset values of Pounds 32m. Total net assets rose from Pounds 1.22bn to
Pounds 1.27bn.
Lex, Page 22; New accounts, Page 24
