FT  24 JUL 92 / Catalan socialists and nationalists play games with the
Games: Jealousy and grumbling in Barcelona
JUST in case visitors to the Olympic Games starting in Barcelona tomorrow
did not know the city is run by the Socialist party and that opposite City
Hall sits the headquarters of the nationalist regional government of
Catalonia, both have spent the past weeks trying to make their positions
obvious.
The socialists began by driving out of town hundreds of prostitutes and
transvestites, thus depriving the city of the most colourful element in its
otherwise cliquey nightlife. Eastern Europeans would instantly recognise the
mind-set that polishes pavements before lots of foreigners come to town.
The nationalists have been, as ever, even less subtle. They took out
double-page advertisements in international newspapers last week asking 'in
which country would you place this point?' with a dot marking Barcelona on a
blank page. The 'country,' of course, was not Spain, but Catalonia, a small,
semi-industrialised region on the margins of Europe.
Ever since it was first decided to hold the 1992 Games in Barcelona, the
socialist City Hall and the nationalist regional government have lost
themselves in a contorted effort to claim them as their own. At one stage
the nationalist government allowed its followers to believe the possibility
really existed that Catalonia would be able to compete as a separate
country.
Nationalist pressure has at least won them the right to have the Catalan
anthem played at the inaugural ceremony tomorrow and the Catalan flag will
adorn Olympic sites throughout the Games. Catalonia's Games? In the City
Hall, Mr Enric Truno, the Socialist party councillor responsible for
preparing Barcelona for the Games, just sighs. 'We have tried to share the
Games with the rest of Catalonia,' by scattering events around the region,
he said in a recent interview.
That has not been enough for Mr Jordi Pujol, the leader of the nationalist
government, for, like most moderate nationalists, his constant carping over
the years about how terribly badly Madrid treats his country has bred a
generation of people who actually believe it. People watching the Olympics
on television around the world might be startled by the occasional youth
wearing 'Free Catalonia' on his T-shirt throwing himself in front of the
cameras. In English, that is. No one but the locals understands Catalan.
The problem is that Catalonia is already free. Poor Madrid, which has had to
fund far more than half of the Dollars 10bn that has gone into Olympic
housing, stadiums, new highways and sewers - and, most important, restoring
to Barcelona a beach - has learned it is best to say nothing when Mr Pujol
and his patriots climb their flagpoles.
But the truth is that these Games are the work of the ruling Socialist Party
in Madrid and its Catalan affiliate. Barcelona has been a socialist city
ever since the first elections after Franco died in 1975. Jealous of the
credit that would go to City Hall, Mr Pujol spent a great deal of time in
the late 1980s frustrating plans to build hotels in Barcelona and
interfering in infrastructure projects.
Unable to topple the socialist mayor, he is now making the most of the fact
that things have gone well. The project is ready, and even the 1,000
athletes who will have birthdays in the next two weeks have had cakes
specially ordered for them. The only thing that can go wrong now is
security.
Mr Pujol would no doubt be quick to point fingers at Madrid if the Basque
separatist movement Eta does anything to upset the Olympics. The Spanish
have drafted in 26,000 police and security guards to ensure nothing happens.
Mini-submarines patrol the beaches, and Mr Truno is calm. Many Eta leaders
in exile in France have recently been arrested, and the organisation is in
trouble.
'By the time the games begin, Eta may have missed its political chance,' he
said. It would be a major departure for Eta to kill foreigners, and the
small Catalan terrorist group is not regarded as a serious threat.
The prostitutes, however, have threatened to invade the city-centre at night
in protest at having been shunted off into an industrial suburb. Madrid
could hardly be blamed for that, but if the ladies and men of the night
become unruly, someone in Barcelona will surely try.
