FT  07 SEP 92 / Kohl acts to end rifts over unification
CHANCELLOR Helmut Kohl last night summoned his German coalition partners for
top-level talks to reconcile deep divisions in the government, primarily
about how to finance the ballooning costs of German unification.
The meeting, which ended after midnight without announcement of any
agreement, follows a surge in criticism of Mr Kohl's leadership from within
his own Christian Democratic Union (CDU), and a rash of speculation about
the need for a 'grand coalition' of Christian Democrats and Social Democrats
(SPD) to handle the country's growing problems.
The talks were specifically intended to co-ordinate the coalition position
before the Bundestag reconvenes today after the summer break and plunges
directly into the annual budget debate tomorrow. The leaders of the three
ruling parties, who are due to report to their respective followers this
morning, were also likely to discuss the malaise in their coalition, which
includes the Free Democrats (FDP) and Bavaria-based Christian Social Union
(CSU) as well as the CDU.
The coalition partners have come to a belated recognition that Germany's
yawning fiscal gap, which has grown because of transfers to east Germany
currently running at a net DM150bn (Pounds 53.7bn) a year, must be reduced.
They cannot agree how.
The parliamentary leadership of the CDU, led by Mr Wolfgang Schauble, has
proposed a compulsory bond or levy to be imposed on the better paid to help
finance east German recovery - an idea which may appeal to the opposition
SPD, but is not universally supported in the CDU.
The minority CSU, led by Mr Theo Waigel, the finance minister, is adamant
that no new measure should be compulsory. Mr Waigel has suggested a
voluntary 'Germany bond' which would earn a low interest rate, tax free. The
FDP, led by Mr Otto Lambsdorff, vacillates in the middle.
Even if the party leaders could agree, it is unclear how a compulsory bond
could be introduced. Mr Kohl will do anything to avoid the impression that
he is considering a new tax to finance unification - something he and Mr
Waigel have repeatedly said was out of the question.
Criticism of Mr Kohl has grown within the CDU because of the coalition's
uncertain handling of the recent extreme rightwing violence against
asylum-seekers in eastern Germany, and its inability to agree on how to
finance subsidies to east Germany.
It emerged at the weekend that Mr Kohl was sharply attacked by members of
his own CDU national executive at a two-day closed meeting near Bonn last
week. According to Der Spiegel, the news magazine, regional party barons
accused him of having 'lost control', and the government of being
'planless'.
The meeting failed to reach a clear agreement on plans for either a
compulsory levy or voluntary tax-free government bond. The CDU leadership
was only able to accept a vaguely worded call for a 'solidarity pact' with
east Germany.
The debate amounts to a considerable embarrassment to Mr Kohl, who has
always insisted that the costs of unification can be borne without a further
tax increase. Mr Bjorn Engholm, leader of the SPD, has stepped up the
challenge to the chancellor by proposing a 'grand coalition on issues'.
