FT  04 JAN 92 / Labour plans radical scheme to regain control of National
Grid
THE LABOUR party plans sweeping changes to the government's remaining
electricity holdings in order to regain control of the National Grid without
increasing public spending.
In a policy initiative in the run-up to this year's general election, the
party said it was prepared to give up part, or all, of the government's 40
per cent stake in the UK's two non-nuclear electricity generating companies.
The proposals emerged as Labour renewed its attack on electricity
privatisation, claiming that it was 'a legalised racket'. Despite huge
profits, customers had been overcharged and executives were being overpaid.
There was also an absence of real competition, the party said.
Labour is considering giving part or all of the government's remaining
holding in PowerGen and National Power, the electricity generators, to the
12 regional electricity companies of England and Wales in return for their
shares in the National Grid.
The combined market capitalisation of the two generators is just over Pounds
4.5bn.
The deal would enable Labour to meet one of its main energy policy
objectives without exposing it to Tory accusations of extravagant spending
pledges. Labour has promised to renationalise the National Grid 'in order
that government can play the necessary strategic role in the industry'.
Labour is committed to paying a 'fair market price' for any equity or other
ownership rights it might wish to acquire 'in the public interest' in any of
the privatised utilities.
The deal would also forge a financial link between the electricity
distributors and the generators. The party argues that such vertical
integration would promote energy conservation. Under the current structure,
distributors are building power plants to compete with the generators. The
proposed swap is one of a number of options under consideration. Another
would be to exchange some of the Pounds 2.8bn debt owed to the government by
the regional electricity companies for sufficient equity in the National
Grid to reassert state control.
The proposals were greeted with incredulity by many in the electricity
industry. 'I don't want shares in the generators: I want to see them broken
up,' said one chairman of a regional electricity company.
Labour's initiative is also tied to its commitments to the coal industry.
The generators must renegotiate their contracts with British Coal by 1993
and Labour is keen to secure a market for domestic coal which costs more
than imports.
If elected, the party has said that it would immediately designate all major
utilities as 'public interest companies' and establish a regulatory
commission for each industry, with more powers than the current regulatory
bodies.
Meanwhile, Mr Frank Dobson, shadow energy secretary, yesterday projected
that the combined annual profits of the 16 electricity companies - including
the two generators, the National Grid and Nuclear Electric - would total
more than Pounds 3.4bn in the current financial year.
The 12 regional electricity companies were 'coining it' at the expense of
captive customers, he said, noting that poorer parts of the country tended
to have the highest unit charges.
Mr John Wakeham, energy secretary, said the Labour attack was 'invalid'. He
said prices were controlled by a regulator and higher profits were due to
increased efficiency.
'Domestic electricity prices - after adjusting for inflation - have remained
about the same over the last five years and have fallen by 2 per cent over
the last seven,' he said.
