FT  18 DEC 92 / Old allies ponder future of Special Relationship: Britain
may find itself becoming an intermediary between the US and Europe
THE arrival of Mr John Major in Washington for a farewell visit to President
George Bush brings to a close a particularly fruitful chapter in the
'special relationship' between the UK and the US.
The personal chemistry between Mrs Margaret Thatcher and Mr Bush may have
been a little cooler than her earlier rapport with President Ronald Reagan,
but Mr Major and Mr Bush seem to have found their way back onto the same
wavelength.
Now the British prime minister will have to re-establish common ground with
President-elect Bill Clinton, at a time when the common threat of Soviet
communism no longer looms so clearly; when international challenges such as
the crises in Yugoslavia and Somalia raise new questions about the roles the
US and the UK should play in the world; and when the US's first instinct may
be to turn inwards, away from Europe and, in the process, from the UK.
The special relationship has never been free of friction, and the clashes
over issues such as Suez and the Skybelt missile have at times been
spectacular.
And some US officials slight talk of a special relationship as wishful
thinking.
'We are constantly struck here by our allies' desire to maintain special
means of consultation,' said one official.
Nevertheless, most British and US officials agree there is a different
quality to their relations, built on the memory of Sir Winston Churchill and
on linguistic and cultural foundations, but also on a feeling that the UK is
consistently the US's most dependable ally.
'There is a very high comfort level because of language and institutions and
political process,' says Ms Rozanne Ridgway, former assistant secretary of
state in charge of European affairs and president of the Atlantic Council of
the US, a Washington-based policy group.
'A conversation with a British diplomat is in some ways different from a
conversation with any other diplomat,' comments a senior congressional
officer.
'Until I came to Washington I would never have believed the relationship
between the British and the Americans,' confirms a European diplomat.
While think tanks often urge the US to concentrate more on its links with
Germany and Japan, both countries, though economically more important, are
inhibited by history and by their constitutions from acting on the world
stage. France and Canada can get involved, but each has regularly been at
philosophical odds with the US on when and how to act.
This gives the UK a stronger voice on questions such as Yugoslavia - though
not on Somalia, where it has chosen not to get involved.
Washington officials attribute much of the recent strength of the special
relationship to the Gulf war. Images of 'plucky Brits parading through the
desert' filled US television screens.
More recently, the UK has played an important role in reviving the stalled
trade negotiations between the US and the European Community, opening the
way for a possible completion of the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade.
Some have argued in the past that the UK must prove its commitment to Europe
by distancing itself from the US; others have taken the opposite view that
full British involvement in Europe will damage its US ties.
Ms Ridgway, however, disputes the idea that there is incompatibility in the
UK's simultaneous involvement with Europe and the US.
'I don't find there has been any dilution of the dialogue since Britain
joined the EC. It's an argument that people use for other reasons,' she
says.
Nevertheless, the UK may increasingly be placed in the difficult position of
acting as interpreter between the US and Europe - especially France - as the
EC continues down the road of unification, a process which most US
politicians applaud in theory but find somewhat disquieting in its
application.
But Mr Hans Binnendijk, director of the Institute for the Study of Diplomacy
at Washington's Georgetown University, argues that British discomfort may
ease as the new Clinton admin-istration finds more common ground than its
predecessor with Brussels and Paris.
'That doesn't mean Britain would become less important as an ally, but it
wouldn't be the two of us against the rest of Europe,' he says.
On some issues, US-UK friction is likely to be greater under Mr Clinton than
under President Bush. These include Northern Ireland and British nuclear
testing in the US's Nevada explosion sites, which the new administration
will want to halt.
Clinton aides insist that no snub is intended by their inability to find
time for a meeting on this visit.
Since both men are basically likeable and eager to be liked, their chemistry
should in time prove to be more than adequate.
