FT  08 JUL 92 / Leading Article: Russia's place at the table
A YEAR AGO it was Mr Mikhail Gorbachev's plea for assistance that closed the
summit of the Group of Seven industrial countries. Rebuffed, Mr Gorbachev
returned home to the August coup, the termination of his career and the
break-up of the Soviet Union. This year it is Mr Boris Yeltsin's turn. But
if he too is rebuffed, the west is likely to lose more than it did by its
denial of Mr Gorbachev. Mr Gorbachev had no vision of economic reform; for
all his faults, Mr Yeltsin does.
G7 leaders must resent Mr Yeltsin's mixture of braggadocio and begging.
Russia, he asserts, should be allowed to sit at the G7's high table. What is
more, as a 'great country', Russia cannot be asked to abide by conditions
imposed on lesser fry.
The G7 should make it clear that membership of this august club is only for
those able to make a positive contribution to the management of the global
market economy. Equally, there can be no question of pouring funds into the
bottomless pit of the Russian military-industrial complex. Nor can Russia be
helped if it refuses to move rapidly towards a private market economy. Mr
Yeltsin should also be reminded that the sufferings of the Russian people,
both past and prospective, cannot be laid at the west's door.
Nevertheless, the west must take account of the way the unscrupulous will
exploit popular discontent. The west may feel that beggars should not be
choosers. But when the beggar is able to blow up the world, he can.
Small carrot
The west's interest remains in helping him make the right choices. The
question is how. The problem is not that the west insists on conditions. It
is that it is concentrating most attention on the wrong conditions and,
still more, that its carrot is too small.
A total of Dollars 24bn is supposed to be on offer. But Dollars 6bn is for a
stabilisation fund that may never be activated and, if activated, is
expected never to be drawn down. A substantial part of the rest is for
relief of debt service obligations that will, in any case, not be met. In
short, the fresh resources that Russia might obtain, even if agreement were
reached, is less than half the Dollars 24bn.
The west should reconsider both its priorities and the scale of assistance
on offer.
The highest priority is rapid privatisation of land and of small and
medium-sized enterprises, as well as creation of a legal framework to ensure
the growth of private enterprise throughout Russia.
Budget constraints
The next priority is the commercialisation of state enterprises, debt
restructuring and the imposition of credible budget constraints. Managers
and workers in state enterprises must also see possibilities for enriching
themselves when they make their enterprises more efficient.
The third priority is a system of payments that sustains commerce in the
former Soviet Union, along with unification and convertibility of the rouble
on current account. A fixed exchange rate is, for now, simply a fantasy.
The fourth priority is a macro-economic stabilisation at least sufficient to
keep inflation under control and, ideally, sufficient to ensure that budget
deficits can be financed without resort to the printing press.
Last and least, is continued debt service. Future historians will be
astounded at the attention paid to sums that cannot be repaid and, in any
case, barely matter against what is at stake.
The west will not obtain all that it seeks. But it must make sure that it
does at least obtain an opening towards a private market economy. Without
that, nothing should be given. Support should be given now without insisting
upon all the other conditions. It should be made clear, however, that the
further Russia goes, the more help it will receive. For really radical
reform, the west should be prepared to offer as much as Dollars 100bn in net
transfers over five years.
As in Europe after the second world war, a durable partnership must now be
established between serious Russian reformers and the west. The west should
overlook Mr Yeltsin's bluster, persist in helping Russian reform and be
prepared to distinguish what is essential from what is desirable.
Mr Yeltsin can, indeed, be irritating. But he offers what may prove to be a
unique chance. It is one that must be taken.
