FT  07 JAN 92 / Arts: Sophisticated Ladies - Globe Theatre
People who saw Sophisticated Ladies, a celebration of Duke Ellington, in New
York and Paris in the mid-1980s still speak of it with great admiration and
affection. The production that has finally appeared in London is not on that
level. In short, it is not sophisticated.
The Globe is a relatively small theatre - too small for this kind of
tribute. An 11-man band plus leader sits not in the pit but on the stage,
taking up more than half the space and thus leaving little room for anything
else. When staircases are introduced at the sides to give height, they look
distinctly wobbly. No-one is going to dance the night away in these
conditions.
Although the second half is better than the first, almost to the point of it
being advisable to arrive at the interval, there are imperfections
throughout. 'Sophistication' is one of those relative words that mean
different things to different audiences: it does not apply to these ladies.
There is a plentiful supply of legs: indeed at times one was reminded of the
old Television Toppers in the days of the BBC monopoly. The faces are as
pretty as the legs, but on the whole these girls tend to alternate between
the three little maids from school variety and ordinary tarts.
The men are in an altogether higher class, notably Horace Oliver, a
19-year-old who has already done a national tour with 42nd Street and
appeared in Porgy and Bess at Glyndebourne. Oliver leads the gang in 'Drop
Me Off in Harlem' and later does a splendid competitive tap dance with Jon
Peterson. That is one of the peaks of the evening.
Other memories that linger are the insistent bass-playing by Frazer Snell
and the piano-playing of Malcolm Newton. Jacqueline Dankworth, daughter of
Cleo Laine, has a plausible shot at 'In a Sentimental Mood', but it is not
much more.
The main puzzle is why a show which on the face of it seems to promise so
much should turn out to be so disappointing. Part of the answer lies in the
lack of variety. It would seem almost impossible to fail with a song like
'I'm Beginning to See the Light', yet if you belt it out as if it were 'When
the Saints Go Marching In', the subtlety - the very light and shade that the
song is about - are lost. There are very few changes of mood in this
production.
Lack of variety is underlined by the almost entire absence of dialogue.
Since there are no characters, there is no characterisation. There is also
no story. The piece could do with the odd joke or stroke of wit and at least
some differentiation. In this production, it is not a patch on Swell Party,
the Cole Porter story at the Vaudeville. In the end Sophisticated Ladies
falls because it is not live up to the title. Perhaps it is being done on
the cheap. That is not what sophistication is about. The direction is by
Roger Haines.
