FT  06 NOV 92 / Arts: The Tender Husband
Sir Richard Steele, MP (1672-1729) was, according to Dr Johnson, 'the most
agreeable rake that ever trod the rounds of indulgence.' He co-founded the
original Spectator, Tatler and Guardian, invented the periodical essay, and
wrote a clutch of overlooked plays. The Magnificent Theatre Company has
revived The Tender Husband in a fine, fizzing production, now at the
Watermans Arts Centre.
The Tender Husband (1705) parodied middle class manners in an increasingly
bourgeois society; it looked back to Moliere, but introduced types later
used by Sheridan and Goldsmith.
Clerimont, the tender husband, has indulged his wife's capacious spending,
but now wants to shame her into frugality. His penurious younger brother,
condemned to an army career, settles on Biddy Tipkin, a rich, air-headed
romantic. But her ward, Hezekiah Tipkin, Lombard Street banker, wants her to
marry a wealthy West Country squire called Humphrey Gubbin, who in turn
loves Lucy Fainlove, the very woman whom Clerimont has disguised as a man
with hopes of compromising his wife. The tangle is cut by Samuel Pounce, an
obsequious lawyer: 'The Pounces will always have money, if there's any in
the world.'
The plot turns on love, money and opportunity. Nothing survives Steele's
Whiggish scrutiny: banking, country life, fashion, law, literature. The
play's principles remain simple: ''Tis by knowing what a man thinks of
himself, by giving him that, you may make him what you will.' Moral
questions never arise, for Steele speeds the action and forms his characters
by circumstance.
The directors, Lucie Fitchett and Ben Crocker respond to Steele's paciness.
The plain set and parody period costumes are a delight, with quilted cherubs
on Biddy's frock, and interlocking numbers on the banker's dress-coat. The
acting should deliver the satire with less fuss. But those who find the
right tone are Harriet Keevil as the sexy Lucy Fainlove, John Conroy as the
machinating Pounce and Simon Holmes as the bankrupted Clerimont shackled to
a connubial horror in organza.
Steele himself was a tender husband. He met his second wife at the funeral
of his first, and made sure he was always in touch. On February 16, 1716 he
wrote her this one-line gem: 'Dear Prue: Sober or not I am ever yours,
Richard Steele.'
Watermans Theatre, Brentford (081 568 1176) until November 14. Then on tour
to: Stamford, Berwick-upon-Tweed, Hexham, King's Lynn, Crewe, Blackpool,
Hemel Hempstead and Bury St Edmunds. Ends December 5
