FT  18 JAN 92 / Books: Happy reunions - Crime
DETECTIVES with wonky or failed marriages are a staple of crime fiction, as
are little old ladies confined to their rooms and glued to their windows. In
Thief Taker (Macmillan Pounds 12.99, 224 pages), second adventure of the
unhappily uxorious DS Macrae and his happily paired sergeant Leopold Silver,
the crafty Alan Scholefield makes good use of both stock elements, turning
them into original and sympathetic characters. There is also a Rendell-style
nutcase, with an even nuttier mother; and a sad girl who works as the sexy
voice on a chatline. Well begun with the previous Dirty Weekend, the
Macrae-Silver series now seems solidly established.
Simon Brett's loser-actor Charles Paris is almost too solidly established.
His perpetual yearning for a double Bells, like his repeated, lacklustre
efforts to recapture his wife's affections are beginning to pall, and even
faithful fans may wish he would shape up, join AA and remarry. Still, his
acting career involves him in some odd and readable complexities. The
latest, Corporate Bodies (Gollancz Pounds 13.99, 189 pages), finds him
playing a minor role in a corporate video but, of course, he is the major
contributor to solving the inevitable crime. Brett, and Charles, have a
tendency to laugh at their own jokes, but, often enough, the reader will
laugh with them.
Kay Mitchell's In Stony Places (Barrie &amp; Jenkins Pounds 12.99, 204 pages) is
also the second in a new series. A solid if not exciting performance in
which the standard ingredients - Chief Inspector forgets his wedding
anniversary, teenage daughter is threatened by a serial killer - are
conventionally handled, but the actual detection process is slyly-paced and
convincing.
Churches, like theatres and boys' schools, are loci classici for murders,
from Edwin Drood's murky cathedral to Miss Marples' deceptively cheery
vicarage. But DM Greenwood writes about ecclesiastic life (and death) from
the inside; and her second novel, Unholy Ghosts (Headline Pounds 13.95, 215
pages), is a knowledgeable account of social and clerical conflict in an
affectionately, tellingly described rural Norfolk. The author's special
viewpoint, devout but also wryly detached, gives the novel an unusual and
welcome tang, which should last through the other volumes that will
obviously continue this series.
Ellis Peters, in The House of Green Turf (Macdonald Pounds 12.95, 192
pages), writes not about her endearing and happily enduring Brother Cadfael,
but about her other protagonist, Inspector Felse. Clearly the author is more
at home in the Middle Ages than in the present, and this volume is just
about impossible to read to the end. Also, if you decide to write about an
opera singer, you should know that Cherubini is not a character in Figaro
but the composer of Medea.
