FT  11 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Lead actor leaves stage of hidden drama -
The background to MTM's recent profit warnings
THERE could hardly have been a worse way for MTM to break bad news to the
market.
Within one week the speciality chemicals manufacturer has twice had to issue
a profits warning. Mr Richard Lines, the chairman, chose to describe the
first as the result of a difference of opinion between MTM and its auditors
over asset valuation that would not affect trading profits.
By Monday, however, MTM announced that trading profits would indeed be lower
than the City expected.
MTM's shares fell to a third of their value a fortnight earlier, and
shareholders were not in the least surprised yesterday when Mr Lines
resigned.
About the only clear picture to emerge from the uncertainty surrounding the
past week is of Mr Lines, the MTM board and its merchant bank, Robert
Fleming, with varying quantities of egg on their faces.
Certainly shareholders have no clear view about the underlying health of
MTM, which Mr Lines founded in 1979 and built into one of the fastest
growing stocks of the 1980s.
And despite assurances from Mr Chris Swinson, national managing partner of
Binder Hamlyn, MTM's auditors, that 'the problems have not changed' between
announcements, analysts remained convinced that something dramatic had
happened last week to change the company's view on 1991 trading profits.
The auditors are concerned about MTM's valuation of its assets.
Specifically, MTM capitalises development expenditures and process
development costs as well as the interest on construction projects.
While this is fairly common practice among large companies MTM is a
relatively small company growing quickly, and this treatment had a material
impact on the reported profits.
The 1989 pre-tax profits of Pounds 9.3m could have been cut to Pounds 5.8m,
had process development costs and capitalised interest been taken through
the profit and loss account as an expense and not capitalised.
Likewise, in 1990, profits of Pounds 13.6m would have been only Pounds 11.3m
had the company applied a more conservative accounting policy.
But the City already knew about this accounting treatment and had warned
shareholders. MTM's shares tended to trade at a discount to the sector
reflecting this waryness about the accounting.
What is more, these two items were only expected to have boosted profits by
about Pounds 2.3m in 1991 out of profits forecast at Pounds 23m.
One possible explanation for what has been a dreadful case of bad
communication is that trading profits in their purest sense were not
affected in 1991. The auditors might this year, however, have chosen to
treat some capitalised costs as operating costs. By the auditors' reckoning,
therefore, trading profit would be lower.
This would not, however, explain why the company's second announcement
talked of trading profits being 'significantly' below City expectations of
Pounds 23m.
Another possible explanation put forward by analysts was that MTM has faced
a problem commissioning a plant and the auditors want the extra cost to be
treated as an operating cost and not capitalised.
Mr Lines set up MTM - then called Marlborough Technical Management - in 1979
as a consultancy to the chemicals industry. The foundations for growth were
two fine chemicals manufacturing projects which he set up from scratch and
sold very quickly making a Pounds 1m profit from each.
Marlborough's rapid growth caught the attention of ICI, where Mr Lines had
spent 11 years, and the UK's largest quoted company set up a joint venture
in which MTM had a 51 per cent stake.
It quickly developed a substantial business supplying the fine chemical
ingredients to large pharmaceuticals companies and came to the market with a
bang in 1986 with a market capitalisation of Pounds 40m.
Growth sprang from a substantial capital expenditure programme and Mr Lines'
undoubted ability to 'do a deal', analysts say. Between flotation and 1990,
the group spent Pounds 120m on acquisitions and Pounds 71m on fixed assets,
issuing in the process Pounds 93m of its paper. At its peak in mid-February
MTM's market capitalisation had risen to Pounds 256m.
Following his resignation yesterday, Mr Lines insisted that the application
of accounting policies was a technical matter, and in any event had a 'one
off' impact. MTM was profitable, demand in 1992 remained strong and the
market's reaction was overdone.
His plea for the City to support what he called 'one of the few successful
manufacturing companies in Britain in the last two decades' came, however,
too late.
