FT  25 NOV 92 / Management: Better safe than sorry when you go to work / A
look at a series of new regulations that will soon be affecting UK employers
Employers will wake up to seven new sets of safety regulations on January 1
next year, governing a range of workplace issues from lifting loads to
visual display units.
Latest figures show that an average of nine workers are killed each week in
Britain and there are about 1.4m work-related injuries every year, the
Health and Safety Commission (HSC) announced at the launch of Workplace
Health and Safety Week - the biggest ever drive to improve workplace safety
in the UK which began on Monday.
The regulations have been criticised by the GMB general union which
yesterday said a leaked document showed the Health and Safety Executive had
'looked for ways to water down and block' UK obligations under European law
which the regulations are designed to implement.
The HSC estimates that industry may face costs of Pounds 300m in the first
year of implementing the new laws, although it says that employers that
already meet existing obligations should not find the regulations onerous.
In all cases employers are required to reduce risks 'as far as is reasonably
practicable', which means to the point where the cost of further measures
would be disproportionate to benefits.
Four sets of regulations have already been published for which Health and
Safety Executive guidance is available:
Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations. The main duties for
employers are to assess the health and safety risks to employees and others
who may be affected by their work and act on that assessment; appoint
'competent people' - employees or outsiders - to implement measures; set up
emergency procedures; inform and train employees to avoid risks; monitor
employees' health where necessary and consult employee representatives.
Health and Safety (Display Screen Equipment) Regulations are the first for
VDU screen work and affect all those who habitually use display screen
equipment as a significant part of their normal work.
Employers must assess the risks posed by workstations and reduce them;
ensure that workstations comply with requirements for screens, keyboards,
working environments, task design and software. New workstations will have
to comply immediately; those operating before December 31 1992 have until 31
December 1996.
For direct employees only, employers will have to plan periodic breaks from
screen work, provide eye-tests, special glasses and provide adequate
training. Those who use screens intermittently may not be covered at all.
Manual Handling Operations Regulations will apply to all industries and
services, replacing earlier legislation which applied only to some sectors.
They abandon old weight limits and adopt broad guidelines and an ergonomic
approach.
The main duties on employers are to avoid the need for manual handling
operations involving a risk of injury; make an assessment of the risk of
injury from manual handling and reduce risks.
An amendment to the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations
1988 emphasises the prevention of exposure to carcinogens at work by using
alternative substances or processes and by means of enclosed systems of
work.
Three further sets of regulations are due later this month or early next.
Exact provisions are not yet known, but the main obligations will reflect
the requirements of their parent European directives.
Provision and Use of Work Equipment Regulations. Employers in all industries
will have to select equipment according to working conditions and hazards;
ensure equipment is suitable, maintained and properly used; give adequate
information and training.
Personal Protective Equipment at Work. Employers will have to assess risks
and ensure personal protective equipment is suitable according to
requirements laid down.
Workplace (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations govern a wide range of
issues in permanent workplaces (not building sites) such as temperature,
space and lighting; safety devices for doors, gates and escalators and
requirements for the construction and maintenance of floors.
The HSE has published a leaflet called New Health and Safety at Work
Regulations available from its Freeleaflet line 0742 892346 or the HSE
Information Centre, Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ.
