FT  18 FEB 92 / International Company News: Textron takes the controls of an
overhauled Cessna - Nikki Tait profiles one of the best-known names in US
aviation following its Dollars 600m acquisition
A LARGE billboard at Cessna Aircraft's Wichita, Kansas, headquarters
proclaims: 'From zero to 500 in 6.7 years.' Employees usually chuckle at
this adman's spoof of car industry marketing - it has nothing to do with
acceleration but everything to do with the sales performance of a
significant product line.
There is, however, nothing laughable about the Dollars 600m cash price that
Textron, the Rhode Island-based conglomerate, has just agreed to pay for
Cessna. The deal was the outcome of an auction which General Dynamics, the
defence contractor and Cessna's former owner, initiated last autumn.
Nor is there anything laughable about the radical overhaul which one of the
best-known names in US aviation has faced during the past decade. At the end
of the 1970s, Cessna employed more than 21,000 people - 16,000 in Wichita
alone - and was viewed as the leading manufacturer of light aircraft.
Today, it has one-quarter of that workforce and makes only corporate jets,
plus a range of single-engine turbo-prop aircraft. The only thing which has
gone up is profit. The Dollars 109m operating figure for 1991, according to
Cessna, was the best in its history.
Nobody could claim that this corporate metamorphosis was achieved against an
easy industry background. It has been calculated, for example, that US
general aviation manufacturers shipped only 1,021 aircraft last year - the
lowest annual figure since the Second World War. That represents an 11 per
cent drop from the previous year, and took total industry billings below
Dollars 2bn.
Reasons for the depressed situation are not difficult to identify. Part of
the problem is attributed to the explosive growth in product liability
costs, which is, in turn, a reflection of US tort claims and litigation.
Back in 1986, for example, Cessna's chairman, Mr Russ Meyer, told a Senate
aviation sub-committee that the company's premium for liability insurance
had soared from Dollars 5,000 per aircraft in 1983, to Dollars 90,000.
Not surprisingly, US manufacturers of small, single-engine aircraft found
the economics becoming hugely unfavour-able. Cessna - which had once
produced nearly 9,000 piston-powered aircraft in a year, and whose
172/Skyhawk model was built in greater numbers than any other aircraft -
pulled out of this market in the mid-1980s.
Piper Aircraft, another leading small-aircraft manufacturer, filed for
bankruptcy protection last July.
The net effect of this retreat was reflected in last year's numbers: US
suppliers produced only 613 piston-powered aircraft in 1991, compared with
17,000 in 1978.
The tax climate has deteriorated, too. The General Aviation Manufacturers
Association (Gama), the US industry's trade body, has been lobbying hard for
the reintroduction of 'investment tax credits' and repeal of the 'luxury
tax' on business aircraft mandated by Congress. Gama took some heart from
fiscal proposals contained in President George Bush's state of the union
address last month, but still maintains that more could be done.
Finally, there is the recession. Business aircraft tend to be viewed as an
executive luxury, and when the outlay for a corporate jet ranges between
Dollars 2.5m and Dollars 25m, this presents an expense that can be easily
pruned. As one analyst puts it: 'When you're laying off hundreds of workers,
buying a corporate jet just does not look good.'
It is true the business jet market held up rather better than general
aviation last year. However, the 186 business jets sold, although 10.7 per
cent higher than the 168 jets sold in 1990, was still only half the 389
delivered in 1981.
Cessna is no stranger to hard times. Founded in 1927 by Clyde Cessna, whose
mechanical interest surfaced when he fixed farm equipment on his father's
Kansas homestead, the company teetered on the brink of bankruptcy during the
Depression. In the event, Cessna did not fail, but between 1931 and 1933 not
a single aircraft was produced.
Cessna's reshaping during the 1980s was perhaps more subtle, but no less
dramatic. As losses started to mount early in the decade, sales of non-core
assets flowed, coupled with job cuts and abandonment of the piston aircraft
market. In 1985, General Dynamics bought the struggling company for some
Dollars 664m, but Cessna, at least, maintains the relationship had always
been hands-off.
"General Dynamics came along when we needed the assistance of a large
corporate parent, particularly to build some of the new designs we were
looking at,' says Mr Roy Norris, senior vice-president of marketing.
'When Cessna was first acquired, and during the first year of ownership,
they made some modest contribution of funds. But following that, all of our
new aircraft programmes and aircraft introductions, were funded totally out
of the earnings of the company.'
Cessna has enjoyed some breaks. Federal Express became a key customer for
the company's Caravan turboprop aircraft - a utility aircraft which was
originally designed 'for flying into the bush'. Of the 500-plus sold to
date, about half have gone to the package delivery company.
But perhaps the most significant element in Cessna's overhaul was the
decision to concentrate on the corporate jet market, where it has come to
command a 60 per cent share.
At the bottom end of its range, Cessna offers the small Citation Jet,
costing Dollars 2.62m and still at the prototype stage. Deliveries are due
to start later this year. At the top, there is the Citation X, due to come
on stream in 1995 and billed as the fastest-ever business jet.
Coupled with fairly resilient sales for existing Citation lines, this new
focus helped push revenues to around Dollars 820m last year, and the order
backlog to over Dollars 1bn.
Cessna says the market has been tough, but bearable: 'We saw a little
softness last year, but nothing of the order of magnitude we were hearing
from other people in the industry,' says Mr Norris.
But the switch in emphasis, plus the domestic recession, has necessitated
more attention on the overseas market. Sales outside the US have accounted
for half the total in recent years, compared with 14 per cent in 1984. New
marble-clad 'showroom' facilities have been carved out of the delivery
hanger, and tastefully under-stated suites await would-be buyers at the
Wichita offices.
As for the new relationship with Textron, whose extensive operations also
take in Bell Helicopters, these are early days. A little warily, Cessna
executives say they hope to keep their operational independence, but
acknowledge possible marketing synergies.
 -----------------------------------------------------
1991 US AIRCRAFT SHIPMENTS
 -----------------------------------------------------
                   1991           1990      % change
 -----------------------------------------------------
Turbojets           186            168         +10.7
Turboprops          222            281         -21.0
Piston              613            695         -11.8
TOTAL             1,021          1,144         -10.8
 -----------------------------------------------------
Source: General Aviation Manufacturers Association
 -----------------------------------------------------
