FT  12 DEC 92 / 'City of death' becomes linchpin for aid: Somalia's lost
generation for whom aid efforts may prove 'too much too late'
LYING ON an operating table in a makeshift hospital in Baidoa, a
one-year-old girl called Hadeja, screamed as an American doctor cleaned out
an eye wound inflicted from a bomb-blast in the rubble-strewn town's central
market.
Hadeja, who will be blind in her right eye, is one of the hundreds of
thousands of the most tragic victims of Somalia's vicious internecine clan
fighting - the lost generation of children under five.
She was among 20 child victims of an eruption of blood-feuding which has
gripped the tense central Somali town in the past few days.
Baidoa, a ramshackle town north-west of the capital Mogadishu, is crammed
with feeding centres and clinics in the heart of the most severely affected
area of war-induced starvation. It is the US Marines' next objective in the
biggest military and humanitarian intervention ever undertaken in Africa. It
will become a linchpin of efforts to get food to an estimated
500,000-900,000 people cut off from a regular flow of food and medicine by
fighting, looting and extortion.
Up to 70 people, mainly bystanders, have been killed in an orgy of looting
and violence ahead of the arrival of US Marines into the so-called 'City of
Death'. Many 'technicals' - armed all-terrain vehicles - pulled back from
Mogadishu by Gen Mohamed Farrar Aideed, Somalia's fiercest warlord, in the
face of the US deployment have arrived in Baidoa for a final spree of
pillage before foreign troops seek to restore order after two years of
gun-law.
Terrorised aid workers in the town, who have been targets of looters and
bandits, have fortified their compounds and pleaded for the US troops to go
to Baidoa urgently to restore law and order.
Pairs of US Air Force F-14 'Tomcat' fighter jets flew over the town
yesterday on reconnaissance missions, also aimed at letting bandits and
gunmen know that US forces were on their way.
'We are disappointed that the Marines are not here yet,' said Dr Michelin
Richer, a pediatric medic with the US-based Charity International Medical
Corps, which runs Baidoa's hospital. 'It has been extremely difficult for us
to work here because of the deteriorating security. As soon as they arrive
we can stop working on emergency gunshot and bomb blast wounds and other
trauma cases and start working on the real business of kids with medical
diseases and malnutrition.'
On a tour of the pediatric ward Dr Richer pointed to several other child
casualties of the recent fighting including a girl who stepped on a mine and
had to have her leg amputated, a six-year-old boy with a gunshot wound in
his right lung and two brothers injured while playing with a grenade.
In a corner of the ward a four-year-old child lay helpless and silent,
slipping hoplessly into death. Yesterday she weighed a mere 12 pounds, about
a third of the average weight for a child of her age.
Pentagon sources said it might take Marines up to 10 days to reach Baidoa -
a period aid workers in the city, where the death rate has stabilised at
20-30 a day, say is far too long. The town and its surrounding areas need
200-300 tonnes of food a day but at the moment, because of security, relief
officials can only fly in 20-30 tonnes.
Aid workers with the international agency CARE have evacuated their women
employees but refused to quit the town because of the risks of all their
stores being looted. Instead they have piled sandbags and oil drums filled
with water around their house and placed gunmen on the rooftop to deter
bandits who have attacked their compound three times in the past six days
and made off with Dollars 20,000.
'Each day the US Marines stay in Mogadishu and do not come to Baidoa they
look weak and the gunmen get their confidence back and we become targets,'
Mr James Fennell, an official with CARE, said in Baidoa yesterday.
CARE has not brought any food to Baidoa from Mogadishu by road since an
attack on one of its convoys last month on the outskirts of the town when a
large number of vehicles were hijacked. But it will resume convoys as soon
as the intervention force is in place.
If the Pentagon is right about the 10-day delay in reaching Baidoa, many aid
workers in the difficult interior of the country will feel disappointed.
Already many believe the US operation is 'too much too late'. A recent
report by the Atlanta-based Centre for Disease Control estimated that 70 per
cent of children under five in the Baidoa area had already perished.
Researchers even found too few children to interview for their survey.
In the meantime Baidoa's long-suffering civilians and the aid workers, wait
anxiously for the first signs of US troops they hope will prove their
saviours.
