FT  22 SEP 92 / Europe's tactical time-out: Resolving the problems which are
confronting the EC will take more than a summit meeting
Now comes the hard part. The razor-thin French endorsement of the Maastricht
treaty has given a temporary reprieve to the European Community's plans for
political and monetary union; but the political credibility and economic
feasibility of the enterprise remain in doubt.
Unity was the theme echoing throughout European capitals yesterday. The
first test of resolve will come next month when the heads of the 12 EC
members states hold a summit in London to discuss what one EC official
described yesterday as 'Europe's foggy future'.
The question is whether the Community can regain its equilibrium after the
stunning political and economic reverses of recent weeks. The onslaught in
the money markets which forced sterling's bloody retreat from the exchange
rate mechanism of the European Monetary System was bad enough; then came a
public slanging match between the UK and German governments over Britain's
charges that the Bundesbank had effectively sabotaged its economic policy by
talking down sterling.
Amid this atmosphere of mistrust and recrimination, the Community's member
states face a second daunting challenge: how to recapture the confidence of
their own people, many of whom remain deeply ambivalent about the goal of
European Union set out in the Maastricht treaty.
This is especially true of Britain, whose on-off relationship with the
Community has been dogged by mutual misunderstanding. Now, at the very
moment the EC faces its most serious political challenge since the oil
crisis in the 1970s, perfidious Albion holds the rotating six-month-long EC
presidency.
Whether Mr John Major, the UK prime minister, can recover from the
humiliating collapse of his Euro-centric economic policy is, therefore, not
only of interest in London. Whether he can stick to his pledge to keep
Britain 'at the heart of Europe' directly concerns the heads of government
in the remaining 11 EC states.
In the immediate aftermath of the French referendum, there are two principal
issues to be addressed by the Community: the functioning of the ERM, and the
longer-term commitment to political and monetary union which all 12 EC
member states signed on to last December.
The tidal wave of speculation which hit the ERM last week led not only to
sterling's withdrawal, but also to the suspension of the Italian lira and a
5 per cent devaluation of the Spanish peseta. The currency realignment
sparked immediate fears of a 'two-speed' Europe, with the weaker currencies
falling behind a stronger D-Mark bloc including France and Benelux.
What is often overlooked is that the Maastricht treaty specifically holds
out the prospect of a Europe a deux vitesses, says Mr Peter Ludlow, director
of the Centre for European Policy Studies in Brussels. The treaty's
provisions not only include an opt-out clause for Britain, but also strict
economic convergence criteria, under which qualified candidates should move
to locked exchange rates, at the earliest by 1997 and supposedly by 1999 at
the latest.
Mr Ludlow says the recent turmoil in the currency markets raises the
prospect of a joint Franco-German initiative to accelerate moves toward
fixed exchange rates among the 'hard-core' currencies, with a public
declaration that other European countries such as Italy could join in the
future.
The first clues will come today when Chancellor Kohl holds talks with
President Mitterrand in Paris. Though the franc is still under pressure, the
impetus for a high-profile Franco-German declaration, which risked being
seen as actively encouraging the creation of a two-speed Europe, may have
receded. More likely, the two leaders will focus on the prospects for
enlarging the Community and making it more accountable  - partly in an
effort to bolster Mr Major's position.
Yet the recent shift in public opinion in Germany against abandonment of the
D-Mark  - the symbol of post-second world war stability and prosperity in
Germany  - may make it more difficult for Chancellor Kohl to offer much more
to his European colleagues.
Already, there are calls for a referendum on Maastricht in Germany, and both
the Bundestag and Bundesrat may reserve a 'right of approval' before
allowing Germany to move to fixed exchange rates, as laid down in stage
three of Emu.
The cloudy prospect for Emu is made all the murkier by the British
government's demand for ERM reform summed up by Norman Lamont, the
chancellor of the exchequer. Last Friday, Mr Lamont declared that he wanted
to be 'satisfied that German policy that has produced many of the tensions
in the ERM is going to have some changes', leading to a more stable
environment. In addition, he wants to correct structural 'fault-lines'
within the ERM, including better co-ordination and intervention in the money
markets.
These are the minimum conditions which the British intend to put forward
before re-entering the ERM. The difficulty is that there is substantial
mistrust about British motives which, in turn, risks severely reducing
British influence in the Maastricht debate.
First, EC diplomats are scathing about Britain's efforts to bully the German
government and the Bundesbank into reducing German interest rates. Mr Lamont
is singled out for criticism. First he used the EC presidency to mobilise 11
member states against the Germans at the recent finance ministers' meeting
in Bath; then he presented the outcome as a victory for Britain. 'This
approach to Community matters is damaging,' says a senior EC official, 'and
it was bound to backfire.'
Mr Lamont's earlier predicament  - an overvalued currency and crippling high
real interest rates in the middle of a recession  - was, nevertheless viewed
with sympathy in Brussels. Some adjustment had to be made. But many agree
with Sir Roy Denman, former EC ambassador to the US, who says ERM membership
was a short-term ploy to secure a reduction in interest rates, as well as a
long-term commitment by Mr Major to Europe. 'Britain entered the ERM for the
wrong reasons, at the wrong rate, and at the wrong time,' he says.
The challenge for the British is to convince their partners that they are
not intent on playing a spoiling game. This applies not just to the ERM, but
also to the broader debate about the future of the Community and the fate of
Maastricht. In this respect, the issue of how to finesse the problems raised
by the Danish rejection of Maastricht in last June's referendum is
paramount.
Mr Major has already declared that he will not put the Maastricht treaty
before parliament until the Danish government presents a clear plan for
resolving this dilemma. In Brussels, mistrust of Mr Major's motives is rife.
'It looks as if he is deliberately dragging his feet because his own party
is split on Maastricht,' said one EC official on Sunday night.
Another Commission official said British delays were certain to encourage
the Danes to hold back too. 'We can solve one problem,' said this official,
'but we can't solve a British and a Danish problem at the same time.'
Mr Major is understood to be contemplating a vote by the House of Commons on
the 'principle' of Maastricht sometime before the Edinburgh summit. This
would have the advantage of steadying frayed nerves, including his own,
while preparing for a month-long vote at committee stage sometime next year,
perhaps around the same time as a second Danish referendum. All this assumes
that the Danes will come up with reservations on Maastricht which are
negotiable in the eyes of the rest of the Community. A protocol, not
included in the treaty, which stated that Danes would not serve in a common
European army is viewed as acceptable  - but a renegotiation of Maastricht
is not. In Brussels, the hope is that the Danes will outline their thoughts
at the London summit next month. Again the tension will be between the
desire of members such as France, Spain and Italy to press ahead with
ratification and those such as Britain urging a 'go-slow' approach. 'The
timing is extremely delicate,' says a senior EC official.
Behind the Danish dilemma lie serious questions about the merits of
Maastricht and the way the EC does business.
The national debate in France was sobering for the entire Community. For the
first time since the Treaty of Rome, the French  - the driving force behind
European integration  - held a debate on the future of Europe, a debate
conducted on national terms.
The result was that 58 per cent of those who voted No to Maastricht cited
fears about the loss of national sovereignty; 57 per cent voiced opposition
to technocrats in Brussels; and 41 per cent voiced concern about the threat
of German hegemony in Europe, which both supporters and opponents of the
treaty invoked in order to galvanise support for their cause.
How to bring the EC closer to the European citizen is one of the most urgent
tasks of the next few months. Part of the answer is subsidiarity  - the
notion that the EC should exercise restraint in its application of Community
law and devolve more power to member states. Mr Jacques Delors, president of
the European Commission, has instructed his officials to draw up concrete
plans in time for discussion at the London summit.
Yet subsidiarity has a price. Some member states may use it to roll back
intrusive but beneficial policies such as the aggressive enforcement of
competition law; others may seek to re-open the debate on state aid, arguing
that more attention to national sovereignty means more support for national
businesses. If this were to gain force, the single integrated market, the
great achievement of the Community in the 1980s, could be at risk.
Moreover, subsidiarity does not address the question of accountability. For
all the debate about whether Maastricht awarded more power to the
Commission, the real winners were the politicians in the European Council.
Ministers and their civil servants  - not Mr Delors  - will benefit from the
expansion of inter-governmental co-operation outside of Community law.
Resolving these conundrums in the Community will take more than a summit.
According to Mr Ludlow, the director of the Centre for European Policy
Studies, they may require a US-style constitution, transparent and
accessible to the ordinary EC citizen.
At this stage, such ideas may seem far-fetched. But unless the Twelve can
reach a consensus on how to resolve the Maastricht muddle, the uncertainty
will increase, sapping their will to co-operate and increasing the risk of
drifting apart.
