FT  12 DEC 92 / Motoring: Best of both worlds - Volvo's hybrid runs on
batteries in town and a gas turbine elsewhere
NO ONE really knows what kind of cars we will be driving 10 years from now,
although it is a safe bet that most will have internal combustion engines.
But they will create less pollution than vehicles today: politicians, and a
rising ground swell of public opinion in favour of environmental protection,
will see to that.
Some, but not many, will be electric. They will be confined mainly to city
centres and could be the only kind of car allowed in the most
environmentally sensitive areas.
The idea of an almost silent, non-polluting electric car is attractive but
the problems are great. Relatively cheap lead-acid batteries are extremely
heavy while more efficient batteries - which are far from lightweight,
anyway - are costly.
For at least 30 years, there has been talk of a radically new kind of
battery that would make electric cars competitive with petrol or diesel
cars. The breakthrough seems as far away as ever. Electric town cars of the
mid-1990s will be conversions of existing models like the Citroen AX, Fiat
Cinquecento and Peugeot 106. Later, purpose-designed battery-driven town
cars will be introduced.
Nearly all the major manufacturers have made battery-powered conversions of
their smaller petrol cars and delivery vans. Most also have displayed
advanced electric car prototypes at motor shows. But all battery-driven cars
have a problem.
They can provide good acceleration and a reasonable highway cruising speed,
or an operating range approaching that of a normal car on, say, a half-tank
of petrol. But not both. So, while a battery vehicle might be practical as a
second car, used for short range commuting or shopping, it is a non-starter
as an alternative to the family-cum-business car.
Enter the hybrid. It offers the best of both worlds by running on
electricity in town and petrol or diesel on the highway. As a battery car,
its speed and range are modest but sufficient. Out of town, though, it goes
like a normal vehicle. Its engine is quite small and creates minimal
pollution because it runs at a fairly constant speed and is coupled to a
generator feeding current via the batteries to an electric drive motor.
Most of the time, the hybrid is no more than an internal combustion-engined
car with an electric transmission. But for overtaking or hill climbing, the
power stored in the batteries (which the engine keeps fully charged, of
course) provides a useful performance boost.
The concept is not new. I drove an experimental Fiat 131 hybrid, with a
one-litre Fiat 127 engine, about 20 years ago. Advanced petrol and
diesel-electric hybrids based on the VW Golf and Audi quattro were seen at
Geneva show in 1990.
PSA (Peugeot-Citroen), a leader in developing practical battery-electric
cars, unveiled a diesel hybrid 405 estate last year with a 130 kmh (81 mph)
top speed and a range of 750 km (470 miles) at 100 kph (58 mph). A more
advanced PSA hybrid, with a gas turbine-driven generator, is under
development. But little Volvo (well, it is little in the car makers'
international pecking order) unveiled a turbo hybrid a few weeks ago at the
Paris show and brought it out again at Birmingham.
Volvo's ECC (for environmental concept car) is based on the theory that
although cars must be environmentally clean, they need to be proper
five-seaters and not - in the words of its design director, Englishman Peter
Horbury - 'Dan Dare shopping baskets.'
The EEC, which I drove very briefly in Sweden this week, is just that. A
medium/large four-door saloon of most un-Volvo-like elegance, it has a
small, diesel-fuelled gas turbine coupled directly to a high speed
generator. This spins so fast - at up to 90,000 rpm, the same speed as the
turbine - that it need be only a fraction of the size and weight of a
conventional generator.
Its 40 kw (call it 56 horsepower) output might not sound much for a car the
size of a Volvo 850. But the ECC is aerodynamically slippery and has tyres
with low rolling resistance. And although a 770 lb (350 kg) battery pack
accounts for 22 per cent of its total weight, it is still fairly light.
This makes it reasonably lively (a top speed of 108 mph/175 kh) and very
frugal: 47 mpg (6.0 l/100km) in town and 54 mpg (5.2 l/100 km) on the open
road. On a full tank, it will go for 416 miles (670 km) at 56 mph (90 kmh.
Exhaust emissions from the gas turbine are lower than those of any car in
use today.
The ECC has a two-speed automatic tranmission and front-wheel drive. When I
tried it, the batteries were partly discharged, but I reckoned it would have
held its own in town traffic. The gas turbine takes 30 seconds to start,
during which the EEC can be driven on its batteries. Its odd, but not
objectionable, whine can hardly be heard inside the car.
Do not plan on buying an ECC, though. The only one in existence reflects so
much research and development that it must be worth nearly its weight in
gold. In any case, it is a working concept, not a production prototype.
A hybrid car can never be as cheap as a straightforward petrol or diesel
vehicle. It does, after all, have two power units. But Volvo thinks the
electrical and electronic equipment should not be too expensive if produced
in quantity. And it says the gas turbine is not much more complicated than a
turbo-charger.
So, it seems that in the increasingly green years that lie ahead, a hybrid's
price might have to be paid if we want to drive proper, full-sized cars in
towns - or, perhaps, even drive them at all.
