FT  22 JUN 92 / Economics Notebook: Adjusting an undeserved reputation
Economic adjustment measures in developing countries, especially under
IMF-inspired programmes, are often blamed for increasing poverty, widening
inequality and holding back development.
A study by the Development Centre of the Paris-based Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) suggests this reputation may be
undeserved. Claims that adjustment is a cruel punishment visited on the poor
by unfeeling international organisations and greedy bankers miss the point,
the authors say.*
Basing their arguments on case studies in seven countries, which included
using economic models to test alternative strategies, the authors conclude
that adjustment does not necessarily dampen growth or increase poverty.
Obviously much depends on the severity of the economic crisis. But different
measures have differing social impacts. This is true both for stabilisation
policies that cut domestic demand to curb inflation and rein in trade and
budget deficits, and for longer-term structural adjustments to improve
supply by making the economy more responsive to market signals.
Political opposition to adjustment that delays government action worsens the
social costs, the study argues. The costs of adjusting are lower than the
costs of not adjusting, and adjusting before the crisis is better than
waiting until the crunch comes and the country can no longer meet its debts
or finance its outgoings.
The study is interesting partly because it claims to break analytical ground
in disentangling and simulating the effects of different adjustment
policies, and partly because it is the work of two academics with no
particular axe to grind. Thus, while the authors see adjustment as
essential, they do not necessarily endorse IMF prescriptions.
Of the seven countries looked at in detail, Chile, the Ivory Coast, Ecuador
and Morocco instituted programmes under IMF supervision. Malaysia and
Indonesia did so on their own initiative before running into trouble (and so
had more choice of policy measures). Ghana is cited as a prime example of an
economy ruined by refusal to adjust when crisis hit in the 1970s.
In Malaysia and Indonesia, where the problems and so the stabilisation
measures were less severe, living standards rose during adjustment. Poverty
also declined in Ghana during adjustment, which got underway in the 1980s.
In the other countries, adjustment was accompanied by stable or higher farm
incomes and employment but urban poverty increased. In Chile, where the
urban poor predominate, and in Ecuador where peasants rely heavily on
non-farm sources of income, poverty rose overall.
The study attributes these differences to the timing of measures and to the
policy mix chosen. Some governments, including Ghana's, ran programmes
designed to protect the poor. Ecuador made no provision and Chile helped
only the poorest.
Adjusting before the crisis meant less drastic cuts in demand, including
cuts in public spending. Early adjustment also ensured a continuing flow of
foreign capital, bolstering private investment necessary for future growth
and cushioning public spending on social services and essential
infrastructure.
The economic models used by the study also indicate for the first time how
countries might have fared without adjustment. The answer is badly. The
authors say critics tend to focus on the costs of adjustment (often
confusing them with the costs of the crisis) and ignore the costs of
non-adjustment.
In Ghana's case, non-adjustment meant drying up of funds from abroad and a
reduction in imports to the low levels of export earnings. This produced
falling incomes, output, trade and a 'disastrous increase' in poverty.
Simulations for other economies confirm that this path leads to socially
costly 'self-centred underdevelopment'.
Looking at stabilisation policies, the authors suggest that devaluation
seems to be a more efficient and equitable way of reducing a trade deficit
than cutting public spending or running tight money policies. It slows
economic activity less and, because it usually favours the poorer rural
sector, it reduces inequality and poverty.
The authors conclude that to minimise social costs the best stabilisation
programmes combine devaluation, a restrictive monetary policy to keep the
lid on inflation (which hurts the poor) and a moderate reduction in public
service wages (if they are higher than elsewhere). The worst involve raising
the prices of basic goods and laying off public sector workers - recipes for
social unrest, but often included in IMF-approved programmes.
Cuts in capital spending, if necessary, should not apply to rural investment
which helps reduce inequality and poverty, the study says. Similarly, cuts
in social spending and subsidies should avoid measures that impose
disproportionate social costs to the sums saved. For instance, making the
poor pay for medicines effectively deprives them of medical care, even when
treatment is free.
The study in general praises structural adjustments which it says tend to
have positive social effects. For instance, price liberalisation usually
favours the rural over the urban sector. Moreover, increased economic
flexibility reduces the costs of stabilisation.
However, the authors, again disputing conventional IMF and World Bank
wisdom, warn countries not to take drastic measures like privatisation to
reorganise state enterprises during an austerity programme. If attempted,
there should be compensation programmes for the unemployed, as in Ghana, and
effective longer-term measures to retrain redundant workers and help them
find alternative employment.
*Adjustment and equity in developing countries: a new approach, by Francois
Bourguignon and Christian Morrisson (OECD Publications, 2 rue Andre-Pascal,
75775 Paris cedex 16; 111pp, FFr130).
