FT  27 MAR 92 / Survey of Japanese Financial Markets (8): Giants face up to
reality - The investment policies of institutions
JAPAN'S institutional investors, once seen as the formidable giants moving
international and domestic financial markets, are now being forced to change
due to the stock market slump and ongoing financial deregulation.
Fund managers operating institutional funds, for the first time in the
postwar period, have started to consider performance, responding to changes
in investor attitudes.
Mr Haruaki Deguchi, senior official of financial and investment planning at
Nippon Life, Japan's largest life insurer, describes the changes in the life
assurance industry as 'a weird child finally growing into a normal adult'.
Inflow of new money at the life insurers has declined as individual
investors are offered more investment products giving returns in line with
market rates. The amount of new money, which grew at rates as high as 20 per
cent in the years of loose credit of the late eighties, because of the
diversification of investment products, has halved to about Y140,000bn for
the fiscal year ending March 1992.
The companies also face the decline in unrealised gains on stock holdings as
share prices have plunged. In addition, the industry, one of the most
heavily regulated financial industries, faces liberalisation, where
dividends offered to policyholders will be deregulated.
Along with dividend deregulation, a rule which forbids insurers to pay
annual dividends to policyholders from capital gains is also likely to be
abolished.
Japanese life insurers fund their dividend payouts with yields from bonds
and real estate, interest from loans and dividends from stocks. However, the
ministry of finance, to increase equity purchases, allowed the life
companies to include capital gains on tokkin - specified money trusts. The
insurers are also allowed to count the coupon on foreign securities as
returns, rather than the actual yield after the bond has been hedged for
currency movements.
Insurers reckon that while returns on investments total only 5.5 per cent at
the most, dividends on policies are around 6.5 per cent. Until now, the
insurers covered the 1 per cent loss by realising gains on long-term
shareholdings.
This system, however, has become an increasing burden on the insurers due to
the sharp falls in the stock market. Mr Deguchi claims that unrealised gains
have declined to 60.6 per cent of the 1986 figure.
From now on Mr Deguchi says insurers will evaluate investments by its net
total returns - which until now, the industry did not find necessary.
This year, Nippon Life plans to invest 40 to 50 per cent of new money into
corporate loans and 10 per cent into domestic bonds, and 30 per cent into
short-term money markets. High-risk investments will be kept at a minimum
level, with investments in equity, real estate and foreign securities each
totalling 5 per cent of new money at most.
Mr Deguchi says Nippon Life is aiming to reduce its 30 per cent exposure of
outstanding investments to real estate and stocks to zero per cent in the
next few years.
Meanwhile, the stock investment trusts' redemptions have recently slowed
down. Last year, the stock market slump prompted pre-maturity redemptions of
stock funds, pushing up redemptions 2.4 times.
The net asset value of equity and bond investment trust funds fell 9.8 per
cent last year with net assets of stock funds down from Y35,077.2bn at the
end of 1990 to Y28,562.4bn.
Individuals, who are unable to afford to trade directly in shares,
originally preferred to invest in trust funds. However, even at the height
of the bull market, returns have not exceeded the rise in the market, since
the objective of the funds has not been to outperform the stock market, but
to offer a better return than that of bank deposits.
The 16 investment trust companies, tied with securities houses, have been
ideal buyers for the unwanted shares brokers had underwritten.
However, the weakness of stock prices and deteriorating confidence towards
the securities industry has prompted a change in investors' attitudes.
Investors, both institutional and individual, are shunning the unit-type, or
closed-end type trust, which can be redeemed only after a designated period
of time, and are turning to the opened-end fund, which can be withdrawn on
demand without penalty.
According to UBS Phillips &amp; Drew, open-end funds now comprise 35 per cent of
stock fund assets, compared to just 10 per cent in 1988. Since open-end
funds invest an average 70 per cent in equity compared to half that for
closed-end funds, the industry's exposure to equity investments is expected
to increase.
Japan's pension funds, jealously guarded by life insurers and trust banks,
are also facing slow but sure signs of change. Total assets of private
pension funds grossed Y38,500bn last year, and is expected to hit Y100,000bn
by 2000. Public pension and mutual aid programmes hold Y113,000bn in assets.
Although the life expectancy in Japan is the longest in the world, and the
population is ageing rapidly, the country's pension schemes lag in quality
of management.
The recent appointment by Nagasakiya, a leading retail chain, of Invesco
MIM, the UK asset management company, to manage a portion of its pension
funds, surprised the industry, as Japanese companies tend to choose fund
managers on shareholding and other business relationships.
Nagasakiya, however, said its decision was performance-oriented. Such
choices are likely to increase in the near future once the schemes start
maturing and payouts increase. 'Japan's pension funds will have to start to
make return oriented investment decisions,' says a life insurance company
official.
The entry of asset management companies into the industry in 1990, and
foreign asset managers last year, has also increased the availability of
performance-based competition. The Pension Fund Association recently set up
a committee to review returns on pension fund managing.
