FT  07 APR 92 / The right creeps through the cracks: The asylum issue has
dealt a blow to the German coalition
Just up the road from Hamburg, Germany's richest city, lies Itzehoe, an
average sort of place, a swampy socialist stronghold close to the Elbe
estuary. In 1988, 72 per cent of the population turned out for the
Schleswig-Holstein state elections and 72 per cent of them delivered their
votes to the rising Mr Bjorn Engholm, soon to be the Social Democrats'
national leader. A drubbing for the Christian Democrats was par for the
course.
Last weekend, only 48 per cent of the local electorate troubled to vote.
With neat, if depressing, symmetry, about the same measly proportion chose
the SPD. Almost 20 per cent shared out their votes between the extreme
right-wing Republicans and the German People's Union (DVU).
The reason is to be found just down the road from Itzehoe, in Oelixdorf, an
ancient suburb chosen by the Schleswig-Holstein state government as its main
clearing centre for asylum-seekers.
Every day, Oelixdorf and communities throughout the federal republic are
obliged to take in, feed, transport, house and often clothe increasing
numbers of people fleeing war, economic hardship and the other forms of
oppression known to man. Last year, Germany's liberal asylum laws obliged
the country to let in 256,112 such people. Ten years ago the total was
49,391. Last month alone, according to the federal asylum office's
meticulous arithmetic, 35,059 arrived on the doorstep.
Yesterday, Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Mr Engholm, the SPD's chosen one to
challenge for the chancellorship in the 1994 federal elections, picked up
their share of the bill. The SPD just held on to power in the Kiel
parliament, but saw its share of the overall vote slashed from 55 per cent
to 46 per cent. Meanwhile, in simultaneous elections in Baden-Wurttemberg,
Mr Kohl's CDU lost its absolute majority, held for 20 years. Stuttgart was
the last state capital in the old west Germany where the Christian Democrats
ruled alone. The DVU, with six seats in the Kiel state parliament, and the
Republicans, with 15 in Stuttgart, shared the spoils and became the
third-largest political groups represented in both assemblies.
For once the establishment parties were united. The result, they said
yesterday, was a blow, a tragedy, a catastrophe or worse for democracy. A
formal verdict on the consequences for democracy must wait until 1994, when
a rash of state and local polls, topped by federal elections in October,
will deliver a more determinate judgment on the Bonn bodgers.
The result was two black eyes, one for Mr Kohl and one for Mr Engholm. Above
all, the outcome reflected anger and disenchantment with mainstream
politicians, the paralysis of the muddlesome conservative/liberal federal
coalition and its loss of contact with the realities of life beyond Bonn,
the so-called Bundesdorf nestling by the Rhine.
The failure of the socialists to draw any advantage from the CDU's collapse
in Baden-Wurttemberg - in Pforzheim, for example, where the Republicans
picked up 18.5 per cent of the vote, the SPD's share fell from 34 per cent
to 28 per cent - amply demonstrates that the SPD offers no credible
alternative. Mr Engholm, who was pushed into accepting the party's
nomination as chancellor candidate before he was ready, has not yet taken a
firm enough grip on the party to break its old habits of tying itself in
ideological knots. With an estimated 40,000 members between them in all
Germany, neither the DVU nor the Replicans have the necessary clout to fill
the political gap.
Even so, by latching on to and linking up the 'fear' issues, shown up by
unfailingly accurate opinion polls - asylum-seekers, rising crime,
unemployment and housing shortages - they made their mark at the weekend. Mr
Franz Schonhuber, Republican leader, who describes his party as 'clearly
right of the centre', campaigned hard on law and order, and an end to
immigration. His counterpart in the DVU, Mr Gerhard Frey, plastered
Schleswig-Holstein with leaflets proclaiming 'Germany should stay German'.
As yesterday's post mortem showed, they owed their success to city-dwelling,
working-class males under 30.
What the opinion samplers did not examine was the depth of the malaise which
produced the shock result. Asylum is only one - and far from the worst - of
the bogeymen stalking Germany. To many inhabitants, the federal republic has
become almost a foreign country: everything has changed. Unification
realised a politician's dream but brought with it 16m dependents, victims of
the earthquake which swept away the east German economy. The chancellor lied
when he said there would be no taxes to pay for unification, and then hit
everybody with a 7.5 per cent 'solidarity surcharge' on their income tax.
The collapse of European communism, another cause for celebration, quickly
soured as last year 200,000 ethnic Germans joined the influx of people
seeking asylum mainly from the former Soviet Union. Well over 1m east
Germans, still objects of profound suspicion in the old federal republic,
also migrated westwards. The economic slowdown is not a recession -
official. But in factories and offices where people are being told that they
should accept a virtual wage freeze for the next few years, it certainly
feels like one. And to top it all, as the headlines said, 'They are giving
away the Deutschemark]' in the interests of something called European unity.
As the mass circulation Bild newspaper remarked: 'Adieu stability.'
The lack of leadership, internal unity and stability has been apparent for
months in Bonn. The weekend's upsets show how far its effects have spread:
from the relatively poor 'fisheaters' in the north to the industrial
fatlands of Daimler-Benz country in the south.
Where is it all leading? To the conference table; first within individual
party headquarters. 'These are protest votes and all the major parties must
reflect and ask what we have done wrong,' said Mr Volker Ruhe, outgoing
general secretary of the CDU and incoming defence minister.
Then, according to yesterday's consensus, it will be time for all -
excluding the far right - to sit down together and hammer out a new working
relationship. As Mr Kohl has repeatedly said since the turn of the year,
Germany faces 18 months without elections, a period in which to draw up a
list of priorities and ways of dealing with them.
Hopefuls in the SPD have proposed a grand coalition in Bonn, but such ideas,
and even suggestions of a round table to plan 'rational-national'
strategies, have been ruled out by a chancellor refusing to allow the
weekend's shocks to loosen his grip on the reins of power. Mr Engholm claims
the problems confronting the country are too great and too urgent to be
dealt with in the confrontational atmosphere of the Bundestag, and Mr Kohl
acknowledges their scale and urgency. But he seems as much concerned with
maintaining his image as the strong man of German politics and dragging his
fractious opposition, as well as dissenters in the liberal ranks, into line,
and together finding a way through the current logjam.
His priorities, which he listed yesterday, may seem pedestrian in the light
of the mass of difficulties crowding in, but touch the heart of German
political sensibilities. He wants new laws to tighten controls over the flow
of asylum-seekers, a new system for funding the care of the elderly, and
adoption of new rules to make abortion more accessible. His demands
challenge principles held sacred by opposition, political allies and friends
alike. Proposals for these changes have been blocked for months by
opposition from within the SPD and even within coalition allies.
The SPD considers the constitution, which allows anyone asking for asylum to
be allowed into the country, inviolable. Where will the pressure for
amendments and infringements on people's liberties stop if the government is
allowed to change the country's basic law, they ask. Without co-operation
from the socialists the government has no chance of achieving the 75 per
cent majority needed in the Bundestag for constitutional change, and even
less of forcing an amendment through the SPD-dominated Bundesrat, the upper
house.
Members of the opposition and the minority coalition partners, the Free
Democrats, believe plans for self-funded systems under which people would
have to pay for nursing and attention in their old age are symptoms of a
conservative desire to dismantle the welfare state. On abortion reform, Mr
Kohl faces dour resistance from his cabinet colleagues in the catholic south
of the country.
At issue is the inflexibility of a socio-political system which is showing
signs of being unable to bear the burdens piled on it by politicians, labour
unions and history. The greatest of these, and a 'priority' often mentioned
by Mr Kohl in recent weeks but neglected yesterday, is the assimilation of
the former East Germany. At present virtually all the costs of unification
are being borne by the federal budget. All the popular resentment is
accumulating on Mr Kohl's shoulders.
If, as he says, he wants state budgets to take a greater share of the costs,
and the people of Germany to take home less real pay, expect less from the
mother-hen state, work longer hours and retire at 65 instead of 60, he is
going to have to show a measure of unaccustomed flexibility and to give
ground to opposition demands in return for concessions.
The present political framework was tested in a small way at the weekend
polls, and it cracked. Ugly and unwelcome, the far right crept out through
the gaps. The danger for Mr Kohl is that in 1994's elections the cracks
could turn into gaping chasms, swallowing up the 'Unification Chancellor'
and releasing even more unwelcome guests than showed up at the wake
yesterday.
