FT  27 JUN 92 / Summer Drink: Life beyond Chardonnay - Jancis Robinson finds
some good value wines which also have something else to offer
BELIEVE IT or not, people other than advertising salespersons recognise
'summer wine' as a concept. As soon as Wimbledon and school sports days are
in prospect, wine drinkers like me suddenly become passionate about things
like rose and fino sherry that we ignore in midwinter.
Recent in-depth immersion in the bottles on offer from Britain's wine
merchants and wine-minded branches of the supermarkets left me Chardonnayed
out, and I am most enthusiastic about a clutch of characterful roses, and
the exhilaratingly light, tastebud-tingling SOCIETY'S FINO (Pounds 4.75 from
The Wine Society of Stevenage); much more of a dry white than a sherry.
It is ludicrously cheap for a high-strength (16 per cent), high-tradition
wine. But perhaps the Spanish government has decided to subsidise the whole
of the sherry business as well as everything else this year. In for an
Olympic peseta . . .
As for the roses, most captivating of all for drinking with food was MAS
JULLIEN ROSE, COTEAUX DU LANGUEDOC 1991 (Pounds 5.95 La Vigneronne of London
SW7), a heady, herby, savoury wine made from Cinsaut, Syrah (the two most
successful grape varieties for rose) plus Mourvedre and Carignan. This is
hand-made wine which would grace any dinner table - none of your Tizer.
Skalli's FORTANT ROSE DE SYRAH 1991 (Pounds 3.49 Victoria Wine) is a bit
more Tizerlike (as the grape-embossed bottle suggests) and another Languedoc
specimen, but it is very lively, crisp and aromatic, and is saved by its
good acid from tasting cloyingly sweet - a common inconvenience in pink, and
especially, 'blush' wines. Equally good value is a wine made from the
Bordeaux grape in Chile, SANTA RITA CABERNET SAUVIGNON ROSE 1991 (Pounds
3.99 Oddbins) which starts fruity but finishes dry. It would make a good,
easy aperitif.
Prize for the most delightfully bizarre wine available at more than 150
shops must go to the BRACHETTO D'ACQUI (Pounds 6.99 Oddbins) made by the
late Giacomo Bologna in Piedmont, famous for taking Barbera seriously. I
tasted it just after sampling a range of supermarket wines too often
characterised by the need to buy to a price, most notably in a bevy of
artificially fruit-flavoured fizzes specially concocted to fall below the
5.5 per cent alcohol low-strength duty limit. Part of what attracted me to
this weird, dark rose-coloured, musky, sweet-but-balanced, frothy remnant of
Piedmontese tradition was, I must admit, its 'so what?' alcohol level of 6
per cent. But it also tastes defiantly of real grapes rather than the stinks
lab.
Too many Chardonnays today (to my probably rather precious palate) taste
man-made rather than map-made. And there are signs that supplies of
everyone's favourite wine, 'South East' Australian Chardonnay, may just be
finite. An increasing proportion of Oz whites on sale in Britain are blends
of Chenin/Colombard/Semillon/Chardonnay, in order to keep the bottles below
those blessed price points.
This may have something to do with the Australians' admirable drive for
truth in labelling, but to find a seriously good Australian Chardonnay
nowadays you will probably have to pay more than you would, say, for Marks &amp;
Spencer's exceptionally ripe current vintage of one of their most successful
wines, the Chablisienne co-op's CHABLIS 1990 (Pounds 6.99 or Pounds 3.99 a
half, M&amp;S). Much to the amazement of everyone, including M&amp;S, it won a gold
medal in this year's WINE magazine taste-athon.
A better bet in Australian whites is probably an unblended, defiantly
unfashionable, but noble varietal: one of several full-bodied MARSANNEs on
offer, for example, or MOONDAH BROOK VERDELHO (Pounds 4.99 Tesco and
Majestic), made into a rich yet dry, tangy table wine from one of the great
grapes of Madeira. Maritime history in a bottle worth ageing.
Read those Australian back labels carefully. Unless oak barrels or casks are
actually specified, the wine probably derives its user-friendly oakiness
from a few drops of oak essence, of which we British are major suppliers to
Australia.
In today's rather desperate marketplace, price seems to bear less relation
than ever to quality. Some producers eager to establish a foothold in the
international marketplace are surely giving their wine away at prices below
Pounds 3. The real double-take bottle is the stylishly labelled FAR ENOUGH
PINOT NOIR 1991 (Pounds 2.99 Waitrose and, under the TABLE MOUNTAIN label,
Budgen). Pinot Noir is supposed to be Burgundy's impossibly finicky red
grape that produces nothing but sludge under Pounds 6 a bottle. Yet here is
a lively, fruity, unmistakeably Pinot, light red for under Pounds 3. The
catch? It is South African and has not, thank goodness, been in expensive
oak casks - nor even suffered a touch of ersatz flavouring.
Even cheaper, and at least as good, is LEZIRIA, another fruitily carefree
(ie tannin-free) young red, said to contain 15 per cent of Pinot Noir plus
85 per cent of the juicy Periquita. It comes from a first-rate co-operative
in the Ribatejo that is, agriculturally, Portugal's answer to Kent. Until
last Saturday Gateway were asking only Pounds 1.99 for it, but it is worth
far more than its non-introductory selling price of Pounds 2.39 a bottle
from both Gateway and Victoria Wine. Both of these reds could be served at
any temperature from icebox to picnic-hot. Indeed, you could set off on an
expedition with them, well-chilled, and let them give you a range of taste
experiences.
Iberia in general has been looking increasingly interesting for all hues of
wine. The huge Thresher Wine Shop/Wine Rack/Bottoms Up conglomerate has made
particularly heroic efforts to reflect change in Spain. Excellent value dry
whites include its aristocratically scented, lively, dry Galician white
CASAL DA BARCA (Pounds 3.49), the latest vintage of the even more exciting
ALBARINO, LAGAR DE CERVERA 1991 (Pounds 8.19 from Thresher or Pounds 7.33
from Laymont &amp; Shaw of Truro) and Oddbins' zesty dry white from Navarra
CASTILLO DE OLITE (Pounds 2.99).
More unexpected still is the new wave of well-made, dry, fruity,
transPyreneen wines made in France from cheap Spanish grapes grown in La
Mancha. SAINSBURY'S BLANC DE PARAISO is Pounds 2.25 until the end of the
month, and then Pounds 2.59, while CUVEE DUBOEUF BLANC is Pounds 2.99 at M &amp;
S and comes complete with the flowery label that is the signature of the
'king of Beaujolais.' The curious thing is that the first wine, made at the
Plaimont co-op, tastes just like its Vin de Pays des Cotes de Gascogne,
while the second bears a remarkable resemblance to poor man's St Veran.
Makes you think.
Spain tends to bottle its own red wine however and two current good buys are
SAINSBURY'S LA MANCHA CASTILLO DE ALHAMBRA 1991 (Pounds 2.99) which is
Rioja's smart Tempranillo grape made like Beaujolais and, in quite a
different style, THRESHER'S RIOJA CRIANZA 1989 (Pounds 3.99), designed to
show off its ration of quarter-French (as opposed to all-American) oak.
Oak - now that is a wine that sells. No wonder the oak essence is so
popular. The real, coopered thing tends to add well over Pounds 1.50 to a
bottle of wine, as London SW10 merchant Lea and Sandeman can demonstrate
with its two superior cuvees of the sprightly estate-bottled dry white
DOMAINE DE JOY, COTES DE GASCOGNE (1991 Pounds 3.50 and 1990 Pounds 5.95
respectively). I cannot abide oak for the sake of it, but the second
oak-aged version really is a joy; the oak endows structure rather than
sweetness or astringency to a most convincing blend dominated by the
gorgeously tangy Gros Manseng grape of south west France. (Nor has a touch
of oak suppressed the peachy scent of the Ardeche co-op's VIOGNIER 1991 -
far better value than most Condrieu at Pounds 4.49 from Safeway.)
The owner of Domaine de Joy is advised, very sensibly, by Denis Dubourdieu,
Bordeaux's white wine witchdoctor. Most dry white bordeaux leaves me as cold
as it tastes, but Dubourdieu's own CH REYNON VIEILLES VIGNES 1990 (Pounds
6.99 Oddbins) is pure delight (and hasn't seen so much as a matchstick of
wood). Dubourdieu insists on such ripeness in the grapes from these
actually-not-so-old vines that he often has to send the pickers through the
vineyard twice, and manages to avoid any of the aggressive herbaceousness so
often associated with the Sauvignon Blanc grape. This wine is so gently
perfumed and ripe that I could easily take it for a fine Alsace.
The aromatic Sauvignon with its searing acid is certainly at its most
appealing in midsummer; even hay fever sufferers can smell it a tennis court
away. New Zealand is a prime source of it, and while the 1991 vintage of the
widely distributed MONTANA SAU3VIGNON (price point: Pounds 4.99) is one of
the best yet, there is more dazzling CLOUDY BAY-type fruit to be had from
PALLISER ESTATE 1991 (Pounds 8 from Thresher and Bute Wines of Scotland).
Even better value is the TROIS MOULINE SAUVIGNON 1991 (Pounds 3.69 Oddbins,
Pounds 3.75 Waitrose) which is now made in the Languedoc and bears a quite
remarkable resemblance to the flirtatious OZIDOC (Pounds 4.20 Adnams of
Southwold).
But perhaps better value still, even if too grassy for my taste, is the
Hungarian GYONGYOS ESTATE SAUVIGNON BLANC 1991 (widely available at about
Pounds 3) made by young Australian-trained, Bordeaux-based Hugh Ryman.
Eastern Europe is another hot spot for the value-conscious wine drinker:
Safeway's SPECIAL RESERVE ROMANIAN CABERNET SAUVIGNON 1985 is a steal, if in
a somewhat predictable style, at Pounds 2.99.
Some of the best-value sparkling wines are Moet's new elegant Australian, an
oxymoron of ever there was one, GREEN POINT (Pounds 9.99 Victoria Wine,
Augustus Barnett); New Zealand DEUTZ MARLBOROUGH CUVEE (Pounds 9.99 Thresher
and Oddbins); Californian pink and white MUMM CUVEE NAPA (around Pounds 8.50
Tesco, Safeway and Oddbins, which offers a taste of it today); and Oregonian
ARGYLE PINOT NOIR 1988 (Pounds 9.99 Oddbins) and Australian CROSER 1988
(Pounds 10.49 Oddbins), both made by Brian Croser of Petaluma in which
Bollinger have an interest. (And, newest of all and so far available only
Down Under, PELORUS, from the Cloudy Bay winery of NZ that is now part of
Veuve Clicquot.)
But there are other well-made, well-priced alternatives to champagne which
have been made quite independently of it. Spanish Cava does not have to look
naff and taste too obtrusively of the Xarello grape, as evinced by
Freixenet's CUVEE D S 1985, and LOXAREL 1986 (Pounds 9.99 and Pounds 6.49
respectively, Thresher). Perhaps Loxarel stands for Lo-Xarello?
Please note that many of these wines are available only at selected
branches, especially within the Thresher empire.
