FT  30 MAY 92 / Canary off its perch: Michael Dennis spoke yesterday to
Robert Peston
Canary Wharf seems impregnable as seen from Olympia &amp; York's executive suite
on the 30th floor of the tower which dominates the east London development.
However, Mr Michael Dennis, the O&amp;Y director who has supervised Europe's
biggest office development with obsessive care since its inception in 1987,
is acutely aware that O&amp;Y may be liquidated, following the decision by the
project's bankers on Wednesday that they would not finance its completion.
Though appalled that the O&amp;Y subsidiaries which own Canary Wharf have been
placed into administration under UK insolvency procedures, Mr Dennis remains
hopeful that the project can rise from the dead, if only the UK government
can be persuaded to move 2,000 civil servants to Canary Wharf and if an
investor can be persuaded to make an injection of new equity.
However, he admits that the deadline to achieve a rescue is short - probably
not much later than mid-June. Though it is premature to write Canary Wharf's
obituary, he is keen to highlight the project's successes.
On July 2 1987, Mr Dennis, a former law professor who in the late 1970s
became Toronto's commissioner for housing before joining O&amp;Y in 1980,
arrived with one of O&amp;Y's lawyers at a barren site in the middle of east
London's Isle of Dogs. He faced another inordinately tight timetable.
At the time, the rights to develop Canary Wharf were held by two investment
banks, Credit Suisse First Boston and Morgan Stanley, and a US developer,
Ware Travelstead. The government had said that unless an agreement was
reached to build an office complex on the site by July 17, it would not
provide the new road and upgraded rail facilities essential to the project's
success.
Within days, O&amp;Y had taken over the 50-acre site. The contract with the UK
government placed obligations on both sides. O&amp;Y would build 5.4m sq ft of
new offices within five years and the government would build the Limehouse
Link road and expand the Docklands Light Railway (DLR) within the same
period.
Though the new buildings were technically superior to anything built in the
UK and though it was the biggest office scheme ever undertaken in the
country, the project was still completed ahead of schedule at the end of
1991 and within the Pounds 700m budget. However, the Limehouse Link will not
be finished till next year while improvements to DLR will not be completed
till later this year - in both cases later than planned. Indeed, Mr Dennis
says that if O&amp;Y had not become so closely involved in the development
phases of both the Link and the DLR, they could still be years from
completion.
Not surprisingly O&amp;Y has been bemused by the government's inflexibility in
respect of a separate - and unsigned - contract, under which O&amp;Y agreed to
pay Pounds 400m towards the costs of extending the Jubilee Line to the
Docklands. O&amp;Y has been unable to deliver on the contract because of its
financial difficulties, which in Mr Dennis's view stem from one cause more
than any other.
He is convinced potential tenants were put off because of their doubts about
the transport links to Canary Wharf. 'If we had not lost two years on the
DLR and Limehouse Link, we would be 90 per cent let today'  - and the Canary
would not be impersonating Monty Python's parrot.
