FT  08 JUL 92 / UK Company News: Seeboard up 45% and gives customers rebate
SEEBOARD, the electricity distributor serving south-east England, yesterday
reported a sharp increase in profits - and immediately promised a minimum
Pounds 10 rebate for all its customers.
Mr George Squair, chairman, said that the rebate and recommended 17 per cent
dividend increase 'provide evidence that privatisation can bring benefits to
shareholders and customers alike'.
Seeboard's pre-tax profits for the year ending March 31 were Pounds 98.4m,
up 45 per cent from the Pounds 67.8m given in the pro forma accounts for
last year's privatisation. This amounted to earnings per share of 53.5p, up
from 36.5p.
The company's mainstream business continued to grow despite the recession.
Electricity distributed rose by 1.4 per cent, and the average tariff
increase amounted to 1.9 per cent. The distribution business made a profit
of Pounds 91.5m, up from Pounds 64.2m. Controllable costs were reduced by
3.6 per cent.
The supply business made a profit of Pounds 4.3m, down from Pounds 7.2m
because of the squeeze on margins.
Seeboard has regained 31 large industrial customers in its area, but Mr Jim
Ellis, chief executive, stressed that Seeboard only accepted business in
this market if it was profitable.
The non-regulated businesses saw their contribution fall from Pounds 2.9m to
Pounds 2m because of the recession.
Retailing turnover was up 11 per cent to more than Pounds 50m, and
electrical contracting work rose to Pounds 26m, up 15 per cent. Seeboard is
also expanding into the power generation and gas distribution business.
Seeboard's dividend increase is the largest so far proposed in this round of
electricity results. The final pay-out will be 12.25p making a total
dividend of 17.25p. Dividend cover increased from 2.5 to 3.1.
Mr Ellis said the result pointed to an underlying growth in the business of
about 1 per cent.
Mr Squair, who will be succeeded by Sir Keith Stuart in September, said:
'Seeboard has come through the testing initial period which followed
flotation with flying colours.'
COMMENT
The Pounds 10 rebate - which will cost Seeboard about Pounds 20m - will be
seen as a stunt to deflect attention from high profits and the most handsome
dividend increase seen in the sector so far. But the real reason is the
regulatory system which requires regional electricity companies to set their
tariffs on the basis of forecasts of costs rather than past history, and
Seeboard overestimated them. Even so, this is one of the best electricity
company results to date, showing underlying growth and a well covered
dividend. The stock market seemed to think Seeboard's concern for its
customers is good for business: the share price rose a few pence to 330p
where the yield is 5 per cent, one of the lowest in the sector.
