FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of Courier and Express Services (8): Playing it safe
on the front lines - Security is a crucial consideration for the industry
ALTHOUGH it has dropped out of the limelight since the Gulf War brought it
into a blaze of publicity security is now a crucial consideration for the
international courier and express industry. With many shipments travelling
in the holds of passenger aircraft, courier and express companies are in the
front line of the global battle against terrorist activity.
The risk of courier and express consignments being used by terrorists to
place explosives on board aircraft was highlighted at the 1991 World Express
Freight &amp; Distribution conference in Amsterdam by the chairman of the
Association of European Airlines security committee, Teun Platenkamp. 'There
seems no doubt that terrorist groups will attempt to conceal explosive
devices in cargo, express and courier packages or mail,' he warned.
The same packages can be - and have been - used for smuggling drugs and
other illegal items. For this reason, express operators are anxiously
waiting to see how EC countries organise their Customs checks once border
controls are abolished to create the Single Market. Shippers who fail to
declare dangerous goods are another problem.
However, the main thrust of current government air transport security
legislation around the world is predictably focused on combating the threat
of terrorist attacks on aircraft.
There has already been at least one documented terrorist incident involving
a courier and shipment. In 1989, an explosion in the lounge at India's
Calcutta International Airport was found to have been caused by a courier
parcel packed with explosives. The parcel was destined to be put on an
aircraft heading for Bombay. However, it was the earlier Pan Am Lockerbie
disaster at the end of 1988 which really started to concentrate
international attention on the urgent need to tighten up general aircraft
security.
Previous legislative moves by individual government and transport
organisations such as the United States Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) and the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) had proved
largely ineffective.
It took Lockerbie, and two other aircraft bombings in 1989 - a French UTA
aircraft over Niger and a Colombian Avianca flight near Bogota - to prompt
governments to consider new air transport security measures.
In the UK, it has led to moves to establish a register of couriers, express
companies and airfreight forwarders with recognised security clearance when
it comes to shipping goods by air. Representatives from the UK airline,
airport, forwarding and courier and express sectors, plus Customs, have met
Department of Transport officials on several occasions to discuss the sort
of measures companies must take in order to qualify for such registration.
Industry observers now expect an Approved Cargo Agent Register, as it will
probably be called, to be in place by the beginning of 1993.
The idea is that companies listed on the register will be given preferential
treatment by airlines when it comes to accepting shipments. Such companies
will be deemed less of a security risk in terms of possible terrorist
activity and will therefore generally find their shipments subjected to less
scrutiny by the carriers.
According to the most recent consultative paper on air transport security
presented by the Department of Transport, companies seeking 'approved cargo
agent' registration will have to set up security programmes covering three
broad areas of activity.
The first will centre on some form of pre-employment screening for new
personnel, probably along the lines of that already in place for airport
employees following the Pan Am Lockerbie tragedy.
The second area for attention will be the physical security of all
facilities and vehicles involved in the preparation and transport of goods
before being flown.
The third group of measures will centre on the use of screening systems,
both in terms of handling procedures and technology such as X-ray systems.
'The paper shows a very firm intention to move the legislative focus further
upstream. It implies there will be controls within air cargo operations from
airport security through to building and vehicle security,' said Mr David
Forbes, group security manager for TNT Express Worldwide. 'I think that
approach is right. We believe that everyone should be doing things to
relieve the pressure on the airlines when it comes to security matters.'
The UK Department of Transport has in the past been criticised by express
industry companies for failing to properly understand the needs of their
business, particularly when it comes to reconciling security requirements
with the need for fast transit. But, say industry sources, communication
between the department and the industry on that issue is improving.
Other governments around the world, however, seem to be moving rather more
slowly. Even the initially positive United States Federal Aviation
Administration became bogged down on the issue. It ran into problems with
the US Post Office which claimed that all mail carried on aircraft was
sealed against inspection and protected by law.
There has been considerable argument over whether consignments carried on
all-cargo aircraft should be subject to the same security checks as those on
passenger aircraft. The US FAA appears to have accepted that cargo carried
on freighter and passenger aircraft can be treated differently when it comes
to security.
The UK Department of Transport, on the other hand, has indicated it is not
prepared to make any distinction between freighter and passenger aircraft
freight. 'The last thing we, as a company and as an industry, need is to end
up with different sets of rules on security in every country where we
operate,' said TNT's Mr Forbes.
'There is a danger that could happen but there have recently been some signs
that governments around the world are starting to get it together more.
Certainly, the UK, US and Australian governments seem to be moving in the
same direction, although the rest of Europe does seem to be lagging behind a
bit.'
Another general problem confronting the courier and express industry and
other air transport organisations seeking to improve security is the lack of
suitable equipment for checking the contents of parcels and larger cargoes.
Both X-Ray machines and equipment employing Thermal Neutron Activation (TNA)
technology, which basically 'sniffs' the air for explosives particles, have
failed to prove particularly reliable in use. The latter also has quite a
high false alarm rate which slows down the checking process.
As a result, it has been estimated that London Heathrow airport, for
example, would need six TNA units, average length 34ft and costing USDollars
1m, just to check baggage.
Rather more practical, it appears, is the application of a concept called
the 'the known or unknown shipper'. The basic idea is that courier, express
and all other companies involved in moving goods by air should make a clear
distinction between the way they handle and check shipments originating from
shippers known to them and those coming from unfamiliar sources.
It is known, for instance, that the courier and package which exploded at
Calcutta airport in 1989 was originally collected from a man staying in an
hotel.
