FT  03 NOV 92 / Coalition poised to collapse in Ireland
THE two sides in the Irish coalition row remained at loggerheads yesterday,
making it nearly inevitable that the government would collapse today.
The crisis began when Mr Albert Reynolds, the prime minister, last week
accused Mr Des O'Malley, industry minister and leader of the Progressive
Democrats (PDs), the junior coalition partners, of being 'dishonest' during
a parliamentary inquiry into the country's beef industry.
The PDs said they would withdraw from the Fianna Fail-PD coalition unless Mr
Reynolds publicly retracted the accusation by this morning. The PD
parliamentary group will gather just before the weekly cabinet meeting.
Ms Mary Harney, a PD deputy and junior minister of state for environmental
protection, said yesterday: 'It is a serious charge. Nothing like that has
ever been made before by a head of the government and, unless it is removed,
I don't see any way that Mr O'Malley could participate in this government .
. . it is a matter for the Fianna Fail party and Taoiseach (prime minister),
if they want the government to continue. The ball is in their court.'
Although Mr Reynolds said at the weekend that his door was open to Mr
O'Malley for discussions, he gave no indication yesterday that he intended
backing down, in spite of signs of a backbench rebellion led by members of
the former cabinet ousted by him when he took over the reins of the Fianna
Fail party from Mr Charles Haughey earlier this year.
Mr Vincent Brady, a former chief whip of Fianna Fail and defence minister,
said: 'I believe a little bit more care and caution should have been
exercised (by Mr Reynolds). Nobody wants an election at this present time
and most of our backbenchers do not want an election either.'
Mr Brady expressed doubts that Fianna Fail could win an absolute majority in
a snap general election. At that point, Mr Reynolds' future as party leader
might be in doubt, he said.
He added that when Mr Reynolds took over the party leadership 'he committed
himself to (winning) an overall majority and I presume that if he fails to
deliver on that commitment his position must come up for questioning'.
Mr Peter Barry, the deputy leader of the main opposition party, Fine Gael,
said yesterday that his party was now on an election footing. He dismissed
claims by senior Fianna Fail officials that they could continue functioning
as a minority government. 'Once the PDs withdraw it wouldn't last for 24
hours,' he said.
