FT  19 NOV 92 / International Company News: Canadian carriers' dispute grows
RELATIONS between Canada's two big airlines, Air Canada and Canadian
Airlines International, have sunk to a new low.
PWA, parent of Canadian, has filed a law suit in Calgary alleging that Air
Canada is trying to drive it out of business by discounting domestic fares
60 per cent to 75 per cent, or well below the cost of service.
'This is predatory pricing and illegal under the Federal Competition Act,'
said Mr Rhys Eyton, PWA chairman. PWA is claiming CDollars 1bn (USDollars
788m) in damages.
It has also alleged that Air Canada increased capacity by more than 10 per
cent last spring with the intention of driving prices lower.
In Montreal, Air Canada retorted that the PWA suit was unfounded and the
capacity increase was designed only to maintain its 57 per cent domestic
market share.
Mr Eyton denied the suit was retaliation for last week's CDollars 1.5bn
action by Gemini Corp, the computerised reservations system jointly owned by
Air Canada and PWA.
Air Canada has claimed the CDollars 1.5bn damages from PWA and other
airlines, alleging that PWA had initiated legal moves to get out of the
Gemini joint venture.
In another move, American Airlines has offered to buy 25 per cent of PWA for
CDollars 250m, if Canadian switches from Gemini to American's Sabre
reservations system.
Air Canada, incensed that the federal government may bale out PWA, has made
two new proposals to Ottawa, including a fresh offer to merge with PWA -
which would require PWA creditors to make concessions of up to CDollars
500m. Under the second, Air Canada would buy Canadian's overseas routes,
including the coveted Asian service.
Transport minister Mr Jean Corbeil said in Montreal the government would
intervene 'only to ensure an equitable long-term solution' to both airlines'
problems.
Air Canada and a Texas group will assume control of Continental Airlines
early next year, after Continental's unsecured creditors approved a
financial reorganisation plan. Continental hopes to be out of US Chapter 11
bankruptcy protection early next year.
