FT  14 AUG 92 / UN agrees force as last resort in Bosnia aid effort
THE United Nations Security Council last night authorised the use of force
as a last resort to ensure relief supplies get through to the beleaguered
population of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The resolution was passed as western governments cautiously backed further
away from military involvement in the former Yugoslav republic. They hope
the threat alone will clear obstacles to relief convoys.
Welcoming the UN vote, President George Bush said he hoped to step up the
Bosnian relief effort in co-operation with allied nations, the UN and aid
agencies. He called on Serbia and Croatia to give their full support.
The resolution, sponsored by the US, Britain, France, Belgium and Russia,
authorises 'all measures necessary' to ensure delivery of humanitarian aid.
It does not spell out what kind of force could be used or by whom.
It was adopted by 12 votes to none, with China, India and Zimbabwe
abstaining.
The council unanimously adopted a second resolution demanding unimpeded
access for the Red Cross to detention camps in Bosnia and other former
Yugoslav republics. Reacting to mounting concern about atrocities, it warned
that individuals violating human rights would be held responsible for their
actions.
Sir David Hannay, Britain's ambassador to the UN, stressed that the Security
Council was not prescribing the use of force. 'It is a resolution which is
authorising (force) as a last resort,' he said.
Despite the UN vote, several European governments were yesterday united in
their determination to resist being drawn into military involvement in the
tangled ethnic conflict between Serbs, Croats and Moslems in the former
Yugoslavia.
President Francois Mitterrand of France said a military campaign would be 'a
fearsome effort'. He said 'adding war to war would not solve anything'.
The Italian defence minister, Mr Salvo Ando, warned the west not to get
sucked into a long guerrilla war.
In Britain, Mr George Robertson, the Labour party's foreign affairs
spokesman, cautioned against military involvement. But he said the British
government 'cannot simply hang around waiting for UN resolutions - action to
force Serbia to the peace table is urgently required'.
Mr Muhamed Sacirbey, Bosnia's ambassador to the UN, protested that the UN
was not going far enough. The envoy, who sought but was denied an
opportunity to address the Security Council, strongly criticised what he
termed a 'Band Aid approach' to the turmoil in his republic. 'I am afraid
that this approach may end up with the patient on the operating table,
ostensibly to help him, but that he may then be dismembered,' he said.
Mr Sacirbey also complained that there was an attempt being made to deal
with the situation in a way that did not fully acknowledge Bosnia's
sovereign status as an independent member of the UN. The real issue was
Bosnia's right to self-defence and how to exercise this, along with ensuring
that relief aid was delivered, he said.
UN diplomats said that any use of force aimed at protecting humanitarian aid
convoys in Bosnia would be carried out under the auspices of the UN, which
already has a peacekeeping force in the former Yugoslavia.
Diplomats said the UN resolution authorising force was a final warning to
Serb irregular forces besieging Sarajevo and other Bosnian cities that they
must allow relief deliveries through. But the diplomats cautioned that the
actual use of force would complicate the conflict.
The UN moves came only hours after a sniper killed a US television
journalist, David Kaplan, 45, in an attack on a convoy taking Yugoslav Prime
Minister Milan Panic into Sarajevo for peace talks.
Mr Kaplan was a producer for the ABC television network.
Resolutions shy from direct intervention, Page 2
