FT  09 MAR 92 / UK News (Employment): Businesslike talk from union's new
leader - Bill Morris, who takes over the top TGWU job today
THE WORDS could come from a business leader: 'I am the chief executive of an
organisation which will see Pounds 60m come in this year and that does not
include investments. We employ more than 1,000 people. I'll have a fleet of
over 400 cars and 126 properties on the books.'
The speaker is Mr Bill Morris, who today takes over the top job at the TGWU
general workers' union, Britain's largest union.
He is explaining why he and other officials are about to embark on a series
of training courses to help them manage their resources better. They will
need them.
Mr Morris takes over as general secretary at a low point in the union's
history. For nearly a decade its effectiveness has been constrained by
political infighting, its administration fund is likely to show a Pounds 12m
deficit for last year and its membership is declining rapidly.
The TGWU has prided itself on being Britain's largest union for more than 60
years. It will almost certainly lose the title next year, as three
public-sector unions, Nalgo, Nupe and Cohse, combine their 1.4m members.
Other unions could soon overtake the 1.2m-strong TGWU in size and further
diminish its influence.
In spite of the problems Mr Morris, previously deputy general secretary,
starts off with goodwill from all sides of the union.
His predecessor, Mr Ron Todd, was personally popular but was never able to
shrug off the effects of two bitterly fought elections for the job in the
mid-1980s. The right wing, grouped around Mr George Wright, his opponent in
the election for general secretary, considered him too heavily influenced by
the broad-left faction which has dominated the executive in recent years.
Like Mr Todd, Mr Morris was the broad-left candidate for general secretary
and, like him, he beat Mr Wright. But his opponents in that election seem to
have forgiven him, for the moment at least.
One union regional secretary said: 'The atmosphere has changed. Bill is his
own man. He is getting round the union far more than Ron did. He talks to us
and he takes our opinions into account.'
Such benign views may become less common later this spring when Klein &amp; Co,
a consultancy, produces a report on the union's structure and Mr Morris acts
on it. The findings are almost certain to lead to an attempt to erode some
power bases.
Virtually everyone in the union agrees that its structure causes it to pull
in different directions. The power bases include the policy-making national
executive, a lay body dominated by the left, and the 11 regional
secretaries, who are paid officials mainly identified with the right. In
addition there are 14 national trade groups, each with its own officers. The
result is a profusion of command centres.
The need to rationalise them has been accentuated by the union's financial
problems. Mr Morris denies that the union is in financial crisis. The asset
base is strong, he says, and the union is on target to balance income and
outgoings this year, following 250 job cuts and a rise in subscription fees.
In addition Mr Morris is shaking up what is widely viewed as an
extraordinarily sleepy financial culture at the TGWU. One departmental head
explains: 'We ask for money when we need it and, providing we do not make
outrageous demands, we get it. It is a crazy system and we recognise it has
to change.'
Mr Morris will introduce budgets and plans thorough checks of whether the
services it buys in, such as legal services, provide value for money.
Better management will lead to savings, but the union will need plenty of
those to cope with declining membership. Since the Tories came to power in
1979 the TGWU's membership has shrunk by half, whereas the average union
decline is about 30 per cent. Its strength is in traditional industries,
which are declining, and it has failed to get a strong foothold in
technology-based or service sectors.
Mr Morris plans recruitment campaigns and aims to increase the union's
attractions with such measures as free skill-assessment for workers made
redundant and free consultancy for workers, such as milk deliverers, who
become self-employed. Mr Morris also points out that a Labour election
victory would ease the membership problems.
'Even if they did nothing to encourage recruitment through legislation, just
creating a new climate would change things. The aggressive behaviour of a
number of employers would not continue.'
But even if Labour won, the party would not help it more than other unions,
which have shown themselves more adept at holding on to members. And the new
large unions created by mergers will provide more effective competition than
smaller organisations.
If the TGWU is to retain its influence it must seek mergers with other
unions, something at which it has not been successful in recent years. Talks
with the National Union of Mineworkers are stalled, possibly terminally, and
other unions looking for partners are put off by the TGWU's structure and
financial problems.
One possibility is a merger with the GMB, Britain's second-largest union and
a traditional rival with a broad industrial base similar to the TGWU's. Mr
Morris agrees there is industrial logic in amalgamation but says no talks
are in progress.
He will no doubt be strongly tempted to get negotiations under way with the
GMB - and other large unions still seeking mergers - as the pace of mergers
among unions quickens and the dangers grow of the TGWU being left
permanently on the sidelines of power and influence.
