FT  07 JAN 92 / Brazil calls for rethink on use of resources
MR Jose Lutzenberger, Brazil's environment minister, yesterday accused the
industrialised world of 'continuing on a suicidal path' and called on world
leaders and businessmen to 'use 1992 to rethink our model of economic
development'.
He warned: 'If we do not want our children to be damned we must end our
current destructive culture and stop acting as if the planet is a mountain
of resources that we can use up as quickly as possible.'
The market economy was only a good model 'if it is complete  - which means
including future generations and the have-nots. What we are currently doing
with resources such as the Amazon is like the auction of a priceless
painting to a group of people who don't know its real worth, by a thief who
just wants to take his profit and run.'
His appeal came at the launch of the Brazilian Foundation for Sustainable
Development, a Dollars 2.4m initiative by 24 of the country's leading
companies to create a technological databank.
He said the destruction of the Amazon rainforest should be the world's
principal preoccupation. Contrary to predictions by leading Amazonian
scientists, he claimed that deforestation last year was down on 1990.
Although official figures will not be published until April, Mr Lutzenberger
said he expected the destruction to be 8,000-9,000 sq km, compared with
14,000 in 1990 and 90,000 in 1987.
According to Mr Lutzenberger, the removal of subsidies has virtually
eliminated the destruction of rainforest by large ranches. His main
preoccupation now was with those exporting precious woods, such as mahogany.
A weekend of torrential rain in Rio de Janeiro has left a trail of
destruction, with at least 23 people dead and hundreds homeless.
The rains, which began late on Saturday, were the worst since 1988, when
many people died in flooding or were buried under rubble from favelas
(slums) sliding down the hills of the city.
The rains swept rubbish and sewage into houses and streets in northern
suburbs, leading to renewed fears over cholera.
