FT  30 OCT 92 / Bottomley was warned on ambulance software: MP's letter to
health secretary last year expressed concern
MRS Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, was warned that the software house
which installed the London Ambulance Service's troubled computerised
dispatch system was small and virtually unknown.
The warning about Systems Options of Aldershot in Hampshire, came last year
in a letter to Mrs Bottomley from Mr Robert Jones, Conservative MP for West
Hertfordshire. The London Ambulance Service, replying on Mrs Bottomley's
behalf, said all computer companies involved had the necessary experience.
Months of problems with the dispatch system prompted claims that patients
may have died because of response delays and led to the resignation on
Wednesday of Mr John Wilby, chief executive of the LAS.
The system, which is crucial to the ability of LAS to handle, on average,
2,300 emergency calls a day, has now been all but abandoned and the service
has returned to manual call-logging while a review is carried out.
Systems Options won the commission in July 1991 as prime contractor in a
consortium which includes Apricot, the British-based computer manufacturer
owned by Mitsubishi of Japan and Securicor Datatrak.
Apricot provided personal computers and networking equipment while Datatrak
provided radio transmitters to give an ambulance's precise location. There
has been no suggestion that equipment supplied by Apricot or Datatrak has
been at fault.
Systems Options' bid of Pounds 1.2m was about half that of its chief
competitors, consortia led by McDonnell Douglas Information Systems and
Systems Scheduling.
The company figures in none of the principal software directories and is not
a member of Computing Services Association, the software industry trade
body.
Replying on Mrs Bottomley's behalf to Mr Jones, Mr J. R. Harris, LAS
chairman, said the intention was to provide one of the most sophisticated
emergency control systems of any UK service. All three companies involved,
he wrote, 'have demonstrated expertise in providing and developing bespoke
(custom) real-time systems capable of handling large volumes of data . . .
the evaluation process involved not only an assessment of the ability of
companies to provide the specified systems in time, but also their financial
status supported by customer references'.
Systems Options yesterday refused to comment.
There was surprise when the company won the contract because it has no track
record in ambulance command and control systems.
It was founded in 1984 and made pre-tax profits of just Pounds 2,006 on
sales of Pounds 550,981 in the year to September 30 1991.
McDonnell Douglas Information Systems in conjunction with the
Manchester-based software house MIS has more than one third of the UK market
for ambulance dispatch systems.
The Department of Health last night said the contract for the computer
system had been put out to EC-wide tender, and had been awarded in the
normal way. The inquiry into the system will determine how failures arose.
Dire effects, Page 10
Return to telephones, Page 10
