FT  06 OCT 92 / Shares fall on economic worries
SHARE PRICES fell sharply in Europe and Japan yesterday amid fears that the
world's economic difficulties may be deepening.
Heavy selling was triggered by mounting worries about the lack of signs of a
recovery in the US and Japan and waning hopes of imminent cuts in German
interest rates.
The gloom was deepened by further selling pressure on some of the the weak
currencies in the European exchange rate mechanism, stoking expectations
that the ERM might soon require a further realignment.
Across continental Europe, share prices showed their biggest one-day drop
since the attempted coup in Moscow in August last year. In London, where
sentiment was also depressed by steep early falls on Wall Street, the stock
market fell by its largest amount in a single day since late 1987.
Paris and Frankfurt closed with losses of 4.3 per cent and 3.6 per cent on
the day; Stockholm fell more than 6 per cent.
Meanwhile, investors switched funds into D-Marks and out of several of the
weak European currencies and the dollar, on speculation that Germany is
unlikely to ease credit policy in the near future.
The dollar's weakness was intensified by the belief among some investors
that the US Federal Reserve may cut its short-term interest rates soon,
perhaps after today's meeting of its policy-making open markets committee.
Such a move could be expected to provide a stimulus to the flagging US
economy, which some believe is heading for a 'triple dip' recession.
In Europe, the French franc and the Spanish peseta came under renewed
pressure against the strong D-Mark, while there were large falls in both the
Italian lira and sterling, both of which are now floating outside the ERM.
The renewed currency turbulence added to expectations that the ERM, which in
recent weeks has suffered its greatest strains since its formation 13 years
ago, may require another realignment to allow for a devaluation of some weak
currencies against the D-Mark.
Yesterday's strains on financial markets started with a 222.57 fall in the
Nikkei index in Tokyo, where the stock market has been weak recently because
of worries about sluggish economic activity.
The fall in the Japanese index, which closed at 17,101.50, was one of the
factors depressing the confidence of investors in Europe and the US. Early
today the Nikkei was 146.94 lower at 16,964.56.
When trading on Wall Street opened, the Dow Jones Industrial Average quickly
fell more than 100 points. The share price slide in New York was prompted by
deepening concern about the economic outlook and disappointment that the Fed
had not cut interest rates after last Friday's poor employment figures for
September.
Later, however, US share prices recovered strongly as some investors gambled
on another interest rate cut and others bought stocks cheaply. The Dow
eventually closed at 3,179.00, down 21.61.
In Europe, the mood was set partly by Friday's decision by the Bundesbank
council to keep German interest rates unchanged.
The lira again fell victim to selling, dropping 5 per cent on the day
against the D-Mark and closing at L934.4 from L885.6. Another big fall was
suffered by the French franc, which closed at FFr3.3930 to the D-Mark from a
previous FFr3.3860.
World Stocks, Page 43
