FT  27 APR 92 / Monday Interview: Avuncular provider of advice - Lewis
Preston, president of the World Bank
Six months after taking over as president of the World Bank, the world's
premier development institution, Mr Lewis Preston is dipping his toes in
media waters. His handlers have finally persuaded him to start giving press
interviews. They have not all gone well. A frosty piece in the New York
Times described him as spending the interview 'slouched in the corner of a
carved-wood sofa' and being more interested in his pictures of wild birds
than in economic development.
Today, the blue-blooded former Wall Street banker is sitting up straight and
radiating charm. Peering over half-moon spectacles, a mug of coffee in one
hand, he seems avuncular rather than gruff or intimidating. Indeed, one
could almost believe this is not the World Bank president but an amiable
retired banker who has wandered into the Washington office of an old friend.
During a decade at the top of J P Morgan, one of the few big US banks to
emerge relatively unscathed from the debt-ridden 1980s, Mr Preston
studiously avoided publicity. Regularly consulted by the world's top central
bankers, he preferred to wield influence from behind the scenes. It is clear
he would like things to stay that way.
'The bully pulpit doesn't interest me a bit,' he declares. For Mr Preston,
who devoted 40 years of his life to J P Morgan, it is institutions, not
individuals, that matter. Already intensely loyal to his new home, he says
the test of his performance will be 'what people think of the bank, not what
they think of me'.
But does the World Bank president, given his potential influence on
development issues, not have a special duty to speak out? He rejects the
argument. It is vital, he believes, for the bank to establish intellectual
leadership, but it does not matter if issues are articulated by him or by
other bank officials. What counts is how well the institution performs.
So far, he says, he has found little wrong with the bank's policies. But
'hate mail' from development lobbyists suggests the execution of policies
falls short of excellence. He hopes that tough management skills honed at J
P Morgan and an 'ability to delegate' will enable him to make improvements.
Bank officials have found the first few months of the Preston presidency
bracing. He started by axing an entire tier of senior management, releasing
around 240 staff for more productive roles. He has since turned his
attention to the bank's opaque internal budget. This is so confusing, he
says, that it is impossible to identify whether resources are misused. He is
certain, however, that there is 'a lot of fat here'.
The one policy that he has gone out of his way to endorse is poverty
alleviation. He says he is not making a rhetorical flourish when he
describes it as the bank's 'overarching objective'.
But should this be the main goal? After all, at an early stage of
development, poverty was the last thing to concern successful capitalist
economies such as the US. Should the bank not aim mainly at stimulating
growth?
Mr Preston is clearly uneasy at the ideological overtones of the question.
'I don't think the trickle-down theory is very satisfactory . . . You have
to have a social safety net in place for the most disadvantaged people.'
Without such policies, you are wasting money: 'Ad-justment programmes won't
work.' He hints that one of Mr Boris Yeltsin's initial problems was his
failure to understand that Russia does not have an adequate safety net.
Has the bank not been left behind in the former Soviet Union, where the
International Monetary Fund has established itself as the principal outside
adviser? No, says Mr Preston. The fund's lead role in the early stages
reflects its macroeconomic responsibilities. 'We've been working awfully
closely.'
The bank is cranking up to lend heavily. From the middle of 1994, it will be
lending Dollars 4bn-Dollars 5bn a year to the former Soviet republics.
Eastern Europe will be receiving a further Dollars 3bn. All told, the former
communist countries will get a quarter or more of all bank loans,
significantly changing the character of the institution.
Mr Preston concedes that the shift of resources - some of the bank's best
personnel as well as cash - is making its traditional Third World clients
nervous. But he says the timing of the collapse of communism was fortunate.
The bank was underlent and now has considerable headroom for extra lending.
Smiling broadly, he adds that the bank has anything but a shortage of
economists.
He does worry, however, that global competition for capital could adversely
affect the poorest countries. The bank is trying to drum up support for the
10th replenishment of the International Development Association, its soft
loan affiliate. If IDA 10 is to be as generous in real terms as the bank's
previous effort, it will have to raise about Dollars 18bn. But Mr Preston
believes significantly more money is needed, both to reflect the growing
number of potential recipients (which now include Vietnam and Cambodia) and
the expanding cost of measures to protect the environment.
One lesson the bank has taught him is that there is no conflict between
economic development and the environment. 'It is absolutely clear that they
are not in tension,' he says. A recent trip to southern Africa helped
convince him that the poor tend to suffer most from environmental
degradation.
But surely there must be a conflict at some level? Suppose everybody in
China drove a car. What would happen to carbon emissions or global warming?
Mr Preston hesitates. He knows his briefing papers must contain the answer.
But he does not remember it. Perhaps his experience in southern Africa was
too limited, he muses.
What about the future of the bank? With more than 5,000 mostly
Washington-based staff, is it not too big and remote? Could not some of its
functions be undertaken by the private sector? After all, two of the bank's
most senior officials have recently left to start up a private venture for
channelling risk capital to developing economies.
Mr Preston's thinking on such issues is at an early stage. 'We have no
monopoly on brains,' he concedes, 'although we sometimes seem to have a
monopoly on insensitivity.' He hints that there is nothing sacrosanct about
present arrangements: 'If anybody can deliver a service better than us, we
ought to be using them.' He also appears sympathetic to arguments for
greater decentralisation. 'My instincts are that we should have more people
in the field.'
He says the big change already well under way is the bank's metamorphosis
from a lending institution to a provider of advice. He is not embarrassed
that the bank's net transfers to many clients are declining as old loans are
repaid. This is happening 'all over Latin America' and is a sign of the
success of past programmes. He says people are wrong to think loans are the
only lever for influencing policy. At J P Morgan, he recalls, old clients
did not reject his advice just because they no longer needed his loans.
Looking ahead, he seems unruffled by the many problems confronting
policymakers. The industrial economies are in a shaky condition. The former
Soviet Union is in turmoil. Millions are starving in the Third World. Yet Mr
Preston's elegant, two-storey penthouse office is a haven of tranquillity.
The man seems as reassuring as his old furniture. You feel he will work
patiently for practical solutions to complex problems, untroubled by strong
ideological convictions.
The bank has fallen into a safe pair of hands. Mr Preston does not pretend
to be a development expert, an intellectual or an economist. But he appears
to have other, rarer virtues: steady nerves, sound judgment, and enough
confidence cheerfully to admit that he does not know all the answers.
The one danger is that his four private decades at J P Morgan have left him
not fully prepared for his role at the helm of a very public institution.
Given the scale of today's problems, the bank needs more than a capable
manager working on budgets behind the scenes. It needs somebody capable of
articulating a vision for development, of providing global leadership on
issues as controversial as the environment and the transition from
communism. Mr Preston has yet to rise to such challenges.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                        PERSONAL FILE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1926 Born New York City. Served in Marine Corps before graduating from
Harvard College.
1951 Joined J P Morgan, the New York bank. Served clients in south
western US and later in the commodities industry.
1966 Head of J P Morgan's London office. Developed Eurocurrency
business, becoming executive vice-president, international banking, in
1968.
1976 Vice-chairman and director, J P Morgan.
1980-90 Chairman and chief executive, J P Morgan.
September 1991 President, World Bank.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
