FT  17 MAR 92 / Kohl struggles to land his catch: The debate in Germany on
European economic and monetary union could last until its December deadline
It is 90 per cent certain that Germany, driven on by the European
convictions of Chancellor Helmut Kohl, will ratify the Maastricht treaty on
European political, economic and monetary union by the end of the year.
It is equally certain that the country is going to make terribly heavy
weather of it. Indeed, Mr Kohl may well have to pay a heavy political price
for his convictions. The whole debate will probably run right up to the last
stroke of midnight on December 31, causing soul-searching in Bonn, in Berlin
and in Brussels, and even the odd beery bickering in the back-streets of
Bielefeld.
Throughout the small group of high-level government officials in Bonn
responsible for negotiating the EC packages over the past two years there
reigns a deep gloom about the coming confrontation. For even if they are
convinced that Maastricht will be ratified, they fear that the debate will
encourage the mood of questioning that prevails in the unified Germany -
questioning of the old certainty of Germany's role firmly anchored in
western Europe.
It could also leave loopholes - if not legal, then at least political - in
the ratification of economic and monetary union (Emu), allowing opponents of
the process to call it into question once again before the final step to
full implementation of a single European currency.
Last week Mr Horst Kohler, state secretary in the finance ministry, leader
of Germany's Emu negotiating team, and Mr Kohl's 'sherpa' - chief adviser
and fixer - for the Group of Seven world economic summits, summoned a rare
public briefing of leading economic correspondents to spell out his concern
at the content and direction of the current debate.
'Surely this debate is serious enough for us to try a bit harder,' he said.
The simplistic state of the discussion 'only goes to show that our German
self-confidence has not come very far'.
He was expressing the fear that the debate would be reduced to the level of
knee-jerk nationalism: to accusations such as 'you are endangering the
D-mark, so you are a traitor to the Fatherland', as he put it.
At the same time, there is a growing fear that anyone who has an axe to
grind within the German body politic will seek to attach it to the
ratification process. That seems to be exactly what the 16 German federal
states are doing, in insisting that they will only give their blessing to
Maastricht if their own involvement in all future Euro-negotiations is
greatly increased. And it is the sore temptation faced by the opposition
Social Democrats (SPD).
The support both of the states, and the SPD, is essential to get
ratification. Mr Kohl will present two items of legislation next month to
the Bundestag and the Bundesrat, the two houses of the German parliament.
The first seeks to amend the German constitution in two ways, each requiring
a two-thirds majority in both houses. They must approve the transfer of
powers from the German Bundesbank to a future European central bank. And
they must allow the vote at local elections to all EC citizens.
Only once that law has the necessary approval can the full ratification of
Maastricht be voted through, by a simple majority. So Mr Kohl is a hostage
to his opponents both in Bonn, and in the states.
Already he has been forced onto the defensive. Both he, and Mr Theo Waigel,
his finance minister, have begun to argue that the most likely name of the
single currency - the Ecu  - has by no means been agreed, and both would
prefer the 'Euro-mark'. Mr Waigel went further at the weekend, suggesting
that the future European central bank must have its headquarters in Germany,
as the only way to ensure 'broad approval and acceptance' of Emu among the
Germans.
Little more than three months ago, it seemed that most of the electorate
barely cared about Maastricht. There was little debate in the media, and
even less in parliament. A broad consensus ruled in Bonn that European
integration was a good thing. While the debate raged in Britain on whether
Emu should happen at all, there was a certain smug self-satisfaction in Bonn
that Germans were far too European to doubt it.
To be sure, there were grumblings within the mighty German Bundesbank, where
the state representatives - men such as Mr Lothar Muller from Bavaria, and
Mr Wilhelm Nolling from Hamburg - were more sceptical about the stability
and security of the process than their Frankfurt-based colleagues in the
bank's directorate. But the Bundesbank as a whole never questioned the fact
of Emu, only the terms, and the politicians in Bonn slumbered on.
All that changed on the eve of Maastricht when Bild Zeitung, the country's
only mass-circulation newspaper and a worthy bell-wether of the mood in the
Bielefeld beer-cellars, ran a banner headline declaring: 'The D-mark to be
abolished.' The next day it ran a funeral address for the demise of the
beloved currency.
Since then the debate has broken out all over the place, fuelled by a
belated recognition among the more populist politicians that a unified
Germany is a lot more sceptical about European integration than the old
divided nation.
The trouble is that the discussion is thoroughly confusing, because the
assault on Maastricht is coming from several directions at once. In the
first place, there are the outright Euro-sceptics, dubious about the demise
of the D-mark, and convinced that Germany must now concentrate more on
integrating east and central Europe, and less on the old EC.
The second group comprises the Euro-enthusiasts, convinced that Maastricht
has failed to strengthen European political union enough, alongside Emu, and
seeking to block the latter until the former has been achieved.
Third come the German federalists, the powerful German federal states, which
see their territory increasingly whittled away by Bonn, through Brussels.
Among them are both Euro-sceptics and Euro-enthusiasts, equally keen to see
the power of central government curbed.
The Euro-sceptics amount to a small minority in Bonn, but with growing
popular support. The opinion polls certainly suggest that. According to the
respected Allensbach institute, the polling body, the proportion of Germans
wanting to slow down the European integration process has risen from 21 per
cent in 1989 to 38 per cent last year. Those suggesting it should not be
slowed down dropped from 58 per cent in 1989 to only 34 per cent last year.
As for the precise question of giving up the D-mark, according to the
Society for the Protection of German Savers, the proportion has switched
from a clear 52:26 in favour back in 1970, to a decided 56:18 against last
year. Other polls suggest the same, with a growing backlash since
Maastricht. The most recent put opposition at 72 per cent, with almost 30
per cent saying they would change their vote in the 1994 elections to
support any party saying it would not give up the D-mark.
That is one option which so far German electors do not have, unless they
vote for the extremes of left and right. The political establishment in Bonn
is very largely united in support of Emu - but the temptation is growing at
the fringes to exploit the popular desire to maintain 'the D-mark in one's
pocket'.
The first to do so was Mr Peter Gauweiler, the environment minister in
Bavaria, a leading member of the Christian Social Union (CSU) in that state.
He is a rival to Mr Waigel, the party leader, and is often seen as the real
heir-apparent to Mr Franz-Josef Strauss, the long-time conservative prime
minister there.
He suddenly came out with a ringing denunciation of the whole process of
European union, describing it as a 'totalitarian dream of universal
redemption', and denouncing the Ecu as 'Esperanto-geld'. He lost the debate
in the party leadership, but his are the words which linger on in the public
memory.
Then came Mr Oskar Lafontaine, deputy leader and enfant terrible of the SPD,
who surprised and alarmed his own colleagues by calling for outright
rejection of the EC treaty - because Emu will be built on foundations of
sand. You cannot have a common currency, and a single central bank, while
allowing each member state to pursue its own incomes policy, social and
financial policies, he said.
'Thank God for Mr Lafontaine,' one EC diplomat remarked. 'His capacity for
choosing the wrong horse is legendary. By coming out against Maastricht, he
forced his party to come out in favour.'
That at least is what happened - up to a point. The SPD has promised not to
allow its doubts to block ratification. But what it wants in exchange is the
promise of another debate on Emu before Stage Three - the final step to a
single currency. That debate should not be a mere formality, says Mrs
Heidemarie Wieczoreck-Zeul, the party spokesman on Europe: it would overrule
the 'automatic' trigger mechanism for Emu provided by the Maastricht treaty,
and give the German parliament its own right to decide whether it believes
the preconditions for Emu have been fulfilled.
Such a 'second look' at Emu certainly seems very similar in effect to the
'opt-out' clause built into the treaty for Britain, although the intention
may be to 'opt in'. It is something Mr Kohl seems certain to fight against.
What he will have to accept is an instruction to report back to both the
Bundestag, the lower house, and the Bundesrat, representing the 16 federal
states, before Stage Three. He will have to report both on how the economic
preconditions for Emu have been fulfilled - whether, for example, Italy has
satisfactorily reduced its state debt and budget deficit far enough to join
 -and on what further progress has been made to political union.
That much the Euro-enthusiasts seem to have won, while promising to ratify
Maastricht in principle.
The greatest threat to Mr Kohl's position, however, comes from those German
federalists who wish not to transfer all decision-making to Brussels, as the
British might suspect, but to keep it all back in the Lander (states) in
Germany. They are demanding fully-fledged changes in the constitution to
give them control over any future moves to transfer more power to Brussels,
or any other multi-lateral institution. They also want a seat in all EC
negotiations on budget spending.
The prospect is regarded with horror by the likes of Mr Kohler. Far from
imposing budget discipline on Brussels, he sees the dilution of Germany's
negotiating position as an invitation to profligacy. But if Mr Kohl wants
ratification by the end of the year it is hard to see what he can do but
compromise.
While this debate goes on back in Bonn, the European debate is moving
forward into further potential quagmires. Mr Jacques Delors' budget
proposals to finance ever greater 'cohesion' in the poorest member states
have for once united all parts of the German political spectrum in
opposition. With the gigantic costs of German unification causing public
spending to be cut no one wants to give new net transfers to the Community.
'It is going to be a terrible year for Europe,' according to one senior
German official. 'There are linkages on all sides. Our states want more
powers for saying yes to Maastricht. But at least we can all agree on EC
budget discipline. Then Spain may insist that it gets more money, or it will
block any moves to englargement. That means blocking Sweden, or Austria -
whose membership we are committed to support. But don't get us wrong. At the
end of it all, we will still be good Europeans.' At least in Bonn.
