FT  25 JAN 92 / Gardening: . . . and Charity went to seed - The results of a
chance encounter
THE MOST spectacular shrub in my garden for some weeks has been Mahonia
Charity, a fine evergreen with long leaves composed of a number of
holly-like leaflets and small yellow flowers in slender spikes, themselves
arranged in large, cartwheel-shaped clusters.
It was a chance hybrid between two wild species named M. lomariifolia and M.
japonica which was picked out of a nursery bed early in the 1950s by Sir
Eric Savill, who was buying plants for the Savill Garden in Windsor Great
Park. When he discovered that, among his plants, he had an entirely new
variety, he thought he had been very fortunate; and so he named his find
Charity.
Since then, a number of seedlings from Charity have been raised in the
Savill Garden and two have been named and distributed. One is called Faith
and the other Hope and both can be obtained from the Savill nursery.
Something like 200 seedlings were raised by the late Lionel Fortescue at the
Garden House, Buckland Monochorum, Devon, by making deliberate crosses
between M. lomariifolia and M. japonica. The idea was partly to test the
theory that this really was the parentage of Charity and partly to find out
if he could produce something different and possibly better.
The theory was proved correct and some seedlings of great merit were
obtained, a few of which were named and two of which, Buckland and Lionel
Fortescue, are available fairly readily.
Finally, the Slieve Donard Nursery in Northern Ireland, the area where the
accidental cross occurred (although this was not the nursery from which Sir
Eric Savill got his plant) also made the cross by hand and gave the name
Winter Sun to what it considered the best seedling. This, too, is available
from a number of shrub nurseries.
Unlike M. japonica, which spreads and sprawls, Charity and its man-made
cousins all grow rather stiffly erect and get to look a little gaunt with
age. But they respond well to pruning in spring and this can be done to keep
them shorter and make them bushier. My own plant has been shortened once and
is now about 9 ft high with many fine flower clusters.
As usual, the first rhododendron to flower in my garden this year was R.
nobleanum. (This is also a hybrid between R. arboreum and R. caucasicum) but
one that has been made deliberately and repeatedly, the first recorded cross
being in 1829. Because of this multiplicity of breeding, with each cross
probably made between parents that were a little different, there are many
variations on the hybrids themselves.
Not that you will find it easy to buy plants of R. nobleanum. Even the Plant
Finder is able to list only nine sources; but one of them is the great
private woodland garden, Leonardslee in Sussex, which has a small nursery.
Inquiries can be sent to Leonardslee Garden, 1 Mill Lane, Lower Beeding,
West Sussex.
Rhododendrun nobleanum has small clusters of funnel-shaped, rose-pink
flowers which pale to white at the throat. For display, it cannot stand
comparison with the splendid Hardy Hybrids that flower in May and early
June, but it is a cheering sight on a winter's day when there is nothing
remotely like it in flower.
Viburnum farreri is flowering exceptionally well this winter and I rate it
ahead of its offspring, V. Dawn, because the stems are more slender and
flexible and the flower clusters, although smaller, are more numerous and
make, I think, a prettier display. They are apple-blossom pink, paling to
white with age, and are scented sweetly; but, on this score, I think there
is little to choose between the species and its offspring. The individual
flower clusters of Dawn are, however, at least three times the size of those
of farreri and they start off a strong rose-pink, paling to near-white with
age.
The full story of Viburnum bodnantense Dawn (to give this fine shrub its
full name) makes piquant reading. It is a hybrid between V. farreri and the
more tender but larger-flowered V. grandiflorum, and the cross was made
first in 1933 in the Royal Botanic Gardens, Edinburgh, by Charles Lamont the
assistant curator. But he did not think any of his seedlings represented any
improvement on either of the parents so he did not even bother to give any
of them a name, let alone distribute them.
About 1935, the same cross was made in Lord Aberconwy's garden at Bodnant,
in the Conwy River valley in north Wales, with a totally different result.
The best seedling was exhibited at a Royal Horticultural Society show in
London, received an award of merit and was named Dawn. Years later,
Nottcutt's Nursery, which now has its headquarters at Woodbridge in Suffolk,
made a similar cross, called its best seedling Deben and got an even higher
award from the RHS - a first-class certificate.
The Edinburgh Botanic Gardens had not abandoned its plants, though, and
called one of its seedlings Charles Lamont. Whether it has ever been put up
for an award, I do not know, but there are good gardeners who consider it
the best of the lot.
The happy ending to this story is that although Dawn and Deben are by far
the easiest to buy, plants of Charles Lamont are available from at least a
dozen nurseries. Consult the Plant Finder for addresses.
