FT  30 NOV 92 / Kohl pledges fight against extremists: Israel condemns
neo-Nazism
MR HELMUT KOHL, the German Chancellor, yesterday vowed to combat right-wing
extremism as part of a two-pronged strategy aimed at reassuring the
country's 6m foreigners and restoring Germany's tarnished image abroad.
Mr Kohl, speaking on German radio just three days after the Interior
Ministry said it had banned the extreme right-wing Nationalist Front, said
the 'full force of the law would be applied' against those involved in
attacks on foreigners.
At the same time, the country's main tourist agencies yesterday carried
full-page advertisements in the main newspapers, condemning the attacks on
foreigners, and reassuring the international community that the country
remained a haven and home for foreigners.
Mr Kohl's interview followed a fresh attack on a refugee hostel in the
eastern German town of Eberswalde, in which 18 rooms inhabited by Bulgarian
and Romanian refugees were gutted by fire, and a weekend of anti-racism
demonstrations throughout Germany.
Yesterday, Israel issued its sharpest condemnation to date of the spate of
racist violence with Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the prime minister, calling on the
authorities to 'crush the head of the snake while it is small'.
An official statement issued after a long cabinet meeting in Jerusalem said
the Jewish state viewed with deep concern 'the phenomena of neo-Nazism,
racism and anti-Semitism'. It added: 'The government demands that the matter
be dealt with with the full severity of the law and that everything
necessary will be done to prevent these phenomena.'
The cabinet rejected demands from opposition MPs and one government member
that Jews from Israel and elsewhere should boycott Germany by refusing to
travel to the country. Instead, the statement expressed appreciation for
those in Germany who 'struggle against racism and anti-Semitism'.
But three MPs postponed indefinitely a trip to Germany scheduled for this
week in protest at Bonn's failure to take stronger action against neo-Nazi
violence.
Public opinion in Germany is rallying behind the government's pledge to curb
the rise of the far-right, though Mr Kohl's ruling Christian Democratic
Union and its Bavarian-based sister party, the Christian Social Union, have
been accused of reacting too slowly to extremism.
Efforts to contain the violence runs in parallel with talks by the main
political parties about how to amend the constitutional right to asylum,
which guarantees the right of any individual to seek political asylum in
Germany.
Talks at amending the constitution - which would speed the application
process, and at the same time restrict the right to entry under this article
 -were postponed yesterday.
Mr Wolfgang Schauble, the CDU'S parliamentary leader, yesterday said the
talks would resume on Wednesday.
