FT  24 SEP 92 / UK Company News: Airtours pays Pounds 16m for Pickfords
chain
AIRTOURS, the UK's third largest tour operator, yesterday announced it had
bought the Pickfords travel agency chain from NFC, the transport group, for
Pounds 16m.
Mr David Crossland, chairman, said owning Pickfords would improve the
distribution of his group's holidays, provide it with better market
information and strengthen its presence in the south of England.
He said that if each of Pickfords' 333 branches booked one additional
Airtours holiday a week, it would add Pounds 2m to the enlarged group's
pre-tax profits.
Airtours would pay for the purchase from its own cash resources, Mr
Crossland said.
The deal was broadly welcomed by the City, with Airtours shares rising 10p
to 223p.
'It's difficult to see any major downside,' said Mr Peter Joseph of Smith
New Court. The only reservation might be that owning a travel agency chain
with 1,700 employees would make it more difficult for Airtours to cut
capacity if the market turned down.
Pickfords Travel is the UK's third biggest travel agency chain after Lunn
Poly and Thomas Cook.
Mr Crossland said Pickfords' market share was 7.3 per cent, compared with
21.2 per cent for Lunn Poly and 8.7 per cent for Thomas Cook.
In the 48 weeks to September 5 this year, Pickfords made profits before tax,
profit-sharing and extraordinary items of Pounds 2.9m on commissions of
Pounds 51.1m generated from retail sales of Pounds 387m. It has cash
balances of about Pounds 40m and is understood to have net assets of about
Pounds 9m.
Pickfords sold its business travel division to Wagon-Lits last year,
generating an extraordinary profit of Pounds 5.5m.
Mr Crossland said the existing Pickfords management would remain in their
jobs and that Airtours did not intend to close any of the travel agency
branches.
Senior members of Airtours staff had visited all the Pickfords outlets.
The company had also had a surveyor's report done on each branch.
Mr Crossland said they appeared to be in good condition but said Pickfords
required increased investment in information technology. He did not yet know
how much this would cost.
