FT  07 AUG 92 / International Company News: Reichmanns agree to detail
business interests in full
MEMBERS of Canada's Reichmann family, long famed for their secrecy, have
agreed to disclose all their business interests to creditors of the ailing
family-owned developer, Olympia &amp; York.
A list of assets will be compiled by Price Waterhouse's office in Toronto.
But Mr Bernard Wilson, a PW partner who also acts as O&amp;Y's information
officer, said yesterday that agreement has yet to be reached on a precise
definition of assets to be disclosed. Mr Wilson said he was uncertain when
the list would be completed.
O&amp;Y's creditors have repeatedly voiced concern that the Reichmanns may
control assets outside the O&amp;Y group which could be used to help repay the
company's CDollars 13.5bn (USDollars 11.4bn) debt.
Olympia &amp; York Developments, the holding company, and 28 Canadian
subsidiaries filed for protection from their creditors last May.
Admin-istrators have also taken over the Canary Wharf project in London, but
the company has so far managed to keep its US properties out of court
protection.
O&amp;Y said in a progress report yesterday that, based on a series of meetings
with creditors in recent weeks, it expects to present a debt-restructuring
plan by August 21. O&amp;Y said that it has adopted a strategy of drawing up
separate restruc-turing proposals for each of its six creditor groups, with
the highest priority being given to lenders to specific projects.
Under pressure from the creditors, the Reichmanns earlier disclosed CDollars
71m of assets not directly owned by O&amp;Y. These include a CDollars 4m
residence in Hampstead Heath, London, and various other buildings and
securities in Canada. Some properties and a corporate jet have already been
sold to help pay O&amp;Y's restructuring costs.
The Reichmanns, through their lawyer, earlier objected to the degree of
disclosure demanded by the creditors. But a lawyer for one bank lender said
in court yesterday that the creditors are now satisfied that O&amp;Y is
co-operating with the creditors.
