FT  14 MAY 92 / International Company News: Beer division bolsters SA
Breweries
A STRONG performance from the beer division of South African Breweries (SAB)
helped the consumer goods group overcome severe recession and record
improved earnings in the year to the end of March.
Mr Meyer Kahn, executive chairman, described economic conditions in South
Africa during the year as the worst in 50 years. He said he was 'relieved'
at the group's performance, given the current environment.
Turnover rose 10 per cent to R17.7bn (Dollars 6.2bn). Operating profit rose
5 per cent to R1.82bn, while attributable profit was up 10 per cent at R779m
 -significantly higher than analysts' predictions of flat earnings growth.
The share of attributable profits from the beer division rose to 60 per
cent, or R465m, a 16 per cent increase over 1991. Profit from other
interests rose by 2 per cent to R314m.
Although there was negligible volume growth in the beer division - for the
first time since the 1983-1985 period - Mr Kahn said it was a 'formidable
performance,' given the decline in consumer spending.
He attributed the continued growth to efforts to keep beer prices
competitive against other consumer goods. He said price increases in recent
years have been held to 80 per cent of the inflation rate.
Mr Kahn said the beer division's performance reflected relative resistance
of beverage sales during an economic downturn compared with durables such as
furniture and textiles, in which the group has large interests.
He said private consumption expenditures in South Africa had declined 5 per
cent during the year, reflecting the 'parlous financial condition' of most
consumers, while the 'turbulent' socio-political environment had also
undermined fragile consumer confidence.
Mr Kahn said the level of real economic activity had declined in all the
group's main retail areas. Earnings dropped 37 per cent at supermarket chain
OK Bazaars; by 35 per cent at retailer Amrel; and by 35 per cent at
furniture company Afcol.
Edgars, the fashion, footwear and apparel group, lifted earnings by 5 per
cent.
Mr Kahn said beverage exports had almost doubled in the past two years. He
said SAB would continue to focus on exports, but he anticipated an average 5
per cent annual sales growth in the domestic market. Earnings from foreign
operations were about 10 per cent of the total.
Looking ahead, Mr Kahn said that although he believed the recession had hit
bottom, he saw little meaningful economic improvement before the first
quarter of 1993. He predicted an earnings increase for 1992-1993 similar to
that of the current year.
Earnings per share increased by 10 per cent to 290 cents, with the dividend
up by a similar margin to 130 cents. A scrip alternative was offered.
