FT  25 FEB 92 / Technology: Robots pick up the call - Peggy Hollinger speaks
to a computerised telephone operator
Most telephone operators who work for Colorgraphic, the Leicester-based
direct marketing services group, are devoid of personality, never get sick
or take days off. Nick Winks, chief executive, wants to keep it that way.
Winks is speaking of his robot operators, which are 60 times more productive
than humans. The speech interactive system recently introduced at the
company's Decisions Voice Response subsidiary, based in Bristol, can handle
up to 120,000 calls a day compared with 2,000 taken by a staff of 16 humans.
Speech interactive is the simple term for a system which recognises letters,
numbers and words as spoken by a caller. The computer then matches
combinations of words, letters and/or numbers to a database which provides
information to be translated back into a voice response.
The commercial use of speech interactive systems is gaining ground in the UK
as consumers lose their inhibitions about talking to computers and as the
direct marketing industry matures.
Until recently, most computer voice systems had been the preserve of
business-to-business transactions, says Jeff Williams of Datapoint, which
designs telemarketing software. However, the success of the 24-hour
telephone bank, First Direct - although not a speech interactive system -
has shown that the consumer-to-computer market is waiting to be tapped.
The biggest challenge to telemarketing in recent years has been volume. With
90 per cent of the response to a television advertisement, for example,
coming in within 15 minutes of the broadcast, it is almost impossible to
staff a switchboard at a viable cost. So the answer has been to advertise at
unsocial hours - when most of your potential audience will be asleep.
Yet computer-operated marketing can solve that problem. Everything from
financial dealing to booking holidays could be organised by computer, say
telemarketing enthusiasts.
In Colorgraphic's case, the computer is used to devise packages for clients,
including a car insurance quotation system and charity fundraising. Winks
says his software is at least 12 months ahead of anything used in the UK. He
claims it is even more advanced than anything used in the US, as most
systems there are based on the touchtone phone rather than the speech
interactive method.
What makes the Colorgraphic system unique is its ability to recognise almost
any accent, ask questions, interpret the answers, provide a customer profile
within seconds, and even make an appointment to call back if the lines are
too busy.
Colorgraphic, which handles the calls for client telephone campaigns, can
also gain access to several outside databases at the same time. 'That's
where Colorgraphic has really scored,' says Williams. 'It has written a
sophisticated software package.'
For example, one of Colorgraphic's clients is a leading UK insurer. Within
minutes callers can receive a quote for car insurance by ringing the
Colorgraphic computers which dip into the insurer's own database for the
criteria to compile the quote. The program is due to be launched in the
spring. The cost for such an exercise can be a low as Pounds 2.15, compared
with Pounds 6 using a live operator.
Other services include house insurance quotes, motor advertising campaigns
where a caller can be referred to the nearest dealer, and stock ordering for
retailers where the computer checks credit worthiness, alerts the warehouse
and issues a delivery note.
If the system is unsure of what it has heard, it is able to flag the call
for a human 'verifier' who replays the tape and types in the correct words.
At any stage the system can divert to a live operator if it, or the caller,
chooses.
Developing the system cost Pounds 1m. To leap the accent hurdle, charities
around the country were offered Pounds 1 per phone call to gather a sample
of 500 different accents for each letter of the alphabet and the numbers
zero to nine.
Now Colorgraphic hopes to draw in advertisers and is working on custom-made
software to meet their needs. For advertisers, the benefits of any such
system are in the immediate response: 'We are looking to turn the operation
round, from the TV campaign to the letter in the post, in a two-hour
window,' says Colin Bond, Colorgraphic's business development director.
