FT  30 APR 92 / International Company News: Taiwan clears the air over bid
for McDonnell Douglas business
SOME OF the uncertainty surrounding Taiwan Aerospace's plan to buy up to 40
per cent of McDonnell Douglas's commercial aircraft business was dispelled
yesterday. Mr Vincent Siew, economics minister, announced to the parliament
that the deal had the full support of his ministry.
The uncertainty resulted from the fact that Taiwan Aerospace, 29 per cent
government-owned, would not be able to finance the deal without outside
backing. Although it was clear government funds would be needed, no
assurance of help was forthcoming.
However, the government faces mounting criticism from legislators, who say
pouring up to Dollars 2bn into a financially stretched company is no way to
make a start in the aerospace industry.
The government's attempts to distance itself from the deal culminated in the
resignation two weeks ago of Mr David Huang, Taiwan Aerospace chairman, who
was known to have official and military ties.
Taiwan Aerospace has not begun production although talks are continuing with
France's Aerospatiale over a proposed joint venture to manufacture
helicopters.
If the deal with McDonnell Douglas goes ahead, wing and fuselage parts for
the new MD-12 wide-bodied jet will be made on the island.
Mr Siew said yesterday the government would be offering carrots to private
investors in the form of low-interest loans and tax incentives, and would
seek to finance the deal through state-owned enterprises, such as the Bank
of Communications. However, direct investment by the government is likely to
be unavoidable.
Mr Earle Ho, Taiwan Aerospace's new chairman, says he hopes the government's
initial investment will make up 49 per cent of the total, in order to
improve confidence. 'They could always reduce that proportion at a later
date.'
Mr Ho, well-known in the local business world, is treading a fine line
between the dissenters and the government. His appointment was intended to
give Taiwan Aerospace credibility as a private company, motivated by profit
rather than ideals of national glory.
He was the first to debunk the idea that the Dollars 2bn figure is written
in stone, questioning that McDonnell Douglas is worth Dollars 5bn, as the
price implies.
Before the deal can go ahead it must be approved by the legislature, and its
progress, even in the face of criticism, should benefit from the
government's more clearly defined role.
