FT  22 MAY 92 / Vienna (5): How waste has been cut - Ian Rodger on the
environmentally conscious Viennese
FEW CITY dwellers in the industrialised world are as environmentally
conscious as those of Vienna. The city government, with solid support from
its residents, has in recent years cracked down on industrial emissions and
is slowly turning the screws on car traffic.
Catalytic converters for cars have been compulsory since 1987 and leaded
petrol will be prohibited from next year. Permanent parking on main streets
in the city will be outlawed from next year as well.
Meanwhile, the city has been improving its public transport system, already
an easy-to-use network of underground trains, high speed suburban trains,
trams and buses. On the energy front, it continues to put the emphasis on
renewable sources of power, with a Sch15bn hydro plant on the Danube
downriver from Vienna due to come on stream next year.
However, the city's most impressive achievement in the past few years has
undoubtedly been its attack on rubbish. This attack is immediately apparent
to every visitor because of the ubiquitous different coloured rubbish bins,
each indicating the kind of rubbish you are supposed to put in them, located
at every main square, outside underground stations and on pavements at
regular intervals.
There are, at a recent count, no fewer than seven categories - organic,
paper, plastic, metal, aluminium cans, clear glass and coloured glass - into
which residents are supposed to divide their rubbish. In addition, dead
batteries must be returned to special collection points.
It is all part of a programme begun by the city five years ago to slow the
inexorable growth in rubbish tonnage. It was also aimed to allow the
Viennese, who were known to be ecology conscious, to do something concrete
to help in the cause of a better environment.
Mr Michael Haupl, city councillor responsible for environment, recreation
and sports, is convinced of the programme's success. In 1990, the average
inhabitant generated 299.6 kilograms of rubbish, 11.7kg less than in the
previous year.
Mr Haupl, a biologist by training, says the response of Viennese has been
outstanding. Last year, 180,000 tonnes of waste material was recovered for
recycling, and he predicts the city will be recycling 30 per cent of its
rubbish - the programme's target - by 1994.
This has been achieved without any legal pressure or sanctions on people.
'Theoretically, there are laws, and fines to punish people who do not
co-operate, but we do not think it would be sensible to impose them. We work
at trying to raise awareness in people to motivate them to do it,' he says.
He acknowledges that the city's net operating costs for waste disposal, even
after taking account of revenues from sales of recyclable material, have
risen because of the complicated logistics of the programme. But he suspects
that the increment is only a small proportion of the overall 25 per cent
rise in rubbish levies in the past five years. 'Most of it is for new
equipment, such as filters and scrubbers, and for capital improvements to
the two existing incinerators.'
The most important saving, though, is that the city will not have to build a
new incinerator. Mr Haupl says the city recognised five years that it had to
try to do something to stop the growth of rubbish generation. Apart from the
high cost of building new dumps, it would face strong opposition from
environmental groups to establishing new ones, so it set out to get around
the need to set up new waste-handling facilities.
The next stages of the programme involve encouraging people to reduce their
generation of waste and getting industry involved. 'So far, we have worked
only at the domestic level. We are starting to require large businesses to
set up policies to reduce waste and maximise recycling,' Mr Haupl says.
He also wants to work more on other environmental problems, including the
excessive use of cars in the city. 'That is our biggest problem, in terms of
air pollution.' Already a third of cars in the city have catalytic
converters, but he says progress in improving air quality is too slow. 'The
Viennese are schizophrenic about cars. They are even fonder of them than
Italians, but they want their life to be free of the problems caused by
cars.'
He says he welcomes the presence of Green party representatives at City Hall
since the election last November, because they are very helpful in
counteracting the political strength of the car lobby.
Mr Haupl acknowledges that Zurich has succeeded in discouraging car traffic
through rigid road engineering and severe limitations on parking places, but
he points out that this has led to the emergence of a political party in
Switzerland that favours easing controls on cars.
Another problem that is hard to deal with is caused by dogs. Vienna has
about 100,000 of these, relatively high by European standards. 'It is not a
problem of dogs, but of dog owners. They think there should be a city
official walking along behind them picking up after their dogs,' he says.
The city tries its best, frequently replacing sand in park sand boxes and
creating places for dogs to do their business, but it seems to be a losing
battle.
Still, the Viennese are proud of their record on the environment, so much so
that they fear joining the European Community on the grounds that EC
standards are lower than Austrian ones.
Mr Haupl dismisses this view as too simplified. In controlling air
pollution, Austria is more advanced than the EC, but the EC's water
standards are higher than Austria's. 'In any event, the EC regulations do
not prevent you from exceeding their standards.'
