FT  11 APR 92 / International Company News: Westinghouse suffers 6% decline
in net income
WESTINGHOUSE Electric, the US conglomerate which has been hit hard by poor
real estate investments, yesterday reported a 6 per cent drop in
first-quarter net income, excluding accounting changes.
However, at the operating level the company managed a 24 per cent
improvement, which Mr Paul Lego, the chairman, said partly reflected a
cost-reduction plan launched late last year.
He added: 'While some of our businesses are recording slight improvements in
order rates, most of our businesses are late (economic) cycle and have yet
to experience increased order activity.'
Net income totalled Dollars 92m, or 27 cent a share, on revenues of Dollars
2.83bn, compared with Dollars 98m, or 34 cents, in the same period of last
year on revenues of Dollars 2.78bn.
However, after adopting new standards of accounting for retirees' health
benefits and taxation, the company reported a loss of Dollars 246m, or 72
cents a share.
The operating profit was Dollars 194m, up from Dollars 157m, and the
operating profit margin rose from 5.7 per cent to 6.9 per cent.
However, the company's 'other income' line decreased sharply, from Dollars
41m last year to just Dollars 7m.
The company's troubled financial services unit, the centre of its real
estate problems, recorded net income of Dollars 4.2m, compared with Dollars
21.2m last year. The sharp decline reflected an increase in non-earning
assets and the sale of certain assets.
The subsidiary, which is trying to reduce sharply its property portfolio,
said it had disposed of assets for about Dollars 400m of cash during the
quarter, and deals in the pipeline would increase the total to Dollars 500m.
Westinghouse's broadcasting business produced a higher operating profit, due
mainly to cost improvements, on flat revenues.
The electronics segment saw a substantial rise in profits, thanks to cost
controls and increased revenues.
Revenues at environmental services dipped slightly but profits rose because
of cost reductions and additional incinerator income.
The industries segment produced a significant rise in operating profit but
Knoll, the office furniture group, saw a dip, due primarily to deteriorating
construction markets in Europe.
