FT  24 FEB 92 / Nato will ask former Soviets to join council
NATO is inviting all but one of the former Soviet republics to join its
Co-operation Council in one of the most striking steps towards closer
east-west relations since the end of the Cold War.
Mr Manfred Worner, secretary-general of the Atlantic alliance, said in Kiev
yesterday Ukraine had agreed to attend a March 10 meeting of foreign
ministers in Brussels and an April 1 gathering of defence ministers. Today
in Moscow, he is expected to extend the invitation to Russia and all other
Commonwealth of Independent States members but not to the troubled former
Soviet republic, Georgia.
'We are turning confrontation to co-operation,' Mr Worner said. 'We see our
main objective now in providing and protecting stability. This is why we
have extended the hand of friendship to our former enemies.'
He did not spell out the precise role which was envisaged for the republics
within the Nato structure, saying only that in addition to consultation and
co-operation, a third aim was the 'exchange of information with as much
transparency as possible'.
Mr Worner said that Nato's top concerns were ratification of the
Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) and Start treaties, adding that
Ukraine's non-nuclear stance should facilitate the implementation of Start.
Nato was also anxious that CFE ceilings should not be exceeded. Ratification
of the CFE is stalled as Ukraine and Russia bicker over their share of the
allotted quotas.
At the weekend, relations between the two republics deteriorated. The
Ukrainian foreign ministry sent Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, commander of
the United Commonwealth Forces, who has sought to preserve a single Soviet
military, a note protesting at his 'distortion' of the Ukrainian position on
the Black Sea fleet. The note questions Mr Shaposhnikov's neutrality and
could foreshadow a Ukrainian call for his dismissal.
Despite these differences, the new geopolitical order was underscored for Mr
Worner's hosts by the timing of his visit. Yesterday was traditionally Red
Army Day, an occasion the old regime celebrated with displays of military
hardware and parades of soldiers.
Mr Worner rewarded Ukraine's efforts to rid itself of nuclear weapons,
assuring the nation that a peaceful Ukraine 'will not be threatened by any
of our weapons'.
Senior Nato officials confirmed that Mr Worner's remark implied that no Nato
weapons are targeted on Ukraine, which has transformed the conventional
Soviet forces stationed on its territory into a Ukrainian army.
Ukraine oil deal, Page 2
European defence, Page 14
