FT  22 JUL 92 / Many historic buildings at risk
MANY LISTED historic buildings and ancient monuments in England are at risk
because of lack of reliable information and slack financial monitoring, the
National Audit Office says in a report published today.
The watchdog on government spending criticises the Environment Department,
which spends Pounds 120m in grants; English Heritage; and other agencies for
a big backlog in repairs and conservation. It accepts that progress has been
made in the presentation of some of the country's leading tourist
attractions.
The report accepts that determined efforts have been made to protect
heritage property by improved listing and scheduling, and the number of
listed buildings increased from 120,000 in 1970 to almost 500,000 in 1991.
It finds, though, that there is limited reliable information on the physical
condition of the listed properties.
English Heritage, established in 1984 to protect and conserve listed
buildings, estimated in 1991 that 37,000 heritage properties, or 7 per cent
of the total, were at risk because they were in bad repair, including 2,400
buildings in the top grades I and II.
A further 73,000 buildings (14 per cent) were found to be vulnerable to
neglect and in need of repairs. There was also concern about the condition
of many ancient monuments.
The NAO discovered that English Heritage did not monitor how far the advice
it gave to local planning authorities was considered when deciding on
listed-building consent applications, and neither were there checks on how
effectively some grants had been spent.
Nevertheless, grants had been successful in restoring many properties, and
costs were found to be well controlled. English Heritage had also secured a
significant increase in visitor numbers, and income had risen substantially
in real terms.
One of the less successful grants was more than Pounds 500,000 for repairs
to Brighton West Pier, one of only three Grade I listed piers in England. A
storm subsequently partly destroyed the pier, which now needs repairs
totalling Pounds 6m.
Among other English Heritage representatives, Sir John Bourn, comptroller
and auditor general and head of the NAO, will be examined on the report at a
Commons Public Accounts Committee hearing in the autumn. Environment
Department responsibilities were transferred in April to the National
Heritage Department.
Protecting and Managing England's Heritage Property. National Audit Office.
HMSO. Pounds 8.75.
