FT  18 AUG 92 / Houston in a whirl as the party hurricane hits
not politically necessarily, but climatically, write Jurek Martin and
Matthew Kaminski in Houston.
Thus it seemed a good omen that the convention dawned with, by local
standards, balmy weather, dry heat in the mid-80s, and coolish nights
perfect for the party-going which accompanies these quadrennial bashes,
regardless of political affiliation.
But it is also hurricane season and, as has been endlessly reported, in
previous years 10 hurricanes have struck the city between August 17-20, the
days spanning the convention. The weather service has discovered an ominous
tropical depression in the Gulf of Mexico.
If it hits, the Republicans could find non-political chaos on their hands.
For a start Houston is a city made for motorists (actually, made only for
motorists since public transport is rudimentary). But it is the
constitutional right of every Texan, and most of the south, to drink and
drive, which means the parties have not been affected.
Not that every party is necessarily overflowing with the demon drink.
Yesterday, for example, the Reverend Pat Robertson, who sought the
Republican nomination in 1988, hosted Pat Boone, the 1950s singer turned
television evangelist, Vice-President Dan Quayle and Oliver North, of
Iran-Contra fame at a 'God and country rally.' As Garry Wills, the astute
observer of American politics, says: 'The crazies are in charge.'
More conventional good 'ole country fun is being sponsored by the National
Rifle Association - '3,000,000 strong and we vote' proclaim the three
billboards that surround the convention site. The association supports a
kind of old west ideal rather than, it seems, the violence and urban blight
to be found in economically depressed modern Houston.
Also there was Charlton Heston, the hero of many westerns, who is now the
gun lobby's pitch man, and Randy Travis, the president's favourite country
singer, who can be guaranteed to sing what Republicans hope to make the
mantra of this convention: 'Forever and ever, amen'.
Still, the Republicans are now, in the late Lee Atwater's words, the big
tent, tolerant of all sorts of opinion. This is why extra-convention dissent
has been confined to a vacant lot across the street from the Astrodome -
where signs had to be approved before coming in. Towering above them is one
of the NRA billboards.
The big tent approach, though, does make for unlikely party bedfellows. It
would perhaps be too much to expect the American Israel Political Action
Committee (AIPAC) to invite Mr Buchanan, Mr Bush's challenger in the
presidential primaries, to speak.
But the way things are going this year it is within the realm of possibility
that Planned Parenthood could invite former Senator Barry Goldwater for
lunch.
The old conservative warhorse has recently taken to warning President George
Bush that his adamant opposition to abortion could cost him the election.
After all, it is Mr Bush himself who keeps calling 1992 'this screwy
political year'.
