FT  06 MAR 92 / PC users braced to meet Michelangelo
FOR millions of personal computer (PC) users around the world, turning on
the familiar desktop machine this morning could be a moment of truth. Today,
the widely feared Michelangelo computer virus is set to strike, wiping out
data files on infected computers.
The level of concern over Michelangelo, however, varies from country to
country and seems to be proportional to the amount of interest the media is
taking in its destructive potential. Michelangelo fever is widespread in the
US and Germany but in the UK concern is muted.
Mr John McIntosh of PC Security, a consultancy specialising in antivirus
software, played down the risks in the UK, saying he expected a few victims
today but not a flood. The level of infection was about equal, he thought,
to the notorious 'Friday the 13th' virus which wiped out records at the
National Institute for the Blind last year but little other damage. There
can be little cause for complacency, however. Viruses have caused damage -
in time and trade lost - measured in six figures.
Those who have yet to take precautions against Michelangelo face the choice
of risking the destruction of files stored on their computer hard disks, or
giving up for 24 hours an essential business tool. Only when the computer is
turned on can the virus be activated. Michelangelo is triggered by the
'clock' inside a personal computer.
It is set to attack today, on the anniversary of the Italian Renaissance
artist's birth. In the US, many corporations, universities and government
agencies have taken the precaution of ordering employees to protect their
computer data by scanning IBM-compatible personal computers with special
programs designed to detect and eradicate the virus.
Although the source of this computer scourge remains a mystery, it is the
latest in an epidemic of rogue computer programs created by computer hackers
that are spreading from one computer to another, primarily via shared
'floppy disks'.
Those personal computer users who avoid Michelangelo face another virus
scare next Friday the 13th. Only by regularly scanning personal computers
for virus infections with the latest versions of anti-viral programs can
users be sure of avoiding the scourge, according to computer security
experts.
