FT  03 APR 92 / International Bonds: Volatility brings new issues almost to
a halt
THE pace of new issue activity in the international bond market slowed
almost to a stop yesterday against a background of volatility in the
Japanese and many European government bond markets.
Traders said that US employment statistics due to be released today could
give a firmer indication of the future direction of US interest rates.
Uncertainty over the prospects for the US Treasury bond market has also
discouraged investors from committing funds to the primary Eurobond market.
Norway's Dollars 1bn five-year issue, launched on Tuesday to yield 25 basis
points more than US Treasury bonds, had widened yesterday to a yield spread
of around 28 basis points.
Syndicate officials said a fall in US Treasury bond yields since the deal
was launched had contributed to the widening yield spread, although some of
the paper remained on the books of underwriters.
Elsewhere, new issue activity was restricted to specialist equity-linked
issues. Jardine Strategic Holdings, the Hong Kong quoted holding company for
the Jardine agriculture to banking interests, launched a Dollars 200m issue
of undated convertible preference shares.
The issue, lead managed by Jardine Fleming, pays a fixed dividend of 7.5 per
cent and will be convertible into ordinary shares at a 16 to 18 per cent
premium to the share price when the deal is priced next week.
Unlike most convertible bonds, the preference shares do not have a
redemption date, although the paper can be bought back - or called - by the
company after five years. However, if the call is not exercised, the only
exit for investors is via conversion into ordinary shares.
The ordinary shares currently yield 3.9 per cent on the Hong Kong Stock
Exchange. Participants in the transaction said the paper appealed to equity
investors keen to pick up a high cash yield. Many of the buyers were
continental European and US equity fund managers with no specialist interest
in the Far East. The scope of JSH's interest make its shares an easy route
to exposure to many Asian markets.
SASIB, the Italian industrial group, priced its unusual L65bn five-year
convertible issue launched on Monday via Lehman Brothers International.
The paper carries a coupon of 9 1/4 per cent and converts into SASIB savings
shares at L5,100, a small 3 per cent premium over yesterday's share price.
Like the Jardine Strategic issue, the bonds were seen as a high-yielding
proxy for equity investment. SASIB's savings shares currently yield 5 per
cent. The paper is mandatorily convertible into equity after five years.
