FT  23 JAN 92 / Technology (Software at Work): Recovering well after surgery
 -Continuing a series on getting the most out of software, Claire Gooding
visits Glan Clwyd Hospital to see IT under medical supervision
Innovation in information technology is not often associated with Britain's
National Health Service. Yet the NHS is Europe's largest employer and a good
deal more complex than any commercial business.
Despite the undoubted quality of its IT staff, computerisation has an
unhappy history in the NHS. Since the late 1960s healthcare professionals
have had to submit data to centralised systems. They resent the paperwork,
see no benefits from their toil and distrust the statistics that result.
In January 1989 the government's Working for Patients white paper focused
attention on the cost and efficiency of health services, posing questions
that had never been raised before. It also put aside a large budget for
information systems to support the changes.
Glan Clwyd Hospital, on the North Wales coast not far from Rhyl, is the
Welsh 'pilot site' for implementing this change of culture. It is a pioneer
in the field of information systems and what, in the commercial world, would
be termed 'change management'.
Clwyd was one of six early sites designated to develop its own systems for
Resource Management (RM), an experiment now extended to 50 more UK sites.
The aim of RM is to improve the organisation, as explained by Roger Dunshea,
Clwyd's general manager of surgery, an ex-nurse and self-confessed 'IT
ignoramus', who was involved in the project from the start.
'RM is about working with consultants to bring them into the management
process, from procurement onwards. It must involve them. I have to encourage
them to focus their thinking on non-clinical matters such as cost and
planning.'
Newly-developed Hospital Information Systems and RM systems emphasise
measurement: it is not possible to deliver efficiency, increase throughput
or adjust budgets without first being able to measure all those elements.
Gren Kershaw, the unit general manager, says Clwyd made a strong bid to the
Welsh Office to become the one RM pilot site allotted to Wales. 'They chose
us because we demonstrated a deep interest in using information to improve
patient care and the way we manage hospital services.'
David Thomas, a consultant gynaecologist and obstetrician, is also the Clwyd
project leader. Long interested in management issues, he has given up some
clinical time to the project but still keeps all his operating and on-call
commitments. 'We were able to demonstrate a close relationship between staff
and management' he says. 'And we had enough committed clinicians to make it
work.' No decisions will be made on the experiment until the end of 1992,
but if it is accounted a success Clwyd's work solution is likely to be
adopted elsewhere.
Thomas is concerned that healthcare professionals and others often
misunderstand both the motives for collecting information, and the data
itself. 'A good example is beds. We had 930 beds in 1983 and we now have
700, but there's been a huge increase in patients treated each year, partly
because the length of stay has gone down, from eight days to
five-and-a-half,' he says.
'In the past, we haven't known what the costs are, or what the implications
are of using one treatment rather than another. Some healthcare
professionals worry about a hidden agenda, even feel it's an attack on their
professionalism. But information is for identifying good clinical practice,
not for undermining health services or attacking doctors.'
Kershaw claims his team has achieved some quantifiable results in 18 months,
delivering useful information for clinicians and managers.
Clwyd's approach has been pragmatic. First, it has concentrated on creating
operational systems which would be useful to the end-users in such tasks as,
for example, delivering the results of blood tests.
The management information has been derived merely as a by-product of
day-to-day activities, a point stressed by everyone involved.
Second, it has bought in packaged solutions, and made them work with a
variety of existing systems, aiming for 'interoperability' of disparate
systems. Open systems, under which all new systems would run under a common
operating system such as Unix, has arrived too late for the NHS. A couple of
Clwyd systems are Unix-based: communications experts are still linking the
older proprietary systems into the patchwork.
Last, but most important, was the effort Clwyd put into involving the staff.
A total of 11 'task teams' were set up to consult colleagues. Nurses,
consultants and secretaries were among those who contributed ideas to the
Patient Administration System (PAS). 'We had to proselytize, inform and
educate,' explains Dunshea. 'The fear of IT had to be removed.'
There were meetings with hundreds of staff, many of whom had never used a
keyboard, and needed reassurance that their lack of expertise could not ruin
the system. Newsletters, site visits and demonstrations were all part of the
effort.
Four IT providers were invited to tender in September 1989, all according to
strict procurement rules. Some of the offerings were too oriented to the US,
where the emphasis is on billing and profit, not care and efficiency.
McDonnell Douglas won the deal on Clwyd's 'scoring system', and supplied
several new systems, including PAS and the Order Communication System (OCS),
plus 24-hour facilities management. These also had to be linked with other
systems such as office automation.
Systems manager Joyce Hall, a former ward sister, took charge of the OCS.
She set out to test the viability of the system as a key element in Clwyd's
'operational' strategy, describing OCS as the 'glue' for all other systems.
'The exercise forced us to look at current working practices. It's not about
computers, it's about managing resources based on proper information,' she
states. Now, transactions - for instance, orders for blood tests - are keyed
in by the people concerned at source, and results are instantly available
from any terminal, cutting down on paperwork. The OCS extends beyond the
hospital itself to family doctors, who have access to test results and
similar information via PCs linked into the hospital.
'A by-product of the OCS is that the information gained can be used to build
up patient profiles, and compare that information across different
specialities. Any shop or manufacturer can tell you the cost of any product
and its components. To my knowledge no one in the NHS can do that as yet:
that's what we'll be able to do.'
Mick Webb, the director of information services, agrees that the primary aim
of RM is to support the operational processes, benefiting the clinicians in
their day-to-day tasks. He sees the information coming full circle, from
operational to management information, feeding back, eventually, into
operational and clinical practice.
'Because it is recording day-to-day activities we can react more quickly,
plan for the future, and see trends. In the past it would have taken two or
three months: now we can see at the end of the week what resources a
patient, or specific group of patients, consumes,' says Webb.
'We think we're at the leading edge in operational terms, even if we're
using long-established systems. We firmly believe what we're doing here will
be of direct benefit to the patients, the care providers and the management:
that's putting things in the right order,' he adds.
Thomas already finds the new systems valuable, and wants others to see the
benefits. 'What I can do now is to get a good idea of the resources I need
for a particular treatment at patient level. The hospital is using
Diagnostic Related Groups with the aim of comparing costs with other
hospitals in other parts of the country. We can find out what works; see how
one consultant manages hysterectomies more effectively than others, and put
those techniques to work.'
Kershaw concludes: 'We still have a long way to go to involve everybody, and
we're not there yet. It's relatively new in a complex world. What we've done
so far is successful, but we must continue driving it hard to get the
benefits.'
The series will continue on the Technology page next month. The Quarterly
Review of Software at Work will appear on March 19.
BUZZWORDS
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT involves healthcare professionals in management
decision making.
PATIENT ADMINISTRATION SYSTEMS record patient andtreatment details.
HOSPITAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS provide management information.
DIAGNOSTIC RELATED GROUPS are 'patient care profiles' for specific
treatments, for example, for a broken leg.
CONSULTANT'S CRITIQUE
THE CHANGES in the NHS have struck deep into the corporate culture. New
techniques and treatments mean that the expectations of patients have been
raised. Heart transplants, for example, have moved from the pages of science
fiction to those of local newspapers.
With finite financial resources the NHS has had to look at efficiency. It
now matters how much treatments cost and whether they are effective. But the
infrastructure does not yet exist and there are decades of established
practice to be overcome. In most cases, there is no means of assessing the
problem, let alone producing solutions.
It is in this context that we need to examine the Clwyd study. The issue is
not so much a computer system as a revolution in working methods. Happily,
Clwyd Hospital has avoided many of the pitfalls of earlier systems. The team
has recognised the need to involve all levels of people in the
implementation.
It has wisely gone for a set of small solutions rather than a grand design.
This has introduced a number of interoperability problems but these are
easier to overcome then the difficulties which accompany the
all-encompassing systems. Grand systems have a habit of becoming
over-complex and never working at all. It is much easier to steer a moving
Lada than a pile of Rolls-Royce parts.
I liked the focus on getting the most useful things working first. Too
often, the order of implementation is left to the programmers who implement
the areas which interest them most.
The Clwyd approach ensures that users get value from the system early on.
This generates goodwill for the inevitable snags.
It has also allowed the team to draw in outsiders such as family doctors who
are an essential part of the referral mechanisms. They too are more likely
to co-operate with form filling if they can see improvements in their own
practices.
The author is a consultant with Software Design and Construction, of Milton
Keynes
HEALTH AUTHORITY CLWYD
COMPANY SNAPSHOT
Glan Clwyd Hospital is a 700-bed District General Hospital outside Rhyl,
North Wales.
NATURE OF BUSINESS:
Healthcare, treating 32,500 in-patients per year, and 175,000
out-patients, including accident and emergency.
ANNUAL BUDGET:
Pounds 42m, of which 1-1.5 per cent spent on Resource Management
information technology.
EMPLOYEES:
2,100 including 60 consultants.
TECHNOLOGY FILE
Clwyd in an example of interoperability, tying together disparate systems.
It used tight contract and project management techniques to keep the project
within time and on budget, and also drew on the technical expertise of the
Welsh Health Common Services Authority for the initial specification.
SOFTWARE AND INSTALLATION DETAILS:
From McDonnel Douglas, on Reality Series 19, installed since March 1990:
Minimum Data Set statistics and contracts for reporting;
Patient Administration System, used by ward staff to admit patients
(June 1990); Inpatient and Waiting List (Sept 1990); Order
Communications and Results (February 1991), which links all wards,
secretaries, and some family doctors to laboratories and departments;
Case note Tracking and medical records.
OTHER SYSTEMS INCLUDE:
Wordperfect 5.1 word processing; Case Mix, set up in Oct 1990 to
accept input from PAS, OCS and older systems for general ledgers
and finance; Orsos Theatre Management from Atwork was linked in July
1990 to feed PAS details to theatre.
SUPPLIER:
McDonnel Douglas Information Systems won the prime contract in
December 1989 using a Pick-based multi-user operating system.
MDD to supply systems on a variety of different computers, and link them
together.
OVERALL COST:
Systems and communications infrastructure was pounds 7m including
24-hour facilities management for three years.
