FT  31 DEC 92 / Yeltsin and Bush to seal arms treaty at weekend
PRESIDENT George Bush and President Boris Yeltsin yesterday approved the
far-reaching nuclear missiles reduction treaty agreed on Tuesday by their
foreign ministers, and are to meet in the Black Sea resort of Sochi this
weekend to seal the Start 2 treaty.
US and Russian experts in Geneva are completing drafting work on the treaty,
which will reduce both sides' nuclear arsenals by around two-thirds. Mr Bush
described the treaty as 'historic' and said he was confident the US Senate
and Russian Congress would ratify the text.
'In my view, this treaty is good for all mankind,' he said yesterday before
flying to Somalia, where he will spend the new year with US troops.
To reach the final compromise, both sides gave ground on three sticking
points:
The US let Russia keep 90 of its 154 silos protecting its massive SS-18
missiles, which are to be eliminated. The silos will be modified to house
other smaller missiles, sparing Russia the expense of destroying one set of
silos and building another.
Russia may also convert 105 of its 170 multiple-warhead SS-19s to single
warhead missiles. The US will itself be keeping Minuteman III missiles
downloaded to only one warhead. Again, this agreement saves Russia the
expense of destroying its SS-19s and having to develop a new missile system,
since its only other single warhead, silo-based missiles are the elderly
SS-11s and SS-13s. The US will be allowed to maintain its B-1 aircraft as
conventional bombers, to be converted to carry nuclear weapons when its
B-52s, built in the 1960s but still going strong, wear out some time in the
next century.
The talks involved broad principles of parity, security and cost, masked in
intricate details of how much concrete to pour into a silo and what parts of
a bomber could be shrouded during an inspection.
Russia accepted stiff cuts in land-based missiles, where it was strongest.
The US similarly gave ground on its submarine arsenal, leaving the US with
an advantage in airborne nuclear missiles - especially acute if Ukraine and
Kazakhstan insist on keeping the Bear and Blackjack bombers based on their
territory.
Ukraine is now the focus of US nuclear diplomacy, as President Leonid
Kravchuk has so far failed to follow through his promise to make his country
a non-nuclear state.
Start 2 builds on the framework of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty
signed in 1991. It allows the US and Russia to deploy no more than 3,000 to
3,500 strategic nuclear warheads by the year 2003, with a separate limit of
1,750 warheads deployed on submarine-launched missiles and a ban on the use
of multiple warheads, known as Mirvs, on land-based missiles.
Apart from the rushed timing, before Mr Bush steps down as president, the
summit is unusual for its location. Sochi, Russia's most prized Black Sea
resort, is next to some of the fiercest war zones in the former Soviet
Union. Less than 60 miles south along the Black Sea coast, for example, is
Georgia's Abhazia region, where separatists are fighting the troops of Mr
Eduard Shevardnadze, the Georgian leader who as Soviet foreign minister was
the architect of previous important arms treaties with the US.
Yeltsin urges Russians to rely on their wits, Page 2
