FT  25 JUL 92 / Minding Your Own Business: Warships of the world keep an old
salt afloat - Keith Wheatley meets a sailor who turned to publishing
LIFE comes through the letterbox when you are in the mail-order business.
'We've got customers in the House of Lords and quite a few in prison. The
latter always seem to pay cash, which endears them to me,' says Mike
Critchley, a former minesweeper captain who now skippers Maritime Books. It
is the only specialist postal source for books on warships, especially the
Royal Navy.
To the non-specialist eye, Critchley's list appears to have been written by
Spike Milligan. Is there really a market for Minesweepers of the Royal
Canadian Navy 1938-45? Or Lloyd's Losses (WWII) Vol 2 at Pounds 75? The
rising Pounds 250,000 annual turnover of Maritime Books suggests there is.
The key to the business is a database of 18,000 customers built up since
Critchley's launch in 1979. He sends them regular mail-shots with special
offers, and nearly a quarter pay a further Pounds 12 a year for Warship
World, a newsletter run by Maritime Books and featuring its new lines.
'I stole the idea from Habitat years ago,' Critchley admits. 'I was furious
that my wife had paid Pounds 1.50 for a catalogue which was largely their
advertising. But it works.'
Aged 46, with a light beard and a quick wit, he could have inherited Jack
Hawkins' role on the bridge of any warship if the British film industry
hadn't sunk. He left the RN in 1978 after a conventional and successful
career. A year later, he surfaced as the harbourmaster at Looe, a small port
in east Cornwall.
To help pass the time, he compiled a small, soft-back picture book called
British Warships and Auxiliaries 1979. It was aimed at trippers, yachtsmen
and small boys - anyone, in fact, who would not want to pay Pounds 50 for
Janes Fighting Ships. 'Of course, no one wanted to publish it, so vanity led
me to do it myself,' says Critchley. 'We sold 18,000 copies at Pounds 1.20
which didn't seem too bad, so I left Looe and decided to go into books.'
He still lives only 10 miles from Looe, just outside the small market town
of Liskeard. The business is based in the grounds of his home where an
extended small bungalow houses more than 100,000 volumes. Every title on
offer is in stock and there is no middleman between customer and publisher.
'Most of them would take three weeks to get it to you. I don't know how
they're still in business,' snorts Critchley. 'If the customer phones you
with his Access or Visa number, he wants the book there in a couple of days
 -maximum.'
For most booksellers, stock is a nightmare, with inventories worth many
thousands of pounds tied up month after month on the shelves. Having no bank
or other debt - a matter of policy since day one - Critchley says he has no
clear idea what his stock is worth. 'It's a conversation I have every year
with my accountant. What's the value of eight tons of the 1990 edition of
Janes Fighting Ships? Probably zero, if I give up or go out of business.'
Nevertheless, he says that in 13 years he has never had to dump a book,
although some take longer to sell than others. He admits, though, that he
makes many of his buying decisions by 'seat of the pants instinct' rather
than analysis.
At present, Maritime Books has 30 titles in print. Some have been hugely
successful, but the naval sector is declining. Critchley finds great
creative satisfaction in commissioning and creating a book but explains:
'We're down to two or three a year now. We're getting enough offers to buy
Pounds 20 books for 70p that it's so much easier to market those than have
all the grief and heartache of publishing your own.'
The high median price of these specialist titles means that the average
spend is probably in excess of Pounds 30 a transaction, far more than the
average high street bookshop. 'The marketing is what it's all about,'
Critchley emphasises. 'Once you've got a customer on the database, you can
sell him something every six months.'
The company has a full-time sales manager, Roger May, and two part-time
workers helping with packing and despatch. Salaries (including Critchley's)
total around Pounds 60,000 a year. 'I'm sorry it's so imprecise but, if
there's anything left, we buy more books,' he says. Postage is the next
biggest item, costing more than Pounds 15,000 a year.
Critchley's favourite customers are overseas, nearly a thousand of them.
'They spend more because, if you're in Bulawayo, you can't exactly pop down
to Dillons, can you?' One entire corner shelf of Maritime's office is
stacked with books for which the Japanese owner has paid but does not want
posted. He has been threatening for years to collect them; Critchley is
itching to meet him.
His own foibles extend to 'owning' a frigate and a submarine. As project
director of the Warship Preservation Trust - comprising HMS Plymouth and the
submarine Onyx, both lying at Birkenhead and open to the public - Critchley
has found himself running his business from the motorway linking Merseyside
with the West Country.
'Somehow,' he reflects, 'I've also bought a lightship.' The intention
originally was to house a retail outlet for Maritime Books in the former
Trinity House vessel. 'It's proved very difficult to find the right berth,'
Critchley explains.
There is only one cloud on view from the bridge of Maritime Books. 'Our only
real problem is that there were a hell of a lot of people went into the RN
during the War and they're now dying off. That customer base is shrinking.'
Besides which: 'Peace is breaking out all over the world and warships are
not a sexy subject. More people now serve in Boots the chemist than the
Royal Navy.'
