FT  23 SEP 92 / Pressure rises on Rome to ease austerity measures
ITALY'S three main trade union confederations yesterday began the first of a
series of regional four-hour general strikes in an attempt to force the
government to soften the impact of higher taxes and social security cuts
proposed in the 1993 budget.
The decision to go ahead with the strikes came despite a meeting on Monday
between union leaders and Mr Giuliano Amato, the prime minister. Mr Amato
appears determined to take a tough line with the unions over demands for
changes in the budget.
The strike in Tuscany, called by the CGIL, CISL and UIL, was widely
observed.
However, it revealed the growing divide between moderates and militants in
the CGIL, the largest confederation formerly dominated by the communists.
Mr Bruno Trentin, the CGIL leader, was barracked and bombarded with coins
and tomatoes at a mass meeting in Florence by a well-organised group of
demonstrators accusing him of betraying the trade union movement.
Mr Trentin has only just been reconfirmed as CGIL secretary-general after
handing in his resignation at the end of July to head off criticism for
signing an agreement with the government and employers abolishing the system
of indexed wages.
In the past few days he has been walking a tight-rope, appeasing grass-roots
protest over government austerity measures and backing the prime minister
out of a sense of national solidarity.
Since the budget was outlined last Thursday a number of industrial centres
have witnessed spontaneous stoppages. The regional stoppages running until
September 29 could foreshadow a national general strike to force the
government to water down measures capping pensions, limiting the
availability of public health care and freezing public sector employment.
The government, anxious to head off a possible taxpayers' revolt, said
yesterday that all those suspected of involvement in the country's growing
bribery scandal could have their assets seized, Reuter adds.
'It wouldn't be good to show bribery suspects appearing to be escaping while
people are being asked to pay more taxes,' said a government source. More
than 70 politicians and businessmen are being held in connection with the
public works contracts scandal which began in Milan in February and has
spread to all mainstream political parties. Sanctions for those caught up in
the so-called Tangentopoli scandal were published in the Official Gazette
and now become law.
Leaders of the opposition Northern Leagues, which made big gains in last
April's general election, have called for the rich northern regions of Italy
to stage a taxpayers' revolt.
