FT  08 JUN 92 / Bush adviser seeks clemency for former Ferranti executive
A TOP intelligence adviser to US President George Bush has written to a US
judge to try to help win a lighter prison sentence for Mr James Guerin, the
convicted former deputy chairman of Ferranti, the UK defence electronics
group.
The letter, from Admiral Bobby Ray Inman, marks the first time any US
government official has substantiated Mr Guerin's claim that he worked
secretly with the Central Intelligence Agency and other agencies.
Disclosure of the letter could have repercussions in US political circles,
as well as among members of the board of Ferranti in Britain. Admiral Inman,
a former deputy director of the CIA who is the acting chairman of Mr Bush's
foreign intelligence advisory board, is also a paid member of the proxy
board of a Ferranti US offshoot. Such 'buffer' boards comprising former US
government officials are required by law for American subsidiaries of
foreign companies engaged in classified contracts.
Admiral Inman yesterday denied any conflict of interest between his proxy
board role and his writing a letter that could help a convicted former
Ferranti executive to receive a shorter prison term.
Both Ferranti's US lawyers and the prosecutors are hoping for a heavy prison
term for Mr Guerin.
Ferranti, which only learned of the letter at the weekend, is believed to be
paying Admiral Inman about Dollars 25,000 (Pounds 13,736) a year.
In London, Mr Eugene Anderson, the US-born Ferranti chairman, was last night
believed to be considering a response. Mr Jim Shinehouse, president of
Ferranti USA, said he was only authorised by London to state: 'At this time
Ferranti chooses not to make a comment.'
Mr Guerin, who in 1987 sold International Signal and Control (ISC) of
Pennsylvania to Ferranti, will be sentenced tomorrow after agreeing a plea
bargain in the US on charges of defrauding Ferranti of Dollars 1.1bn. He was
also charged with Dollars 950m of money laundering and the illegal transfer
of military technologies to South Africa and Iraq.
Admiral Inman's letter to Judge Louis Bechtle in Philadelphia is dated April
27 1992 and was submitted by Mr Guerin's lawyer along with a memorandum
arguing for a reduced prison term. It says the former Ferranti deputy
chairman 'displayed patriotism toward our country' during work with US
intelligence agencies in the 1970s.
Admiral Inman, travelling in Germany, said yesterday he submitted the letter
on behalf of Mr Guerin 'because his lawyer asked me to'.
