FT  11 SEP 92 / Mollemann warns of German stagnation
DRASTIC action must be taken to revive the competitiveness of the German
economy, and prevent a vicious circle of stagnation in the west undermining
recovery in the east, Mr Jurgen Mollemann, the economics minister, warned
yesterday.
In a thoroughly gloomy assessment of the state of the German economy, he
called for further tough measures to cut public spending in the west, to
boost transfers to the tottering eastern economy, and insisted that tax
increases could only be considered as the very last resort.
'The economy in west Germany is stagnating,' he declared. 'Most of the
economic indicators point downwards. The expected relief from (increased)
exports is not within reach.' As for east Germany, it was still far removed
from any self-sustaining recovery.
'The danger exists that our entire productive capacity will be overtaxed for
the foreseeable future.'
As the government, opposition, industry and trade unions appeared to be
manoeuvring towards the negotiating table to thrash out Chancellor Helmut
Kohl's proposed 'solidarity pact', further details emerged on the plight of
the east German economy.
The new Institute for Economic Research in Halle warned that the collapse of
eastern industrial production could get worse. The key engineering sector
had been badly hit by the collapse in trade with eastern Europe: in May this
year, it was producing just 25 per cent of its monthly output for the second
half of 1990.
Mr Wolfgang Roth, the economics spokesman of the opposition Social
Democratic party (SPD), called on the German government to make industrial
recovery in the east the highest priority on its agenda. A pick-up in
service industries, retail trade, banking and insurance could not provide
the basis for a genuine economic revival, he warned.
He said the government must admit the full plight of the eastern economy,
and the mistakes in its own policies, to make the planned round table talks
on a solidarity pact meaningful.
Mr Theo Waigel, finance minister, made it clear that the government was
hoping for agreement on an outright wage freeze from the talks, the planning
for which will begin next week.
Mr Mollemann spelt out a string of tax reforms for industry he wanted, in
addition to the corporation tax reform for 1994 announced by Mr Waigel,
which would cut the rate from 50 to 44 per cent.
The trade unions, on the other hand, are adamant that a solidarity pact must
involve sacrifices from industry and the well-paid.
