FT  11 JAN 92 / Arts: Audiences keep faith - Box office takings for 1991 are
on target
IT MUST have been like a rugby scrum on London's South Bank arts complex
last week end. All nine performances at the three auditoria at the National
Theatre were 100 per cent sold out and on Sunday the Hayward Gallery had its
highest attendance ever with over 3,800 people shuffling in front of the
canvases of Toulouse-Lautrec to ensure that box office revenue for the show
topped the Pounds 1m mark.
In the Royal Festival Hall The Nutcracker provided its annual Christmas
treat for children, and the finances of the English National Ballet, with 97
per cent capacity for the evening performance and 95 per cent at the
matinee, ringing up another Pounds 1m jackpot.
So much for talk of the recession hitting the arts. Of course this was a
special weekend and advance bookings in January are ominously blank for many
companies. But against most economic logic the audience for plays and music,
opera and dance, has kept the faith. There is no boom but box office takings
are, in most cases, on target. Indeed they are considerably higher than
during last year's disastrous Gulf War-torn spring, and the lack-lustre,
tourist scarce, summer.
This is especially true of the theatre. When the Society of West End
Theatres finally produces its 1991 figures they are likely to reveal a
decline in audience of around 5 per cent on the record 1990 when 11.3m
people took in a West End show. At the end of August attendances had been 7
per cent down on the previous year. By late October they were 6 per cent
lower and there are signs that the year ended fairly strongly, delivering an
audience just about on a level with 1989.
In fact the West End is in a strange state of suspended animation, a trough
of comparative well being. On average last year 40 West End theatres were
open for business and ten were dark, identical figures to 1990. During 1991,
193 productions raised their curtains for the first time as against 187 in
1990. There were 32 productions of classic plays and revivals as against 31
in 1989 and there were seven new musicals, again no change on the previous
year.
The only sign of caution was a fall in the gamble on new plays, down from 30
to 21. The obverse was the safety first revival of past musical hits, which
doubled to ten. One extraordinary fact, which social commentators might like
to chew on, is that for the second successive year no thriller appeared in
the West End. This is a genre kidnapped by television.
The post-Christmas torpor always kills off a few productions and this year
Noel and Gertie, It's Ralph, and Alan Ayckbourn's The Revenger's Comedy made
premature excuses and left but there are 14 hopefuls waiting in the wings.
Although impressario Duncan Weldon has made a well argued case for the death
of West End theatre, with too many expensive products chasing too few
cautious customers (and there are omens of the Broadway scenario of a few
big hits, mainly musicals, making money while the majority of productions
are certain loss makers), the London theatre is currently alive if not
positively thriving.
This is also true of the subsidised sector, especially the Royal National
Theatre. In the last three months it has made up the money it lost in the
summer when The White Devil and The Miser proved commercially disappointing.
Wind in the Willows did capacity business last month and Alan Bennett's
other contribution, George III, played to 99 per cent audiences. The gamble
on reviving Edward Bond's The Sea has paid off after a slow start and it was
92 per cent sold last month. The RNT is set to score a satisfactory 80 per
cent capacity on its season.
In contrast the RSC had problems in the autumn, notably at its main house in
Stratford where Julius Caesar was scuppered by the critics, but a string of
hits at The Swan and the Other Place produced Stratford attendances of 78
per cent to set against the 70 per cent in London, where the Shakespeare
transfers and Wilde's A Woman of No Importance did well but David Edgar's Dr
Jekyll and Mr Hyde did not deliver the hoped for Christmas box at the
Barbican. Even so overall RSC autumn attendances of 75 per cent are on
target.
It is also better than expected in the concert halls. The core audience  -
 middle aged and middle class - is protected from the worst economic
stresses, and October at the Festival Hall produced the third best
attendance figures for the month in the past 11 years. There is evidence of
horns being pulled in at the restaurants and bars, and independent
impressarios are taking fewer risks, but the South Bank is far from
panicking.
It is a similar picture at the Barbican where box office income is
marginally down. The LSO audiences have recovered after a summer blip but
customer retrenchment was apparent when the annual Christmas performance of
Messiah dropped 10 per cent of its usual capacity. The Barbican, too, is
suffering from the cut backs by impressarios and has unexpected dark nights
in February.
Opera, with the costliest seat prices, is most vulnerable to an economic
downturn. The English National Opera is presenting a safer repertoire after
the gamble of its 1990-91 season, which was completely devoted to operas
written in the 20th century, and it must be glad of its caution. Don
Giovanni and Figaro's Wedding have done the business, although Die
Fledermaus has fallen below target, thanks to sniffy reviews for a fun
evening. Forward bookings are not great but so far this season the ENO is
achieving 70 per cent audiences and is on target to break even.
Audiences, at just over 80 per cent on the year, are higher at the Royal
Opera House but below the levels needed by director general Jeremy Isaacs to
keep Covent Garden in the black. Last season he notched up 90 per cent plus
for both opera and ballet, and planned for the same response. Once again
Figaro is packing them in but Mozart's youthful masterpiece Mithridate has
not turned good reviews into full houses.
Covent Garden took no risks in providing impressario Raymond Gubbay with his
production of Turandot which on Wednesday ended its run at Wembley Arena.
The Opera House received a guaranteed fee and the chance of extra revenue if
the show proved a commercial smash. In the event it epitomised the current
financial state of the arts - satisfactory but not brilliant. Around 80,000
seats were open to offers, and over Pounds 2m committed on the venture. Good
reviews proved the salvation and although a sold capacity of 70 per cent
will not deliver a profit it should provide the lift off to take the
production to lucrative dates in Australia, Japan, and around the world.
