FT  07 JUL 92 / International Bonds: Hanson launches Pounds 400m issue to
pay off bank debts
AN active session in the Eurobond market yesterday was dominated by issues
in sterling, dollars and Canadian dollars.
In the sterling sector, Hanson, the UK conglomerate, launched a Pounds 400m
issue of 10 per cent bonds due 2006, which could set the scene for further
UK corporate financing.
The proceeds of the issue, arranged by Barclays de Zoete Wedd, will be used
to repay existing bank debt.
Few UK companies have tapped the sterling market as many still expect yields
to fall further. 'UK companies tend to take the view that a 10 per cent
coupon at 10 years or longer is expensive,' one banker said.
But expectations of substantially lower rates in the near-term have dimmed
since the Danish rejection of the Maastricht treaty. While most analysts
still believe that there is room for a further decrease in yields after the
French referendum in September, there is a new element of risk - failure to
ratify the Maastricht treaty - which could send funding costs in the
sterling market rocketing. However, despite yield spreads over gilts at
historically tight levels, most companies are likely to continue to wait for
lower rates.
Mr Martin Taylor, vice-chairman of Hanson said the financing costs appeared
'reasonable. The deal (was offered) at only a fractionally higher cost than
our short-term bank debt.' However, the size of Hanson's balance sheet, with
a market capitalisation of Pounds 10bn and gross debt of Pounds 9.5bn, makes
its strategic approach rather different from other companies.
The Pounds 400m deal was fungible with an illiquid Pounds 100m issue, of
which Pounds 50m was repurchased by Hanson in 1990. Although a number of UK
institutions complained at the reopening of a deal which had previously been
partly repurchased, they were not deterred from buying paper. However, the
large size of the deal means that it is expected to take some time to place,
despite surprisingly strong interest from overseas investors, who do not
normally buy long-dated Eurosterling bonds.
A Pounds 200m 10-year deal for the Province of Ontario, priced to yield 27
basis points above the comparable gilt yield, was considered on the
expensive side. The most notable aspect of the deal was that it formed part
of a back-to-back swap with a CDollars 450m 10-year deal for the European
Investment Bank. Given the current poor availability of opportunities, the
swap allowed both borrowers access to a fresh investor base while meeting
their precise funding requirements. The EIB took fixed-rate sterling and the
Province of Ontario fixed-rate Canadian dollars.
Dealers said that the EIB's CDollars 450m deal, priced to yield 15 basis
points over the 10-year government bond yield, was well received. Both the
swap and the deals were arranged by Salomon Brothers. Also in the Canadian
dollar sector, the Tokyo Electric Power Company launched a CDollars 500m
five-year deal, via Goldman Sachs. The deal was considered attractively
priced to yield 48 basis points above the five-year Canadian government bond
yield, and met strong demand.
In the dollar sector, Canada's Export Development Corporation launched a
Dollars 300m seven-year deal and International Telecommunications Satellite,
an agency owned by 124 member-countries, launched a Dollars 200m 10-year
deal, both arranged by Credit Suisse First Boston. Intelsat's debut offering
in the Eurobond market was particularly well received, with the yield spread
tightening to 37 basis points from 40 basis points at launch. Expectations
that the tide is about to turn for the dollar, combined with last week's
rate cut, are underpinning the dollar sector.
If the bullish tone holds, the World Bank is expected to launch its Dollars
1.5bn global bond offering tomorrow for pricing on Thursday. The deal,
arranged by Merrill Lynch and IBJ, is expected to have a five year maturity.
