FT  19 AUG 92 / Nafta sets Mexico on the path to industrial unrest: A push
to raise productivity prompts a union backlash
THE long, costly company lock-out at Mexico's Volkswagen plant, and a strike
by 22,000 textile workers, may herald increasing confrontation between
Mexican management and unions as they prepare for free trade in North
America.
Both disputes are partly over management attempts to introduce new, flexible
work practices. While managers are struggling to improve productivity to
compete with North American rivals, union leaders are guarding work
practices that maintain their power over management and sometimes over their
own members.
Although the VW strike looked to have been resolved yesterday, the recipe
for strife could be repeated as more companies face up to the consequences
of the North American free trade agreement (Nafta), putting President Carlos
Salinas de Gortari's government in an awkward position.
It has strongly supported the business sector over the past three years, and
undoubtedly shares the goal of boosting productivity. The administration
was, for example, almost certainly behind Monday's decision by the Federal
Conciliation and Arbitration Board to cancel VW's collective contract with
the unions, letting the company dismiss dissident workers at will and
re-hire on its own terms.
The company said yesterday that the majority of workers were already
returning to work after management reached agreement with official union
leaders to re-hire practically all workers under new labour conditions.
The apparent quashing of the dispute will send a powerful signal to workers
and unions to accept new working practices, or face the consequences.
However, Mr Salinas is still treading carefully, as he cannot afford an open
break with the official union sector, represented by the 3m-strong
Confederation of Mexican Workers (CTM). The CTM and its all-powerful
nonagenarian chief, Mr Fidel Velazquez, backs the ruling party in elections,
supplies crowds for political rallies and, above all, suppresses wage
demands from its own members. Were the government to break with the CTM,
there would undoubtedly be an outbreak of labour trouble.
The government has thus pursued a cautious labour strategy, trying not to
upset the union or business sector. It has cracked down on older, corrupt
union leaders while encouraging the rise of more 'modern' ones, such as Mr
Francisco Hernandez Huarez, the telephone workers' chief.
But it has done nothing to revise the country's outdated federal labour law,
responsible for many of the costly, inefficient labour practices, in
deference to Mr Velazquez.
The dispute at VW reveals what is at stake. The group is the leading seller
of cars in Mexico, and a principal foreign investor. Its workers are also
among the best paid, and its work practices the most rigid in the car
sector, partly because workers are represented by a relatively independent
union.
Nafta has forced VW to take a tough stand with its union, provoking the
dispute. Under the trade agreement the company will be vulnerable to imports
of US-made cars aimed at the lower end of the market, which VW dominates.
Nafta also forces VW to meet higher North American content rules, to be able
to export tariff-free to the US. The company is thus bringing about 40
German parts producers to set up shop in Mexico. It hopes to introduce
'just-in-time' inventory methods with these producers, which would require
changes in work practices.
In early July VW appeared to have scored a victory when the official union
leaders accepted Japanese-style work groups and promotion schemes based on
merit rather than seniority, already common practice in the 'Big Three'
US-owned car plants in Mexico.
But soon after this a dissident faction in the union, apparently backed by
most workers, went on strike, claiming not to have been informed about
details of the new contract. The dissident workers, apart from wanting to
take over the union, were concerned that new work practices would diminish
the power of shop stewards in the plant, according to Mr Huberto Juarez
Nunez, a professor at the Autonomous University of Puebla.
Similar disputes in CTM-controlled factories have often been suppressed by
Mr Velazquez, underscoring his value to the government. But the cost of this
support is high: the administration is unable to overturn the federal labour
law.
The law makes it costly to dismiss staff, difficult to hire temporary
workers, and illegal to break strikes by taking on non-union workers and, by
permitting closed-shops, forces companies to sack workers who are expelled
from the official union.
'A change in the federal law', says Mr Carlos Fernandez del Real, legal
adviser to the dissident VW union faction, 'would hurt the power of the
charros (union chiefs), and limit their power to control the workers.'
Mr Salinas seems to hope the CTM will be replaced by modern, but supportive,
unions such as Mr Hernandez's telephone workers. This largely depends on Mr
Velazquez bowing out soon.
However, Mr Velazquez, who turned 92 in April and has run the union for 51
years, likes to remind people that his mother lived to 100.
