FT  25 AUG 92 / World Trade News: Japanese beer makers aim to boost US sales
JAPANESE beer makers are hoping to boost their market shares in the US,
Europe and Asia, Reuter reports from Tokyo. At present, Japanese exports
account for only a small fraction of the brew drunk around the world.
Japan's four biggest brewers, Kirin, Asahi, Sapporo and Suntory export about
30,000 kilo-litres of beer each year, but world beer consumption is well
over 100m kilolitres, the Brewers' Association of Japan says.
At the top of the Japan brewers' list of targets is the US, where total beer
consumption and the imports share of the market are both high. While Germans
top the world in per capita beer consumption, the total amount of beer
consumed annually in the US is about twice as much as in Germany, according
to the Brewers' Association.
Imported beer accounted for some 4-5 per cent of the 22.7m kilolitres
Americans drank in 1990. Imports are about 2 per cent of the 6.6m-kilolitre
Japan market.
Overseas, Japanese beer has been sold mainly to Japanese restaurants or
oriental supermarkets, but that is changing. 'Japanese beer is increasingly
popular among Americans,' an Asahi official said. 'Sixty per cent of our
beer (sold in the US) now goes to the local market, such as ordinary
supermarkets and liquor shops.'
Sapporo is leading the way in the US market, aiming at sales of 1.5m cases
in 1992, compared with 1.4m in 1991, Mr Kenzo Sakami, general manager at
Sapporo, said.
Asahi aims to increase its US beer sales to 850,000 cases in 1992 from
700,000 cases a year earlier. Each case holds 12 bottles of 0.633 litres.
Kirin and Suntory have made a link-up with Canadian brewers to make beer
that will maintain the premium image of imported beer in the US but be
fresher on the shelves.
Molson, based in Montreal, is now brewing Kirin beer for export to the US,
where Kirin expects to sell some 1.3m cases in 1992. The Toronto-based John
Labatt brewery started making Suntory's canned draft beer in February, and
Suntory aims to sell 200,000 cases in the first year in the US.
Japanese brewers are also eyeing the potentially lucrative European market.
'With the integration of the European Community, its economy is expected to
grow, and this would lead to a rise in beer consumption,' Mr Sakami said.
Kirin is trying to strengthen its sales in Europe through a tie-up with
Britain's Charles Wells, which will make Kirin lager at its factory in
Bedford, starting in February 1993. Charles Wells plans to brew 150,000
cases of Kirin in the year starting February 1993 and 300,000 cases a year
by 1996.
The Japanese companies are also keen to expand in Asian countries such as
Hong Kong, Taiwan and Singapore, which have low import duties on beer. The
Hong Kong-based San Miguel Brewery, a unit of San Miguel Corporation of the
Philippines, is brewing Kirin beer for domestic sales and exports to other
Asian countries. 'We expect an increase in Asia's beer consumption as its
economy develops,' Mr Samuro added.
