FT  03 DEC 92 / Algeria joins Egypt in war on militants
THE ALGERIAN government is broadening the scope of its battle against
Islamic militants by co-operating with the Egyptian authorities.
The moves come after 10 years of estrangement between the two countries
following Egypt's signing of the Camp David peace agreement and their
diverging positions following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990.
The Algerian government of Mr Belaid Abdessalam has declared 'all-out war'
on the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) which was banned last February after
the cancellation of the second round of elections which the FIS was poised
to win.
The Interior Ministry introduced an indefinite curfew from Saturday with
pedestrians and vehicles banned from streets between 10.30pm and 5am in
seven northern and central areas of the country, including the capital.
Mr Sasi Lamuri, Algeria's minister of religious affairs, visited Cairo last
month. Mr Mohammed Ali Maghub, his Egyptian counterpart, said both countries
were trying to stop the 'export of the Iranian Islamic revolution'.
Two weeks ago Algeria expelled seven Iranian diplomats, having withdrawn its
ambassador from Tehran last winter following an Iranian press campaign
against Algeria. Meanwhile, the Egyptian and Algerian secret services are
known to be working together on ways to control Islamic militancy.
For the Egyptian government the fight against Islamic radicals has taken on
a new dimension since Islamic groups began making sporadic attacks on
tourists in upper Egypt. A British tourist was killed and many German
visitors were injured last month.
After Mr Abdessalam's declaration of 'war' last week, the Algerian
authorities banned FIS-backed trade unions such as the Islamic Workers Union
(SIT) and thousands of private associations which, by late last year, had
virtually become a parallel administration in many Algerian towns.
Around 10,000 or so such associations sprang up in Algeria after riots in
October 1988 broke the Nation Liberation Front's reign as the single ruling
party. Most associations are believed to have been controlled by the FIS.
