FT  05 DEC 92 / Arts: A tale of two Tempests - The ESC and the Ninagawa
productions
THE Tempest is the only Shakespeare play with only one woman in it. Timon of
Athens runs it numerically close, but Alcibiades has two mistresses. In The
Tempest Miranda is out on her own.
That thought occurred to me when watching two separate productions in London
this week. It is not the master key to such a magical piece, yet it must
have some significance. At the very least, it gives added point to Miranda's
famous line: 'Oh brave new world, that has such people in't'. The stress is
on the word 'people'. Miranda has not seen any people before, except for her
father and then Ferdinand, her first love. Suddenly, late in the play, to
see so many other 'goodly creatures' suggests that if there were a Tempest,
Part II, she might start to discriminate.
Here is one area where the Japanese and English Shakespeare Company's
versions of The Tempest overlap. Both draw attention to Miranda's awakening
to the real world. There is another similarity. A central scene in both
productions is when Trinculo, the jester, and Stephano, the drunken butler,
first come across Caliban: not very civilised human beings encountering the
sub-human.
Until this week I had not fully realised that this is among the best comic
scenes in Shakespeare - up to the level of the gravediggers' meeting with
Hamlet. In the ESC version Trinculo is played by Tony Haygarth and, on the
night I saw it, Stephano by an understudy, Andy Hough. Between them they
supply moments of brilliance to an otherwise uncertain production.
The ESC version scores again in that it has a marvellously agile
hermaphrodite Ariel played by Olwen Fouere. There is never the slightest
doubt that this Ariel is crucial to the play: not human, but not stupid
either, temporarily a servant to Prospero, but not, like Caliban, a slave.
Ms Fouere sings, speaks, dresses and walks the tightrope almost to the point
of dominance.
Curiously Ariel is the one part where the Japanese production, directed by
Yukio Ninagawa, falls down. It is possible that my lack of Japanese has
misled me, in which case I apologise in advance for missing the subtleties,
but Ariel here appears like a slightly crippled spirit dressed in a white
sheet who eventually flies off into the sunrise. The part is never central
to the scheme.
For the rest, Ninagawa's direction is as visually stunning as you would
expect. Every part of the Barbican stage is used to the full in a way that
the Royal Shakespeare Company never knows quite how to manage. The play is
set on the island of Sado in the Sea of Japan, which is where the Noh
Theatre was founded and was the place of Japanese exile. It is a natural
home for The Tempest, just as Macbeth has his place among the Japanese
warlords.
The use of music, colour and lighting is of a standard that we seldom
achieve in this country. Note that little patch of sea, always slightly
changing, in the background. When there is group movement, it really is
group movement, and when there is stillness, it is total.
Mariko Fuji is a rapturously attractive Miranda, a young woman waking up.
Where there may be a new interpretation is in Haruhiko Joh's Prospero. At
the start, he is full of Japanese authority (not at all like the more
detached scholar of John Woodvine in the ESC production). At the end, he is
a visibly sadder and wearier man, having launched his daughter on the world.
It is like the dignified abdication of the emperor.
There is a chance to see the Ninagawa at the Barbican this afternoon and
this evening. The ESC Tempest is alternating at the Royalty with Macbeth for
another week.
