FT  01 AUG 92 / Property: House with vintage memories - Some country
properties that have evocative motoring associations
THIS weekend, the Vintage Sports Car Club is holding its annual meeting at
Prescott, the hill-climb course near Cheltenham, Gloucestershire. The event
attracts about 10,000 spectators and the fanatical owners of some of the
world's most evocative motoring hardware.
The Prescott course has belonged to the Bugatti Owners' Club for 55 years,
having been saved from housing development by two brothers, Godfrey and Eric
Giles, who bought the 65-acre Prescott estate in 1937 and leased the hill to
the club at a peppercorn. The first meeting was held on May 15 1938.
The kilometre of winding track that echoes to the roar of engines at full
throttle and the smell of high-octane fuel also is the private drive to the
18th-century Prescott House, which is for sale at Pounds 650,000 through the
Cheltenham office of Humberts (0242-513-439).
Prescott House was the first clubhouse of the Bugatti Owners' Club. It was
rented for many years to the BBC's motoring correspondent, BH Hartley, until
the club sold it in 1957 to Colonel Ian Cator.
After his death, his son sold it in 1985 to Ronnie Bock, a specialist
restorer of T'ang dynasty objects using unusual dentistry techniques.
'I love old cars but I am certainly not a Bugatti owner. I have never liked
them,' says Bock, firmly. 'I have just sold a TR3A at an enormous loss but I
have acquired a 1923 Star, which I shall use for everyday motoring.'
He has restored and modernised Prescott House to make it a very comfortable
eight-bedroom residence with garaging for four cars and more than four acres
of gardens and grounds. 'It must be one of the only houses in England to be
approached along a private race track,' he says.
Another is next door: the converted stables occupied by David Sewell,
curator of the Bugatti Trust Museum, who must hope Prescott House is bought
by one of the BOC's 1,600 members.
Nestling in a valley in Gloucestershire is another house with motoring
associations. Atcombe Court at South Woodchester, near Stroud, is owned by
Victor Gauntlett, former chairman and part-owner of Aston Martin Lagonda.
Offers of Pounds 750,000 are being sought by the Tetbury office of Humberts
(0666-502-284).
This beautiful Grade II-listed Georgian building stands in more than 12
acres of gardens and grounds - including paddocks, woods and lakes - and is
surrounded by farmland. Its impressive outbuildings are in immaculate
condition.
The main house has seven bedrooms but there is a staff or guest wing with
another three bedrooms. The former coach house and stable block have been
converted into garages for at least six cars - mainly workhorses like Range
Rovers and Land Rovers, his more valuable motors being kept in high-security
garages elsewhere.
Gauntlett bought a stake in Aston Martin Lagonda in May 1980 and became
chairman the following year, a post he occupied until he left last September
(although he and Peter Livanos had sold the company to Ford in 1987).
Having founded Pace Petroleum in 1972, which he built up to 500 filling
stations by the time he sold out to the Kuwaitis in 1983, he and Livanos now
are developing a new company, Proteus Petroleum, which already has 140
sites.
Although he owns some very collectable Aston Martins (including the
limited-edition Vantage), Gauntlett's favourite car is a 1929 two-seater,
boat-tailed, 4.5-litre 'Blower' Bentley which still can do 120 mph.
'I'm really a Bentley man, first and foremost,' he admits. 'After all, WO
Bentley designed the Lagonda engine that powered Aston Martins in the 1950s.
I have been quite mad about Bentleys over the years. The three-litres are
lovely to look at, but I'm a heavy metal man.'
So, too, is Keith Schellenberg, who owns a mouth-watering collection of
Bentleys. Since 1974, he has lived on the Hebridean island of Eigg, which
covers 7,400 acres, but a messy divorce led to a judge ordering the island
to be sold.
Knight Frank &amp; Rutley has just announced that Eigg has been bought for
around Pounds 1m - by Keith Schellenberg.
