FT  25 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Brussels denies blame for
American woes
THE US is losing market share for oilseeds in the European Community to low
cost producers like Argentina and Brazil, and this has nothing to do with
the new EC subsidy regime just rejected by a General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade panel, according to EC officials, writes David Gardner in
Brussels.
Brussels has not yet formally reacted to last week's Gatt ruling, but
officials privately dispute the premises of the panel's reasoning, and
question the tactics of the American Soybean Association, the powerful lobby
which induced the US administration to refile the complaint.
EC figures show that between 1985 and 1990, soyabean imports from the US
fell from 7.5m tonnes to 6.3m tonnes, or from 58 per cent to 48 per cent of
total imports. During the same period Brazil increased its market share for
soyabeans in the EC from 23 to 31 per cent, and Argentina improved its share
from 15 to 18 per cent. Total EC imports remained stable - 13m tonnes in
1985 and 13.2m tonnes in 1990 - but the players in the market changed.
Officials argue that US expectations have not been met in a market to which
they have highly prized duty-free entry through a deal struck during Gatt's
Kennedy Round in 1962. The US objective, they conclude, is to dismantle all
oilseed subsidies in the EC, 'but even if they did, it doesn't mean the US
is going to pick up the EC market,' one official remarked.
Though the EC produces significant quantities of rapeseed and sunflower
seed, its output of more sensitive soyabeans is relatively modest - rising
from 347,000 tonnes in 1985 to 1.96m tonnes in 1990, in part because of
Spain's entry into the community in 1986.
Agriculture officials from member states also underline that the US
irrevocably weakened its own position in the EC by slapping an embargo on
its soya exports in the mid-70s during a domestic shortage. This created
security of supply concerns in Europe and opened the gate to Latin American
producers.
The EC had hoped to settle the long-standing row over soya - which along
with wheat is at the heart of the transatlantic farm dispute. To comply with
Gatt's 1990 ruling against its oilseeds regime, from June it proposes to end
discrimination against non-EC producers, pay direct income support to
farmers based on past yield rather than current production, and make this
production more sensitive to market prices.
Brussels wanted an Ecu163 a tonne reference price, based on world market
average of the past four years. It planned Ecu384 per hectare compensation
for the cut, giving farmers an average Ecu768 per hectare based on average
EC yield of 2.36 tonnes per hectare. Payments would alter once world prices
fluctuated up or down by more than 8 per cent. Neither the US soya lobby,
nor the Gatt, are impressed.
