FT  16 SEP 92 / Companies are accused of ignoring hackers
BRITISH business is shutting its eyes to the risks of unauthorised
interference with its computer systems which may be costing it up to Pounds
2bn a year, a report commissioned by the Department of Trade and Industry
warned yesterday.
It said there was widespread ignorance of the Computer Misuse Act, passed
two years ago to crack down on the growing problem of computer 'hacking',
and a reluctance to use the law to pursue computer criminals.
Computer security experts said the report would raise awareness of security
issues that companies were too willing to sweep under the carpet. Mr Alan
Stanley of the European Security Forum, whose members include many of
Europe's largest companies, said companies were still unwilling to admit
that the security of their computer systems had been compromised. It was
therefore impossible to compile a database showing the full extent or cost
of computer misuse.
Hacking involves gaining unauthorised access to computer systems, either out
of curiosity or to perpetrate fraud. Other computer crimes include
programming 'viruses' or 'timebombs' - software which subverts or damages
computer systems.
The report recommends measures to highlight the risks and costs involved in
computer misuse and suggests that the Home Office should consider
establishing a national computer crime unit. It also proposes the
establishment of a directory of established computer security experts.
The report was welcomed by Mr Edward Leigh, the trade and technology
minister, who said the DTI had arranged seminars in London, Manchester,
Bristol and Birmingham later in the year to consult business about the
implications.
The DTI study, carried out by the management consultancy Coopers &amp; Lybrand
in association with the law firm Cameron Markby Hewitt, set out to test
whether the effectiveness of the act was being prejudiced by a lack of
information about computer misuse and a lack of expert advice.
It concludes there is no shortage of computer misuse experts, but their
skills are under-employed because businesses find it hard to identify
'reliable' suppliers of authoritative advice and, in any case, prefer to
deal with computer crime within the company rather than going to law.
The act defined three new offences: unauthorised access to computer programs
and data, or hacking; unauthorised access with further criminal intent, and
changing the contents of computer programs or data.
Dealing with Computer Misuse; inquiries to the DTI, 071 215 5000.
