FT  31 DEC 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Texaco adopts can-do
approach to design - Gary Mead explains why the oil group is revamping its
packaging
The advent of the European single market has encouraged more companies to
reflect the shift towards trans-nationality in their products. The most
immediate way to tell customers - and staff - that you are a multinational
is through product and graphic design.
Texaco is one company which is going through a design revamp, turning a
design hotch-potch of oil products aimed at the domestic purchaser into a
single, unified look.
But the Dollars 1m (Pounds 600,000) which Texaco has ploughed into
redesigning its domestic-user oil range since 1989 is prompted by more than
a wish for cosmetic change.
According to Rudy De Pauw, general manager for lubricants and technology of
Texaco Services Europe: 'The European forecourt market (for motor oils and
related products) is declining at 5 per cent a year.'
Yet although the Dollars 250m European forecourt market for oil and oil
derivatives is in such a parlous state - thanks to both the increased
efficiency of cars and a decline in the number of people doing home
maintainance - it is still worth Dollars 25m a year to Texaco, one of the
five big suppliers.
De Pauw hopes that the re-design of Texaco's domestic oil packaging will
shift Texaco's share from 10 per cent to 10.5 per cent annually, worth an
additional Dollars 1.25m.
De Pauw also believes that another design change will not be necessary for
five years; if his calculations are right, Texaco is thus looking forward to
a total Dollars 6.25m return on its redesign investment.
He says: 'What we are trying to do is get better brand recognition across
Europe, to have throughout Europe a uniform recognition.
'We felt that not only was the previous packaging looking a bit tired and
dated, but also we had a different type of packaging in every European
country, and different styles of packaging even within the same countries.
We discovered through our customer research that people felt our product
ranges had a chaotic look.'
Texaco employed the London design agency Seibert Head to come up with a
design that would tap into a common pan-European feel for colours.
They discovered that black is accepted everywhere as a colour associated
with diesel oils; silver for premium oil products; anthracite for multigrade
oils and light grey for ancillary products.
Certain packaging designs were rejected as not suitable. One plastic carton
shape - rounded at the edges - was considered but thrown out when consumer
research suggested that customers associated the shape more with household
detergents than motor oils.
And the new packaging is not just about looks; part of Seibert Head's brief
was to come up with plastic bottles which pour smoothly and don't glug
unpleasantly over customers' hands and feet.
'What we now have is a range of products designed to look as though they
belong to a family, which we know makes people more attracted to them than
before,' says De Pauw. Furthermore, having a coherent packaging design
reduces the cost of Texaco's other promotional activities.
De Pauw suggests that Texaco will make savings of between Dollars 300,000
and Dollars 500,000 annually, since having the same package designs
throughout Europe means the company will be able to produce pan-European
advertisements with the same look and message for all countries in which it
operates.
In 1993 Texaco plans to return to television advertising across Europe; it
is currently in the process of reviewing its advertising agency account and
options.
De Pauw says that while packaging redesign can perhaps lubricate Texaco's
image, 'it cannot reverse the decline of sales to the home buyer. It's about
getting an extra edge on market share.'
