FT  09 MAR 92 / The past is not what it used to be
This year's budget prospect has inspired too many commentators to take a
hike down memory lane. Memories or histories of the Bretton Woods system, of
the last great debt deflation 60 years ago, of past electoral bribes that
were taken or refused, or of rectitude rewarded or rebuffed, are mis-cited
in support of every conceivable strategy, as the writers suppose. Every
strategy, in fact, except the one or two which actually worked - but we will
come to that later.
For example, here we are back with demand management, to the horror of the
few remaining monetarists. That, as they explain, is what comes of operating
in a fixed exchange rate system, where you lose monetary sovereignty. That
is true as far as it goes, but then that is not very far. The similarity -
that an exchange rate commitment tends to run your monetary policy - looks
striking, but the differences are bigger.
For a start, a system of (possibly temporary) currency blocs is quite unlike
the Bretton Woods system. That looked, while it lasted, more durable than
the gold standard; exchange rate crises were quite rare and very well
flagged. The ERM still looks tentative and the commitment to it a matter of
political expediency. So there is a currency risk premium on interest rates,
even - at the moment - in Germany. The result is recession in most member
states, most of the time. On the other hand, the old system depended for its
stability on controls on capital movements, so the exchange markets were
dominated by current account flows, and chancellors worried about little
else.
Today, their main worry is the possible effect of any dash for freedom on
financial market confidence. They have, in a sense, more freedom than their
predecessors in the 1960s. They also have bigger temptations, given the
deflationary club they have joined, and run bigger, more unpredictable
risks. I doubt that hindsight about the hyper-responsibility of Mr Roy
Jenkins or the irresponsibility of Mr Reginald Maudling proves anything
except that the commentator is probably getting on a bit. My own guess would
be that the markets will allow Mr Lamont considerably less freedom than the
supposedly Draconian IMF would have done in the old days.
This is one reason why a growing group on the right, including the
monetarists but also some Maudling nostalgics, wants us to escape the market
constraints by leaving the ERM. But here there is a useful parallel in
living memory; indeed a cautionary tale. Mr Anthony Barber thought he could
get away with a huge monetary stimulus because Britain had left the ERM Mark
I, known as the Snake. That was a devaluation greeted at the time as a dash
for freedom. Those recommending just the same dash now ought to mention this
health warning.
There is still one respectable-looking argument for recommending desperate
remedies. That is the belief that we are not back in the irksome disciplines
of Bretton Woods, but in the threatening depression of the 1930s. The story
sounds a bit the same - a downward slide punctuated with optimistic
forecasts, a stock market which fell in a series of small crashes separated
by nostalgic bull phases and an economy riddled with debt. For example, Mr
Peter Warburton has recently reminded us that private debt has tripled as a
proportion of British GNP in the last four decades, to reach a level only
exceeded - and that but briefly - in the early 1930s. It all looks very
telling, unless you remember what the 1930s were actually like.
That was the time when cash was king, so that you could pick up Chippendale
chairs for what would be, say, Pounds 20 in today's money. It was a time
when willing borrowers were so hard to find that the government could get
away with refinancing the National Debt at half the then going long rate
because investors had nowhere else to turn. It was also the period when the
Bank of England adopted an official anti-competition policy, godparenting
the formation of cartels and of groupings such as ICI simply to preserve
some sort of corporate sector.
It is not wholly impossible we are heading back to such an era; that, after
all, is the Rees-Mogg thesis. But if we are, it is clear we still have a
very long way to go. Meanwhile the rapidly strengthening recovery in the US
economy, despite fiscal paralysis, a discredited president and deepening
recession in most trading partners, suggests spontaneous recovery is still
possible from today's debt burden. This burden was, you should remember,
built up over years, and mainly to finance consumption and investment,
rather than in a brief speculative orgy. All it takes is a sensible cut in
interest rates.
Could we do as well here? Inside the ERM, it depends partly on the German
sense of timing, but not entirely. Our own Treasury seems to have learned
too much from the false parallel with Bretton Woods and been too timorous
about interest rates. Bigger cuts might certainly have scared off some bank
funds. Remember the Gnomes of Zurich? Not if you are young enough to trade
these days, but the memory seems to be alive and nightmarish in Great George
Street. What has changed from the past is that a cut big enough to help the
economy would certainly have boosted the stock market, and so attracted
longer-term funds. That is why the dollar has been rising ever since it
became clear that the Fed's rate cuts were working.
So what advice is there for Mr Lamont? The situation suggests the oldest and
usually the best advice - make a confident speech, and sit down.
Unfortunately, he has devalued confident speeches. He might be tempted by
the example of the 1930s to do what worked for Britain then and the US this
time, and devalue, but the Barber memory is too recent. Or he could do a
Roosevelt, and pay for high public investment from, higher taxes. But that
sounds like Labour. How nice not to be Mr Lamont.
