FT  04 SEP 92 / Technology: Heavies move in - After years of work in mass
production, robots are taking on bigger jobs
The drive for competitiveness and low-cost production may have made the car
industry the natural home for the world's robot population, but Karlheinz
Langner and his colleagues at IGM Robotersysteme have other ideas.
Langner, a managing board member at Austria's only robotics company, has his
sights set on industry's heavy brigade. Less visibly than their counterparts
in the car industry, but with increasing urgency, manufacturers of heavy
equipment - anything from excavators to steel bridge sections - want to
improve their product quality and reduce cycle times, increase their
manufacturing flexibility and clean up their workplace.
All these issues, in varying degrees, have been tackled successfully by the
mass-production car industry with the use of robots, but heavy industry is
very different.
In recent years, many heavy engineering companies have been reticent about
robots. They may have been put off by the robot suppliers' sales patter or
unconvinced that a robot can cope with welding, for example, a crane boom or
bulk handling container, particularly if each item to be welded might be
slightly different from the previous one.
Or they might simply have jibbed at the expense - as much as Dollars 350,000
(Pounds 175,000) for a sophisticated system with one or more robots, slides,
gantries and devices to rotate a workpiece that could weigh as much as 15
tonnes. And having purchased a system, some customers have had to solve
software problems themselves to get the robot working correctly.
But companies such as IGM, which celebrates its silver jubilee this year,
are spending heavily to find new solutions for the use of robots in heavy
industry, and that, in turn, broadens the market for the robot suppliers.
Some sectors such as shipbuilding, for instance, are only now waking up to
the opportunities for using robots, which were simply not available five
years ago.
Anybody who has visited a modern car factory cannot fail to be impressed by
the serried ranks of robots spot welding body sections or inserting
dashboards. Such machines, however, are worlds apart from those produced by
IGM, which specialises in arc or continuous path welding and some cutting
robots, and its rivals at the heavy end of the welding equipment industry
such as Esab of Sweden and Cloos of Germany.
A continuous weld is the norm in construction equipment, for example, to
cope with the immense stresses to which plant will be subjected during its
working life, and demands for high-quality welding are increasing.
Grappling with the welding of an excavator boom could require up to 16 axes
of movement from the robot and its surrounding equipment, putting pressure
on the robot supplier not only to design the system correctly in mechanical
terms but to ensure that the software and sensor systems are sufficiently
sophisticated and fast to cope.
In such a market, says Langner, understanding the customer's needs is of
vital importance. But when almost every customer has a different problem
that may require a customised solution, the challenge could be too great for
a small company such as IGM, without the years of experience that produces a
clear product strategy.
Each robot supplier has a different approach, but IGM's is based on two
vital elements, says Langner: a modular design system to allow the company
to respond to individual customers' needs without having to reinvent the
wheel, and the decision to keep all control systems development in-house.
Broadening the appeal of robots to heavy industry requires a combination of
developing the business end of the system (the welding itself), taking the
robot's mechanical engineering to the limits, and constantly updating and
improving the control systems.
IGM develops welding systems together with Fronius, an Austrian welding
equipment company - for the customer, after all, the quality of the weld is
the proof of the pudding. The robot supplier recently introduced a new
high-performance welding technique known as Time (transferred ionised molten
energy), developed originally by a Canadian metallurgical expert.
IGM has also developed an automatic head change facility, allowing welding
to be followed by flame cutting in one continuous cycle. This is being used
by a UK customer for welding steel bridge sections.
As in machine tools, however, while mechanical developments near their limit
it is the brains of the robot system - its software and sensors, and the
programming - that is receiving the lion's share of attention. This is where
the acronyms really begin to proliferate.
So-called off-line programming, where the robot is set up for the next job
without disturbing its present task, is particularly important when it could
take many hours, if not days, to start up a new component on a welding
robot.
IGM's latest contribution is IOPS, which uses computer-aided simulation of
production cells and manufacturing lines to get the best configuration of
the welding cell for each workpiece.
Another important result of the company's R&amp;D work is ISIP, a new
optoelectronic camera system for measuring weld grooves. This uses optical
sensors to determine the position and geometry of the fabrication,
underlining the growing importance of vision systems as the 'eyes' in an
increasingly complex 'eyes-brain-hand' environment.
Perhaps the most significant development at IGM, however, lies at the heart
of the robot software. In a few weeks' time, the company will have running a
prototype of a new robot controller based on the transputer, the Inmos
superchip. IGM had realised some five years ago that it needed to have a
more powerful control system, says Langner, and the new controller will
increase control speeds by a factor of 10.
The new control should be on IGM's robots by next year, but Langner also
sees applications for the control outside robotics, with initial demand of
about 500-1,000 units a year, compared with the 150-200 IGM will need each
year for its robots. 'But we will not market it by ourselves,' Langner
stresses.
