FT  11 DEC 92 / Survey of Ecuador (7): Oil policy at centre of a political
storm - Energy
THE NEW government's energy minister, Mr Andres Barreiro, has had the
political spotlight on him since taking office.
He put the case for Ecuador's withdrawal from the Organisation of Petroleum
Exporting Countries and has borne the brunt of public anger over fuel and
electricity price increases. Furthermore, he still faces 'trial' by Congress
which could force his resignation - a threat that leaves oil policy in limbo
at a crucial stage in the new administration.
However, the price adjustments were an unavoidable hurdle in the
government's programme to cut subsidies and rationalise fuel use and as such
have been welcomed by the financial sector. Years of undercharging have left
the main electricity companies with a large debt and Ecuador without the new
projects needed to ensure future supplies. If the rains are unkind and the
change to daylight saving time does not reduce consumption, the minister
will have to take the unpopular step of reintroducing power rationing.
One of the main reasons for leaving Opec was the decision to raise crude
production well beyond Ecuador's quota of 275,000 barrels per day (bpd).
Although output has been 10 to 20 per cent above this level for some time,
Opec has turned a blind eye rather than force the issue and lose a member,
albeit a country that represented only 1 per cent of production. Being in
the organisation also gave prestige to a small nation and fed nationalist
sympathies in Ecuador.
Production is due to increase by 60 to 70,000 bpd during 1993, taking total
output up to about 390,000 bpd by the end of the year. Between 1994 and 1996
another 100,000 bpd could be available but this will depend on the
production agreements reached with foreign companies now developing fields
in the Napo and Pastaza areas of the Amazon region. Oil reserves currently
stand at about 1.5bn barrels.
Some 120,000 bpd are used for domestic consumption and the growth in output
will generate more for the treasury as well as extra foreign income. In the
first eight months of this year earnings from crude oil rose by 15 per cent
to Dollars 804m, mainly because of the bigger volume of exports.
Not one new exploration contract was signed under the last government and
foreign companies operating in Ecuador are hoping for solutions to a series
of contractual problems. 'When they began investing in the mid-'80s they
were expecting to produce light crude at good prices - but instead some have
heavy crude at under Dollars 17 a barrel,' said Mr Fernando Santos, a former
oil minister.
The government is anxious to encourage further exploration and plans to
reform the oil law and change tax regulations. Areas in the north-east
reserved for the state oil company, Petroecuador, will be opened up and a
number of blocks will probably be put on offer in mid-1993, once the reforms
are approved. The north eastern Amazon is close to existing infrastructure
and good quality oil has been found at shallow depths. This area is also
away from the more problematic Indian-occupied areas.
'Ecuador has excellent potential, though the Indian question is sensitive,'
said a foreign company oil executive. 'The pre-Cretaceous has not been
touched but drilling costs would be higher, it is deeper and technically
more difficult.'
Nearly all Ecuador's oil is produced in the Amazon and Indians and the
environment have become high profile issues. Ecological groups have taken up
the Indian banner, campaigning to prevent the development of oil fields in
national parks and Indian reserves.
Conoco, a subsidiary of US group Du Pont, which put out a 'green'
development plan for heavy crude deposits in Waorani Indian territory, left
Ecuador after protracted negotiations had failed to conciliate all the
different interest groups.
Maxus Energy, a Texas oil company, took over from Conoco as operator and is
starting to build a road from the river Napo into the production area. This
is the most controversial element of the project because in the past roads
have channelled thousands of new settlers into the forest and Indian lands.
'The armed forces have promised strict controls so no colonists will pass
along the roads, the agrarian reform institute must not recognise any
settlement of the land,' said Mr Manuel Navarro, head of Petroecuador's
environmental unit.
The Waorani case is the most complicated - the Indians are a small,
semi-nomadic group, especially vulnerable to outside influence and
manipulation. Recently some of the Waorani were brought to Quito and camped
out in front of Maxus' offices until the cold drove them back to the Amazon.
'A moratorium on oil development in these areas is impossible so we must
minimise impact. Now the environmental unit is in on everything from the
pre-feasibility stage,' said Mr Navarro. An environmental audit of Texaco,
which operated in the main Amazon fields for 20 years, is due to start this
month.
The future of Petroecuador and all its subsidiaries is still under
discussion. Parts of the oil industry may be privatised - for example, the
refineries on the Santa Elena peninsula and some of the retailing business.
Big investments in infrastructure are needed, including a new pipeline over
the Andes mountains if Amazon production goes above 400,000 bpd.
But it is not clear how far the government will go on privatisation, given
the strength of the oil trades unions, the convenience of a state income and
the nationalism attached to oil issues.
The electricity sector - particularly the distribution end - is also a
candidate for privatisation in the long term. Three quarters of Ecuador's
generating capacity is hydroelectric, although small thermal plants are
being set up. The Paute scheme, which supplies a third of the country's
power, is threatened by the quantity of sediment accumulating in the
reservoir. Construction of a dam higher up the river to control the problem
has been postponed several times but is now to go ahead, according to the
government.
In spite of a plethora of plans and studies of energy alternatives, Ecuador
has never had a comprehensive energy policy. Natural gas in the Gulf of
Guayaquil remains undeveloped, and extensive fuels such as diesel are used
in thermal power stations. The government has made a start by trying to
rationalise consumption but there is still a long way to go.
