FT  18 JAN 92 / Minding Your Own Business: A basic post modern look
IF DESIGNER labels were all the rage in the 1980s, basics are what the '90s
seem to be about. No more razzmatazz, no more over-the-top glitz and glamour
 -sweatshirts and plain cotton shirts, chinos and singlets, leather belts
and loafers are what the retailing gurus see as the way to fame and fortune.
Who says so? Well, David Krantz, for one; and if his name does not mean much
to you, then Blazer, the chain he founded, probably does.
Blazer started as one shop in Golders Green in north London in 1979. By the
late 1980s there were 25 stores, all purveying a well-bred Anglicised
version of the 'preppy' look that was then all the rage but hard to find.
Blazer's reputation and influence spread. Krantz sold out to the Storehouse
Group for Pounds 5.4m in 1987 and spent a few years enjoying the money and
musing on what to do next.
Basics, sold by mail order, is the result. He chose basics because he
believes that 'people are fed-up with over-the-top fashion. They want
comfortable and reasonably-priced clothes in good quality fabrics and great
colours.' And he opted for mail order because: 'With rising high street
rents and staffing costs, that is the best way to deliver value for money to
the customer.'
This weekend sees the launch of his collection of casual, dress-down clothes
for men and women called Racing Green. In his splendid, full-colour
catalogue there are all the classics we have come to expect  - vat-dyed
cotton twill shirts (Pounds 32), button-down Oxfords (Pounds 35), polo
shirts (cotton double pique, in masses of colours, Pounds 19), cotton chinos
(Pounds 39 for men and women), crew-neck jumpers and so on through the the
staples of most modern wardrobes.
Items like these used to come cheap but now they do not. In one of those
strange evolutions of attitudes, the modern consumer seems to demand more in
the way of quality, finish and detailing from basics than from fancier gear.
There is more snobbism attached to wearing the right pair of jeans, the
just-so polo neck and the real leather belt than there is to party wear.
I am all in favour of basics, and wear them often myself, but, as the
fashion industry makes a synchronised turn away from distinctive, look-at-me
status clothing towards high-quality basics, is there not a danger of
conformity? Can the market-place support so many companies doing the same
sort of thing, no matter how well they do them?
Perhaps this is the time for the sartorial version of contra-cyclical
buying. There are investors who sell as everybody buys, and buy when
everyone sells. The really clever designers could be those who, even now,
are sewing the sequins on their glitziest, fanciest, most outrageous range
ever.
For a catalogue telephone 051-707 2020, fax 051-708 8803 or write to Racing
Green, Heming Way, Liverpool X, L70 1RX. Lines are open 24 hours a day,
every day. Krantz says orders will be delivered within days in a sturdy box
with the clothes wrapped in Racing Green tissue paper.
