FT  03 APR 92 / Day of violence adds to pressure on Moi
KENYA'S opposition stepped up the pressure on President Daniel arap Moi
yesterday as a general strike, called to force the government to release
political prisoners and secure an early general election, kept most Nairobi
workers at home.
Clouds of black smoke hung over slum areas in Nairobi as youths, exploiting
the opposition's call for a peaceful strike, burned rubber tyres, set up
roadblocks and clashed with anti-riot police. State-owned buses and private
cars were stoned and burned to prevent commuters going to work.
Despite the violence about 40 per cent of Nairobi's workforce reached the
city and some shops opened at midday.
Most Asian businesses, however, remained closed after a series of fires
early yesterday destroyed houses and shops in the Asian commercial districts
of the city.
Opposition leaders in Nairobi claimed the action had been a 'huge success'.
Mr Paul Muite, a leading member of the Forum for the Restoration of
Democracy (Ford), the main opposition movement, said in London last night
that the strike would continue today.
He warned that Ford was prepared to mount a civil disobedience campaign if
the government failed to provide a timetable for an early general election,
monitored by observers from the Commonwealth and other organisations.
'We regret the need for such a campaign,' said Mr Muite, a Nairobi lawyer,
'but our calls for dialogue with the government have been ignored. Although
this strike is for two days, the next time it will be indefinite.'
Ford has called for the establishment of an independent electoral
commission, and speedy completion of a new electoral register.
Western diplomats said the day-long clashes added to concerns that Kenya's
transition to multi-party democracy was becoming jeopardised by violence.
Running battles continued throughout the day in the shanty towns of Kangemi,
Kawangware and Satellite as paramilitary police used tear gas and live
ammunition to disperse the rioters.
Several people were beaten by police wielding batons and pickaxe handles.
Yesterday's events mark the continuing threat of a descent into violence of
Kenya's precarious transition to political pluralism.
