FT  02 MAY 92 / How To Spend It: Tying and dyeing in the studio - An
eclectic range of crafts and textiles
LIVINGSTONE Studio is the sort of place you could spend ages in, simply
admiring the craftsmanship and design of traditional and contemporary
textiles.
The white-washed walls of the Hampstead, London, gallery are adorned with
exquisite garments fashioned from fine cotton, linen and Indian silks. An
eclectic collection of artefacts - such as boldly coloured tapestries,
hand-crafted wooden bowls and platters, and individually designed
plant-holders - is scattered about, complementing the clothing. The high
ceilings and many windows enhance the viewing.
For lovers of art and fashion this could well be the ultimate shopping
experience.
There are no shop assistants hovering around - you can look at your leisure
just as you would observe paintings in a gallery. But should you want to
know more about the exclusive range of items, owners Inge Cordsen and Kate
Crosfield will give a guided tour.
'Just look at the traditional tie and dye work here,' says Cordsen,
displaying a pale gold Indian silk dress which appears to be finely
embroidered. Closer inspection reveals no stitching - hours of detailed
tying and dying have produced an amazing effect of design and texture.
For intricate stitching, Cordsen shows off a hand-made silk appliqued
outfit, comprising coat, dress and trousers. Their most expensive item, at
Pounds 1,147, is a delight to examine and touch.
With Livingstone Studio, Crosfield and Cordsen did what they were strongly
advised against doing - opened their doors to the public in the recession.
Last year, the two embarked on nine months of research - including a
three-month business course for Crosfield and five weeks travelling around
India in search of hand-woven silks, antique shawls and colourful village
handicrafts. In October they had their first exhibition.
Their third exhibition, now under way, features their spring and summer
clothes collection. 'Indigo and ivory' combines textiles and garments of
natural colours and dyes, hand-woven cottons and silks, quilts and cushions,
antique English linens and lace. Space is also devoted to the work of young
British textile artists.
Clothing prices start at Pounds 58 for a hand-finished cotton blouse with
hand-made buttons. A 17th century lace shawl costs Pounds 250, cashmere and
silk scarves Pounds 180, a raw silk skirt and jacket about Pounds 365. Some
clothing items can be made to order and a selection of fabrics is for sale.
German-born Cordsen has been designing textiles and knitwear since leaving
art college in the mid-1960s. Customers for her knitwear range - a business
operated separately from the studio - include Liberty's, Harrods and
companies in Italy and Japan.
Crosfield specialises in collecting antique garments and textiles. The
studio's second exhibition featured 19th century textiles and artefacts from
the Sarakatsani nomadic shepherds in the Balkans, some of which are still on
show.
Livingstone Studio, 36 New End Square, London NW3 1LS. Tel: 071-431-6311.
Wed-Fri 10 am-5 pm. Weekends 2 pm-5 pm.
