FT  01 OCT 92 / Lira tumbles on budget nervousness
THE lira yesterday suffered its sharpest fall on the foreign exchange
markets since the Italian authorities withdrew it from the European Monetary
System on September 16 and let it float.
The fall was triggered by nervousness in advance of detailed presentation of
the 1993 budget due late yesterday. Dealers said the market was concerned
that Mr Giuliano Amato's government would fail to show sufficient
determination to push tough austerity measures through quickly.
The lira also suffered from rumours that the government was considering
draconian measures, such as freezing bank deposits. These rumours created a
sharp increase in deposit withdrawals from banks and led the prime minister
to issue a formal denial.
This was backed up yesterday by a circular from the Bank of Italy to the
banks.
These rumours and the public's reactions underlined the volatility of
sentiment. The lira yesterday at one stage touched 890 against the D-Mark
before settling at 878. This compared with the lira's relatively stable
838-844 movement in recent days.
On the present parity the lira has declined in value by 13 per cent since
the realignment of September 12, which was then intended to be a maximum of
7 per cent. The latest figure for convertible currency reserves to the end
of August showed a total of L22,891bn (Dollars 18.7bn), emphasising the thin
margin of manoeuvre open to the Bank of Italy when it faced the turbulent
events of this month.
The 1993 budget is aiming to raise L93,000bn in increased taxes and spending
cuts. On the latest projections this would leave a deficit of L150,000bn in
1993, similar to that of the current year. The deficit is equivalent to
almost 11 per cent of GDP.
The government hopes to achieve a primary deficit (without the cost of
interest payments on debt) of L50,000bn. However, interest payments are
being projected at L200,000bn. The main spending cuts are due to come in the
health service, from capping pensions and freezing public sector employment,
and in reduced transfers to local authorities.
Revenue will be enhanced. The government is proposing a special one-off
corporation tax, higher taxes on home ownership and luxury goods, as well as
some L7,000bn from privatisations - half the ambitious target in the
original 1992 budget. Revenue projections are on the basis of an optimistic
1.5 per cent GDP growth and inflation of 4.5 per cent, which takes account
of the lira's September depreciation.
The budget can be discussed for up to three months in parliament. But, given
the need for Italy to regain international credibility, Mr Amato is expected
to press for early approval in a vote of confidence. In recent days he has
threatened to resign if parliament fails to back the measures or attempts to
water them down.
The most controversial aspects of the budget, already outlined on September
17, is a sharp cut in the availability of free medical care and caps on
pensions as part of a wider reform of the generous state pensions scheme.
