FT  19 OCT 92 / Queen has chance to repair German links
SOME of Germany's media commentators appear to believe that Britain's Queen
Elizabeth is arriving on a state visit today to patch up the unseemly
squabble in Anglo-German relations over who forced sterling to devalue.
Two facts suggest otherwise.
In the first place, the trip has been planned with painstaking attention to
diplomatic detail for the past 18 months. And second, the latest squabble
needs patching up in Britain, not in Germany, where it has attracted little
attention.
For all that, the Queen's visit to Bonn, Berlin, Dresden and Leipzig over
the next five days could scarcely have been better timed to pour some balm
on relations which have been troubled ever since unification.
It was Lady Thatcher's truculent acceptance of German unification in 1990
which did cause diplomatic upset, and which the Queen now has a unique
chance to set to rights with a trip concentrated very much in the former
East Germany.
Queen Elizabeth is hugely popular in Germany, on both sides of the old
divide. She is even called jokingly 'our best German', thanks to her
extensive German ancestry - underlined by the British embassy in the
publication of family trees both for the Queen and for Prince Philip, all of
whose sisters are German princesses.
She is coming for the third time on a state visit to Germany, putting the
country on a par with only France and the US in the British royal perception
of importance - a fact which has also been widely reported.
Indeed, she is coming about two years ahead of her normal schedule, because
'she wanted to visit Germany as soon as possible after unification', and in
order 'to demonstrate the British commitment to the new federal states (in
East Germany)', according to the briefing given to the German press by Sir
Christopher Mallaby, the British ambassador.
Her visit to Dresden to attend a service of 'reconciliation and remembrance'
in the Kreuzkirche, the cathedral which was heavily damaged in the allied
bombing of the city in 1945, will be the most sensitive on both sides. There
are fears of counter-demonstrations by right-wing extremists from the German
side, and thunderous editorials in British newspapers if the Queen were to
breathe a word suggesting British remorse for the fire bombings.
As for the latest Anglo-German squabble, the only sign that it has been
taken into account is that Mr Helmut Schlesinger, president of the German
Bundesbank and blamed by the British Treasury for wittingly or unwittingly
talking down sterling on the currency markets, will be invited not once, but
twice to meet the Queen.
But perhaps that is simply confirmation that nobody on the banks of the
Rhine has noticed the row.
