FT  04 JAN 92 / Perspectives: The hostage saga that still goes on - The
Britons who remain trapped in Kuwait
WITH THE return of Terry Waite the British hostage saga was thought to be
over, but the last of British hostages in the Middle East have yet to be
released.
A number of Britons who were last year held hostage by the Iraqis were
trapped again when they resumed work in Kuwait earlier this year. The irony
of it is that their captors are Kuwaitis, for whose freedom British soldiers
died.
Driven by what is perceived as greed, insecurity and congenital suspicion
the Kuwaitis, who last year saw their power and some wealth vanish
overnight, are trying to claw back what they think they are owed. As if the
persecution of Palestinians and the stateless Arabs for alleged
collaboration was not enough, they are now meting out some rough justice to
the allies as well.
In a form of bonded labour several Britons have been forced to work out
their 'debt' before they are set free. Their punishing experience, first at
the hands of the Iraqis and now the Kuwaitis, has finally moved the Foreign
Office to intervene on their behalf.
At the centre of this saga is the state-owned Kuwait Oil Company, before the
invasion one of the best employers in the country, whose staff enjoyed rare
privileges.
KOC, the production arm of Kuwait Petroleum Corporation, formed the backbone
of its oil industry and with its control of the wells became the main target
of Saddam Hussain's plan to destroy Kuwait. During the Iraqi occupation the
KOC lived up to its pre-invasion image. It said it had a moral obligation to
help the families of its men held in Iraq as human shields or hiding in
Kuwait.
'We were the only Kuwaiti company looking after the families during the
crisis,' says the manager of the KOC's London office Abdulla Al Abdulrazzak.
The company offered a living allowance to hostages' families and paid
mortgages and rents as well as school fees. Since the then Finance Minister,
Sheikh Ali Al Khalifa Al Sabah, gave assurances that Kuwait would honour its
contracts. This was understood to be a payment in lieu of salaries. The
families were heartened when ROC offered flowers and reassurance in their
moments of hopelessness.
The change came with the liberation. The payments stopped in April but the
Britons were told to be ready to report to work. Those who were recalled
were in for a shock when in a sudden change of rules they found that their
contracts were no longer valid. Large deductions from their salaries were
made, and explained as repayment of the cost of supporting the families
during the crisis. The company claims that the payments were advanced
against benefits settlement.
Disgusted and angry, several decided to leave Kuwait only to discover that
they could not get release letters or exit visas.
It took David Hudson, KOC's superintendent of maintenance planning, five
months to get his. Hudson, who has landed another job overseas, left behind
at least three colleagues who have been prevented from leaving.
Other Britons who have not settled their pre-liberation bills and loans face
captivity for the second time in less than two years. All the debts have
been punched into the airport computer to make sure nobody escapes the law.
In the months after the liberation the British government seemed impervious
to the hostages' pleas for help. Jimmy Smith, who refused to risk a return
to his work at KOC's Ahmadi hospital, was told by the Foreign Office: 'We
don't deal with individual cases. If you don't feel well go to your GP, and
if you have no job ask for unemployment benefit.'
The British government dismissed the hostages as simply unemployed and,
according to support groups, wanted to sweep the issue under the carpet. Not
until October, 10 months after their release, and only after a special study
showing that one in four hostages still suffer psychological problems and
need professional help did the government take their plight seriously. It
allocated funds for special trauma units, agreed to meet hostages for
consultations and to deal decisively with the Kuwaiti employers.
The Foreign Office summoned the Kuwaiti ambassador and according to a source
close to the FO 'gave him a dressing down' about the KOC's treatment of
Britons. The Foreign Office also went directly to the company according to
Abdulrazzak.
Since then the KOC has decided to suspend the deductions from the salaries
of Britons 'with a view to writing them off.' But Abdulrazzak denies that
any Britons are held in Kuwait against their will.
'We are not a terrorist organisation, we are not holding anyone against
their will,' he says. He admits though that after the liberation the company
was slow to respond to people's complaints and operated in an 'organised
chaos'.
'We are solving the problems as we go along,' he says. But there is still
confusion about new contracts and redundancies. Abdulrazzak says the new
contracts are for one year only and offer bachelor instead of married status
and frequent holidays.
He announced there would be redundancies among about 50 Britons who are
still waiting to be re-employed. This is part of an overall plan to out
staff by two thirds because the company's production facilities including
its 700 oil wells, were destroyed in the Gulf war. Three thousand workers
have already been laid off or left of their own free will. A group of 15
Britons has engaged a solicitor to sue the company for breach of contract.
The solicitor, Paul Bacon, from Nottinghamshire, says he will try to settle
out of court. Failing that he could resort to litigation in British courts.
Jadranka Porter was a journalist in Kuwait who stayed throughout the Gulf
War. She is the author of a book Under Siege in Kuwait - a Survivor's Story,
published by Victor Gollancz, in June last year.
