FT  04 NOV 92 / Letter: Lesson to draw is that record of all economic
forecasters is poor
Sir, Your analysis of economic forecasters' accuracy during the recession
makes interesting reading ('Britain's top 10 forecasters', October 30), but
the main lesson to be drawn from such analysis is surely the poor
forecasting record of all those included (including ourselves).
Those who feature at the top of the table should not be too hasty in
congratulating themselves. There is much less difference between the best
and worst forecasts in your table than there is between the best and the
actual outcome. On your figures, the best forecaster (Smith New Court)
predicted a total 0.3 per cent rise in GDP in the two recession years, 1991
and 1992. The final outcome looks likely to be a fall of 3.3 per cent.
We have looked recently at the causes of this poor record, to see whether it
can offer any clues as to how forecasts might be improved in the future (see
Lloyds Bank Economic Bulletin July 1992). What appears to have made this
recession deeper than forecast was the reaction of businesses to the initial
signs of slowdown: 1990 and 1991 saw very sharp cutbacks in investment,
output, employment and stocks by industry, concentrated first in services
but then spreading to other sectors. This is the natural reaction of
businesses to a deterioration in their external environment, especially when
they are relatively highly geared - and thus highly risk averse - as many
were in the late 1980s. However, it is not one that most economic models are
designed to predict.
The failure of the economy to begin to recover in 1992 (whereas all
forecasters in your table predicted an upturn) can be attributed to the
continued financial fragility of the personal sector (see Lloyds Bank
Economic Bulletin, September 1992). This is another failing for models which
do not appear to take sufficiently sophisticated account of the effect of
personal finances. Peter Warburton was thus right to stop using computer
models when he did. If only the rest of us had done the same] This analysis
suggests, by the way, that to the extent that forecasters of a monetarist
persuasion were more accurate, they appear to have been right for the wrong
reasons.
Finally, one complaint about your assessment method. In times of rapidly
changing views about economic prospects, it is much easier for an
organisation which revises its forecasts monthly to score well than one
which publishes its views only once or twice a year. This suggests to me
that the Treasury forecast compares favourably with even the best in your
table.
Patrick Foley,
chief economic adviser,
Lloyds Bank,
PO Box 19,
Hays Lane House,
1 Hays Lane,
London SE1 2HA
