FT  25 APR 92 / Nucor sees 'interesting possibilities' in Scotland
NUCOR, the US steel producer, is to investigate what it calls 'interesting
possibilities' for building a 1.2m-tonne-a-year steel plant on a greenfield
site in Scotland.
Mr Keith Busse, a vice-president of Nucor, said in Glasgow that the most
promising site was at Hunterston on the Firth of Clyde, where British Steel
has an ore-handling terminal, but other sites would be investigated.
He was speaking towards the end of a visit to Scotland, during which he
looked at British Steel's Ravenscraig plant, at Motherwell, Lanarkshire,
which is due to be closed in September.
He said the decision that it would not be economic to introduce Nucor's thin
slab compact strip production technology at Ravenscraig did not exclude the
use of other facilities there, such as the basic oxygen steel production
shop. It was unlikely to be the best location for the compact strip project,
though.
Mr Busse said Nucor would examine whether the costs of setting up a plant on
a greenfield site could be reduced to 'the competitive levels we have to
meet before putting forward a project'. That would take several weeks.
Mr Busse, who visited Scotland at the invitation of Scottish Enterprise, the
official development body, acknowledged that to build a plant at Hunterston
would require the co-operation of British Steel, which owned the terminal.
British Steel is said to be wary of allowing a competitor with low-cost
production methods to set up in Britain.
Mr Busse acknowledged that Europe still had overcapacity in steelmaking but
said Nucor's success in the US had been based on applying new technology in
markets where there was also overcapacity of older equipment.
The greenfield site plant would be a joint venture with a partner Nucor
would find in Europe. It would employ between 500 and 700 people and make
rolled strip products for the UK and Continental markets.
Mr Busse said he had spoken to Mr Allan Stewart, the Scottish industry
minister, and found him very supportive. But Nucor did not believe in
seeking government subsidies, nor would it try to obtain subsidised energy
prices.
