FT  24 MAR 92 / International Capital Markets: Merrill chairman awarded
Dollars 16.8m salary package
MERRILL Lynch, the big US securities house which last year earned record
profits of Dollars 696m, has awarded its chairman a 1991 pay package of
salary and stock options worth a current indicated value of Dollars 16.8m.
The pay package for Mr William Schreyer, Merrill chairman for the past
decade, is one of the largest ever seen on Wall Street and is likely to add
fresh fuel to the simmering controversy in the US over excessive pay awards
to top business executives.
Only last week, it was revealed that Coca-Cola, the soft drinks group, had
given its chairman 1m shares of restricted stock with a current market value
of more than Dollars 80m.
Institutional investors and shareholders rights' groups in the US have
argued recently that too many senior executives are being overpaid, and have
targeted in particular the inclusion of stock options in pay awards.
Merrill, however, defended the payout yesterday. Mr James Wiggins, director
of media relations at the securities firm said: 'All of our compensation
formulas are designed to pay for performance, and they reflect a record year
of earnings for the company when shareholders saw the value of their common
stock nearly triple.'
Mr Wiggins also pointed out that only Dollars 5.9m of the package had been
paid to Mr Schreyer. The remainder consisted of 300,000 in stock options
which Mr Schreyer can exercise only at yearly intervals over the next four
years.
Based on the difference between the options' exercise price of Dollars
21.375 and Merrill's current share price of almost Dollars 60, the options
package is worth nearly Dollars 11m.
Mr Schreyer could earn more, or less, from the options over the four years
depending upon how well the company's share price performs. Merrill said Mr
Schreyer had so far not taken up his rights to any of the options, neither
had he exercised any of the 300,000 options he was awarded in 1990, when his
cash payout was Dollars 1.6m.
