FT  21 FEB 92 / Leading Article: Labour fails the health test
IT IS a strange quirk of British political life that the electorate does not
trust the Labour party to run the economy or the Conservatives to run the
National Health Service. The fact that the UK is in a deeper recession than
most of its competitors does not appear to have shaken the former view.
Voters may be equally prepared to be taken in by Labour's promises to sweep
away the government's long-overdue reforms of the NHS, designed to improve
the allocation of funds and curb rising costs.
Mistrust of Conservative intentions on the NHS is fuelled by the Labour
party's success in portraying the reforms as a form of privatisation which
will destroy the flagship of the welfare state. That charge was repeated
yesterday by Mr Robin Cook, the shadow health spokesman, when Labour
published its plans for the health service in greater detail than before.
Previous versions had promised to reverse the government reforms - for
example, by taking the self-governing trust hospitals back under the control
of district health authorities. But it was possible to believe that Labour
had accepted the wisdom of key elements of the internal market. For example,
the split between the purchaser of health services and the providers looked
set to continue, albeit described in more PC (politically correct) terms.
Yesterday's policy paper rudely dispels any such illusion, with the stark
promise to sweep away the internal market.
Tough talk
In its place, Labour proposes a return to top-down administration for the
health service. The government would set targets for the regions, which
would set them for the districts, which would set them for the hospitals and
other health care units. Tough talk about rigorous performance agreements
cannot hide the fact that this is a return to the planned economy in health
care, with the inflexibility and inefficiency which that brings.
Labour recognises the need to reward efficient providers of health care, but
cannot accept that competition offers a tried and tested mechanism for doing
this. So a system of 'incentive funding' would hold back money to be
distributed to service units which perform well against targets. Since some
units will receive incentive funds and others will not, it is hard to see
how this can be described as avoiding the need 'to compete in order to
succeed'. Labour's promise that incentive funds will be introduced only
after economic growth permits an increase in NHS funding does nothing to
resolve the contradiction.
Market competition
These contortions cast doubt on Labour's avowed conversion to the merits of
the market as a means of allocating scarce resources and driving up
standards through competition. Mr Robin Cook certainly seems unpersuaded: he
claims that market competition in the NHS will produce a 'two-tier' health
service. He is presumably working on plans to nationalise food distribution
to avoid a two-tier market in this equally important staff of life.
Labour is, however, correct to point out that the government's reforms have
created a two-tier service. But the cause of this is not the internal
market: it is the partial introduction of self-governing trust hospitals and
GP fund-holding practices which has created the differentials. Both have
improved the quality of health care for those who use them: both should be
extended to all parts of the NHS so that those currently not covered can
benefit.
All over the developed world, health care systems are confronting
inefficiencies and escalating costs similar to those which faced the
pre-reform NHS. Despite national differences in health care provision, many
are moving in directions similar to those mapped out by the government's
reforms. Labour's determination to duck such questions is understandable
given the political dividends from attacking the Conservative reforms. But
it could be a crude form of 'short-termism' if a future Labour government
were to reverse the reforms and then find itself facing exactly the same
problems which led to them in the first place.
