FT  28 NOV 92 / London Stock Exchange: New UK peak as Wall Street returns
THE FT-SE INDEX pushed ahead to new peaks yesterday after Wall Street
returned from its Thanksgiving holiday in good spirits, apparently
signalling satisfaction with the better news on the US economy released
earlier this week. The London market turned ahead strongly when the Dow
Industrial Average gained 28 points in early trading.
The final reading showed the FT-SE Index at a new closing peak of 2,760.1
for a net gain of 18.3 points. Trading volume increased sharply and the
stock market was driven ahead by arbitraging pressure from the stock index
market where the December contract came within seven points of 2,800 at one
stage.
Some US buyers were seen in the futures sector but UK traders pointed out
that yesterday was also the final session of the two week trading account in
London, and that some of the buying pressure was speculative.
The market opened quietly, with London evidently waiting for Wall Street to
return to business at mid-afternoon UK time. Share prices edged higher but
the stock market made little response to a cautious report from the
Confederation of British Industry that manufacturing order books had rallied
and that a slow recovery in the domestic economy next Spring seemed likely.
But early gains were lost as buyers stayed resolutely on the sidelines and
the market was little changed when the first hints of Wall Street's mood
reached London.
The rise in the Footsie was dramatic and at best the Index showed a gain of
more than 20 points at a new trading high of 2,761.9. Yesterday's rise
enabled the Footsie to close with a gain of 27.7 points on the week and of
around 2.3 per cent over the two week trading account. Seaq volume jumped to
665.9m shares from the 601.7m of the previous session; Thursday's retail
value of equity trading remained high at Pounds 1.28bn.
As expected, it was the US-orientated stocks which led the way forward, with
Reuters, the global information group standing out strongly.
However, oil stocks were restrained by uncertainty over crude oil prices and
demand for the pharmaceuticals was selective.
Optimism spread to the domestic consumer stocks, which would respond to a
recovery in world economies.
But government bonds fell yesterday, reviving worries about the impact of
impending government funding.
Although restrained by uncertainty in currency markets, equity retail
business has remained above last year's average daily levels.
