FT  22 AUG 92 / Special Report on Courses and Careers: If you failed to make
the grade - Do not despair. Poor A-levels need not be ruinous
TWO Bs or not two Bs? That is the question for the thousands of A-level
students whose examination results will be known this week. Is it time to
decide which favourite CDs to take to university - or which universities
will take C/Ds?
Failure to get the required A-level results can mean shock, disappointment
and the upsetting of cherished plans for higher education. 'The majority of
students will not have considered the possibility that they might fail,'
says Julia Cox, a personal tutor with Mander Portman Woodward (MPW), a
leading London tutorial college originally established to cater for those
retaking A-levels. But it need not mean unqualified disaster.
As a first course of action, Cox recommends a direct approach from students
to their chosen colleges, to see if grade requirements can be relaxed. 'I
find on the whole that admissions tutors are extremely friendly. They are
trying to do a very difficult job as fairly as possible.' An appeal, or even
a personal visit, from a well-organised hopeful, armed with the necessary
information (such as UCCA or PCAS reference numbers) and offering as much
help as possible, can result in the college reconsidering its terms.
Admissions tutors are conscious that the examination system is something of
a lottery, and a demonstration of real commitment by a student can sometimes
offset lower grades. 'It's worth having a go,' insists Cox.
The likelihood of success will be modified by the chosen subject and the
market. Many colleges offering less popular courses - physics, engineering,
most technical subjects - are already beginning to tell students how to
proceed if they do not get their grades. On the other hand, over-subscribed
subjects such as law, English, medicine, and the history of art present more
of a problem, and the universities can call the tune.
'College admissions are a perfect example of the law of supply and demand,'
says Joe Rushton, chairman of MPW. Most institutions now get most of their
money as a direct result of recruiting students. So, within the constraints
of available space, teaching staff, or government quotas, the institutions'
aim is to get as many students as possible. 'If they have a place, they want
a student to fill it. There is a real educational market.'
Students cannot be moved into the UCCA/PCAS clearing system until they have
been rejected on the offers they are currently holding, so it pays to
establish one's position as early as possible. Places may be available on
the same or similar courses elsewhere and the press will be carrying details
of what is available. But the formal clearing process is very slow - it can
take up to six weeks. Cox recommends students to put their areas of interest
in descending order of priority, get on the phone and do their own research.
'Arm yourself with the UCCA or PCAS books, your reference number, some good
things to say about yourself and a lot of patience. Just keep ringing round.
As soon as you get someone who takes down your details, go back to your
tutor and get them to take over from there. It comes down to individual
student motivation a lot of the time. You can't sit back and let the system
grind.' However, she cautions against the temptation to accept a place just
because it has been offered - you can lose future entitlement to a local
authority grant.
A good deal of rapid rethinking and positive action has to be done at a time
when students are still smarting from their disappointment. But an A-level
certificate which fails to 'make the grade' can sometimes be a welcome
opportunity for a change of heart where young people have drifted towards a
particular course on the basis of a generalised interest, or under pressure
from parents or teachers.
If this is the case, what questions should students ask themselves? 'Work
backwards from where you eventually see yourself,' advises Cox. 'Look at the
career indicators, but also look at the fact that you will spend three years
of your life studying.'
Many students have not really thought beyond their interest in a subject for
its own sake. There is nothing wrong with that but, bearing in mind the
thousands of courses available, it may not be as difficult or as
time-consuming to find something equally appealing. 'When they have been
shaken up a bit, students are open to suggestions, if you genuinely offer
help,' says Cox. 'That doesn't mean that we capitalise on the fact that they
are vulnerable. But they are more willing to listen.'
Disappointing A-level results may reinforce a determination to pursue a
particular course; a change of direction can throw up new demands for higher
grades. In either case, the student will be faced with 'retakes'.
'What students see when they are sitting there with their envelope is: same
school, same subjects, same struggle,' says Rushton. What is needed is an
injection of enthusiasm. It is a question of interpreting the certificate in
the most positive way. In most cases, one result will be acceptable and
another can be improved if the exam is retaken. But there is often a subject
which a student rather regrets having chosen in the first place. Many young
people do not discover their real areas of interest until well into their
A-level studies. A different subject, such as politics, statistics or social
biology, which can be studied without prior GCSE, can add freshness and
motivation to a retake course.
Having decided to retake a subject, a short burst of energy can get the exam
out of the way by January, with the prospect of improved results, an
interesting higher education course to look forward to, and eight months
ahead for other pursuits. It is not a bad outlook.
Information:
MPW London (Arts) Fiona Dowding 071-835-1355. MPW London (Sciences) Nigel
Stout 071-584-8555
Also in Bristol, Cambridge and Birmingham
