FT  20 JAN 92 / Exporters uncover Nigerian fraud
BRITISH exporters have discovered an elaborate fraud, apparently based in
Nigeria, in which counterfeit bankers' drafts and US letters of credit are
being used to get companies to ship goods to Lagos for which they will never
be paid.
The fraud was uncovered by Leeds Chamber of Commerce and Industry after
Farnell Electronics, a member, asked for a routine check on documentation
for a Pounds 46,000 order. Several other cases have since come to light in
Leeds and Birmingham. Orders range up to Pounds 120,000 in value.
Uninsured trade with Nigeria has long been hazardous. In the early 1980s,
uninsured trade arrears reached several billion dollars. Most of the debt
was eventually settled when Nigeria issued promissory notes worth some
Dollars 5bn (Pounds 2.7bn) on terms which were subsequently rescheduled.
Nigeria is notorious as a base for crude attempts to obtain money by fraud,
and last year the Central Bank of Nigeria and the Confederation of British
Industry warned businessmen to be on their guard. However, the latest
attempt seems more sophisticated. Mr Terry Richards, head of Leeds chamber's
international department, says it may have fooled companies throughout
Europe.
The perpetrators made contact with their victims more than 16 months ago.
Farnell was asked to quote to supply electronic components in September 1990
by sending a pro forma invoice to a company in Nigeria. It has been waiting
for confirmation ever since.
Normal procedure is for the would-be importer to use the pro forma invoice
to get Nigerian government approval to use foreign exchange for the
purchase. Nigeria, like several other African governments, then uses a
private inspection agency, to check on the quality and value of the goods
ordered. If all is in order, what is known as an M Form is issued.
Confirmation of orders should then be accompanied by a banker's draft and a
letter of credit guaranteeing funds.
As with all similar transactions, the exporter cannot bank the draft until
the goods have landed in Nigeria and the importer has obtained the bill of
lading.
The fraudsters are sending their victims confirmation of orders, based on
allegedly approved pro forma invoices, with an apparently certified draft
drawn on a fictitious branch of Nigeria's Wema Bank. Payment is 'guaranteed'
by a purported letter of credit from what appears to be a bogus finance
company in New York.
The orders do not include an M form, but they incorporate a request to send
the goods as soon as possible because the importer's own customers are
threatening to cancel. Mr Richards says companies not familiar with
Nigeria's procedures may respond if they have been waiting months to close
the sale. Birmingham Chamber of Commerce and Industry said three companies
had sought advice since Tuesday and it had alerted the Department of Trade
and Industry.
