FT  03 DEC 92 / Survey of Management Buy-outs (2): Of collars and cylinders
 -The tangled web of industry jargon
EVERY trade or profession has its technical terminology or jargon and the
buy-out sector is no exception. Buy-outs in Britain have traditionally been
handled by venture capitalists so some of the terms derive from venture and
development capital areas.
Other expressions have come from the world of corporate finance. But
whatever their provenance, they can be confusing to buy-out teams, many of
which have no previous experience in this field.
Bimbo
A somewhat controversial term coined by 3i to describe a deal involving both
existing and outside managers: a buy-in/management buy-out or bimbo. About
half of all deals take this form.
Bought deal
This is when a deal maker provides all of the finance needed for a buy-out
deal and then sells on or syndicates part of the funding to other investors
later. Carried out by the larger providers of finance when speed or
confidentiality are particularly important for the deal to succeed.
Bridge financing
Short-term funding provided when a company is about to raise a new round of
equity or is about to go public.
Business plan
The document put together by managers to justify their application for
finance. Should contain summaries of past and projected profit and loss
accounts, balance sheets and cash flows.
It should also include details of products and services, markets, future
strategy and profiles of the managers. A warning, however: don't get too
carried away. Most financiers will not go beyond the two-page executive
summary.
Caps, collars and cylinders
Clauses in buy-out deals which limit the extent to which the interest rate
charged on borrowed funds can rise or fall. A safeguard against borrowing
costs rising to the point where they endanger the company. Such agreements
usually have a limited life of one or two years. The longer the period of
cover the more expensive the collar or cap.
Carried interest
A stake taken in the investee company by the venture capital or buy-out fund
managers. Can be in the form of options.
Deal flow
The rate at which investment propositions come to the deal-maker or
financier. Many claim to select only one deal in 50, although deal flow
numbers are treated by some as a sort of virility symbol.
Development Capital
Later stage finance for more established companies which are profitable or
nearly profitable. Less risky generally than early stage finance.
Due diligence
Detailed analysis and appraisal of the background of the entrepreneur and
his business plan.
Earn-out
Either a formula for relating the final purchase price of a company to
actual future earnings or a means of encouraging management to perform by
payment on the basis of future performance (see also Ratchet).
Employee buy-out
A deal involving not just the top management but also all or a large number
of the more junior employees of the organisation. The difficulty of
involving large numbers of employees without disclosing a deal prematurely
has meant that relatively few of these deals have been done.
Some managers get round this by staging a buy-out and then involving other
staff later at a later stage.
Employee share ownership plan (Esop)
A trust which is established to acquire shares in a company for subsequent
allocation to employees over a number of years.
Exit
The point at which the financier sells his holding in the buy-out company
either through a trade sale to a larger company, by the management buying
out the other investors to assume complete control, or by a stock market
flotation. It is essential the managers and their financial backers agree
from the outset on the exit strategy.
Gearing or leverage
The ratio of debt to equity in a company's capital structure. Intermediate
forms of capital, such as redeemable preference shares and convertible
loans, can complicate the calculations and mean a variety of ratios may be
applied to the same company.
Hands-on/hands-off
The degree to which an investor in a buy-out becomes involved in its
management. A hands-on investor would normally nominate a non-executive
director to the board and might commit some of its other executives to help
out if the company ran into difficulties. Hands-off investors would have
little or no active involvement in the company.
Internal Rate of Return (IRR)
Different investors work this out in different ways but the term generally
refers to annual compound rate of return to the investor over a given period
of time.
Returns normally include dividend distributions and profits from either
disposals or a fair valuation of the buy-out company.
Junior debt
Loans which rank after secured or senior debt for repayment in the event of
a default.
Junk bonds
High yielding, unsecured debt used in US buy-outs. Since the debt is in the
form of a bond certificate, it can be bought and sold more easily than the
mezzanine loans (qv) used to finance UK buy-outs.
Lead investor
Venture capitalist or other deal-maker with the largest share in the
syndicated investment.
He or she usually initiates the deal and then takes a hands-on role on
behalf of the other partners.
Lemons and plums
Bad deals and good. Bad investments usually go wrong before the good ones
produce a profit: the lemons ripen before the plums.
Leveraged buy-out
Similar to a management buy-out, though usually applied to US deals where
the transaction will have been initiated by a financial group rather than
the management. The name refers to the high level of borrowing which the
company takes on, using the assets being purchased as leverage.
When British buy-outs seemed to be going the way of their US counterparts,
with large, highly speculative deals being put together by City financiers,
the term started to be applied to UK buy-outs. Nowadays the idea of high
levels of leverage is a distant memory.
Living dead
Companies which are just about trading profitably but which are unlikely to
do really well.
A slightly dated term used about investments the deal-makers prefer to
forget.
Lock-out agreement
An agreement to give the buy-out team time to negotiate the purchase of
their company free of pressure from other bidders.
Management buy-in
An offshoot of the management buy-out industry. The purchase of a business
by one or more outside managers with the help of a group of financial
backers.
The term was applied indiscriminately in the late 1980s to any bid which
involved a well-known City figure on the grounds that a buy-in sounded more
constructive than the hostile takeover that it usually was.
Buy-ins are now seen as being considerably riskier than buy-outs because
they involve an outside management team which does not know the company as
well.
Many deals are neither pure buy-ins nor buy-outs but bimbos (qv).
Management buy-out
The purchase of a business by its existing management with the help of a
group of financial backers.
The managers put up a relatively small amount of the total finance but
usually gain a disproportionately large share of the equity. Buy-outs are
funded largely by loans secured on the assets of the company itself.
Mezzanine finance
This refers to loans, that are usually unsecured, which rank after secured
or senior debt but before equity in the event of the company failing.
To compensate for the greater risk, they usually carry interest 1 to 3
percentage points above secured loans and often carry an equity 'kicker' to
give the lender a stake in the equity.
Newco
The management buy-out is usually carried out through a newly created
company which is normally referred to as a newco.
Preferred ordinary shares
This refers to the ordinary shares which are taken up by the outside
investors in a buy-out.
These shares rank ahead of the plain ordinary shares which are owned by the
management in terms of dividends and the pay-out in the event of a
winding-up.
Ratchet
An incentive arrangement whereby the managers get a bigger share of the
equity if the venture performs well. Sometimes managers forfeit shares if
they do particularly badly (see also Earn-out).
Second round financing
Increasingly needed to help buy-outs which have run short of funds. Can also
be given to businesses which have done well and are able to raise new money
for further investments.
Senior debt
Secured debt which ranks first in terms of repayments in the event of a
default (see also junior debt).
Slippage
Happens when the buy-out company starts to eat up more cash than expected
because development costs exceed budget or sales grow too slowly.
Syndicated investment
An investment which is too large and risky to be handled by one investor and
which needs to be shared among several partners.
Fewer deals are syndicated in present market conditions, while syndicates
also involve fewer participants.
This is partly because the smaller deals do not require so many players.
However it also means that if trouble arises, fewer people have to be
consulted in order to sort out the mess.
Vendor finance
Finance provided by the vendor in the form of either a deferred payment or a
retained minority stake in the bought-out company, usually in the form of
loan notes.
It allows the vendor to share in the profits of the company if it does well
and can also be used to boost the sale price, thereby impressing the
vendor's shareholders.
Venture capitalist
This is the deal-maker who provides the funds and the advice for
entrepreneurs who are either starting a business from scratch or staging a
management buy-out.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
LEADING DEBT ARRANGERS
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                      Total     Total value      Av. Value    Number of
                     number   of debt Pds m  of debt Pds m  investments
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Bank of Scotland         64           1,168             18          112
Nat West/County
  NatWest                61           1,519             25           83
Barclays/BZW             42             817             19           65
Midland/Samuel Montagu   29             555             19           43
Charterhouse/RBS         21             851             41           38
Bankers Trust            19           1,417             75           20
Standard Chartered/CWB   18           1,001             56           30
SecPac                    9             247             27           14
Citibank/Citicorp         8             620             78           13
Lloyds                    7              81             12           23
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Kleinwort Benson          6             144             24           15
Warburg                   5           2,039            408            6
Chemical                  4           1,430            358            6
Continental               4              87             22           11
Scandinavian              4              59             15            4
3i                        4              24              6           25
Manufacturers Hanover     3              50             17            3
Credit Argicole           3              47             16           15
CIBC                      3              26              9           15
NM Rothschild             3              52             17            6
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Den norske                3              21              7            7
TSB                       3              19              6            4
Toronto-Dominion          2              37             19           11
Industrial Bank of Japan  1              68             68           14
Westpac                   1              35             35           11
Creditanstalt             1               7              7           19
Bank of Novia Scotia      1               7              7            8
Long Term Credit Bank
  of Japan                                                           17
Allied Irish                                                         11
Dai-Ichi Kangyo                                                      10
Nippon Credit                                                        10
Fuji                                                                  8
Sumitomo                                                              8
Others                   30             938             33
None/not known/
  (duplication)          20            -145
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                        379          13,266             35
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Qualification: in Pounds 10 million plus deals, 3 deals arranged or 8
investments made
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
