FT  20 JAN 92 / Management: Why the kissing has got to stop
Managers are trained to believe that cliches about national characteristics
are as misleading as they are pernicious.
But it may just be that the old caricature of Latin races as highly-sexed
contains a spark of truth. Sexual harassment at work has caused such a
headache for French employers and their staff that the government has
recently seen fit to act.
Veronique Neiertz, state secretary for women's rights and daily life, is
planning to introduce new penalties in the spring parliamentary session.
These will come on top of criminal sanctions due to come into effect
shortly, which will make sexual harassment a crime in French law for the
first time.
According to a survey of 1,300 people, commissioned from Louis Harris by the
government at the end of last year, the problem is growing fast. One-in-five
French citizens of both sexes have encountered sexual harassment at work, up
from 7 per cent in 1984. Blackmail, repeated advances and obscene language
were the most common problems.
Neiertz aims to strike a balance between giving victims protection and
avoiding what she sees as the excessive regulation in the US, where the mere
creation of a 'hostile environment' is punishable.
As an illustration of French attitudes to sex at work, the Judge Clarence
Thomas saga in the US was met with general bafflement in France. The public
takes little or no interest in the sexual habits of public figures, whether
they are business people, judges or politicians.
Demonstrations of personal sexuality are in some ways less controversial in
France than the US or the UK. But France's relaxed attitude to the
boundaries between acceptable and unacceptable conduct is changing. The
criminal penalty against harassment, agreed by the French parliament last
summer, sets a fine of up to FFr100,000 (Pounds 10,300) plus up to a year in
prison for anyone who, 'abusing the authority conferred on them by their
position, uses pressure to obtain favours of a sexual nature'.
The latest proposals put this general idea into labour law, describing the
offence as 'a word, gesture, attitude or behaviour by a hierarchical
superior with a view to compel an employee to respond to a solicitation of a
sexual nature'.
Employers would be obliged to establish in-house rules against harassment
and would be forbidden from discriminating against victims or witnesses or
resorting to other means to hush up cases. Often the 'victim is more
punished than the person guilty of harassment', says Neiertz.
What is most striking about the new rules - and what sets France apart from
other countries - is that they apply only to harassment by superiors and
offer no remedy for people who are abused in this way by colleagues or
inferiors.
It could be that harassment by colleagues is too widespread in France to be
controlled by legislation. 'I do not say there is not sexual harassment
between colleagues, but when there is no link of power or economic
dependence, the woman or man being harassed can defend themselves,' Neiertz
told a French newspaper. She added: 'We must not end up with the excesses of
the US, where the slightest glance can be misinterpreted'.
