FT  27 AUG 92 / Leading Article: German raids
THE VIOLENCE against foreigners which has flared since the weekend in the
east German port of Rostock is an indication of the trials afflicting
unified Germany. Well-drilled gangs of hoodlums, many of them Molotov
cocktail-wielding members of extreme rightwing groups, have mounted nightly
attacks on accommodation for refugees. In some shameful cases, local
townspeople have stood by and applauded. The episodes illustrate the serious
tensions caused by the probable influx of 400,000 asylum-seekers into
Germany during the whole of 1992. Even though many of the thugs in Rostock
came from western Germany, the turmoil shows the inflammable nature of the
social tinder in a region struggling with the passage from communism to
capitalism.
More widely, the unrest underlines the malaise gnawing at the spirit of
consensus which has fostered Germany's postwar stability. Two years ago,
Germany's parliamentary democracy failed to recognise the full extent of the
challenges brought by reunification. Bringing together two unequal parts of
a divided country has seriously strained Germany's economic and social
fabric. The trouble on the north German coast is a further reminder that the
transition still cannot be judged an unqualified success.
On the specific question of asylum, Germany is bearing a disproportionate
part of the burden in Europe caused by widespread immigration from
distressed areas of the former eastern bloc and the third world. Germany
needs to change its constitution - as the opposition Social Democrats have
now belatedly recognised - to stop misuse of liberal asylum regulations
drawn up in the aftermath of the second world war. The problems of housing
and feeding large numbers of people seeking solace from foreign hardship
have tested social security budgets, as well as the patience of even
well-meaning Germans. Many towns have simply run out of hostel space.
The country also needs to tighten policing in the increasingly large areas
affected by outbreaks of xenophobia during the last year. The east German
police, still containing many officers who sustained communist rule for 40
years, lacks authority in many regions east of the Elbe. The Rostock forces
of law and order proved remarkably ineffective this week, although
reinforcements have been rushed to the city to try to forestall the threat
of more attacks in the next few days.
Above all, Germany must try to prevent further worsening of a strained
climate where sections of the population are only too willing to seek
scapegoats for the failures and disappointments of unification. It is up to
German politicians to unite a country which is manifestly still divided,
rather than to indulge in inter-party bickering. If they fail in that task,
the rampage in Rostock will not be the last sign of ugliness along the road
to unity.
