FT  18 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: UK fishermen fear further cuts
in 1993
BRITISH FISHERMEN are expecting to be granted a substantial increase in the
quantity of haddock they will be allowed to catch in the North Sea next year
when the European Community's fisheries council meets in Brussels tomorrow
to decide on quota allocations. But they are still looking forward to 1993
with foreboding because they fear that conservation measures to be brought
in under the UK government's new fisheries legislation will reduce their
fishing and cut their incomes.
The European Commission has been advised by independent scientists that
stocks of haddock in the North Sea have recovered from the low levels of
1990 and 1991. This should allow the UK's haddock quota to rise from about
43,000 tonnes this year's of to about 75,000 tonnes.
The cod quota is likely to be close to this year's at about 100,000 tonnes,
but there should be higher quotas for pelagic species - mackerel and
herring.
Both the UK government and the commission are anxious that the recovery in
stocks of haddock, one of the most popular fish among British consumers,
should not be dissipated by renewed overfishing. From early next year the
government will use new powers to regulate fishing under the Sea Fish
(Conservation) Act, which recently won parliamentary approval. This will
oblige fishing boats to spend many days of the year tied up in port, with
the each boat's restriction based on the amount of fishing it did in 1991.
The government believes this will ensure access to fishing is allocated
fairly and that supply of fish to the market will be more even, avoiding the
gluts which led to sharp price falls this year.
Fishermen fear they may have to spend up to 190 days a year in port, which
will prevent them catching their quotas. The government will not say what
tie-up time is likely next year but insists that all the UK's quota will be
caught.
Next year sees the UK introducing a small decommissioning scheme involving
Pounds 25m over the next three years, which would cut the fleet by between 5
and 7 per cent. Fishermen who last week staged a big demonstration in
Edinburgh against the EC's common fisheries policy say it is insufficient.
'The government has a blind adherence to effort limitation as the way of
conserving fish stocks, with a totally inadequate de-commissioning scheme.
It boils down to de-commissioning by bankruptcy,' says Mr Roderick McColl,
for the Scottish White Fish producers' association, which represents a large
part of the UK North Sea fleet.
