FT  06 APR 92 / Survey of Light Rail Systems (2): Supertrams will run on
rail lines and through streets - Expanding network planned for Manchester's
Metrolink
MANCHESTER'S new light rail link should be fully operational by the end of
June - 153 years after the city first publicly acknowledged it needed
something to do the job for which Metrolink is designed.
Although the first scheduled service of the Metrolink supertrams is due to
begin today, it will only be between Bury, about seven miles to the north,
and Manchester's Victoria Station, on the edge of the city centre. After
four weeks of settling down, the trams will be able carry on from Victoria,
arcing south and west through city centre streets to Deansgate Station.
Another four weeks, and Metrolink supertrams will start running on to
Altrincham eight miles to the south, and back again to Bury. This will
enable the city centre to be traversed by rail by through travellers, rather
than just skirted, for the first time. Four more weeks later, in June, a
spur will link the city centre's main shopping area with Piccadilly Station.
Where Metrolink is differs from most other tram systems is that its vehicles
can run both on normal railway lines and through the streets. This means
that Greater Manchester's mainly radial rail system will start to be
transformed into a genuine network.
It has been a long time coming. Manchester boasts the world's first railway
station, built in 1835 at Liverpool Road, and now part of a complex of
science, engineering and heritage museums in the city centre.
It was the terminus for George Stephenson's railway between Liverpool and
Manchester, then the fastest form of transportation on earth. It was a
breakthrough that speeded up the industrial revolution, but as with many
other important technological developments in the history of the world,
Manchester was soon to prove that being first was not always an advantage.
In the course of the next 30 years, the city centre became ringed by railway
termini, all separated from each other. Indeed, even before Piccadilly and
Victoria Stations were built in 1842 and 1844 respectively, a rail tunnel
was proposed to link the two embryonic stations on which they were based. It
was never built; only this June will Metrolink start doing the job envisaged
so long ago. Viaducts provide some inadequate links, but Manchester
generally became a place where people went to by train. From 1877 they were
able to get on horse-drawn trams to move about the city and connect between
termini. In 1901, electric trams replaced the horses.
In the same year, the first circular tube railway around the city centre was
mooted at a cost of Pounds 1.5m. Nothing materialised. The idea was raised
again in 1912 but lapsed with the First World War, although the Bury line
was electrified.
By 1928, a Pounds 14m underground network was being considered, with links
to Salford, Stretford and Prestwich. Two years later and the cost was up
Pounds 20m for a 35-mile network with inner and outer circles and radial
routes.
Post-war priorities
Although the line to Altrincham was electrified in 1931, the slump and the
Second World War put paid to any chances of the idea going ahead and in 1944
Manchester city council decided against a Pounds 38m, 24-mile underground
railway because there were greater priorities for post-war reconstruction.
The tram era came to end throughout Greater Manchester between 1949 and
1951, but trolley buses continued until 1966. Meanwhile, Piccadilly Station
was modernised in 1959, confirming its position as Manchester's main
intercity terminus, but still unlinked to Victoria, less than a mile to the
north and the main east-west station for the conurbation.
The age of the car and road transport had fully dawned. A measure of rail's
decline is that although, by 1973, the forerunner to what is now the Greater
Manchester Passenger Transport Executive (GMPTE) was still proposing a
Pounds 160m tunnel to link the two main stations and form the base for a
20-mile light rapid transit network, the total cost of Pounds 160m was only
a quarter of the highways budget for the same period, but was considered
prohibitive.
The tunnel proposal was eventually dropped by Greater Manchester Council in
1977, although Councillor Jack Flanagan, chairman of the Metrolink working
party, says that some still nurtured hopes for it as late as 1985.
In 1979, a new study was started by British Rail, GMPTE and the Department
of Transport. The problem it addresssed was the same one that had been
confronting people for 140 years: ways had to be found to fill missing rail
links in Manchester city centre and turn Greater Manchester's suburban,
radial rail routes into a regional network.
A surface rail link, sweeping round the western fringe of the city centre
between Salford and Deansgate, was approved by the government in 1985 and
since 1988 has provided a through route across the conurbation between Wigan
and Stockport.
The supertram concept of Metrolink also emerged from the study.
Parliamentary powers were sought in 1984. The government promised to give
money provided the private sector was involved. Development of the Deebom
principle ensured this and the Bill passed its final stages in 1988. The
contract to design, build, operate and maintain the system was signed two
years ago.
Mr Roger Hall, deputy director-general of Metrolink, forecasts 10m passenger
journeys a year - 4m each between Bury and Altrincham and 2m within the city
centre.
The value to the city has already been recognised by the Central Manchester
Development Corporation, which has put money into one of the five city
centre stations.
These themselves are distinctive, with a 'camel's hump' shape so that people
who cannot easily use steps - including parents with pushchairs  - can get
up the gentle slope of the platform to its apex, level with each supertram's
floor. Access from elsewhere on the platform is by retractable step.
The 26 supertrams will come at five-minute intervals in the rush hour, every
10 minutes at other times. There will be no conductors, but ticket
inspection will be vigorous, with Pounds 10 on-the-spot fines for fare
dodgers. Ticket machines have been installed at every station and multi-ride
tickets will be widely available.
Five future routes are already envisaged, providing supertram links to
Oldham and Rochdale in the conurbation's east and north-east,
Chorlton-cum-Hardy and Didsbury in the south, Marple in the south-east,
Glossop in the east and Salford Quays and Trafford Park in the west.
A new route into east Manchester to serve the stadia planned there - whether
Manchester's bid for the 2000 Olympics succeeds or not - is also envisaged.
The franchises to operate any or all of these will also be open to bidding
by private sector consortia.
Long term, the impact on Greater Manchester - a conurbation of more than
2.5m people ' should be telling, particularly since Metrolink will improve
access by public transport to Piccadilly station and the planned rail link
from there to Manchester Airport.
Generally, however, a proper, efficient, public mass-transit system is
essential to Manchester's development as Britain's second financial and
professional centre after London and the widening recognition of it as the
capital of northern England. The road infrastructure remains generally good,
but most routes are crowded in rush hours and capacity limits will
eventually jam up the city for long periods, hindering its development.
A remaining problem, however, will be the widespread British one of lack of
co-ordination between different public transport services. The effect of bus
deregulation is seen by Metrolink's political leadership as 'complete
disaster,' with more buses competing for fewer passengers, charging higher
fares and running more 'dead' miles nearly empty.
Greater Manchester Buses, a 12.35 per cent shareholder in Metrolink, has had
to face a series of redundancies and fare rises recently to stay solvent.
Against this background, spreading Metrolink's net as quickly as possible,
and running it hard and at full capacity cannot come too soon.
