FT  26 MAY 92 / Survey of Tohoku Region of Japan (7): Anxiety over power
project - Rokkasho / A village divided by nuclear strategy
JAPANESE CHILDREN are taught from an early age that theirs is a country
without natural resources, which must make painful sacrifices to compensate.
This is also the thinking behind a drive by the nation's electric power
companies to build some of the world's most ambitious and controversial
nuclear power facilities in a corner of Aomori prefecture.
The Y1,260bn (Pounds 5.3bn) programme is located next to the village of
Rokkasho, near the north-east tip of Japan's main island of Honshu.
Given Tohoku's sparse population, the Rokkasho project is having a profound
economic impact, creating jobs, luring industry and stimulating demand for
services.
But environmental dangers have also caused severe anxiety among residents,
and spawned the region's largest political controversy of the decade. The
ruling Liberal Democrats came out in force to secure victory in last year's
Aomori prefecture gubernatorial race, after a series of embarrassing
election defeats by Rokkasho opponents.
On the positive side, construction alone will offer work to between 7,700
and 8,700 people, and the nuclear facilities will employ 2,500 people when
fully operative, according to the Federation of Electric Power Companies
(FEPC). It says the project has also attracted five companies to the region,
and that others will follow, including such big names as Sumitomo Electric
Industries, Mitsubishi Cable Industries and Hitachi Cable. About 1,000 jobs
already have been created, and another 3,000 will follow, the FEPC
estimates.
Mr Masaya Kitamura, governor of Aomori, terms the fuel cycle the
prefecture's most important undertaking. Over the 10 years required to build
the facility, Y730bn will flow from public works to prefectural companies,
he believes, while the creation of jobs will help relieve the constituency's
main problem.
The project has proceeded at what is lightning speed for the nuclear power
industry, since an 1984 agreement between the FEPC, Aomori prefecture and
Rokkasho village to go ahead with a uranium-enrichment factory, an
underground storage site for low-level radioactive waste and a plutonium
reprocessing facility.
Japan Nuclear Fuel Industries (JNFI), which was set up by the power industry
to help operate the site, reached a landmark in April with the official
start-up of the Y250bn uranium-reprocessing operation. Eventually it is
expected to supply about 30 per cent of Japan's nuclear fuel. The Y160bn
low-level radioactive waste site is scheduled to begin receiving deliveries
by the end of the year from the nation's grid of 42 nuclear reactors.
Ground-breaking for the Y850bn plutonium reprocessing plant, the greatest
focus of controversy, has been delayed for further safety studies. It is
likely to go ahead late this year or early next, with completion around the
turn of the century, says Mr Ryuji Mitsui, of JNFI.
The electric power industry aims to turn Rokkasho into the Mecca of Japan's
so-called nuclear fuel cycle, to achieve long-sought national energy
independence. Fast-breeder reactors, which theoretically are net producers
of plutonium, are the final critical link in the fuel-cycle, although other
leading nuclear nations have largely abandoned them as too expensive and
dangerous.
'We want people to understand the (electric power) industry's opinion that a
domestic source of nuclear fuel is necessary,' says Mr Terou Tokuine, of the
FEPC's nuclear fuel cycle site development department.
What most worries Aomori people, apart from the presence of plutonium, the
most toxic substance on earth, are plans to begin accepting high-level
nuclear waste, about 1997, from Japanese fuel reprocessed in the UK and
France. Critics say the risks of turning Rokkasho into a nuclear laboratory
and dump for the nation's radioactive garbage outweigh the economic
advantages, while most of the benefits are going to interests outside
Tohoku, such as large companies involved in the project.
Seven years into development of the nuclear site, Rokkasho village remains a
sleepy scattering of houses, stores and a town hall for the 11,000 people
who mostly make their living from farming and fishing.
The mayor, Mr Hiroshi Tsuchida, who says he always supported the nuclear
facility, concedes that the economic gains have been patchy. Families of
those involved in construction will continue to fare well for the next
decade, although the lives of other residents has have changed little.
'The biggest worry now are the plans to introduce high- level radioactive
material,' Mr Tsuchida adds.
The nuclear project is causing concern well beyond Rokkasho in a nation
where a nuclear allergy, resulting from wartime experience, and a pacifist
constitution are inconsistent with plans that could leave Japan with the
world's largest plutonium stockpile by early next century.
Mr Koji Asaishi, an Aomori lawyer, says he became an active opponent of the
Rokkasho project because of plans to introduce plutonium. 'I don't say don't
use nuclear energy, but they must first solve the downstream problem of
disposal,' he says.
According to Mr Asaishi, internal power industry documents leaked to
Rokkasho opponents also suggest that a major earthquake could result in
disaster. He adds that plans to store high-level radioactive material at
Rokkasho violate the original agreement, which gave short shrift to the
issue and said that any such storage would be 'temporary.'
Mr Asaishi says opposition is proceeding on three fronts: efforts to suspend
construction until further safety studies are completed; organisation of
citizens' groups against the facility; and opposition among political
leaders.
'If we don't continue, they will go on with even more dangerous
developments,' he says. 'The real problem is that Aomori citizens and the
people of Rokkasho can't check whether the operation is really safe or if
the facilities are necessary.'
Ironically, opposition within the nuclear power industry itself may prove
the anti-Rokkasho group's most potent ally. Doubts have arisen about the
expensive and complex fuel cycle initiative, given that the industry must
complete two 1,000MW light-water reactors annually over the next two decades
just to achieve existing goals.
Mr Takao Ishiwatari, director general of the Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel
Development Corporation, suggested recently that safety and practicality may
require rethinking of fuel cycle plans.
For the Rokkasho area and greater Tohoku, failure to go ahead with the
multi-billion dollar plutonium facility could have far-reaching economic
implications. But if it is built, and then rendered useless by political or
other considerations, it could contaminate Rokkasho with an image as one of
history's white elephants.
