FT  20 JUL 92 / Asean talks will take up disputes over islands
FOREIGN ministers of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (Asean)
converge in Manila today for discussions this week on concrete programmes to
expand regional co-operation.
The meeting takes place against a backdrop of the continuing territorial
disputes involving three Asean members - China, Vietnam and Taiwan - over
the Spratley Islands in the South China Sea, a quarrel which could
deteriorate shortly with the expected start of oil exploration in the area.
The foreign ministers' gathering is their first since the January accord
among the six Asean governments - Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines,
Singapore, Thailand and Brunei - to transform the region into a free-trade
area by 2007.
They will discuss ways to strengthen Asean's ability to cope with a changing
international environment and then discuss trends in trade, investment and
development with counterparts from their main economic partners: the EC, US,
Canada, Japan, South Korea, Australia and New Zealand.
Mr Raul Manglapus, chairman of the Asean Standing Committee and Philippines
Foreign Affairs Secretary, said yesterday that the Spratley disputes will
also be discused. The three Asean members involved - Brunei, Malaysia and
the Philippines - and China, Vietnam and Taiwan all have claims on the
islands. With the exception of Brunei, all also have troops on some of the
islands, under which may lie oil and gas reserves.
China and Vietnam have awarded contracts separately to western companies to
drill for oil in the disputed territories, and Vietnam recently increased
its campaign by wooing Malaysia to participate in one exploration venture.
Over the past few weeks, China is said to have planted a territorial marker
on a reef and had earlier authorised its army to use force, if necessary, to
control the islands.
Nevertheless, Qian Qichen, China's foreign minister, has been invited to the
Manila meetings and is expected to hold talks with his Asean counterparts as
a group and individually.
Mr Manglapus said this week's meetings will tackle 'some guidelines (that)
will provide us with the start of a kind of modus vivendi between contesting
nations before a final resolution is arrived at'. And, while analysts are
not optimistic that a definitive end to the disputes can be reached this
week, Mr Manglapus noted 'a strong feeling on the part of our partners (for)
a peaceful solution.'
