FT  27 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Scots interest rates may have peaked too soon
 -Media Watch
A ROW of four men (there are few women in Scottish politics) in armchairs
arguing on television about Scotland's constitutional future is the best
media entertainment in the general election in Scotland.
There is usually Jim Sillars, the eloquent deputy leader of the Scottish
National party, who can silence others by the power of his voice; Donald
Dewar, now looking more confident that Labour can hold off the SNP; Malcolm
Bruce or Menzies Campbell from the Liberal Democrats; and Ian Lang, the
Scottish secretary, who is never ruffled but looks worried.
What makes watching the TV debates more fun than reading the newspapers is
hearing the electorate directly. Scottish Television has assembled a panel
of 500 people at Lanark in the Clydesdale constituency in the central belt
whose voting pattern in 1987 was close to the Scottish average. But if the
constituency's 23.5 per cent quota of Tories is there they are keeping very
quiet.
The election is different here. There is one first-rate issue unique to
Scotland: the question of the country's constitutional future. Yet it does
not produce much news.
Although John Major was here on Wednesday and Margaret Thatcher on Tuesday,
most of the big election news is still being generated in London, and the
Scottish broadsheets usually lead with the same issues as their national
counterparts.
The only good Scottish election story was the publication of a letter from
Ian Lang to John Major in which Lang outlined what most people suspected -
that the Tories want to use the SNP to split Labour's vote.
The newspapers cannot really complain. The heavyweights, The Scotsman and
The Herald, have kept the flame of devolution alight in the years when it
seemed a colourless abstraction. They had their reward when interest in it
soared two months ago, triggered by a Scotsman opinion poll.
However, these papers account for only a small part of Scottish newspaper
readership. In Fife and Tayside in eastern Scotland, people read The
Courier, published in Dundee. It far outsells The Scotsman, still has
classified advertisements rather than news on its front page and has almost
daily editorials backing the Conservatives.
Further north, in the Grampian and Highland regions, the daily broadsheet is
the Press and Journal, which is also inclined towards the Tories.
The tabloids should have been predictable. The Daily Record, like its sister
paper the Daily Mirror, is firmly behind Labour and devolution. However, the
decision in January by the Scottish edition of The Sun to switch its backing
from the Tories to the SNP and independence surprised more than a few
readers.
