FT  28 FEB 92 / A-Z of Personal Finance (25): Four dates that govern
entitlement - Ex-dividend/Ex-rights
THE RECEIPT of dividends is one of the most important privileges of being a
shareholder. Consequently there are strict rules about when, and to whom, a
dividend should be paid.
Most companies pay dividends twice a year, announcing them with their
half-yearly (interim) and annual (preliminary) results. But the dividends
are not actually paid until some time after the results announcement.
Between the announcement of the dividend and its actual payment, many shares
are bought and sold. A system has been established to settle the question of
whether the buyers or the sellers of such shares are entitled to the
subsequent payment.
According to Mark Powell, chief executive of broker Laurence Keen, there are
four significant dates: the day dividends are announced; the day they go
ex-dividend (or xd); the day the company closes the shareholder register for
dividend payments; and the date of payment itself.
If you buy a share after a dividend has been announced but before it has
gone ex-dividend, you are entitled to the dividend payment. In the jargon,
you have bought the shares cum-dividend.
It is possible, however, that your name will not appear on the register
before the company closes its books, usually about a month before the
dividend is actually paid. In that case, says Mr Powell, your broker will
automatically claim back the dividend for you.
If you buy a share after it has gone ex-dividend, then you are not entitled
to receive the payment.
Sellers should remember that they will not receive a dividend, even if it
has been announced, if they sell before the ex-dividend date. If they want
to receive the payment, they have to wait and sell the shares after they
have gone ex-dividend. However, there is unlikely to be an advantage in
doing so, because shares normally fall in price as soon as they go xd.
A rights issue (when a company raises money by issuing new shares) follows
the same pattern, though the process will normally be quicker. A share will
go ex-rights a matter of days after the issue has been announced.
Consequently, if you sell your shares just before a rights issue is
announced, it is possible that you will still be on the shareholders'
register when the company sends out the allotment letters. If that happens,
you should return the allotment letter.
Those who sell the shares after they have gone ex-rights will be entitled to
take up the new shares in the rights issue. If you do not want to do so, you
can sell what is called the nil-paid rights in the market. Alternatively,
you can wait until the issue closes; the company will then try to place the
shares in the market, and pass the proceeds on to you.
