FT  19 NOV 92 / Clinton gets passport search apology
EFFORTS by senior Bush administration officials to search the passport files
of Governor Bill Clinton were 'an attempt to use the records and employees
of a government agency to influence the outcome of a presidential election',
a State Department investigation has found.
'We found no major fraud, no massive corruption, no rogue operations
subverting American foreign policy. In a broader sense, however, what we did
find was far more disturbing than any of these,' Mr Sherman Funk, the State
Department inspector general, concluded in a report on the passport search.
Mr Lawrence Eagleburger, the acting Secretary of State, said he resented and
regretted the department's involvement in politics, and had offered to
resign immediately. President George Bush had refused his resignation.
'I apologise for the department being in this mess,' he said, looking angry
and hurt at a televised news conference yesterday afternoon.
Mr Funk said his investigation began with rumours that Mr Clinton, who had
just been nominated as the Democratic presidential candidate, sought during
the Vietnam war to give up his US citizenship.
'It is not too much to think that if this information had emerged and been
confirmed, it could have had a decisive impact on the outcome of the
election,' he said.
He said the attempt to use Mr Clinton's passport records for political ends
was 'a very heinous activity, and shame on the Department of State that it
happened'.
Mr Funk said a search of Mr Clinton's passport files after a request under
the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) would have been legal but it had been
conducted with excessive zeal for political reasons.
'Never in our opinion in the annals of the FOIA Act has there ever been a
FOIA search conducted with such urgency, scope and grade level of
participant,' he said.
Mrs Elizabeth Tamposi, assistant secretary for consular affairs, was
dismissed by Mr Bush last week for leading the search, but Mr Eagleburger
said yesterday she was not the only person responsible.
Mr Funk said disciplinary action had been recommended for four people and
censure for several more. He found, however, no evidence that the passport
search was orchestrated or directed by the White House, nor that anyone
above the rank of assistant secretary was involved or had given direction to
the search.
