FT  14 SEP 92 / Survey on Mauritius (4): A new dynamo is required - Mr
Ramakrishna Sithanen, the finance minister, takes stock
'It's going to be difficult but manageable,' says Mr Ramakrishna Sithanen,
the finance minister, as he takes stock of the economic options facing
Mauritius in the 1990s.
Two serious short-term problems loom: inflation, which he has successfully
cut from 13 per cent a year ago to below 3 per cent at present; and a
deteriorating balance of payments situation.
The balance of payments - a forecast deficit this year of 0.7 per cent of
GDP - looks likely to get worse if, as planned, import-intensive investment
in machinery and technology takes off as the manufacturing and services
sector gear up to compete in the world economy.
Similarly, businessmen worry that inflation will accelerate over the next
year, especially if, as seems probable, public sector labour unions win
their battle for a double-digit pay award.
Topping the list of the minister's longer-term worries is the likelihood
that global market conditions for Mauritian exports will become increasingly
competitive. Uruguay Round trade proposals and reform of the Common
Agricultural Policy in the European Community could damage the country's
garment and sugar industries.
As one industrialist luridly puts it: 'The phased abolition of the
multi-fibre agreement (MFA) would spell the death knell of at least a third
of export processing zone (EPZ) clothing firms.'
With growth already having slowed in the EPZ, sugar, and tourist sectors,
the island is looking for a new dynamo. The current emphasis is on turning
Mauritius into an offshore business centre and free port - underpinned by
consolidation, modernisation and diversification of agriculture,
manufacturing and tourism.
'There is no reason to change a winning formula,' says Mr Sithanen.
Mauritius must consolidate 'what we are good at,' simultaneously
diversifying its economy to ensure a flexible response to the fast-changing
global economy. 'We must improve performance in traditional sectors to stay
competitive.'
Two elements are crucial to Mauritian economic strategy in the next few
years, he says: deeper integration with the world economy, and regional
co-operation to exploit the island's geographical position. No other country
in the region has the potential to develop into an offshore business centre
interfacing between Africa and the Far East. The freeport could become a
springboard for such trade.
He sees Mauritius as the gateway to a growing African economy in the 1990s,
exploiting its export platform serving Africa as a member of the 18-nation
preferential trading area (PTA). But for regional growth to take off,
southern and east Africa needs a locomotive. The only country capable of
this is South Africa.
In a full employment economy, growth will have to come from improved
productivity, moving upmarket into higher value-added products and
developing competitive advantage in skills and capital intensive activities.
Having recently lost comparative advantage in labour-intensive, low
value-added production, Mauritian manufacturers must find new markets and
new niches. 'There is always room for niche marketing,' he says, 'provided
you market yourself properly.'
The range of options has narrowed. This is partly because Mauritius has
exhausted its most obvious source of comparative advantage - low-cost
labour; but also because it confronts by a new set of conditions in the
world economy: conditions favouring skills and capital-intensive techniques.
Mr Sithanen sees no quick-fix solution. Financial services, the freeport,
and offshore business development will be a long haul, he says. But he sees
no viable alternative to the growth strategy adopted in the late 1980s.
'We must continue with what we are doing,' he says, 'only we must do it much
better.'
But that will happen only if there is a change in attitudes: 'a change in
the work ethos. People will have to work harder and better if productivity
is to increase - the name of the game is to increase competitiveness.'
