FT  11 JAN 92 / Ticket to travel price war: Tour companies' manoeuvres
Discounting is to Britain's tour operators what sun and sangra are to their
younger customers. When excess is followed by throbbing pain, everyone
promises a life of eternal moderation - until the next binge.
All the large operators say they have nothing to gain from the sort of
prolonged price war that led to the industry offering some foreign holidays
for less than Pounds 100 in the late 1980s. Average profit margins sank to
less than Pounds 1 a holiday for many companies, and customers complained
about the declining quality of facilities.
This week, however, Thomson, the UK's largest operator, cut Pounds 15m off
the cost of 300,000 summer holidays and warned rivals that, if they wanted a
price war, they could have one. Mr Charles Newbold, Thomson's managing
director, says: 'I don't want to go back to those days of low margins, but
people are trying to gain market share. That is a recipe for very aggressive
price competition. I'm not going to lose any of our market share.'
The collapse last year of Mr Harry Goodman's International Leisure Group
(ILG) helped ensure that remaining operators enjoyed large increases in
profits in 1991. Mr Newbold warns that this year might not be as buoyant:
'People made record profits in 1991 because of Harry Goodman's magnanimous
gesture in going out of business. I don't think people will make record
profits in 1992.'
The current price-cutting was sparked off by Airtours, the third largest
operator, which last September published brochures offering keenly
competitive prices for summer 1992. Owners Abroad, the second largest
operator, responded with a range of price cuts and offers of free holidays
for children.
The discounting is not an attempt to grab what remains of a
recession-blighted market. The UK travel industry has proved resistant to
the drop in consumer spending. The Association of British Travel Agents says
demand for winter breaks is up 20 per cent over last year and summer
bookings have increased by 8 per cent.
Some tour operators report an even better start to the January and February
booking season, during which they expect to sell about 60 per cent of their
summer holidays. Mr Howard Klein, chairman of Owners Abroad, says summer
holiday bookings for the week ending January 4 were up 63 per cent over last
year. Bookings were hit last year by the onset of the Gulf war, but Mr Klein
says they were still proceeding normally in the first week of January 1991.
Comparisons with 1990 are difficult, because of Owners Abroad's acquisition
in March that year of tour operator Redwing from British Airways. Mr George
Marcall, sales director of Airtours, says his company's bookings in the
first week this month were 35 per cent up on the same month last year and 10
per cent on 1990.
The travel industry says the gloom pervading the rest of the economy seems
to have persuaded people that it is worth investing what cash they have in a
week or two in the sun. The collapse of the housing market means that money
that would have gone into new homes, and the washing machines and
dishwashers to go in them, can be spent on holidays instead.
The real reason for the current bout of discounting, Thomson's Mr Newbold
says, is a battle between Owners Abroad and Airtours. Together with Thomson,
they account for nearly two thirds of the UK package tour market. Mr Nigel
Reed of Paribas Capital Markets estimates that Thomson had 35 per cent of
the market last summer, while Owners Abroad had 15 per cent and Airtours 12
per cent.
'You've got an almighty battle between Owners Abroad and Airtours for second
place,' Mr Newbold says. 'They're getting very aggressive on price and we
have to make sure that we protect our part of the business.'
Mr Klein insists that, while Owners Abroad welcomes any increase in market
share, its primary objective is to maintain profit margins; it is Thomson
that is over-sensitive about market share. 'I remember meeting Charles
Newbold four or five years ago and saying: 'When are you going to stop
cutting this industry's throat?' And he said, and I'll never forget it: 'We
won't lose a point of market share'.'
Mr Klein and Mr Marcall say they do not believe that Thomson's discounts
will lead to an all-out price war. They take comfort from the fact that the
reductions apply to only one in eight of Thomson's holidays.
Mr Klein argues that it has become more difficult for new tour operators to
set up, and push prices down by undercutting the majors. After the collapse
of ILG, the Civil Aviation Authority increased the financial guarantees it
requires from new tour operators. Established travel companies have to
provide a bond equivalent to 10 per cent of their revenue from package
tourists reaching their destinations by air. This has been raised to 15 per
cent for new operators.
The City is uncertain whether to believe Owners Abroad and Airtours'
insistence that the travel industry is not on the verge of a further round
of price slashing. Since Thomson announced its discounts on Tuesday,
Airtours shares have fallen 51p to close at 823p last night. Owners Abroad
shares have lost 11p to 96 1/2 p.
Mr Reed of Paribas says the travel companies always try to reassure the City
that there is no price war in the offing. 'On the other hand, they want to
make out to the consumers that never before have prices been lower, they've
got to buy now, there are never-to-be-repeated discounts on offer. It's very
difficult for these guys.'
