FT  17 JUL 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (21): The longer you
wait, the higher the benefits - Options at retirement / Personal Pensions
SOMEONE WHO has contributed to a personal pension and wants to take the
benefits must first take three important decisions:
Precisely when to take the benefits?
Whether to take any part of the benefits as a tax-free cash sum, and if so
how much?
What type of annuity to buy with the remaining value of the contract(s)
after any cash has been taken?
To understand the relevance of these decisions, one should look quickly
again at the format of personal pensions, whether the old-style retirement
annuity contracts or the new-style personal pensions.
There is considerable flexibility over the timing of benefits. With
retirement annuity contracts, benefits can be taken at any time between
one's 60th and 75th birthday (both dates inclusive); with personal pensions,
the choice extends from the 50th to the 75th.
You do not have to stop work and retire in order to take the benefits, nor
do you have to take the benefits simply because you have stopped work.
Benefits can be taken to fit individual circumstances.
If a person dies before taking the benefits, under many contracts the
accumulated value is paid, free of inheritance tax, into his estate. Some
traditional contracts only pay a return of contributions, with or without
interest, on death.
Many people may consider the death benefit far more valuable than the
pension/cash sum benefit, and so can defer taking the benefits for as long
as possible. But they have to take the benefits when they reach age 75.
When the contract is cashed in, part of the accumulated value can be taken
as a tax-free cash sum. With a new-style personal pension, up to 25 per cent
of the value can be taken in this way.
With retirement annuity contracts, the formula is more complex, but the
percentage increases with the age at which benefits are taken and is greater
than with a personal pension. The remainder must be used to buy an annuity.
When to take it
In general, the longer you can defer taking the benefits, the greater the
accumulated value under the contracts. Similarly, the older you are, the
higher the annuity rates used to buy the pension.
If you have a series of personal pension contracts, you can arrange to cash
in a few contracts at a time, thereby building up your pension.
In deciding when to cash in, it is necessary to consider any other sources
of income, such as state pensions or personal savings. Care needs to be
taken if a contract is unit-linked - cash in when the market is depressed,
such as immediately after Black Monday in October 1987, and the value of the
contract will also be depressed.
Similarly, if contracts are cashed in when interest rates are falling, then
annuity rates will also be falling and the contract value will buy less
pension.
The cash option
This is the easiest question to answer. One should always take the maximum
available cash. It provides flexibility in one's financial arrangements, and
it usually makes sense to convert taxable income into tax-free cash.
An individual should take cash, even if he needs maximum income. He can use
the cash to buy an ordinary annuity, which, because of the favourable tax
treatment, provides a higher rate than the corresponding pension annuity.
Buying the pension
This is the most difficult decision, and one where an adviser cannot really
help, other than to explain the situation clearly.
Most articles in the media discuss the open-market option - where one can
find the best annuity rates. But this is the last in a series of decisions
that must be taken. The first and most important is: which type of annuity
to buy?
Ideally, one wants the maximum starting pension, where the real value keeps
pace with inflation. But such pensions are only available to civil servants
and other public sector employees. People with personal pensions must buy
their annuities in the real world. There is a variety from which to choose:
Level annuities.
Annuities increasing at a fixed annual rate.
With-profits annuities, where the value is increased each year by bonus
additions.
Unit-linked annuities, where the value varies according to the unit price of
the underlying fund.
Index-linked annuities, where the value increases annually in line with
rises in the Retail Price Index.
These can be on the life of the individual or on the lives of the individual
and spouse or partner, with payments continuing at the same rate or a
different rate after the first death. The annuity payments can be guaranteed
for a minimum period. The permutations are almost endless.
The only restrictions imposed by the Inland Revenue are: first, that the
guaranteed period of annuity payments cannot exceed 10 years; and second,
that payments to a surviving spouse or partner must not exceed the payments
made when both were alive.
Unfortunately, the general rule is that the higher the annual increases in
annuity payments, the lower the starting value of the annuity. The highest
starting value is provided by a level annuity on the life of the individual
with no future increases. Someone who wants pension increases must accept a
lower starting value. If he wants to provide for a spouse or partner, he
must accept an even lower starting value.
Few people will have accumulated sufficient value on their personal pension
contracts to be able to afford an acceptable starting pension that will rise
with inflation. For example, a man aged 65, wanting an index-linked annuity,
has to take a one-third reduction in the starting value compared with a
level annuity.
In making the choice, a person must decide:
How much he needs to live on at present.
How long he is likely to live, remembering that the life expectancy of a
healthy man aged 65 is about 14.6 years and about 22.5 years for a healthy
woman aged 60.
What the inflation rate will be over his lifetime, remembering that, if
inflation averages just 5 per cent a year, the real value of a level annuity
will be halved after 14 years.
What will happen to the individual's spouse or partner when he or she dies.
Someone selecting an annuity has to compromise between the starting value
and the annual increases. One approach is to assess what income you require
on retirement, taking into account all other sources of income, including
the state pension, which is revalued each year in line with inflation. You
can then judge what type of annuity will meet this requirement. The exercise
should include provision of a pension for your spouse or partner, taking
into account any income they may have.
The with-profits annuity offers a convenient compromise. With these
annuities, offered by Equitable Life, one can vary the starting income and
the annual increases by anticipating part of the future bonuses, as shown in
the tables. The greater the amount of anticipated bonus, the lower the
future increases.
If someone wants to take the highest starting income and let the future look
after itself, as most do when buying annuities, then it is their own choice.
But no adviser could, under best-advice rules, recommend such a course.
Once the type of annuity has been selected, the individual can use the
accumulated value to buy the best one available - this is the so-called
'market option'. An independent financial adviser should be able to help him
to select the best annuity rates.
However, someone with the old-style retirement annuity contracts could find
that, by going to a life company other than the one with issued the original
contract, the maximum cash sum available would be limited to 25 per cent.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
        PENSION ANNUITY BOUGHT WITH POUNDS 100,000: MAN AGED 65
                    Gross monthly amount (Pounds)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Level annuity                                       1,098
Annuity increasing by:
3 per cent a year                                     900
5 per cent a year                                     780
10 per cent a year                                    513
With-profits/unit-linked annuity:
Full growth                                           535
Anticipating 3.5 per cent growth                      732
Anticipating 9 per cent growth                      1,067
Index-linked                                          732
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Rates as at July 1                           Source: Equitable Life
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
PENSION ANNUITY BOUGHT WITH POUNDS 100,000: MAN AGED 65, WIFE 62
Gross monthly amount (Pounds )
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Level annuity                                         966
Annuity increasing by:
3 per cent a year                                     768
5 per cent a year                                     649
10 per cent a year                                    394
With-profits/unit-linked annuity:
Full growth                                           414
Anticipating 3.5 per cent growth                      603
Anticipating 9 per cent growth                        934
Index-linked                                          603
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Payments reduced by half if the man dies before his wife.
Rates as at July 1                          Source: Equitable Life
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
