FT  24 OCT 92 / How To Spend It: An old style gent
HACKETT MAN should be in clover. As from this week he now has his own
complete gentleman's outfitters where nothing jars or is out of place.
There he can worship at the altar of tradition, Englishness, quality and all
those other values so dear to the hearts of those whose preferred style of
dress owes nothing whatever to Armani, St Laurent or anything that could
remotely be labelled fashionable.
All the time-honoured products that Hackett man depends on are gathered
together under one roof. If it were aimed at any other sort of chap one
might be be tempted to call it a men's department store but for Hackett man
a gentleman's outfitters sets the mood exactly - it is what his kind of
dressing is all about.
Its location is spot on, too, right in the heart of Sloane Ranger territory,
next door to the Sloane's favourite shop, The General Trading Company, and
around the corner from Peter Jones, epicentre of Sloane school runs.
The official opening of the flagship store (the store is already operating
but there is a big glitzy opening next Thursday) is one big step forward in
the development of the Hackett brand.
Ever since Alfred Dunhill perceived that Hackett was a brand with huge
untapped potential - rumour has it that Lord Douro, Alfred Dunhill's
chairman, is a regular Hackett dresser - and bought it in June last year,
plans have been brewing.
James Pow, the managing director recruited from Mulberry, has no qualms
about opening a flagship store in the middle of a severe recession and sees
it as the first step towards establishing a full-blown international brand.
'There is a big gap in the market between expensive Savile Row tailoring and
High Street clothes.
'London needs a simplistic authentic gentleman's outfitters, a store with
the feeling that Brooks Bros had 15 or more years ago. We want it all to be
quietly, authentically English, with no pressure to buy, you will probably
either like it all or dislike it all.
'I believe firmly that the 1980s were an over-fashioned time and that people
now want to get away from frills and hype and look for quality and value for
money.'
Those who know and love the Hackett style already will be aware that it grew
out of a love of the qualities found in the best second-hand clothing.
Ashley Lloyd-Jennings and Jeremy Hackett are two immaculately dressed chaps
who could not find modern menswear with the qualities that they admired. So
they started to manufacture menswear to traditional standards.
The style of the new Hackett shop is a natural evolution from that. A sense
of Englishness is fundamental to the store. According to James Pow, 99 per
cent of the products are British-made.
There will be a made-to-measure service in suits (which basically means
making personal adjustments to ready-made clothing) and a full bespoke
service (prices around about the Pounds 895 mark). There will be all the
usual masculine appurtances from shirts to shoes and ties. Casual moleskin
trousers sell for Pounds 55, tweed jackets, all made according to the
stringent LLoyd-Jennings/Hackett standards, for about Pounds 235.
How you regard those prices depends on where you normally shop - those who
are used to Ralph Lauren prices will be impressed, those whose usual
stamping-ground is Marks &amp; Spencer may find the prices rather a shock. But
before you judge look carefully at the quality of the fabric and the making.
New to Hackett is a collection of English-made leather goods (such as the
black crossgrain travel shaving and toothbrush case, photographed here top
right), while those who liked the old barber's shop in the Covent Garden
store will be happy to know that a barber's shop has been reinstated at the
new store.
Hackett is not - and cannot be - to everyone's taste. If Armani, Paul Smith
or Boss are more your scene you may find it a little too traditional, a
touch dapper or fogeyish. But, for every man who longs to dress in a way
that is above and beyond fashion and who just wants to put on his clothes
and then forget about them, Hackett has a lot to offer.
Hackett is at 137/138 Sloane Street, London SW1.
