FT  03 NOV 92 / International Company News: Airlines to renew talks on
alliance
CANADIAN Airlines International is to renew talks later this week for a
far-reaching alliance with American Airlines amid signs that plans for a
merger between Canadian and Air Canada have run into difficulty.
PWA Corp, Canadian's Calgary-based parent, said yesterday the talks
scheduled with American officials in Dallas would be 'preliminary'.
American and Canadian were at an advanced stage of negotiations last summer
for an alliance which would have included American buying a 25 per cent
equity stake. Canadian would have meshed its marketing and reservations
systems with American.
Canadian was unable, however, to fulfil all American's conditions, notably a
requirement to raise new equity.
American Airlines declined to comment yesterday on the resumption of
discussions, but is understood to have retained its interest in its original
proposal.
A deal would be attractive to American because of the opportunity to expand
its Sabre reservations system and other 'back-office' facilities, as well as
giving access to Canadian's valuable landing slots in Japan and other Asian
airports.
In the wake of the collapse of the talks with American, Canadian was forced
to turn to its arch-rival, Air Canada. But the two domestic carriers have so
far been unable to agree on details of their proposed merger, such as the
composition of the combined fleet and the restructuring of their massive
debt, estimated at CDollars 7.7bn (USDollars 6.2bn).
Canadian and Air Canada last week asked the National Transportation Agency
to delay public hearings on the proposed merger, which were due to start in
Ottawa next Monday.
Both the Canadian carriers are suffering heavy losses. According to a leaked
document published in the local press last week, the merged airline would
post a 1993 loss of CDollars 666m.
Besides staunching the red ink, both airlines are also anxious to find a
partner which would make them more attractive as part of one of the emerging
international airline alliances.
PWA said the renewed negotiations with American stemmed from a request by
Ottawa's bureau for competition policy that PWA 'shop around' for an
alternative to the Air Canada merger.
An employee group has put forward a buy-out plan which would include an
investment by American.
