FT  30 SEP 92 / Gas-powered car project launched
BRITISH GAS is to launch the first serious attempt to put gas-powered
vehicles on UK roads.
The company expects to be running 100 of its own vans and cars on compressed
natural gas by the end of the year and is putting out to tender an order to
convert 200 more vehicles to gas early next year.
More significantly, it is taking the first steps to set up the nationwide
network of gas filling stations that will be essential if it is to compete
with petrol and diesel as a transport fuel.
A network of nine natural-gas refuelling stations will be in place by next
spring. They will be available for use not only by British Gas but also by
other companies that invest in fleets of natural-gas vehicles.
Mr Keith Nelson, British Gas marketing manager for natural-gas vehicles,
hopes that within eight years the UK will have at least 200,000 gas-powered
vans and cars and a refuelling infrastructure good enough for private
motorists to consider using gas instead of petrol or diesel.
The UK has been experimenting with various forms of gas-powered car for
several decades but lags far behind several other countries in introducing
gas as a transport fuel.
Almost 1m natural-gas vehicles are in use worldwide, with large development
programmes in Italy, Russia, Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the US.
The impetus behind their development in many parts of the world is
environmental. Such vehicles emit 30 per cent less carbon dioxide and 70 per
cent less carbon monoxide than petrol-powered vehicles. The gas is stored
under pressure in cylinders fitted in the boot of the car or on the floor of
the van. They can be filled quickly at one of the refuelling stations or
overnight with a special device attached to the domestic gas supply.
Mr Neil Fricker, for British Gas Research and Technology, insists that,
contrary to common perception, compressed gas is less hazardous in an
accident than a petrol tank.
The main disadvantage of today's gas-powered vehicles - which have
'bi-functional' engines that can run on either gas or petrol/diesel - is the
space taken up by the gas cylinders. But that should disappear in the long
run.
VERY large gas users face considerably higher prices than users in some
European countries and have not seen any price benefits from measures to
introduce competition into the UK gas market, Mr Ian Powe, director of the
Gas Consumers Council, said yesterday, Neil Buckley writes.
His comments will strengthen demands for lower energy prices from UK
industry, where many customers are already complaining about electricity
prices.
The Gas Consumers Council, which represents 18m British customers, said
yesterday one reason for the price rise for large users was the requirement
 -imposed by the Office of Fair Trading - that British Gas must halve its
share of the industrial supply market by the mid 1990s.
The consumers' council will shortly report to the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission, which is carrying out an inquiry into the UK gas market.
British Gas said that in real terms UK industrial contract prices had
dropped by 30 per cent since the company was privatised in 1986. It
accepted, however, that prices for large users were higher than in some
European countries.
