FT  30 SEP 92 / Survey claims 20m in CIS want to emigrate
AS MANY as 20m people in the three main republics of the former Soviet Union
have contemplated emigration, with the US, Sweden and Germany cited as the
most popular places for starting a new life in the west, according to a
survey published yesterday by Russian and Dutch academics.
The survey found that 8 per cent of Russians, 11 per cent of Ukrainians and
19 per cent of Kazakhs described themselves as 'frequently' or 'permanently'
thinking about emigration.
Although 11 per cent of respondents said the US was their first choice,
researchers found that Russians, Ukrainians and Kazakhs did not tend to
focus on just one or two countries as potential new homes.
'Given this even distribution, it would be conceivable for western countries
to indulge in a more liberal immigration policy, provided that nearly all
countries took such a stance simultaneously,' a report on the survey said.
The survey, which claims to be one of the most detailed accounts ever
compiled of the mental, physical and material needs of people in the
Commonwealth of Independent States, was conducted on the eve of the Soviet
Union's collapse in November and December 1991.
The questionnaire was devised by professors at Erasmus University in
Rotterdam and put to 9,000 households in Russia, Ukraine and Kazakhstan by
Dr Yuri Levada, a Russian sociologist, and the Russian Centre for Study of
Public Opinion on Social Economic Subjects.
Despite the upheavals since late 1991, researchers say most of the survey's
data is still valid, although responses to questions about politics should
be regarded with caution. Prof Stanislav Menshikov, a visiting professor at
Erasmus, said yesterday that the mood in the former Soviet Union was now
'probably worse than a year ago'.
The former Soviet Union emerges from the 'Erasmus Survey 1991' as a region
beset by intense worry about job security, lagging purchasing power, crime
and poor, overcrowded housing.
Multi-generation households of grandparents, parents and children are still
common.
At the same time, one in five households still consists of two nuclear
families.
'If we assume that in all two-family households the families would prefer to
live independently, if possible, this would suggest a 20 per cent housing
shortage,' the report said.
More than 95 per cent of households in the survey area have refrigerators
and television sets, while slightly more than 82 per cent owned a washing
machine, though the report points out 'a Russian washing machine is not the
comfortable, luxurious apparatus known in the west.' Car ownership, at 21.2
per cent, is higher than most people in the west expect.
One intriguing aspect of the survey is the direct comparison between
attitudes in the former Soviet Union and the Netherlands.
Despite the high standards of the Dutch health care system, the Dutch tend
to have relatively more complaints about their physical health than
Russians, who lead harder lives.
However, researchers found 'very shocking' and 'dramatic' disparities in
mental health, even after allowing for differences in the Russian and Dutch
characters.
Nearly 15 per cent of Russian respondents said that they had occasionally or
frequently contemplated suicide, compared with 3.5 per cent of Dutch
respondents.
Only 33 per cent of Russians said they were in a good mood, compared with 90
per cent of the Dutch.
