FT  14 FEB 92 / Technology (Worth Watching): Top prizes in the invention
stakes
A MEDICAL system which could enable doctors to test for illnesses in their
surgery - without sending blood or urine samples off to the laboratory - won
a team of scientists at the Wolfson research laboratories at Birmingham
University the top prize in the UK's Toshiba year of invention competition.
The printed liquidic circuit system - resembling a large electronic circuit
 -uses standard chemistry tests, but carries them out automatically in a
single device - unlike previous more complicated methods.
The device consists of a single layer of filter paper on to which a pattern
of wax tracks is printed, defining the channels through which the body fluid
flows. The device contains a layer of antibodies to which the antigens in
the blood or urine, if present, bind. At the end of the test a colourmetric
device shows whether antigens are present.
A FIFTEEN-year-old schoolboy won the schools category of the awards with an
energy-saving device which could cut the electricity bills of schools and
factories.
After noticing that the lights at a local school were often left switched on
at night, Richard Mead, of Cheltenham College, set about designing a series
of clips which can be attached over the lighting circuits in the fuse boxes.
Attached on top of the wiring insulation the clips detect the magnetic field
when power passes through the wiring. The clips in turn are wired to a
central electronic box with a series of red lights on the top. When the
lights are left on, corresponding ones on the box light up too.
A HAND-HELD instrument which helps owners of oil rigs or power stations to
cut their repair bills won two divers the individual award category.
The device, sold by Instrument and Inspection Services, of London, is used
by repair workers carrying out remedial grinding on huge metal joints - a
process in which the sharp edges of the cracked surface are smoothed away to
help prevent further deterioration. The gauge accurately calculates the
thickness of the metal left by subtracting the depth of the grinding from
the metal remaining.
THE small business category of the Toshiba awards was won by London
architect Brian Perry for developing a fire escape system using
non-incandescent light. Intended for use in public places, the continuous
luminescent beams can be used to identify escape routes and can be activated
automatically by fire or smoke detectors.
The non-incandescent light becomes highly visible when the minute particles
present in smoke and dust from the fire act as a diffuser.
Contacts: Toshiba: Japan, 03 3457 4511. Toshiba year of invention hotline:
UK, 081 691 9191. Wolfson Research Laboratories: UK, 021 472 1311.
Cheltenham College: UK, 0242 513540. Instrument and Inspection Services: UK,
071 499 7484. Perry Architects: UK, 071 485 4142.
