FT  21 SEP 92 / World Economy and Business Review (1): An interdependent
world pays for past excesses - After several false dawns, there is little
sign of a robust economic recovery, the outlook is for slow growth at best
IT WAS not supposed to be like this.
The 1990s dawned amid hopes of a new era of prosperity after the collapse of
communism. The end of superpower rivalry was the icing on the cake of
extended economic growth and rising living standards enjoyed by the western
industrial democracies in the 1980s.
Now, with just a quarter of the decade gone, disappointment abounds.
Global growth has been feeble. World output stagnated last year, according
to the International Monetary Fund. Some countries, notably Britain, have
suffered lengthy recession.
Unemployment in the 24 industrialised nations of the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development has jumped from less than 25m two
years ago to about 30m today.
Leadership is in short supply. The three economic powerhouses - the US,
Japan and Germany - have become introspective as they struggle with their
respective problems of lacklustre growth, asset price deflation and the
inflationary strains imposed by German unification.
International economic policy co-ordination - a high priority for
policy-makers in the 1980s - is seriously weakened. Monetary and economic
policies among the Group of Seven leading industrial countries now follow
the 'Sinatra Doctrine' of 'doing it my way'. This principle has undermined
solidarity in the European Monetary System. In an unprecedented setback for
the EMS, Britain and Italy last week floated the pound and lira rather than
suffer the consequences of speculative attacks on their currencies.
There is still something to cheer about outside the charmed circle of the
industrialised democracies. Latin America appears to be getting up off the
canvas after a decade of low growth and falling living standards, triggered
by the Mexican debt crisis of 1982. The dynamic economies of south-east Asia
should also notch up more growth although at a slower pace than in the boom
years of the past decade.
But these few bright spots are eclipsed by problems elsewhere. Eastern
Europe is finding that the struggle to adapt to the market economy is far
more difficult than expected. Worse still is the position in the former
Soviet Union. Russia's economic reform efforts have run into ever greater
problems since the start of the year. The break-up of the single Comecon
trading block has greatly increased the adjustment problems of all the
former communist states. Africa, in the headlines again for starvation in
Somalia and civil strife in South Africa, seems condemned to lag
economically behind the rest of the globe.
Symptoms of tension are legion. Currency markets have succumbed to turmoil,
reflecting divergent economic policies and monetary conditions. Last week,
the EMS suffered the worst crisis of its 13-year history with three member
currencies forced to devalue or float.
Earlier, the dollar was driven down to historic lows against Germany's
currency as fund managers switched billions of dollars of investments into
high-yielding D-Marks.
More than funds are moving around the world, however. The wealthy countries
of northern Europe and north America are proving to be a powerful magnet for
economic immigrants from the world's poorer regions. The vicious rioting
against asylum-seekers in the eastern German city of Rostock in August and
in other cities this month highlighted the social and political dangers
posed by immigration.
Yet, the forums for discussing such north-south issues as migration are
woefully under-developed. The United Nations has its hands full with crises
such as Bosnia and Somalia. The International Monetary Fund and World Bank
are increasingly occupied in mobilising the industrial world's limited
financial support for the former Soviet Union. The OECD has put itself
forward as a clearing house for ideas between its 24 industrialised member
countries and non-member states, but the Paris-based body is underfunded and
taken less than seriously by its members. This year's annual OECD
ministerial meeting was notable for the virtual absence of G7 finance
ministers from the talks.
Suggestions that this year's G7 summit meeting in Munich might be the
prelude to closer north-south relations have been followed by a deafening
silence. The summit turned out to be little more than an expensive photo
call that failed to achieve any progress on the most pressing economic
problem on its agenda, the stalled Uruguay Round of trade liberalisation
talks.
A successful conclusion to the talks being held under the auspices of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) could enhance the growth
prospects of industrial and developing countries alike. Freer trade could
help the former Soviet republics and the countries of eastern Europe
overcome their economic crises and help secure democracy in these regions.
After the Munich summit, there was talk of a 'window of opportunity' for
achieving a Gatt round breakthrough between yesterday's French referendum on
the Maastricht treaty and the US presidential election in November. But
nobody is banking on it. In Gatt matters, leaders propose while trade and
agriculture ministers dispose.
The world's present economic tribulations and policy paralysis have their
roots in excesses of the 1980s.
It was a decade in which politicians would hymn the virtues of sustainable
non-inflationary growth while failing to correct errors that would
eventually undermine this goal.
The US, for example, became hooked on debt; first as the expansionary fiscal
policies of the Reagan years spawned huge budget deficits and later as the
private sector caught the disease, with banks only too happy to provide
funds for leveraged buy-outs and property speculation on a grand scale.
In Britain, financial deregulation and insufficient official concern about
sharply higher bank lending and house prices resulted in a credit-fuelled
inflationary boom.
Japan experienced a stock market and property bubble created by a sustained
period of low interest rates that was intended to support the dollar and
hold down the value of the yen. Germany's problems came at the end of the
decade when unification triggered economic overheating, inflation and a huge
jump in government deficits.
Tight monetary policies were deployed to curb such excesses and they
continue to take their toll.
In the US, companies and consumers continue to pay down their debts in spite
of an aggressive easing of policy that brought the official discount rate
down to 3 per cent in August - its lowest level since 1963. Recovery in the
US therefore remains anaemic. Financial markets are correspondingly jittery
ahead of the November presidential election.
Japan's 'bubble economy' has been followed by an equally spectacular asset
price deflation that has hit consumer spending and the country's banks.
Although the government's Y10,700bn emergency economic package, introduced
at the end of August, triggered an immediate recovery of Tokyo stock market
values, its full effects will not be known for several months.
In Europe, the problems of German unification have increasingly transmitted
slow growth to other members of the EMS through the European exchange rate
mechanism.
The D-Mark's position as the dominant currency in the ERM, which has been
spectacularly confirmed in the recent market turmoil, has ensured that other
EMS countries have been unable to escape the impact of the high interest
rates used by the Bundesbank to counteract inflation and excessive monetary
growth.
Although the Bundesbank cut its internationally important Lombard rate by a
quarter of a point to 9.5 per cent last week, the floor that it sets for
interest rates among ERM participants is still a brake on growth in
countries such as France or Denmark.
There are, to be sure, some positive signs in the world economy.
Inflationary pressures have eased in virtually all industrialised countries.
In Germany, signs of economic slowdown and the Bundesbank's cautious
monetary easing hold out hope of reduced inflationary pressures and a
further reduction of interest rates.
But after several false dawns, there is little sign of a robust economic
recovery: the outlook is for slow growth at best. One result will be reduced
economic opportunities for the developing countries and the ex-Communist
states of eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union which have invested
high expectations in western economic leadership and values.
G7 policy co-ordination created problems in the 1980s by focusing on
currency stabilisation while allowing inflationary excesses to build up. But
the subsequent divergence of policies and performance between Germany and
the US and inside the EMS have made for difficulties in an interdependent
world. It remains to be seen whether the past week's EMS changes will be
followed by greater co-operation in international economic policy-making or
continuing monetary turbulence.
