FT  15 DEC 92 / Survey of European Finance and Investment - Italy (5): Efim
upsets the bankers - The state's debt problems
ITALY IS fast acquiring a reputation as unreliable among international
bankers. The collapse of Federconsorzi, the farm services group, followed by
the ugly dispute over Efim, which went into voluntary liquidation in July
this year, have tarnished the country's reputation as a borrower.
The Efim affair remains unresolved as far as many bankers are concerned. Six
months after the state holding group - which controls about 140 companies
ranging from helicopter makers to glass manufacturers - collapsed, foreign
bankers still have not received any of the money that they are owed.
Privately, foreign banks warn that Italian state borrowers could find it
hard to raise money in the international syndicated loans market in future
unless they are prepared to pay handsome terms for the privilege.
Eighteen months ago, international banks clashed with the Italian
authorities over Federconsorzi, the farm services group which went under
with debts of L4,200bn.
International banks claimed that Federconsorzi had been able to borrow in
the syndicated loans market on relatively favourable terms because it was
regarded as a state credit to all intents and purposes. They were furious
when the Italian government refused to repay Federconsorzi's debts. Many -
including the Japanese banks which had a large exposure to Federconsorzi -
refused to lend to Italian names in protest.
When Italian borrowers were eventually able to return to the market, pricing
on their loans increased to reflect banks' concern over Italian credits.
However, few lessons seem to have been learnt from that affair. Efim was put
into liquidation by government decree on July 18 with total bank borrowings
of about L9,500bn, of which nearly L4,000bn is owed to foreign banks.
The Italian treasury announced shortly afterwards that creditors would be
issued bonds denominated in either Ecu or Lira and paying interest at only
about half the market rate - an offer worth about L4,000bn. The proposed
coupon on the Lira bonds was 7.25 per cent while that on the Ecu bonds was
set at 4 per cent.
The banks were furious at the miserly coupons, saying that the overall deal
was equivalent to only 80 per cent of the principal and interest due.
The creditor banks argue that Efim, and its subsidiaries Agusta and Safim,
were able to borrow in the international loans market on competitive terms.
Agusta and Safim were treated as state risks, even though there was no
explicit Treasury guarantee.
After several weeks of lobbying, the state eventually relented and agreed to
repay the debts in full. However, banks complain that they have had no
further details of how they will be repaid or when.
Under the terms of the latest decree, the Treasury will guarantee in full
those loans made to the failed holding company and its wholly-owned
subsidiaries, also in liquidation. However, foreign bankers remain uncertain
over the implications for loans made to those subsidiaries which are not
wholly-owned by Efim, such as the Agusta helicopters group.
The Italian government said in October that Efim's loss-making aerospace and
defence interests would be transferred to IRI (Italy's largest state holding
group) to be managed, pending their sale. These include Agusta and Oto
Melara, a missiles producer. The government has said it will take on the
debts owed by Agusta and Oto Melara.
The Efim debacle has coloured bankers' perceptions of Italian risk. Many
argue that the clumsy handling of its debt repayments could make bankers
reluctant to lend to other state-controlled names, such as IRI.
Certainly, Italian names have been frequent users of the international
syndicated loans market in the past. Total syndicated borrowing reached a
peak of Dollars 14.69bn in 1990, falling back to Dollars 8.03bn in 1991 and
a mere Dollars 4.95bn so far in 1992, according to figures provided by
Euromoney Loanware.
Bankers point out that several loans to IRI, ENI and ENEL, the state holding
companies, are due to mature in the next year or so. It could turn out to be
expensive and difficult to refinance these borrowings in the loans market.
The top state-owned borrowers, such as Ferrovie, the railway, and ENEL, the
electricity utility, have traditionally had easy access to a range of
financial markets - so if the syndicated loans market is closed off to them,
they can tap other markets such as the bond market instead. But small
financial institutions which have depended on the syndicated loan market in
the past could find other sources of funds difficult to obtain.
Bankers report that few Italian state borrowers are willing to approach the
syndicated loans market while the Efim affair drags on. Coming after the
Federconsorzi scandal, bankers are naturally even less willing to lend to
Italian state names at a time when the economic background in Italy appears
to be deteriorating.
Isveimer, the Italian credit institution, recently launched a Dollars 150m
floating rate note (FRN) issue, and bankers point out that the generous
terms of the deal reflect the need to overcome a general uneasiness about
Italian borrowers.
However, not all have been treated in this way. Fiat, Italy's largest
private industrial conglomerate, recently succeeded in raising the amount
borrowed via a five-year revolving credit facility to Dollars 800m from the
Dollars 500m it had originally planned. The pricing - of 55 basis points
over the London interbank offered rate - was seen as relatively aggressive.
Bankers point out Fiat is one Italian name that has not been damaged by the
Efim affair.
In many cases, however, bankers are waiting for the resolution of the affair
before they rush to lend to Italian names.
