FT  23 MAY 92 / Arts: Guggenheim megalomania - As the museum reopens its
doors, Susan Moore reports on the controversial plans of its new director,
Thomas Krens
NEXT month the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York reopens to the
public. Its two-year closure has seen not only the restoration of Frank
Lloyd Wright's idiosyncratic masterpiece to its 'pre-original condition',
but the construction of a 10-storey annexe to provide additional gallery
space on Fifth Avenue and the creation of a new Guggenheim Museum in SoHo,
contributing a further 30,916sq ft for the display of works of art.
Under its new director, 45 year old Thomas Krens, a deal has been signed
with the Basque government to build a Dollars 98m sand-blasted steel and
concrete Guggenheim in Bilbao, designed by Frank Gehry, and a project mooted
for another Guggenheim to be hewn out of the rock of the Monchsberg in
Salzburg.
The museum's holdings have increased too. In 1990, the Solomon R. Guggenheim
Foundation controversially deaccessioned three paintings to finance the
Dollars 30m acquisition of 210 Minimalist paintings and sculpture from the
collection of the Italian Count Giuseppe Panza di Biumo. The foundation may
also accept the gift of his villa at Varese. If that were not enough, it has
also offered to administer an earlier Krens brainchild, a projected Dollars
87m modern art museum in economically depressed North Adams in
Massachusetts.
Shrouded by builders' hoardings and stripped of its collection, the
Guggenheim has generated more column inches in the press than any other
flourishing cultural institution. The reason is that Krens is redefining the
concept of the public museum for the late 20th century, and finding new ways
both of financing and filling it. Moreover, in terms of scale, expense and
funding, his Guggenheim resembles more a multinational business conglomerate
than a 20th century art museum. Is Krens an inspired visionary, an
irresponsible megalomaniac, or a Barnum purveying a new kind of travelling
circus?
Krens was appointed in 1988. He inherited a museum with an endowment of
Dollars 25m and an operating deficit of nearly Dollars 2m, a monument by
probably America's greatest architect in a sorry state of disrepair, and
space to exhibit only three per cent of the museum's outstanding holdings.
Now new office, storage and conservation space allows the public to see all
of the Wright building for the first time, and for it to be used exclusively
for the display of art.
The cost of the New York projects - the annexe, the restoration, the SoHo
museum on Broadway and Prince designed by Arata Isozaki, plus the new
conservation workshops and store on the Westside - is Dollars 76m. (The 27
members of the board, all of whom are expected 'to take a financial
responsibility', insist that the Guggenheim bears none of the costs of its
overseas projects. Indeed, the Basques are paying for their museum,
guaranteeing operations, paying Dollars 50m for acquisitions that complement
the Guggenheim collections, plus a Dollars 20m fee for its expertise.)
Some Dollars 54.9m has been raised by the Guggenheim Foundation issuing
tax-exempt bonds in a deal that took 12 members of staff 18 months to
negotiate and produce, in association with the Trust for Cultural Resources,
the Swiss Bank Corporation and JP Morgan. 'It is almost free money,' says
Krens. That may be so, but it has to be repaid within some 20 years. Unlike
comparable bonds issued by other cultural institutions, this one is not
secured by collateral. If the museum cannot raise the money, the
responsibility will fall on the board. If the board fails to deliver, the
museum's assets may be at risk.
'Museums often have to change in order to survive', says Krens. 'Either
their mandate, or their collection or their audience must change. There is
no such thing as a given Guggenheim, so part of what I have to do is to
anticipate the way culture is evolving as defined by museums, to articulate
a clear set of standards and objectives for the museum and translate those
into policies and programs that can be paid for.'
Krens is sticking to the museum's mandate - the 20th century. It is the
collection that is changing.
The purchase of the Panza di Biumo collection (which, ironically, can never
be deaccessioned) is consistent with Krens's stated desire to build on the
museum's qualities and strengths. The Guggenheim began life as a Museum of
Non-Objective Painting. This collection offers non-objective art of the
post-war period, with some 20 works apiece by American Minimalists such as
Robert Ryman, Richard Serra, Donald Judd, Dan Flavin, Robert Morris, Bryce
Marden and Robert Mangold.
'I believe this will be historically justified as a brilliant acquisition
for the institution. We are now the strongest museum in the world for a
particular field, 1963-1975. We own the voice', says Krens. Moreover, the
strong association of the museum with particular artists may well inspire
artists and collectors to donate works.
Work of such radical scale demands vast spaces, hence Guggenheim SoHo and
Bilbao. Krens has been accused of cultural imperialism. A far greater danger
is of his opportunism becoming predatory, or undirected. As Krens put it,
'the museum's stance and aesthetic outlook is hard to articulate.'
Undoubtedly, the Guggenheim will be 'a more efficient organisation accessing
different audiences essentially with the same product'. The implication is
that the the Guggenheim collections in New York, Venice, Bilbao and perhaps
Salzburg, will be constantly on the move. Soon we will see whether, on the
one hand, Krens and his impressive international curatorial team will
justify the museum's costly expansionist programme. On the other, will they
honour their fundamental curatorial obligations of preserving and
interpreting its rich existing holdings?
