FT  16 NOV 92 / Czechs and Slovaks face the pain of breaking up: The
problems of dividing archives, armed forces and buildings
PITY the unfortunate officials at the Czechoslovak Defence Ministry. They
have been saddled with the task of dividing up, as fairly as possible, not
just the country's armed forces and weapons but also its archives, including
important records from the second world war and the years of communist rule.
Worse, they have to find a solution before the country divides into the
republics of the Czech Lands and Slovakia on January 1 1993.
Apart from cutting everything in three and handing two pieces to the Czechs
and one to the Slovaks, to correspond to the population ratio, they simply
do not know how to begin dividing such historical material.
As an example of the problem that breaking up can bring, the issue of the
archives is not entirely trifling. Slovakia's defence minister, Mr Jozef
Tuchyna, has said that if there is no full agreement on defence between the
two republics before January 1, Slovakia may not accept any others.
Defence, agriculture and the division of federal property are the three
crucial areas on which no consensus has yet been reached. The federal
property issue is proving particularly difficult and is unlikely to be
resolved by January 1. The main problem is that the federal parliament has
been unable to muster the necessary three-fifths majority to pass a bill
authorising the division.
Both the Czech and Slovak national councils have threatened to pass a
resolution forcing the parliament to act. The federal cabinet, meanwhile,
has agreed to set up a special commission of senior officials from both
sides, headed by the federal prime minister, Mr Jan Strasky, to get things
moving.
Property will essentially be divided territorially and in proportion to
population, with special measures to compensate either republic in instances
where most of the property of a federal institution is located in the other.
Slovakia is expected to be the bigger beneficiary. Not only are most
government buildings, for example, in Prague, the Czech capital, but the
Czechs also have most of the federal defence installations, though the
armaments industry is in Slovakia.
Despite these difficulties, however, progress has been made in other areas.
To date, 22 agreements governing future relations between the Czech republic
and Slovakia have been signed by the republics' prime ministers, Mr Vaclav
Klaus and Mr Vladimir Meciar. The most important is a customs union due to
come into force on January 1, which provides for abolition of all trade
restrictions between the two republics, a single customs territory, and
common tariffs on trade with third countries.
Both sides have also agreed to continue with a single currency - the koruna
 -for up to six months after the split.
Other agreements include a pact on friendly relations; the harmonisation of
social security and health benefits; environmental protection; double
taxation agreements; the protection of each republic's investments in the
other; and the maintenance of transport and telecommunications links.
These achievements reflect areas with a broad element of consensus. The real
haggling is over those areas where there is no common approach. Western
diplomats praise the 'businesslike' manner adopted by both sides. However,
one senior diplomat pointed out the importance of reaching 'some kind of
definitive arrangement' on the issue of federal property by the deadline,
otherwise 'it will drag on for years and will no longer be a priority'.
This point was underlined this week by Mr Vladimir Dlouhy, Czech republic
trade and industry minister. Returning from a trade mission to Italy, he
said the 'vagueness' surrounding the split had affected business confidence
in Czechoslovakia, and politicians must spell out more clearly what has been
achieved so far.
