FT  08 DEC 92 / Money Markets: Futures hit in late trade
STERLING futures fell as dealers adjusted positions yesterday and the belief
hardened that base rates will remain at 7 per cent for the next few months,
writes Peter John.
The March contract opened marginally higher but a rally was unsustainable
and it drifted back throughout the day. Then, shortly before the official
close, the contract was hit again and sold down to 93.27. The pressure came
from a large options-related trade. Dealers said one financial house had
sold short sterling and written more than 2,200 March 93.25 sterling calls.
At the official close, March short sterling was around its lows of the day
with more than 22,000 contracts dealt. It was joined by the franc and D-Mark
contracts which also retreated from expectations that interest rates are
about to fall. March Pibor settled 25 basis points lower at 91.30 while the
March Euromark contract fell 14 to 92.14.
Meanwhile, cash rates remained steady with three-month Libor holding at 7
1/8 . There was some pressure at the shorter end as a result of a lower than
expected liquidity shortage forecast from the Bank of England. Expectation
that the shortage would easily be taken out meant that few people would be
interested in borrowing overnight. The rate dropped to 6 1/8 per cent as the
Bank forecast a shortage of around Pounds 100m, up to Pounds 200m below some
estimates.
Among the main factors affecting the position were exchequer transactions,
expected to remove Pounds 775m from the system, take-up of treasury Bills
and paper maturing in official hands and bankers' balances below target.
These were partly offset by a fall in note circulation adding Pounds 780m.
The Bank did not operate in the money market at midday, nor in the
afternoon, but later revised its shortage forecast to Pounds 250m. During
late assistance, the period when the term of loans are not mentioned, the
central bank provided Pounds 180m.
It also announced the roll-over details of the temporary arrangement first
made available on September 18 to help money market liquidity after the
collapse of sterling on Black Wednesday. The Bank yesterday set a weekly
rate of 6 per cent on the agreement.
Meanwhile, German call money, which is reflected by the narrow money supply
band, firmed slightly to about 8.90 per cent after Friday's 8.85 per cent.
