FT  24 AUG 92 / The Markets Under Strain: US election rivals ignore dollar
THE IMPLICATIONS of the dollar's plunge are only just beginning to seep into
US political consciousness.
Strange though it may seem in Europe, President George Bush and Governor
Bill Clinton, his Democratic challenger, are debating the economy without
even mentioning the dollar. Both men are focusing exclusively on domestic
imperatives, such as the need to create jobs. Until very recently top White
House officials were calling loudly for further cuts in interest rates.
This blithe indifference to the dollar may not last. On Saturday the New
York Times and Washington Post ran front-page stories on the dollar's
decline. Until then currency news had been relegated to business pages. As
public awareness grows the Democrats may try to make capital out of the
dollar's weakness, saying it is yet another sign of Mr Bush's economic
incompetence.
But the exchange rate is politically a far less sensitive indicator than it
is in Europe. The dollar is rarely perceived as a macho measure of economic
strength, if only because few US consumers know or care what it is worth in
terms of other currencies. Dollar depreciation has been widely welcomed as a
way of giving US companies an edge in export markets. Mr Nicholas Brady, the
Treasury secretary, and an ardent advocate of lower interest rates,
frequently argues that export growth holds the key to US economic revival.
Few analysts worry that dollar weakness will threaten an acceleration of
inflation. Exports and imports each account for less than 11 per cent of
gross domestic product, about a third of the ratio in European economies.
Higher import prices thus have little impact on the overall price level.
Forecasters expect inflation to fall to between 2.5 per cent and 3.0 per
cent next year as high unemployment and competitive labour markets keep a
firm lid on wage rises.
A free fall of the dollar, of course, is not at all the same thing as a
gradual, controlled depreciation. On Friday the dollar's plunge undermined
both share and bond prices, something that the US cares a great deal about.
Until then domestic markets seemed oddly insulated from foreign exchange
fluctuations.
Even so, few Wall Street analysts see dollar weakness as likely to cause a
revision of monetary policy. They do not believe the US Treasury and Fed
will do more than 'talk up' the dollar and join other central banks in
periodically intervening in foreign exchange markets.
Mr Bill Griggs, a bond market expert, said: 'I don't think there is any plan
to raise interest rates. I don't think they feel the economy would permit
it. Politically, it would be suicide.'
Mr William Brown, chief economist at J P Morgan, the New York bank, said
that if the economy failed to strengthen, a further loosening of monetary
policy was likely. 'If the growth rate is still 1.5 per cent in three months
time and unemployment is trending higher, the Fed will cut the discount rate
again,' he said. He believes small cuts in the federal funds rate - at which
banks lend to each other - are possible before then, if economic news is
bad.
The view that US rates ought to fall rather than rise is not just based on
worries about the sluggish domestic recovery. In the US Germany is blamed
for causing turbulence in foreign exchange markets. The problem is seen
primarily as an excessively strong D-mark rather than a weak dollar - which
has held its value much better against the Japanese yen.
Mr Neal Soss, chief economist at First Boston Corporation, a Wall Street
brokerage, said: 'I would hope and expect that the Fed will not place itself
in the position of the Bank of England and subjugate monetary policy to
foreign exchange constraints.' If the Fed were to raise rates now, he said,
the US would in effect become an honorary ERM member and allow the
Bundesbank to dictate its monetary policy. That would not be acceptable in
the US.
The country's policymakers are keenly aware of the strains that high German
interest rates are causing in Europe. They sympathise with the plight of
countries such as the UK and are anxious that progress towards economic
integration in Europe is not jeopardised by French rejection of the
Maastricht treaty.
The Fed, at the direction of the US Treasury, has thus joined other central
banks in intervening in foreign exchange markets as much to ease tensions in
the ERM as to defend the weak dollar. In the short run, the strong D-mark is
seen as a much bigger threat to small, weak European economies than to the
US.
Fed intervention on Friday, however, did seem motivated mainly by domestic
considerations. The Treasury wanted to make sure that the dollar remained
firm following Mr Bush's acceptance speech at the Republican convention in
Houston. In the event, the intervention misfired because it seemed to
confirm market fears about the dollar's fragility. Mr Griggs said: 'The
dollar would probably have been stronger without any intervention.'
Most US analysts believe the dollar is now chronically undervalued and will
rebound as the economy recovers and the abnormal gap between German and US
interest rates narrows. However, the belief that the Fed will not raise
interest rates in the approach to a close presidential election creates the
potential for great instability. Put bluntly, it invites speculation against
the dollar and puts far too much strain on foreign exchange intervention.
The assumption that the Fed will not raise rates may, of course, be false.
It has tightened policy in the approach to past elections. But if it were
forced to act, it would strike a devastating blow to Mr Bush's re-election
hopes.
