FT  02 MAR 92 / Japan's wildlife stand to be tested
JAPANESE fishmongers have greeted the conservationists and government
delegates arriving for an international conference on wildlife trade with
petitions asking them to consider the cultural implications of imposing
trade curbs on bluefin tuna served in Tokyo's more expensive sushi
restaurants.
Keen for recognition as a leader in environmental issues, Japan is hosting
the triennial conference of the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species (Cites) beginning today in Kyoto. But it is likely to
have its conservationist credibility tested at the 12-day gathering.
Several controversial proposals to be discussed at the conference, which, as
well as limits on bluefin tuna fishing, include a relaxation of the ivory
trade ban and the listing of tropical timbers for protection, have drawn
strong reaction from affected Japanese business groups, some with links to
the ruling Liberal Democratic Party.
The conference must deal with a range of awkward issues, among them whether
developed countries have the right to recommend limits on the potentially
profitable trade of developing countries, and whether countries agreeing on
trade limits should receive compensation.
Tokyo did not join the Cites group when formed in 1975, but the foreign
ministry has since identified wildlife trade as an issue where Japan can
play a politically important role. Other issues targeted by a government
intent on lifting its profile include the arms trade and global warming.
Japanese delegates will announce tougher rules for trade in wild animals,
requiring the country of origin to verify an export permit before a
protected animal is shipped. Document falsification will be among the issues
covered in a report to be presented at the conference.
Mr Seizo Handa, chief executive director of World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF)
Japan, said it was 'appropriate' the conference was to be held in Kyoto
because Japan, after the US, is the second biggest trader in endangered
species. He applauded the government for having taken 'some measures' to
lessen that trade. Japan has not decided how it will vote on the ivory issue
this time round, when five southern African governments will propose
resumption of a limited trade. A compromise, trade in elephant meat and
skins, will also be debated.
