FT  15 MAY 92 / Latvia issues parallel rouble / A look at the 'suicide'
steps being taken to cope with currency shortages in the Baltic states
IN A move which the International Monetary Fund calls 'economic suicide',
Latvia has issued its own parallel currency and other Baltic states are
taking similar measures to ease the rouble shortage afflicting the former
Soviet republics.
Raging inflation has led to an acute cash shortfall which the Russian
financial authorities - who consider the independent Baltic states as debtor
nations - have refused to meet. As a result the payment of wages and
pensions is often delayed for months, strengthening the pressure on Baltic
governments to replace the hated 'occupation rouble'.
Latvia responded on May 7 by issuing a transitional currency, the 'Latvian
rouble', which is legal tender on its territory together with the Russian
rouble. Lithuania has made a similar limited step, decreeing that its
'Vagnorky coupons' are to serve as rouble substitutes. Estonia has printed
its own money, the kroon, but has decided not to issue it for the time
being.
The convertibility of the new currencies is strictly limited. They will be
used for public-sector wages and payments, but it will be hard to force the
private sector to accept them. 'What happens when I pay a 25 rouble
restaurant bill with a 200 Vagnorky note?' asked a Lithuanian official. 'I
doubt I will get 175 roubles change.' Latvian citizens have already dubbed
their new currency 'white' money.
The IMF, which is supporting Russian moves to make the rouble convertible
and the linchpin of the entire 'rouble zone', has warned that the new
currencies will be even more vulnerable to inflation than the Russian
rouble. It warned that for the smaller, energy-dependent republics like the
Baltics to create their own currencies now would be 'economic suicide', says
Bank of Latvia president Einars Repse.
In its recent reports on the Baltic republics, the IMF said the short-term
economic outlook was 'bleak' in Latvia and Lithuania and 'precarious' in
Estonia, whose GDP could shrink by over 20 per cent this year.
The Fund has warned that the introduction of new and largely inconvertible
currencies would only deepen the slump as trade with the rest of the former
Soviet Union, which accounts for over 90 per cent of the total trade of the
Baltic states, is further disrupted.
The Baltic moves towards currency reform are motivated by political as much
as economic factors. The governments of all three Baltic states are in
crisis, facing economic depression, potential ethnic conflicts between their
native populations and over 2m ethnic Russians, and continuing occupation by
former Soviet troops.
In Latvia, parliament is increasingly critical of the government headed by
Mr Ivars Godmanis, made up largely of former communists. The government
could fall if the Latvian rouble is driven out of circulation by the Russian
rouble.
The Lithuanian government staggers on, although half its ministers resigned
at the end of April, while a whiff of scandal surrounds the Bank of
Lithuania's preparations for the new currency, the litas. President Vytautas
Landsbergis is expected to call new elections if he wins a popular mandate
from a referendum on an executive presidency on May 23.
In Estonia, the ex-communist government, elected under Soviet law, is under
fire from the rival Congress of Estonia, which represents the pre-war
republic's citizens and their descendants. Daily pickets outside the
parliament building have demanded the death of prominent ex-communists and
called for immediate, independently-run general elections. But the top
priority of all three governments is to ensure the speedy departure of the
estimated 100,000 former Soviet troops on their territory. Russia says it
lacks the funds or housing to relocate the troops and the latest round of
talks ended in deadlock. The Baltics are counting on western pressure to put
urgency into the troop withdrawals but thus far only the Scandinavian
countries have come out openly in favour of the Baltic stance.
'These troops must go,' Mr Mauno Koivisto, the Finnish president, said
during his recent visit to Lithuania,in a statement which marked a shift
from traditional Finnish reticence in dealing with the former Soviet Union.
Instead, Russia recently sent new troops into its Lithuanian bases, which
led President Landsbergis to accuse Russia of 'blatantly disregarding
Lithuanian sovereignty'. Repeated protests to General Valery Mironov, the
local commander of CIS troops, have gone unanswered.
Latvia's mission to the UN meanwhile has accused Russia of repairing a
Libyan submarine at Bolderaja dock near Riga in breach of international
sanctions. The Russian Foreign Ministry claims the submarine will take three
years to repair and pledged that it would not be returned to Libya while
sanctions were in force, according to Mr Mihails Stepicevs of the Latvian
parliament's commission on defence and internal affairs.
The combination of political, military and economic uncertainty is taking
its toll of the reform process throughout the region. Only Lithuania has
begun privatising state-owned enterprises, while prices have not yet been
completely liberalised and a carousel of subsidies still protects the less
well-off.
The old state monopolies try to squeeze the last drops out of the faltering
Soviet supply system to keep shops full, although prices are very expensive
for local wages and salaries. 'The reform process is very slow and the
instinctive reaction is still a communist one,' said a western diplomat
summing up the obstacles to faster change.
Mr Andrei Nechayev, the economics minister, said yesterday that the
government still intended to make the rouble convertible at a rate of 60 to
80 to the dollar - in spite of doubts voiced by officials at the Russian
Central Bank, writes John Lloyd in Moscow.
Mr Nechayev told the news agency Interfax that the rate was 'fairly
realistic', given the availability of a Dollars 6bn stabilisation fund
provided by the IMF and the Group of Seven countries - though he admitted it
would bring difficulties for importers and investors.
Mr Georgy Matiukhin, the chairman of the Central Bank and Mr Dmitri Tulin,
the deputy chairman, have in the past few days poured cold water on the
intention of the government to move to a fixed and internally convertible
rouble by the autumn.
Timing the move towards fixing the rouble remains uncertain, given the
doubts of the Central Bank - without whose co-operation it could not happen.
The Central Bank will itself be in the dock next week, following a decision
of the Russian parliament to examine its performance. Many deputies consider
it has ceased to be responsive to the will of parliament, under whose
jurisdiction it falls.
