FT  07 APR 92 / A million must move for China's next great wall: Yvonne
Preston surveys some of the human and environmental costs of the Three
Gorges Dam project
IN THE middle reaches of the majestic Yangtze river, sheer cliff faces and
mountains rise from turbulent waters to form the Three Gorges, an
inspiration to Chinese poets and artists down the centuries.
One of the world's scenic wonders, it is the site of the planned Three
Gorges dam, an engineering project - given the go-ahead by the Chinese
parliament last Friday - which will not only change the landscape forever,
but cost more than 1m people their homes, and swamp 23,800 hectares of
arable land, 657 factories and mines, 139 power stations and 956km of roads.
The scheme, incorporating the biggest hydro-power station and largest
ship-lift in the world and an unprecedented five ship locks, is costed at
57bn yuan (Pounds 6bn) at 1990 prices. Such is the controversy surrounding
it that a third of the deputies in the normally tame National People's
Congress failed to give it their rubber-stamp vote.
The Three Gorges - Qutang, Wuxia and Xiling - will be dominated by the
reservoir which will stretch out behind the 185-metre high dam when it
reaches the proposed 175-metre water level 15 years from the start of
construction. The 600km reservoir will be a tranquil body of water, twice
the width of the present turbulent river, improved navigation being one of
the project's proclaimed benefits.
Others are flood control in the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze  -
and power, for which China has an insatiable appetite. The project will
generate 84bn kw/h of hydro-electric power a year, one-eighth of China's
1991 output.
The water level in Qutang, the smallest and most westerly of the Three
Gorges, only 100 metres wide at its narrowest point, is set to rise 90
metres. In the hillside town of Wanxian at the western approach to the
Gorges, population 30,000, the level the water will reach is marked on
buildings. Few will be above.
The town will be re-built back from the river with some of the 18.5bn yuan
allocated to resettlement from the project's budget of 57bn yuan. Some
private scepticism was expressed in Wanxian county, which has a high
proportion of all the people to be moved, that the money promised by the
central government would be forthcoming.
The reservoir will flood 19 counties and municipalities in the two provinces
of Sichuan and Hubei, swamping hundreds of populated areas, including the
cities of Wanxian and Fuling with 100,000 people. Altogether 140 towns and
hundreds of villages are to go, though officials claim none will be totally
submerged.
The dam will cost 1.13m people their homes by the time the project nears
completion in the year 2008. Tang Dengqing from the Yangtze River Water
Resources Commission in Wuhan, responsible for helping to plan new cities
and towns and develop barren land for displaced farmers, says moving so many
people is unparalleled in the world. It is the most serious of all problems
associated with the dam, he says.
Sites have been chosen for the new cities and an overall broad plan mapped.
Experiments in moving have been conducted, though reports say people show
reluctance to go. The new county town of Badong, 2km from the original site,
has basically taken shape after five years construction.
Those to be resettled from urban areas - 60 per cent of the total - are less
of a problem than peasant farmers, says Tang. Scratching a poor living from
terraced plots often high on mountain sides, they must now be moved higher
to still less hospitable land.
There are also conflicts of interest between provinces. Hubei province,
down-river of the dam gains from flood control, cheap power and new jobs,
but has only 15 per cent of the people to be displaced.
Upriver of the dam the much poorer and heavily populated Sichuan province
gets 10 per cent of the power but is home to the remaining 85 per cent of
the people to be displaced.
Sichuan faces an increased risk of flooding, as the water level up-river
rises. There is an additional risk that the accumulation of silt will affect
navigation to Chongqing, Sichuan's largest port. Deputy director of the
Three Gorges project office in the city, economist Sun Lai Yan, says 50,000
people within the municipal area will have to move. Many have urged the
government to do more research on the project before going ahead.
The governor of Sichuan province, Zhang Haoruo, cast his vote for the dam at
the weekend, but even he acknowledges the majority of Sichuanese are
opposed.
There have been rumours, officially denied, that elder statesman Deng
Xiaoping, born in Sichuan, had expressed reservations.
Through the 40 years of debate since the project was first proposed,
uncertainty has inhibited development along the affected area, which remains
poor and lacking in investment funds. The point is re-iterated by official
spokesmen backing the scheme. Critics remain concerned about the risk of
reservoir-induced earthquakes, the threat of river banks collapsing, and the
accumulation of silt in the first 50 years of operation, affecting
generating capacity and shortening the dam's useful life.
Money is another question. China can afford it, the minister for water
conservancy and power, Yang Zhenhuai, said in Beijing after the vote. Funds
would come from the state, from the generation of power which would begin
nine years after the start of construction, from the sale of bonds and from
preferential foreign loans.
Harnessing the Yangtze has been an aspiration of the Chinese Communist Party
since Mao Zedong visited the dam site in the 1950s. The appeal of an heroic
project to today's leaders is a powerful impetus behind the largest
construction project since the founding of the People's Republic.
