FT  29 APR 92 / Leading Article: Shock therapy for Italy
ACCUSTOMED AS it is to feeble and fractious political leadership, Italy is
this week trying to come to terms with a new phenomenon: that of having no
effective leadership at all. The resignation of President Francesco Cossiga
on Saturday, following the departure of Mr Giulio Andreotti, the prime
minister, earlier last week, leaves the country without a head of state or a
government at a time when it is more in need of leadership than ever. Just
possibly, the consequence may be to push Italy towards the sort of
fundamental political reform that it has long been advised to adopt.
Although he sought to present it as a principled protest against the
politicians' refusal to reform the political system, President Cossiga's
resignation was no high-minded act of state. He had only two months of his
term left to serve in any case, and his announcement seemed laced with
personal pique that will do little to create the climate necessary for
constructive reform.
Nevertheless, at least Mr Cossiga's action has the merit of providing shock
therapy. It has underlined the lesson of Italy's recent general election:
that its political system has reached the limits of viability. The April 5
election delivered a serious rebuff to the long-ruling Christian Democrats.
It also resulted in an unprecedented fragmentation of the political parties,
highlighting the excesses of Italy's system of proportional representation.
Additional support
A nationwide protest vote, inchoately expressing a desire for institutional
reform and better economic management, has led to no fewer than 16 parties
being represented in the new parliament. The outgoing four-party coalition
of Christian Democrats, Socialists, Liberals and Social Democrats, still
possesses a marginal parliamentary majority. Yet with these parties' overall
share of the vote below 50 per cent, they need additional support to retain
credibility.
Any new partner, whether it be the centre-left Republicans, the former
communists regrouped in the Democratic Party of the Left (PDS), or the newly
emerged populists of the Lombard League, would demand a high price: the
clean-up of government, electoral reform, a curb on the Christian Democrat
and Socialist grip on the levers of patronage, and, in the case of the
Republicans and Lombard League at least, concrete economic measures to
ensure Italy meets the minimum requirements for convergence with the EC laid
down at Maastricht.
Tough choices
It is that European challenge which points up the current paralysis. To make
the grade for economic and monetary union, Italy faces tough choices - on
public spending, on subsidies to state industry, on reforming the pensions
system - that can only be made by a strong and stable government. That is
precisely what the present parliament will not be able to produce. If the
country is not to be relegated, as many of its politicians and
industrialists now fear, to the slow lane of a two-speed Community, it will
have to change its political system.
The most logical solution, therefore, is for the political parties to agree
on an interim government with a clearly defined but limited role. Apart from
implementing emergency economic measures to deal with the budget deficit and
inflation, such a government should concentrate on constitutional reform.
Parliament, in these circumstances, would have to act as a sort of
constituent assembly preparing for fresh elections, say within 18 months.
There is no shortage of proposals as to how the electoral system might be
modified - for example, by introducing tighter controls on the admission to
parliament of minority parties. There is also pressure in some quarters, not
least from Mr Cossiga himself, for the presidency to be given greater
powers.
Such ideas deserve consideration. But suggesting ways of strengthening
government is not enough. The established parties themselves also need a
thorough overhaul, for it is they - and the Christian Democrats in
particular - that have created the system of patronage and corruption that
is at the root of the trouble.
That is the true meaning of the election. It is a warning that Italy's
politicians cannot afford to ignore.
