FT  15 DEC 92 / New man at top sweeps into office with an old broom
MR Viktor Chernomyrdin, unexpectedly appointed as Russia's prime minister
yesterday, is widely recognised as a superb manager of the old Soviet
school.
Any enthusiasm reform supporters might have shown for his appointment was
soured by the refusal of Mr Yegor Gaidar, whom he replaces, to stay on as
economic strategist and the likely resignation of other young reformist
ministers.
'Surrounded by a few decent chaps, he is capable of behaving wisely,' said
one western diplomat, who hoped that at least Mr Anatoly Chubais, the
privatisation minister, would not step down.
'But on his own Chernomyrdin is a terrible menace to reforms,' he added.
'He is very impressive but he is definitely of the Old Guard,' said a
businessman who has dealt with him in the past.
His success as manager of the Soviet gas monopoly, Gasprom, prompted his
appointment in June as deputy prime minister responsible for energy policy
when president Boris Yeltsin sacrificed his young minister for oil and gas,
Mr Vladimir Lopukhin. But expectations that this avuncular-looking
54-year-old would quickly restore order to the country's most important
industry proved unfounded.
Oil output has been continually falling.
This means Russia, long the world's largest energy producer, has dropped
behind Saudi Arabia in the league table, producing 7.9m barrels of oil per
day. Saudi oil output is currently about 8.4m bpd.
'He's made some progress in restoring centralised control to the industry,
but he's neither stopped the theft of oil nor spurred foreign investment,'
said the businessman. 'He's at ease with yielding power but it is impossible
to predict how he will react to a multi-faceted brief,' he added.
Mr Chernomyrdin, who presents a somewhat unworldly figure, is said to be
unencumbered by ideology from his past as a senior communist party official.
But given the difficulties of trying to turn back the clock, reforms in
Russia could well suffer from his lack of vision.
