FT  16 OCT 92 / Brazil's reforms win praise from Gatt
THE General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) has praised Brazil for its
sweeping trade liberalisation programme, implemented despite serious
economic difficulties in just two years.
In a report yesterday the Gatt secretariat says the trade reforms have
achieved impressive results in bringing about a marked change of direction
in Brazil's long tradition of inward-looking policies.
However, Gatt warns that the liberalisation efforts could be put at risk by
failure to tackle domestic economic imbalances, including rampant inflation,
and achieve sustained economic growth.
Mr Celso Amorim, Brazil's Gatt ambassador, assured Gatt's governing council
during discussion of the report that the new government of President Itamar
Franco was committed to the liberalisation process. He said the economic
reforms commanded a growing consensus within Brazilian society.
The economic system based on import substitution and state intervention,
under which Brazil had built up its diversified industrial base to become
the world's tenth biggest economy, had not failed but had reached its
limits, Mr Amorim said.
Trade liberalisation has been a key element in Brazil's structural
adjustment programme adopted by the incoming democratic government in March
1990 to stabilise the economy and boost industrial efficiency and
competitiveness. Brazil is a leading exporter of coffee, soy meal, orange
juice, iron ore and steel products. Its main customers are the US and EC.
Since 1990 the Brazilian government has scrapped almost all import
restrictions, streamlined trade procedures and slashed tariffs, notes the
report. Remaining restrictions in the informatics sector are due to end this
month and by mid-1993 tariffs will average just over 14 per cent against 41
per cent in 1989.
'A highly restricted and regulated trade regime has been changed in a
relatively very short time into one largely free of quantitative
restrictions,' the report says. It has thus 'become considerably more
transparent and less discretionary'.
However, the Gatt secretariat says price and exchange rate stability, and
sustained economic growth, are 'a necessary condition' for consolidation of
the reforms. 'Failure to control inflation, to revive economic activity, and
to tackle rising unemployment, would increase the political odds against the
success of the liberalisation experiment.'
Though the recent debt restructuring agreement signed by Brazil with
commercial banks 'should ease some of the pressures on economic management',
inflation is still running at over 20 per cent a month while sluggish
economic activity in recent years has cut real incomes.
The report adds that Brazil's membership of the Southern Cone Common Market
(Mercosur) cannot provide a substitute for a successful conclusion to the
Uruguay Round of global trade talks, which would improve Brazil's access to
markets in industrial nations for its exports.
Many of its principal exports are affected by trade restrictions in foreign
markets, while dumping of farm surpluses by the major traders is preventing
Brazil from expanding agricultural exports.
The country's trading patterns make it likely to benefit more from
multilateral liberalisation than from bilateral or regional groupings.
