FT  18 SEP 92 / German right-wing extremists 'no danger'
MR Alexander von Stahl, the German advocate general, asserted that
right-wing militant organisations did not represent a danger to Germany
despite the wave of attacks against asylum-seekers.
Mr von Stahl said no organisational structure could be detected among the
largely young German assailants. Instead, the assaults on foreigners were
frequently 'locally, spontaneously and often very alcoholically motivated,'
he suggested.
Mr von Stahl's controversial remarks contradicted persistent indications
that right-wing groups in east and west Germany had managed to influence a
considerable number of young east German extremists.
German police yesterday arrested seven neo-Nazis and issued arrest warrants
for six more after raiding more than 100 homes to crack down on rightist
violence.
Heinz Wolf, police chief in the eastern German state of Saxony, said the
raids on Wednesday by more than 500 policemen yielded a large haul of
illegal weapons and racist pamphlets.
He said the raids were made after investigations into attacks on foreigners
by rightist youths, many of them skinheads. Those arrested were accused of
breach of the peace, arson and grievous bodily harm.
Youths in the east German port city of Wismar in the state of
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern attacked a hostel for asylum-seekers late on
Wednesday for the third night in succession. Police took eight persons into
temporary custody. Unidentified persons threw a Molotov cocktail against a
hostel for asylum-seekers in Zemitz, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, but guards were
able to extinguish the blaze quickly.
The interior ministry yesterday said Romania had agreed to take back its
citizens who fail to prove they suffered political persecution at home. The
statement said Interior Minister Rudolf Seiters has been seeking agreements
with the main countries involved to take back their citizens if they fail to
win asylum in Germany.
Until now, rejected refugees were allowed to appeal the decision and in
practice remained in Germany for years. Sixty per cent of the 43,000
Romanians who came to Germany from January to the end of August were gypsies
but only 0.2 per cent of them have been granted asylum.
