FT  30 OCT 92 / Colombia plagued by struggle for power: Why power cuts have
hit a country rich in energy resources
COLOMBIA abounds in energy resources. It has oil, gas, coal and a large
choice of well-watered Andean valleys with hydro-electric potential. Its
8,600MW of electricity generating capacity should more than meet local
demand.
In spite of all this, power cuts averaging six hours a day have plagued the
country since April, knocking at least 1 per cent off economic growth this
year and damaging badly the government of President Cesar Gaviria.
Guerrilla attacks on power facilities, labour problems and a six-month
drought from last December all contributed to the electricity shortage. The
main cause howeverwas financial and administrative chaos in the electricity
companies.
A government-appointed commission concluded that 80 per cent of the
rationing could have been avoided with proper planning, information and
maintenance. Now, the sector faces radical restructuring.
Colombia is over-dependent on hydro-electric power. Thermal plants
contribute barely 22 per cent of the country's generating capacity, and at
the critical moment only about half of this was operable.
The government says that reservoirs were down to 54 per cent of capacity at
the start of the drought and the six regional electricity companies had
delayed bringing the thermal plants into service in an attempt to keep costs
down.
Things look unlikely to improve much soon. The reservoirs, now at an average
37 per cent of capacity, will start the dry season in December considerably
emptier than last year. The rainfall problem has been exacerbated by
deforestation and failure to manage the watersheds. Power rationing will
probably continue at least until April 1993.
Many of the sector's problems stem from the policies of the 1970s and early
1980s, when the World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank were deeply
involved. The two banks loaned Dollars 3.6bn to the electricity companies
under government guarantee, equivalent to some 80 per cent of the capital
invested in expanding power supplies. Generating capacity quadrupled, the
number of subscribers tripled, and the sector's debt grew to more than
Dollars 5bn.
'The banks - they share responsibility for all this,' said Mr Rudolf Hommes,
the finance minister. Unusually, the World Bank agrees. The World Bank
evaluation, concluded in 1991, of its role in the Colombian power sector
found many faults.
It found a lack of vision and flexibility, inconsistencies between sectoral
policies and macro-economic policy, laxity on quality control and
performance standards. Furthermore, lending terms changed abruptly in the
late 1970s, so that capital repayments started before hydro-electric plants
came into operation. Exchange risks were never discussed and rapid currency
devaluation in the mid-1980s expanded the companies' debt burdens. The World
Bank and the government argued throughout over tariffs; the rates still
average out at 75 per cent of cost, with many residential users receiving 50
per cent subsidies.
The biggest embarrassment has been the ill-starred El Guavio project,
north-east of Bogota, five years overdue and absurdly over-budget at Dollars
2.5bn. The World Bank admits that when El Guavio was approved in 1981, the
wisdom of such big, expensive schemes should have been questioned. The
geological risks of tunnelling through the eastern Andean mountains were
also known - and proven during 10 years of construction.
If El Guavio had come on line as originally planned, rationing would not
have been necessary. As it is, the attorney-general's office is
investigating some 30 cases of negligence and irregularities in connection
with the project. Landslides, financial bottlenecks, land purchase problems,
contractual irregularities and bad management contributed to the delays.
After tortuous negotiations, the IADB has approved a Dollars 150m loan for
El Guavio and the national grid, a sum that will be matched by the
government, which will issue bonds to raise the funds. The government is
also taking over the debts of the bankrupt electricity companies and
recapitalising them. The aim is to give the companies more independence;
they could eventually bring in private investors.
The government's plans also include a programme to boost gas production and
distribution to homes. Residential consumption accounts for 50 per cent of
demand in Colombia, since electricity is widely used for cooking and
heating.
Mr Hommes also plans to reduce subsidies and make them transparent, and to
cut the high electricity losses. Twenty-one per cent of electricity is lost
or stolen, because of billing problems and piracy which follow from
inadequate distribution equipment and practices.
The emergency programme this year included repairs to thermal plants, the
construction of a link to Venezuela, speeding up El Guavio and bringing into
operation floating power-stations. Urra 1, a 340MW hydro scheme, near the
Caribbean coast, is also being built.
However, the programme is not going smoothly. The contract for the floating
power stations has been rescinded after the first barge, supposed to deliver
20MW, generated only a fraction of this after weeks of delay. Meanwhile,
electrical engineers are warning that El Guavio will not start up until
mid-1993, behind even its most recent schedule.
For the longer-term, the National Social and Economic Council, the
government's policy making body, has approved a new 2,500MW expansion plan,
and legislation to restructure the electricity sector is going through
congress.
The expansion plan, with an estimated Dollars 2.7bn cost, raises the share
of thermal power to 30 per cent, outlines many smaller, more flexible
projects, and stresses distribution, neglected in the past. The multilateral
banks are expected to resume lending to Colombia for some of these schemes.
However, financing the expansion plan is proving difficult and there could
be rationing again in 1995 and 2002 if the projects fall behind. On top of
that, the measures only partly address the long-standing lack of a coherent
energy framework with clear objectives.
