FT  24 JUL 92 / Management: Transparent move to European unity - Christopher
Lorenz observes Pilkington's tricky balancing act in its new Brussels
headquarters
Nine months ago Pilkington, Europe's second-largest glass maker, shattered
the illusions of many conservative insiders by becoming one of the first
British companies to relocate the headquarters of its core business from the
UK to the heart of Europe's incipient 'single market'. It announced that
direction of the European part of its big flat and safety glass interests
was being moved to a small unit in Brussels from its totem-like HQ on
Merseyside, deep in England's north-west.
At the same time it revealed a much-needed slashing of overheads: a net
reduction of 250 in its 500-person corporate head office on Merseyside; 120
jobs were decentralised, leaving the HQ only 130-strong.
Yesterday, 24 hours after a sombre annual general meeting, it delivered
another surprise: it is reinforcing in unexpected fashion the European
structure it announced internally only a few months ago.
From the start, Pilkington's task in Brussels was a delicate managerial
challenge: the creation of an integrated, European-minded operation out of a
set of mainly nationalistic subsidiaries, notably its truculent German
offshoot, Flachglas. The latter's minority shareholders were bought out only
in 1989, after nine years of tension under majority British ownership. The
situation was not helped by Flachglas's size: twice as large as Pilkington's
equivalent glass operations in the UK.
Against this unpromising background, Pilkington embarked on the integration
process with considerable diplomacy, while leaving no doubt who was now
boss.
For a start, Brussels is an obviously neutral location. Then, between
December and June, Pilkington gradually outlined the tactful structure and
staffing of the 35-person Brussels organisation, called 'Flat and Safety
Europe'. After a lengthy gestation period, the office opened officially last
week.
Under the chairmanship of Glen Nightingale, a main board director of the
parent company - who also has responsibility for the group's North American
flat and safety glass interests - five directors of market-orientated
European 'business lines' were created. Only one of the five men is British:
the chief executive of the existing UK glass company who now also has the
European mandate for basic glass. There is one Finn and three Germans,
including the Flachglas board spokesman, who now also has European
responsibility for special glasses.
The nationality balance was given a slight tilt towards the British by the
appointment of three English functional directors - for marketing,
technology and finance.
Only two are based full-time in Brussels: the financial and marketing
directors (the latter is an old hand and Nightingale's right-hand man).
Nightingale expects the business line directors to be travelling for up to
70 per cent of their time, so he saw little point in uprooting them and
their families. But, in addition to board meetings, he has declared a series
of monthly 'Brussels days', when everyone has to be there to mix informally.
Nightingale expects it to take up to another two years for each national
company to be integrated into the new European structure, under their
respective business line directors. This is partly to avoid overloading the
people concerned, but it is also because some of the national companies have
not yet moved fully to a market-based structure allowing clearly defined
responsibilities to be transferred to Brussels. Flachglas, in particular, is
still converting from its typically German functional structure.
It is the complexity and intricacy of the European reorganisation which
caused yesterday's surprise: the appointment under Nightingale of a
full-time chief executive of Flat and Safety Europe, who will take up
residence in Brussels from October.
Companies with more European experience may be surprised that Pilkington
could have hoped to accomplish proper integration without someone in such a
post. Nightingale may be a powerful character, but it was over-optimistic to
expect him to drive the tricky integration process by spending just two days
a week in Brussels.
With hindsight, he now realises that 'the man to whom the business line
directors report needs to be based in Brussels - to cause that to be the
centre of things. It's no good having a visiting leader - he has to be on
the ground'.
There was a second surprise in yesterday's announcement - that the chief
executive will not be a European, but a South African, 52-year-old Brian
Young. He has worked for Pilkington since 1967, mostly in Southern Africa,
but for the past two years as chief executive of Pilkington Australia.
Again, the appointment has the benefit of neutrality, but some of the
Germans may be discomfited by an Anglo-Saxon above them.
Nightingale admits there has been some 'disquiet' that the business line
directors will no longer, as originally planned, report straight to a main
board director. But he says they know and respect Young.
The new man certainly faces a challenging task. Without submerging the
national identities which have given Pilkington's constituent companies
strong leadership in many of their markets - though not in southern Europe -
he must exploit cross-frontier economies of scale much more effectively than
over the past decade. Given all the sensitivities, that will create quite a
thorny menu for him and his Brussels colleagues to master.
