FT  17 NOV 92 / German motor's rough ride: Christopher Parkes on why
Daimler-Benz has stalled
MERCEDES-BENZ, the motor at the heart of Daimler-Benz, the German vehicles,
aerospace and electricals group, is running rough.
Bankers' and brokers' analysts ran for cover yesterday, slashing forecasts
as they went, following a radical revision by Mr Gerhard Liener, finance
director, of the group's own expectations for 1992.
Group net profit, he confirmed, far from meeting the board's target and
matching last year's DM1.94bn (Pounds 800m), will fall to around DM1.5bn. A
large chunk of that, possibly as much as DM400m, will come from the
newly-consolidated Deutsche Airbus business. Mr Liener said Mercedes-Benz
would sell some 30,000 cars fewer than expected this year, and inventories
had increased accordingly to 40 per cent above normal levels. The results
would also be hit by the cost of special sales incentives.
By way of compensation, he suggested that the dividend would be held at last
year's DM13. And as he made clear in a radio interview yesterday, payroll
cuts totalling 40,000 jobs by the end of 1994 - including 7,500 on top of
the 20,000 already announced at Mercedes - would yield annual savings of
around DM1bn as early as next year.
Deutsche Bank promptly cut its forecast for the group's earnings this year
from DM57 to DM50 a share, and from DM47 to DM40 for 1993. Daimler shares
shed DM14.60 in Frankfurt and closed at DM539.40 in a static market
apparently paralysed by word from the government's panel of five independent
advisers that the west German economy will not grow at all next year.
Just as in the economy at large, nothing much is going right at present for
Daimler-Benz. Deutsche Aerospace (Dasa), its aircraft arm, squeezed a DM50m
profit out of DM12bn sales last year.
It said last week that new orders this year would be at least 25 per cent
lower than expected.
Mr Bernd Gottschalk, head of the Mercedes trucks division, recently marked
his first six months in the job with the announcement that plans for a new
DM1bn lorry plant near Berlin had been shelved.
He later explained that Mercedes' worldwide truck output would fall 5 per
cent and domestic production would be down 11 per cent this year.
September's intake of orders from German customers for vehicles over 6
tonnes was 29 per cent lower than in August, he added.
It is now clear that trucks and cars, which bring in about 70 per cent of
both group sales and profits, and which are the cornerstone of Daimler's
grand design to transform itself into an international high-technology power
centre, have suffered a sudden and dramatic downturn in their fortunes since
the half-way mark this year.
At the end of June, Mr Edzard Reuter, group chairman, was still confident of
beating 1991's net result. By August, when the half-year figures appeared
and showed a 16 per cent profits advance, he spoke of a 'subsiding boom' in
the domestic market where the group does around 46 per cent of its business.
Even then it seemed that cost-cutting measures already under way, including
cutting 20,000 jobs at Mercedes and 7,500 at Dasa, would cushion the group
against the effects of subsidence.
As late as last month, senior executives insisted that the group would sell
550,000 cars this year.
But as Mr Liener's informal weekend briefing to Stuttgart journalists
betrayed, the Mercedes car business had already stalled.
Deliveries in July and August were between 30 per cent and 50 per cent lower
than in the previous months, the company said yesterday. There had been some
recovery since then in middle and top-range sales, but not in the popular
190 series.
This unexpected downturn (which had not dented rival BMW so badly because it
had the 'luck' to have new models on hand to tempt buyers) was the main
cause of the group's troubles, the the company added.
The failure of Japanese and US markets to recover according to economic
forecasters' prescriptions was the second main factor, while the September
money markets 'disaster' which led to the revaluation of the D-Mark had
played a lesser role, the company said.
Corporate short-sightedness was another factor, according to local analysts,
who have persistently charged that German business has for too long failed
either to acknowledge or address the possibility that Germany might not,
after all, be immune to infection from international recession.
Yesterday's black prognosis from Bonn's 'five wise men' confronts German
industry and its bell-wether Daimler with the prospect of another round of
reassessment of how it can best cope with the downturn, restore fading
competitiveness in its traditional businesses and at the same time continue
the advance into new technologies.
The group hopes that the launch of the new 190 car series, to coincide with
the modest upturn expected by economists in the middle of next year,
followed by the appearance of revamped mid-range models, will mark a turn in
Mercedes' short-term fortunes.
Longer-term, its brand-new car plant at Rastatt near Baden Baden is
perfecting manufacturing techniques which, it is hoped, will bring the group
within striking distance of the productivity levels common among Japanese
competitors.
In the meantime the group has learnt hard lessons which should stand it in
good stead if forecasts of international recovery next autumn turn out yet
again to be too optimistic.
