FT  02 MAR 92 / Management: Equality, not pornography - Women at Work
The auto industry has always been dominated by men, but at the Audi factory
at Ingolstadt, near Munich, women are beginning to make their mark. For the
last decade they have become an increasingly common sight on the production
line. They are now also to be spotted in the ranks of management.
The factory is loaded with women-welcome signals. Instead of the pornography
that graces the walls of most factories, there are posters showing women and
men working on cars wearing identical company overalls.
Audi started hiring young women as apprentice tool makers and mechanics in
1978. As 80 per cent of the company's jobs are technical, the initiative was
seen as essential if the company was to cease to be a male-stronghold.
In some respects Germany has a more traditional view of male-female role
differences than Britain, but in the last few years both the government and
big companies have been trying to make it easier for women to combine
careers and family. With the birth rate falling sharply, women are
increasingly seen as important to companies like Audi.
At the outset, Audi set itself the goal of increasing the proportion of
female apprentices to 25 per cent. Over the last 14 years, 700 women aged 15
to 20 have taken places on these training schemes, many of whom have gone on
to do advanced training.
It has not been easy: the proportion of female apprentices has still not
reached the target, although it has risen from around 5 per cent to nearly
20 per cent.
One of the most difficult problems has been to persuade the women themselves
to do technical jobs - Audi found the majority were much keener to go into
sales-related jobs.
In an attempt to change attitudes, the company is running advertisments in
German newspapers pitched specifically at female recruits. It sends members
of staff to give talks in schools to parents and students explaining the
potential for young women coming into their factory, to overcome traditional
views of the automotive industry as 'masculine'.
Audi has learned a lot over the last decade about how best to integrate
women into the company. Ten years ago the women were put in separate teams
from the male apprentices but this did not work well. Now the teams are
mixed, with at least two girls on a team. Women apprentices are encouraged
to attend seminars where they can swap experiences.
More recently, Audi has shifted its emphasis to trying to get women
managers. This is part of a general move in German management, related to a
shift away from Prussian-style hierarchies, to increase the ratio of women
to men.
'Where does it say that men make the best managers? It is our policy to
encourage more women to join the next generation of engineering and business
managers . . . ' an Audi recruitment advertisement promises.
Realising no equal opportunities programmes will work without endorsement
from the top, the company has given a board director overall responsibility
for women's development.
Audi offers its staff 50 different types of part-time work. Mothers can take
career breaks for up to seven years with a guaranteed job when they return.
They can retrain with Audi during their maternity leave.
As a company spokesman says: 'We have recognised the problem and are doing
something about it in a positive way. What we don't want or need is quotas
issued by the government.'
