FT  26 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Medeva quadruples to Pounds 16.7m and talks
of further purchases
AFTER A hectic year of acquisitions, Medeva, the UK pharmaceuticals group,
yesterday reported quadrupled pre-tax profits for 1991 and put shareholders
on notice that it was going shopping with new shares again soon.
The company, one of 1991's best-performing stocks, increased taxable profits
from Pounds 4.01m to Pounds 16.7m on sales up only 57 per cent at Pounds
82.4m (Pounds 52.6m).
Fully diluted earnings per share more than doubled to 8.3p (3.4p) and the
board is proposing a final dividend of 1p, giving a total for the year of
1.5p, double last year's pay-out.
The shares gained 18p to close at 296p.
Gross profit margin increased from 39 to 46 per cent, despite the depressing
effect of the highly competitive generics business, which only broke even
after prices plummeted but still accounted for 36 per cent of sales.
'We are increasing our sales with much more profitable products than we
started the business with (in 1990),' maintained Mr Bernard Taylor,
chairman.
Organic growth was probably about 10 per cent, although it was difficult to
break it out as the group's structure had changed so much during the year,
he said.
Mr Taylor, a former chief executive of Glaxo, warned shareholders that
although they had already supplied Pounds 196m in two years for Medeva's
acquisitions, the group planned to acquire more products and marketing
networks in countries like Germany, Italy and France.
The group paid tax for the first time, at 18 per cent, but expects that rate
to rise to 29 per cent this year.
COMMENT
Is there no stopping Medeva? Possibly not in the short term, although more
than doubled earnings growth is surely not repeatable this year. Much less
certain is the medium-term goal of forming a viable FT-SE 100
pharmaceuticals company - which depends on Medeva developing its own
products for the market. A canny purchaser of product portfolios Medeva
certainly seems to be, but it is too soon to judge the company as a
developer of new products. In the short term, though, it is going to be
quite a ride. Cost savings on the generics side will be swallowed up as
prices plumb new depths, but strong growth in Adams and MD mean Medeva is
forecast to achieve pre-tax profits of Pounds 38m and earnings per share of
13.3p, giving a prospective multiple of 22. Expensive? Yes, if the
medium-term strategy fails. If it succeeds, however, investors who are
willing to dig repeatedly into their pockets may be richly rewarded.
