FT  10 JUL 92 / Secretive Saudi bank may be forced to change course:
National Commercial Bank may have to forfeit its privileged private status
and sort out its problem loans
NATIONAL Commercial Bank (NCB), Saudi Arabia's oldest and biggest, is a
singular and secretive institution in a singularly secretive country. It is
the kingdom's only private commercial bank, and the confidentiality this
affords is the factor beyond any other which has attracted the Saudi princes
whose custom has won it the tag 'the Saudi royal bank'.
But NCB's highly-prized secrecy looks increasingly a millstone around the
bank's neck as it enters the most controversial and troubled period in its
41-year history.
However the bank survives the shock resignation this week of Sheikh Khalid
bin Mahfouz, the bank's chief operating officer, who left to defend himself
against fraud charges in the Bank of Credit and Commerce International
(BCCI) affair, it will not emerge as quite the same institution.
Whatever the eventual verdict on Sheikh Khalid, who with a London associate
was accused of fraudulently obtaining more than Dollars 300m (Pounds 157m)
from BCCI customers, and the effect of other possible ramifications of NCB's
involvement with the collapsed bank, analysts and fellow bankers agree that
the Saudi bank will be forced, for internal problems of its own, to change
its structure and outlook fundamentally over the next few years to survive
as a competitive institution.
NCB is essentially Saudi Arabia's founding banking institution and has been
among the kingdom's most trusted, by royals and subjects alike, in a land
traditionally suspicious of banks.
Owned by the bin Mahfouz family (whose net worth is estimated at Dollars
2bn), which holds more than 60 per cent of the bank's shares, and the
al-Kaaki family, it has a third of the kingdom's total bank deposits, eight
overseas branches or offices and, with net assets in 1989 of Dollars 23bn,
is the largest private bank in the Middle East.
But NCB has not published full financial figures since 1989, and its
accounts for the three preceding years were qualified by the auditors.
According to Capital Intelligence (CI), the Cyprus-based rating agency,
auditors have consistently been unhappy with the way the bank has classified
billions of riyals of non-performing loans, most of them more than a decade
on the books, lent, for the most part, to a few very highly-placed Saudis.
The extent of these loans is undisclosed.
Saudi bankers do not doubt that the bank's solid deposit base and top-level
support will guarantee its leading status in the kingdom's banking market.
But the bank appears to be losing some ground in the kingdom's increasingly
competitive, and increasingly sophisticated, banking sector. NCB's share of
domestic deposits, dominant though it is, has shrunk over the past five
years from around 40 per cent to nearer 30 per cent of the total.
CI, in a recent memorandum, said it believes the main cause of NCB's delay
in producing full figures for 1990 and 1991 to be its 'challenging and
unconventional' methods to try to recover non-performing loans. This,
decoded, means essentially that, by failing to produce figures for the
kingdom's best-connected bank, NCB has sought to embarrass the country's
rulers into intervening to force the debtors to pay up. Some analysts argue
that only King Fahd, the Saudi ruler, himself could achieve this.
But whatever the reasons for NCB's non-disclosure, the effects have hurt its
international standing - quite apart from any detrimental effects of Sheikh
Khalid's alleged dealings with BCCI. In May, for instance, the bank closed
its London office, arguing it had been running at a loss. However, many
bankers believe the Bank of England urged the closure, uncomfortable that a
branch with Pounds 1bn on its books had produced no up-to-date figures. The
Bank will not comment on the matter.
However, the US Office of the Comptroller of the Currency said yesterday
that among its reasons for ordering the closure of NCB's New York branch was
its failure to provide 'current, complete financial information' on NCB's
consolidated operations.
CI early in June suspended its rating for NCB because of the non-disclosure
and said in its explanatory memorandum that while under Saudi law NCB, as a
private bank, has no legal requirement to produce results, it had an
'ethical obligation' to do so while it engaged in substantial dealings with
foreign counterparties.
CI also argued that the bank had become too large to remain an unlimited
liability partnership and should urgently consider turning itself into a
joint-stock bank, like the kingdom's other 11 commercial banks. 'The right
time for this has already passed,' said CI.
Whatever the other effects of Sheikh Khalid's departure - and insiders
suggest that his hands have been very much guiding the bank's rudder -
analysts say it could prove the spark for overdue structural change. 'Once
things stabilise,' says Mr Mardig Haladjian, a CI analyst, 'a major
restructuring is certain to take place'.
Indeed, NCB officials themselves appeared to acknowledge as much soon after
Sheikh Khalid's resignation. 'Like all dynamic institutions, the bank will
change as circumstances change,' said a bank spokesman in Jeddah, when asked
if the resignation might herald further changes.
But there is a dilemma inherent in any moves the bank might make to open
itself out. A full restructuring - and certainly a public share offer -
would require the bank to sort out its problem loans, which in turn would
require the energetic support of senior members of the Saudi royal family.
But, as several Saudi bankers are quick to note, these are the very people
who most prize and enjoy NCB's status as a private, and therefore highly
confidential, institution.
