FT  24 OCT 92 / Tensions at the top: How to relieve the rigours of rule
Wanted: Men (fewer women can stand the strain these days) to run countries
suffering from doldrums and deficits. Ability to withstand depression would
be useful. Applicants should be ready for a 16-hour day, punctuated by
television debates, budgetary discussions, sandwich lunches to discuss
unemployment, and banquets with other leaders in similar predicaments, when
interpretors will be available. Experience of dealing with opposition
parties and high interest rates essential. The successful candidate may not
see his family for long periods unless in the company of a) TV cameraman, b)
a policeman c) a divorce lawyer.
The pleasures of governing western industrialised countries have seldom
appeared more scant. Few presidents and prime ministers in recent weeks have
been free from the strain of economic woes or electoral misfortune. Leaders
react to the stress in different ways - and some seem to beat it much better
than others.
President Mitterrand likes to emphasise inner calm by never wearing a wrist
watch. This is a sign, some amateur psychologists argue, of a tranquil and
self-sufficient turn of mind (or simply, others say, of lack of
consideration for keeping people waiting). Mr Carl Bildt, the Swedish prime
minister, has been up all night on several recent occasions hammering out
austerity programmes to save the krona. But since the Bildts - who live in a
small central Stockholm apartment - have a one-year old baby, he says he is
used to disturbed nights.
Mr George Bush indulges in frenzied pursuit of leisure, completing a round
of golf in less than two hours, or pursuing fish in a cigar-shaped powerboat
off the coast of Maine. He was rewarded this week by seeing the local
newspaper in the township of Kennebunkport, where he has a holiday home,
endorsing the Democrats for the first time.
Mr John Major is far from being a nervous wreck, as some UK newspapers this
week have tried to depict him. But the British prime minister - whose
predilection for junk food pre-dates his accession to the highest office -
looks thinner than when he won the general election in April. Well before
the general election, aides admitted that he found his cramped Whitehall
living quarters wearisome. After six weeks of working 18 hours a day, the
prime minister is tired and sometimes irritable. Yet those who have spoken
to him this week have been impressed above all by Mr Major's sombre
deter-mination.
One leader who, for all his travails, has not lost his appetite is Mr Helmut
Kohl. Since unification two years ago, the German chancellor has taken an
almost other-worldly approach to his country's problems, refusing to attend
to questions of detail. 'He likes to tell people: 'Get on with it,'' said
one aide yesterday. Mr Kohl can most easily relax over a bottle of wine and
a plate of Saumagen, or stuffed pig's belly - the Rhineland equivalent of
Scottish haggis. His ability to devour real haggis impressed his Scottish
hosts during a visit to Edinburgh last year.
Every year, he takes a two-week spring break at a health resort to cut his
17-stone bulk, and then rapidly puts on weight again. Mr Kohl
conscientiously declined all but a morsel of the main course during one
recent dinner. Afterwards, he wolfed down a dozen apples in 15 minutes to
still his hunger.
Mr Kohl's colleagues are driven close to distraction by his beatific
optimism. One way that Mr Kohl escapes stress is through an extraordinary
capacity to cat-nap whenever he needs it - in aircraft and cars, even in
helicopters - and then wake up, capable of instantly focussing on the next
problem. For all his unruffled appearance, Mr Kohl can show extreme
over-sensitivity. If he has taken any lessons in withstanding the rigours of
office, he seems to have absorbed them from Mr Mitterrand.
After his operation for cancer of the prostate gland last month, the French
president is approaching his 76th birthday on Monday with Sphinx-like
impassiveness.
The president likes where possible to repair to his appartment in the rue de
Bievre, near Notre Dame cathedral on the south bank of the Seine. He takes a
daily after-lunch walk in the streets around the Elysee palace and plays
golf on Mondays, often with his friend Mr Andre Rousselet, chairman of the
Canal Plus pay television station, at the prestigious Golf de Saint-Cloud,
west of Paris. The club is unable to divulge his handicap.
Visitors to an honours-giving ceremony at the Elysee on Wednesday evening
recount that the president was cheerful and alert. Without using notes, he
was able to make short but apt personal speeches to each of the recipients
of decorations.
Like Mr Mitterrand, Spanish prime minister Felipe Gonzalez - favourite
bedside reading: Don Qixote - likes to go walking to get away from it all.
He spends his summer holidays deep in the marshy wilds of the Coto Donana
national park by the southern tip of Spain or, rod in hand, on a fishing
smack in the straights of Gibraltar. He has dug a cabbage plot in the
gardens of his official residence, the Palacio de la Moncloa. Lately, Mr
Gonzalez has developed a passion for cultivating bonsais. He can sometimes
disappear at weekends to tramp the sierras of Castille in search of
incipient saplings that might be added to his mini-tree collection.
The champion in standing up to pressure is Prof Giuliano Amato, Italy's
Socialist 54-year-old prime minister, who has battled with four months of
crisis. Most evenings he returns home exhausted between 1.00 and 1.30 am and
goes almost straight to sleep before waking at around 6 am. Even with his
rational academic's mind, he admits he often wakes early 'with all the
problems crowding in on me and reaching right to the stomach'.
On the few occasions he can relax, Mr Amato likes to stay at home with his
wife, Diana, listen to Mahler records and read. He still likes to pretend he
can lead a private life. On the weekend after Italy's devaluation last
month, he gave the slip to his bodyguards and stood in line at a cinema to
see 'Americans'. For world leaders trying to escape the pains of office, the
best remedy is to try to behave like everyone else.
Contributors: Tom Burns, William Dawkins, Robert Graham, David Marsh, Jurek
Martin, Quentin Peel, Philip Stephens and Robert Taylor
