FT  24 JUL 92 / Survey of Turkey's South East Anatolian Project (8): The
landless need help - Land reform is seen as crucial to the long-term health
of the Gap
THE aghas, or feudal landlords, of the south-east region have their minds
set on one subject these days: land reform.
If a less immediate problem, the issue is seen by many economists as
critical for the long-term health of the Gap project. The question is, what
sort of land reform?
Today, more than a quarter of the cultivated land is owned by less than 1
per cent of the region's farmers. On the other hand, 61 per cent of the
farmers, or about 150,000 families, own holdings of less than 5ha.
A pilot project has just been started in the Sanliurfa region, to
redistribute government land to landless farmers. To date some 10,000ha of
government land has been given to landless farmers. 'It's the landless
farmers we want to help,' says Mr Hurman Ocakli, vice-president of the Gap
authority in Ankara.
In the 1970s, under socialist legislation passed by Mr Bulent Ecevit's
government, land was expropriated from the aghas and given to poor farmers.
In 1980, following the military coup, the law was overturned. According to
figures from the Gap authority, more than 10,000ha has been returned to the
original owners.
Today's government seems attracted to reform less as a vehicle to achieve
more equitable land distribution than as a way to improve efficiencies, in a
region where the patchwork of the small farms serves to reduce productivity
levels.
A pilot project in the Harran plain has been started, aimed at consolidating
plots. Many of the region's farmers have scattered allotments, too small to
achieve economies of scale - a product of the local inheritance practices,
where farms are divided up between the sons. Officials have set an optimum
land plot at around 4ha for first class land and 6ha for the third grade
farm. Under the project, they have set a maximum land holding of 60ha for
any one plot.
Since 1983 in the Harran land reform area, land sales have been prohibited
without government permission. This is partly to prevent alternative land
use in the planned irrigation area, and to discourage the large agricultural
combines from buying out smallholders.
Ironically, over the long term the master plan predicts that there will be a
large-scale consolidation of land holdings, as mechanisation becomes more
widespread, and as higher input costs force smaller landholders to sell up
and head for the cities. Given the project's original aim to keep people on
the farms, this might seem a contradiction. But, as Prof Tekinel sees it,
'this is what happens when an area develops.'
