FT  28 NOV 92 / Fashion: Queen of inspiration - Brenda Polan talks to
Vivienne Westwood, the fashion world's enfant terrible
THE BRITISH like to think of the French as culturally inflexible and, in
some ways, not least their chauvinism, they are. But in their concept of
culture itself and what may constitute one of its vital components, they are
much broader and more open-minded and experimental than the British.
So it is highly significant that it was in a modern art museum in a French
provincial town last week that Vivienne Westwood received a standing
ovation.
In Anglo-Saxon culture, the designer is artisan not artist and, should he or
she become uppity enough to forget it, astonishment, mockery, contempt and
ridicule will be the reward.
Vivienne Westwood OBE, twice British Fashion Designer of the Year (1990 and
1991), has experienced all that. She is used to it, but not inured. Highly
intelligent, well-read and intimidatingly (and, according to many
commentators, inappropriately) cerebral, she would say, before the British
fashion industry's tardy recognition, in a bewildered tone: 'I don't know
why I am not given the esteem I deserve. My clothes are wearable. They are
commercial.'
Yet they have never sold in large numbers and they have never made her rich
(although her ideas have made others so), and even as it acknowledged her,
the British fashion industry remained nervous.
It still regarded her, affectionately of course, as a creative genius whose
work needs to be interpreted by a less eccentric designer before it becomes
wearable. And interpreted it has been.
Vivienne Westwood is probably the most copied designer of the last two
decades. Her peers, the international community of designers, are unstinting
in their praise and, often, shameless in their borrowing of ideas. It was
the designer Azzedine Alaia, a man who acknowledges her overwhelming
influence on late 20th century fashion, who began the process which
culminated in adulation in Bordeaux when he invited her to show her
collections at his premises in Paris.
The audience smiled delightedly and applauded throughout as an enormous
catwalk was populated by the seminal fashion ideas of the past two decades.
First came the Let It Rock collection which dates from 1971 and her
collaboration with Malcolm McLaren, creator of the Sex Pistols, and which
evoked the soot-suited Teddy Boys of the 1950s. Next on was Punk (1976-79)
which, with its overtones of sado-masochism, was described by Umberto Eco as
'semiotic guerrilla warfare'.
Then the Pirates (1979-81), trigger for the New Romantic movement of the
early 1980s, swaggered on. This revived a late 18th-century cut which,
instead of following the lines of the body, opposed them, creating folds and
sags.
'I was interested,' says Westwood, 'in the effects of garments made from
squares of fabric, shaped only with gussets, and how such clothes affected
posture and movement. We tend nowadays to assume that people used to cut
clothes like that because they didn't know any better. They did. They just
liked the effect.'
The Savages collection for spring 1982 pursued this theme, but looked at
versions from the folk dress of other cultures. It inspired other designers
to experiment with asymmetric layering. The collection which followed,
Buffalo Girls (autumn 1982), was possibly the most influential Westwood has
ever done. She focused on the Indian women of Latin America, recreating
their layered skirts and petticoats, their bowler hats worn on top of a head
scarf, their sturdy brassieres worn over their blouses because, above all, a
bra is for them a status symbol, an expensive north American artefact.
From this moment stemmed all the various experiments with corsetry as
outerwear which culminated in Jean-Paul Gaultier's costumes for Madonna and
hundreds of thousands of adolescents worldwide sporting Wonderbras on the
dance floor.
Hobo-Punkature (spring 1983) came next, triggering bag-lady chic and the
passion for prematurely aged or 'distressed' clothes.
Then, with Witches (autumn 1983) Westwood presaged the return to a
body-delineating style of dress when she began to work with tubes of knitted
and Lycra-impregnated fabrics. She continued in this fabric-led direction
with Hypnos (spring 1984) which explored the erotic possibilities of the
silky, stretchy fabrics created for sportswear. Gym wear and cycling shorts
became a staple of young women's daily wardrobes.
For the following autumn, she changed direction and, with the Clint Eastwood
collection, supplanted Hollywood's glossy, tight-trousered Wild West with a
more authentic mix of unpressed 19th century city clothes, cannibalised
denim and native American pieces, mixing in a mass of 20th-century American
logos.
During the following two years, 1985-86, she developed the mini-crini, in
her version hooped and bell-like, swinging seductively as the wearer walked.
'We assume nowadays that the crinoline and the corsetry that went with it
were uncomfortable and constricting and hampered women,' she says. 'But
people wore corsets for comfort and posture. They liked them. I liked the
crinoline because it took up space, made its wearer imposing and I suspected
that it felt very sexy to wear. I liked the strong femaleness of the
archetypal fertility-symbol shape as well.'
Her next preoccupation was to be the Englishness of English style and its
class associations. From Harris Tweed (autumn 1987), through Britain Must Go
Pagan to Time Machine, she concentrated on tailoring, juxtaposing elements
from the wardrobe of the Queen with classical draperies, boned bustiers and
1940s platform soles.
BY spring 1989 and Civilizade, she was in a rococo mood, inspired by the
Commedia dell' Arte and using rich fabrics, ornate decoration, a theme
developed by other designers, especially Gianni Versace.
In Voyage to Cythera and Pagan 5, she dispensed with the skirt, proposing
the bodysuit adorned only with a gold fig leaf or stylised, graffito-like
erection (to be flashed when the wearer opens her jacket). Soon everyone was
going skirtless.
Westwood developed her theme of clothes as definers of gender in Portrait
(autumn 1990), cross-dressing her models in chalk-stripe menswear-style
suits, shirts and ties and contrasting it with the Boucher-printed corsets
and body suits sporting a pretty, frilled satin codpiece.
With the following collection, Cut, Slash and Pull (spring 1991), she looked
to the street fashion for torn and frayed jeans and related it to the
Renaissance fashion for slashed clothes. The undergarments were pulled
through the slashes in the overgarments, adding the age-old erotic charge of
the intimate on display. 'All clothes,' she says, 'have to be about sex. As
soon as you do a new cut, you look at the body differently.'
Starting with Dressing Up in autumn 1991, Westwood has, through collections
called Salon, Always On Camera and Grand Hotel (spring 1993), explored two
versions of glamour: the work of the great couturiers, particularly
Christian Dior, and Hollywood's vulgarisation of it. 'We have forgotten,'
she says, 'how anarchical Dior was, how, with the cut and structure of New
Look, he changed the relationship of clothes to the body. He spent a lot of
time underneath frocks in museums, working out how they were constructed.
That's my method, too.'
But neither could be called copyists. 'Historical clothes are, if you like,
an inspiration, a starting point for experimentation. Couture is getting
more and more crude because people are not experimenting enough with cut,
they are not working on the body, so they recycle the same basic shapes and
play only with detail. That's why people who copy me often get it wrong.
They think it is a matter of detail when it is all in the cut.'
Westwood trained as a teacher, primarily of art, and brought to her
accidental profession (McLaren had a shop to fill and told her to fill it)
an analytical curiosity which had rarely been applied to clothes before. In
clothes-making, she was to discover her own credo: 'An idea is pointless
unless you have the technique to give it form.'
She is also a natural heretic and particularly likes to quote Bertrand
Russell: 'Orthodoxy is the grave of intelligence.'
'Conservatism leads to stagnation,' she says. 'Only scepticism is creative.
It is the job of anyone who claims to be civilised to oppose and question
accepted ideas.' When she filled McLaren's shop with studded leather and
slick rubber and the other accoutrements of sado-masochism, she explained
that she was interested in the 'control' of sexuality inherent in the
clothes and accessories. The consensus then was that sado-masochism degrades
women; just as she was later to speculate about the crinoline and the
corset, Westwood wondered whether it might not, conversely, empower them.
Nor, of course, is her current preoccupation with the couture of the 1950s
at all straightforward. 'I am into elegance now,' she says. 'I think, in
this tasteless world, elegance can be subversive.' Certainly clothing has
been used politically throughout history. The couturier, however, descended
as he/she is from the court dressmaker, is traditionally on the side of the
establishment, of orthodoxy. It is the role of the artist, the philosopher,
the writer to question orthodoxy. Perhaps that is why Westwood is so
disconcerting to her domestic audience. Fortunately for her self-esteem,
boosted to the point of euphoria last week, the French see things
differently.
Vivienne Westwood's current collection, Always on Camera, stars extravagant
fake furs including pink leopard, mohair coats, tweeds, elegant Dior-style
suits, the rococo corset and lace-printed denims as well as witty costume
jewellery and watches designed for Swatch. From Vivienne Westwood, 430 Kings
Road, London SW10 (tel. 071 352 6551) and 6 Davies Street, London W1; Smith
and Westwood, Unit 2, Clayton Square, Liverpool. Pieces from previous
collections at the Westwood Sale Shop, 41 Conduit Street, London W1.
