FT  19 DEC 92 / Leading Article: In the bleak midwinter
IN LIVERPOOL, Cambridge and other far-flung parts of Britain, seven wise men
will spend the Christmas season staring at the economic stars. What gifts
might Mr Norman Lamont expect when these recently appointed wise men travel
to the Treasury early in 1993? Britain's embattled chancellor can hardly
hope for gold, while myrrh would be most unwelcome. Nor will medium-term
prophecies of looming current account or budget deficits please the
chancellor. Only news that an economic recovery is under way will give him a
happy new year.
The past week's economic news in the UK has been far from encouraging.
Output in November remained flat, business expectations for the coming
months are depressed, and unemployment rose by a further 41,000 last month.
Most worrying, there is little sign that banks and consumers have responded
to the 3 percentage point cut in interest rates which has followed Britain's
departure from the European exchange rate mechanism. Bank lending in
November fell by Pounds 600m compared with a predicted rise of Pounds 2.3bn.
Nor, peering further afield, will the wise men find much good news for the
UK economy. The OECD has revised its forecast for economic growth among its
24 industrialised country members to 1.9 per cent next year down from 3 per
cent last June.
The main cause of slow growth, according to both the OECD and the
International Monetary Fund, is the continued inability of Germany's
politicians, unions and the Bundesbank to discover how a cut in Germany's
high interest rates might be balanced by tighter fiscal policy and a
commitment to wage restraint. The OECD has already shaved half a point from
its over-optimistic 1.2 per cent growth forecast for Germany next year.
Dangerously unbalanced
Confirmation that German economic policy is dangerously unbalanced was
delivered this week from an unlikely quarter. When the managing director of
as orthodox and inflation-hating an organisation as the IMF calls for a two
percentage point cut in a country's interest rates, as Mr Michel Camdessus
did on Thursday, then something is amiss.
Presumably, Mr Camdessus was not only speaking for the IMF but also as a
Frenchman, a distinguished member of that brotherhood of French bureaucrats
which runs multilateral institutions. The force of the words he used in
criticising Germany's chokingly high interest rates and persistent budget
deficit testifies to the strain that the ERM is placing on the domestic
authority of the French ruling elite.
While a touch of the blues may have crept into Mr Lamont's bath-time
singing, he can rest assured that he will not have as tense a Christmas as
his French colleague, Mr Michel Sapin. With an election pending, and the
French franc languishing at the bottom of its bands within the ERM, the
French Treasury is assured of a nervous start to 1993.
The effort to sustain the French commitment to the ERM against the
speculative pressures of the coming weeks will severely test the
co-operative spirit and sense of common purpose of France and Germany.
Without either an open-ended German commitment to protect the French franc's
D-Mark parity or, alternatively, a sizeable cut in German interest rates,
the risks that the Franc will be forced out of the ERM are not negligible.
German inflation
Yet this week's uncompromising noises from the Bundesbank about the need to
target monetary policy on German inflation alone, and the apparent failure
of Mr Helmut Kohl's solidarity talks to deliver an agreement on wages and
tax increases, do not inspire confidence. Even Germany's famed consensual
approach may fail to avoid prolonged recession. The pain will not be
Germany's alone, as was confirmed by the news that French manufacturing
output fell by 1.7 per cent in October
All is not bleak and chilly in the OECD's Christmas message. Not only does
the report expect the US economy to grow by 2.4 per cent next year but the
OECD now believes, following recent news, that this forecast is half a
percentage point too low. These numbers should be taken with a heap of salt.
The OECD has, after all, been forecasting US recovery for at least a year,
partly because it underestimated the US credit crunch, but also in an
attempt to dissuade US politicians from using fiscal policy to boost
short-term economic growth. Any temporary fiscal expansion, the OECD says,
must be 'both temporary and accompanied by a credible commitment to unwind
it when the economy picks up', conditions that the US political system has
been unable to meet.
Encouragingly though, if the message from last week's economic circus in
Little Rock is genuine, President-elect Bill Clinton has been persuaded to
take a medium-term view, which emphasises deficit reduction over short-term
stimulus. It is a message that Britain's seven wise men will soon have to
send loudly and clearly to the UK Treasury, assuming, that is, that they are
men, not dwarfs.
