FT  20 FEB 92 / London Stock Exchange: Further selling hits BP
RELENTLESS selling by UK and international institutions drove BP down to its
lowest level since January 1989. One fund was believed to have unloaded a
large line of stock late yesterday. BP suffered renewed selling on bearish
stories regarding its Cusiana oil discovery in Colombia. Cusiana, one of
BP's biggest drilling successes of recent years, has generated considerable
excitement among investors, and prompted strong US demand for the stock last
week.
Strauss Turnbull, the securities house, said yesterday, however, that it
expected the latest drilling news from Cusiana to be 'disappointing in size
and structure; it means more expensive drilling'.
Further disappointing news has come with a series of boardroom changes. The
market is particularly concerned at the loss of Mr James Ross, chief
executive at BP America, who is moving to Cable and Wireless. Already badly
weakened by last week's disastrous preliminary figures, the shares have been
hurt further by the Opec agreement to reduce output by 1.4m barrels a day.
At the close BP was 14 lower at 251p, with the Seaq ticker revealing blocks
of 9m and 1m shares traded at 249p.
BAe outperforms
Standing out as the day's best FT-SE performer was British Aerospace (BAe).
The market greeted the group's figures and a maintained dividend with
relief.
The shares started rising early in the session as some dealers carried out
bear closing, but powered ahead after examination of the figures, gaining 30
to 303p by the close. Turnover soared to 18m shares, the highest daily total
for more than three years. Smith New Court was a sizeable buyer, while UBS
Phillips &amp; Drew was reported to have been among the day's big sellers.
Dealers said a large amount of the buying was for the dividend, which is due
on Monday.
Analysts differ on the outlook for the company. Mr Peter Deighton at Smith
raised his current year forecast by Pounds 30m to Pounds 250m. He said: 'We
are pleased that there are no surprises in the figures and the cash flow
position was better than we anticipated.'
Mr Paul Compton at UBS remained sceptical. He said: 'This is still a risky
stock. Defence profits will come under pressure in coming years and Rover
will not grow to counteract this.' He predicted a dividend cut this year.
News of UK government defence orders also helped sentiment.
ICI firm
A positive note on ICI, published by a leading securities house, ensured
that the shares were firm in a dull market. The stock, up 14 at one stage,
closed 11 ahead at 1301p in spite of the belief that ICI's full-year
results, due next Thursday, will show reduced profits.
Hoare Govett reinforced its existing buy stance on ICI and disclosed a
profits forecast of Pounds 1.4bn for 1993. Mr Martin Evans, the broker's
chemicals analyst, argued that a combination of cost-cutting and cyclical
recovery would result in earnings growth of around 33 per cent next year
that would leave the shares on a highly attractive discount rating of 10 per
cent to the market for 1993.
Institutions continued to sell their holdings in the Electricity Package to
marketmakers, who split them into individual stock holdings. Liquidity in
the Package is expected to shrink rapidly ahead of the cessation of trading
in the issue, expected in the summer.
Funds were said to have sold the Package at Pounds 2,760 and reinvested some
of the proceeds in a handful of the individual stocks. These included London
Electricity, where turnover jumped to 4.6m and whose shares firmed 3 to
278p, and Yorkshire, where 3.3m were traded but the shares settled a shade
easier at 313p.
A block of 5.4m TSB (3 higher at 125p) traded late in the session at 125 1/2
p boosting turnover to 12m.
Shell Transport, affected by extreme nervousness over today's fourth-quarter
figures and worries about the dividend, weakened 13 to a 12-month low of
455p on high turnover of 5.7m shares. Mr Keith Morris, oil specialist at
Carr Kitcat &amp; Aitken, was cautious on the dividend payment, and said he
expected a final of 11.6p, against most estimates of 12.2p, pointing to
Shell's traditional conservatism during difficult times.
Second line oils were again in disarray, shaken by actual and expected
earnings and asset valuation downgrades said to have been carried out by a
number of broking houses. Enterprise dropped 13 to 392p, its lowest level
since June 1988, and Lasmo retreated 9 to 197p, its lowest point since March
that year. Clyde slipped 4 to 58p and Hardy Oil &amp; Gas 11 to 108p. Most
closed off the bottom, however, responding to a positive note issued by
Hoare Govett, which said most of the stocks, except for Enterprise, were
still trading at a discount to asset value, even with crude oil at Dollars
18 a barrel.
Pharmaceuticals were weak yesterday, reflecting falls in US pharmaceutical
stocks overnight. Merck fell Dollars 2 1/4 , and Glaxo, which tends to track
Merck, and which announces its half-year results today, failed to respond to
good news in the UK on asthma drugs and lost 22 to 826p. The performance of
Glaxo shares was also affected by expectation of a negative report today
from the authoritative New England Journal of Medicine. The report, part of
a long-running debate, is expected to be critical of some forms of asthma
drugs.
SmithKline Beecham dropped 26 to 924 1/2 p in the 'A' shares and 107 to
4153p in the units. The company announced that the American Academy of
Pediatrics was recommending immunisation for teenagers and infants against
hepatitis B. The vaccination is produced by SmithKline and Merck, but the
news broke after the market closed and failed to help the SmithKline share
price.
Profit-taking caused Wellcome to slide 29 to 1113p, while Fisons weakened 11
to 373p.
Kingfisher, parent of DIY company B &amp; Q, was the star of a mixed stores
sector. The shares advanced 8 to 531p following recommendations from UBS
Phillips &amp; Drew and Warburg Securities.
In an internal buy note, issued before yesterday's retail sales figures, UBS
said Kingfisher is reasonably geared into a consumer recovery. Warburg is
positive about the DIY division and suggests that the company is at a 13 per
cent price to earnings discount within the sector.
WH Smith 'A' put on 5 to 462p and Boots 2 to 465p, but Marks and Spencer
lost 6 to 318p, Sears a penny to 105p and Ratners 1 3/4 to 18 1/2 p. January
retail sales were better than expected, but this was entirely the result of
higher food sales, as clothing and footwear and sales of household goods
fell. Analysts were reluctant to read too much into the data, suggesting
stores are likely to benefit on expectations of a generous UK Budget in the
run-up to a general election.
Holiday group Owners Abroad reported a doubling of profits, triggering a
revision in analysts' estimates for the coming year. The shares, however,
dipped 3 to 117p, mainly on profit-taking, although there was disappointment
that the dividend was increased by only 10 per cent. Most analysts are now
looking for Pounds 36m to Pounds 38.5m this year and around Pounds 43m next,
with the shares remaining on most brokers' buy lists. 'Bookings are well
ahead, costs are being kept down and margins are not under pressure,' said
Mr Peter Hilliar at BZW. 'We think the stock is undervalued.'
Sentiment in BAe supported Rolls-Royce, which firmed a penny to 137p on
turnover of 4.8m. US buying was noted in British Airways, which moved up 4
to 259p.
Central Television continued to strengthen, with no one prepared to sell the
stock and speculation growing that a share split is on the cards. The shares
added 25 at 1308p.
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, steady at 15p, was the most heavily traded stock in the
London market with more than 41m shares changing hands.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1991/92
NEW HIGHS (76).
OTHER FIXED INTEREST (1) LCC 3pc '20 Aft., AMERICANS (6) Chase Manhattan,
Chrysler, Echlin, Ingersoll-Rand, Lowe's, Whirlpool, BANKS (2) HSBC,
Standard Chartered, BREWERS &amp; DISTILLERS (3) Holt (J), Young N/V, Do. A,
BUILDING MATERIALS (7) Epwin, Heywood Williams, Do. Prf., Kalon, St. Gobain,
Titon, Wolseley, CHEMICALS (2) Allied Colloids, MTM, CONGLOMERATES (1) Sime
Darby, CONTRACTING &amp; CONSTRUCTION (2) Boot (H), Maunders (J), ELECTRICALS
(1) Motorola, ELECTRONICS (4) Eurotherm, Hewlett-Packard, Macro 4, MTL
Instrs., ENGINEERING GENERAL (5) Bullough, Polymark, Do. Ptg. Prfd.,
Powerscreen, Rotork, FOOD MANUFACTURING (2) Unilever, Wessanen, HEALTH &amp;
HOUSEHOLD (4) AAH, Amersham, Community Hospitals, Takare, HOTELS &amp; LEISURE
(6) Boosey &amp; Hawkes, Granada, Do. 7.5p Prf., Owners Abroad, Do. 9.75p Prf.,
Tanjong, INSURANCE COMPOSITE (1) Aon, INVESTMENT TRUSTS (5) Beta Global
Emrg. Mkts., India Fund, Sth. East Asia Fd. Wrrnts., Manakin, Templeton
Emrg. Mkts., MEDIA (3) Central ITV, Headline Book, News Corp., MERCHANT
BANKS (1) Schroders N/V, MISCELLANEOUS (1) Alumasc, MOTORS (1) Davenport
Vernon, OIL &amp; GAS (1) NZ Oil, OTHER FINANCIAL (3) Secure Tst., Spanish
Smllr. Co's, Do. Wrrnts., OTHER INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS (3) Tomkins, Do. 5.6pc
Prf., Do. 6 1/4 pc Prf., PACKAGING, PAPER &amp; PRINTING (3) Brit. Polythene, De
La Rue, Microfilm Reprographics, PROPERTY (1) New Cavendish, STORES (3)
Boots, GUS A, Oriflame, TEXTILES (1) Claremont Garments, TRANSPORT (3) Brit.
Airways Cap. 9 3/4 pc Cv., Cathay Pacific, TNT.
NEW LOWS (52).
BREWERS &amp; DISTILLERS (1) Macallan-Glenlivet, BUILDING MATERIALS (1) Ward
Group, CONGLOMERATES (1) Gieves, CONTRACTING &amp; CONSTRUCTION (1) Sindall
(Wm), ELECTRICALS (1) Fujitsu, ELECTRONICS (5) Acorn Computer, Gresham
Telecomputing, Harland Simon, Kewill Systems, Radius, ENGINEERING AEROSPACE
(2) ML, Westland, ENGINEERING GENERAL (1) WB Inds., HEALTH &amp; HOUSEHOLD (1)
Hospital Corp., INSURANCE COMPOSITE (2) Baltica, Hafnia, INVESTMENT TRUSTS
(9) Drayton Cons., Drayton Eng. &amp; Intl., Electra, Flmg. High Inc., Gartmore
Scot. Cap., Malaysian Emrg. Wrrnts., Morgan Grenfell Equity Inc., Nth. Amer.
Gas, River &amp; Merc. Cap., MEDIA (2) MMI, Osprey Comms., MISCELLANEOUS (1)
Porth, OIL &amp; GAS (13) Blystad, Bow Valley, Brit. Borneo, BP, Cairn Energy,
Calor, Clyde Petrlm., Enterprise Oil, Hardy Oil, LASMO, Pict Petrlm., Tuskar
Res., Ultramar, OTHER FINANCIAL (1) Lon. Finance, PACKAGING, PAPER &amp;
PRINTING (2) Delyn, NMC, PROPERTY (2) Britannia, Chesterfield, STORES (1)
Colorvision, MINES (5) Free State Dev., Kinross, Loraine, St. Helena,
Vlakfontein .
