FT  13 MAY 92 / European freedom of movement may end at Dover: Britain's row
with its EC partners on border controls
BRITAIN'S long-simmering dispute with the European Commission over frontier
controls is coming to the boil, just in time to embarrass the UK government
as it takes over the EC presidency in the second half of this year.
As in so many aspects of Community policy, the issue boils down to a matter
of trust. Will Britain trust its partners sufficiently to remove all
controls on people and goods entering the UK from the rest of the EC? The
short answer at the moment is: no.
The dispute stems from the 1986 Single European Act's commitment to a single
market defined, in Article 8a, as 'an area without internal frontiers' by
the end of 1992.
Britain contends that this freedom of movement only applies to EC citizens,
and that, as Mr Douglas Hurd, the UK foreign secretary, stressed this week,
'we are justified, indeed have the obligation, to maintain our controls on
non-Community citizens'.
But, technically, it is impossible to check the passports of non-EC 'goats'
without also checking the credentials of the EC 'sheep'.
Last week, the Commission delivered a long-expected legal opinion that
Article 8a requires an end to all controls, and was confident that, if it
had to take Britain to the European Court of Justice, it would win.
Such a legal battle could take a long time. In the meantime, there are
pressing and expensive tasks such as changing the infrastructure at EC
airports, if there really is to be a EC-wide free travel zone.
The Commission has been so absolutist in its interpretation of Article 8a,
because it fears that if frontier controls remain for just one reason -
checks on travellers - they can be used as an easy pretext for the return of
checks on goods, for fiscal, security, health purposes. In fact, the UK
Customs and Excise is busy preparing, like its counterparts elsewhere in the
EC, to move its fiscal checks inland.
Brussels has set aside Ecu400m (Pounds 280m) to retrain or re-employ the
250,000 customs agents who will be put out of work. From next year, truck
drivers will no longer have to stop at intra-EC border posts (except perhaps
on the Danish-German border) to file VAT and excise documents.
There is far less progress in finding alternatives to other border checking
activities such as controlling the movement of drugs, explosives, artworks,
and hi-tech goods of military potential.
Some problems appear intractable such as how to get rid of the quarantine
which the UK and Ireland impose on the import of cats and dogs. Finding
alternative ways of checking drugs, explosives and rabid animals, are
essential if Britain is to stop controlling the entry of people from other
points in the EC.
However, of even greater concern is the need to improve controls on the EC's
periphery. There is growing migratory pressure on the EC, traditionally
mainly from north Africa, but now from eastern Europe.
All 12 EC states are, in principle, ready to sign a convention 'on the
crossing of external frontiers' of the Community. But the convention is held
up by an Anglo-Spanish dispute about Gibraltar, with the UK wanting its
colony treated as part of EC territory, but Madrid insisting that travellers
from the Rock to Spain are crossing an 'external' frontier. The Portuguese
presidency of the EC is trying to broker a deal.
But this 'external' convention seems not to be enough for Britain to drop
its 'internal' guard.
It would set agreed rules for issuing visas to third-country citizens, for
which a common policy is provided in the Maastricht treaty. It would lead to
the Twelve exchanging information on undesirable aliens. It would also
require each state to impose immigration controls on incoming aircraft,
ships, cars and buses, which the other 11 could - but need not - rely on.
The convention contains a British-inspired declaration that other (ie
internal) controls can be maintained.
The Dublin convention on the treatment of asylum-seekers has also been
signed by the Twelve, though only ratified by Denmark and Greece.
Absent from this convention is the trust apparent in the 1990 Schengen
treaty setting up a free travel zone between Germany, France, Italy, Spain,
Portugal, and the Benelux countries. (Greece now wants to join Schengen.)
This far-reaching pact provides for elaborate co-operation between the eight
countries' police and immigration forces. But it has not proved quite the
trail-blazing treaty it was intended to be. Only France has ratified it, and
it has run into difficulties in the Dutch parliament.
None the less, in Brussels' view, Britain remains the main obstacle to a
frontier-free Europe. True, Denmark is dithering about dropping controls
because of its passport union with Nordic countries. But this will be eased
once they join the EC. Ireland will probably follow the UK lead.
Given Britain's island geography, it is 'plain common sense', Mrs Margaret
Thatcher, the former UK leader, used to say, for it to keep controls. But if
other countries show they can enforce proper controls on their parts of the
EC's external rim, it will become plain common sense for British officialdom
to abandon Dover.
