FT  06 APR 92 / Survey of Latin American Finance and Investment (9): Plans
for a big drive - Argentina / Privatisation
ARGENTINA'S economy minister, Mr Domingo Cavallo, has spent a year planning
a privatisation drive in which he proposes to sell nearly all state
companies by 1993, raising at least Dollars 6bn.
He obviously hopes to avoid repeating Argentina's first, and chaotic,
privatisation of the national airline and telephone network in 1990. They
were sold cheaply without adequate regulation mechanisms, under terms giving
operators big profits. The result: high prices, poor service and arrogant
staff.
That might have been enough to discredit privatisation forever, except in
Argentina, where deficit-ridden, incompetent and corrupt state companies
helped push the country to the verge of economic collapse three years ago.
The memory of hyperinflation and the government's successful reforms have
made privatisation politically popular.
It has also been financially popular. The sale in December and in March of
the government's remaining 30 per cent stake in the two privatised telephone
companies boosted the capital markets, bringing hundreds of thousands of new
shareholders into the stock market and yielded almost Dollars 2bn cash for
the government.
Uncharacteristically, Argentina is now ahead of its neighbours in economic
reform.
Bolivia, among the first Latin countries to embrace free markets, has not
privatised anything. It is negotiating with Comsur, a local mining company
part-owned by Britain's RTZ, to sell the Bolivar zinc and silver mine. It
plans to sell part of its airline Lloyd Aereo Bolivia by mid-year, to be
followed by a number of small manufacturing companies. Paraguay has only
dipped its toe into the market. It approved privatisation legislation in
December and plans to start by selling Lineas Aereas Paraguayas, the
national airline. It will be followed by four other companies, which include
Latin America's only working steam railway.
Uruguay did reprivatise a bank in 1990 that had been taken into the public
sector after it had failed, but stopped there. In 1991 it passed legislation
to sell control of Pluna, the airline, and Antel the telephone system.
All that is small beer compared to Mr Cavallo's plans to sell roughly 60
companies this year. They include the national mint, leading petrochemical
plants, a water company, five freight railway networks and four energy
utilities. Even YPF, the oil company, is being heavily restructured to
prepare it for eventual privatisation.
Mr Juan Carlos Sanchez Arnau, assistant privatisation secretary, has spent
the past year drawing up regulatory mechanisms and recruiting legions of
financial, legal and technical consultants. He has even published a
privatisation timetable. The government has also fired thousands of
employees from bloated state company payrolls.
Mr Cavallo is aiming for a minimum cash inflow of Dollars 1.9bn, plus
swapping around Dollars 4bn-worth of equity for domestic and foreign debt
with a face value of Dollars 8bn. The companies will be sold with some
financial liabilities, mainly unpaid taxes and social security
contributions. Mr Sanchez Arnau says estimating revenues is pointless, since
they will depend on the amount of equity on sale. Furthermore, prices will
be set by competitive bidding.
Rather than sell all equity in utility companies, Mr Sanchez Arnau is
selling controlling stakes to operators. Part of the stock will be held by
employees. The government will retain minority stakes, selling them
gradually over the coming years on local and international equity markets.
The government expects to raise considerably less from the 30-odd companies
owned by the defence ministry, which controls Argentina's rusting
military-industrial complex. Its assets range from SOMISA, the country's
biggest steelmill, to acres of prime real estate and the duty free shops at
Buenos Aires airport. Most of the assets are manufacturing companies. The
government intends to sell 100 per cent of equity for cash.
Privatisation of the national gas monopoly and three electricity utilities
will broadly follow the British model. Companies will be broken up into
production, transport and distribution units and sold separately. They are
to compete in near-market conditions, supervised by a regulator.
The railway company's long-distance freight lines are being offered as 10-
or 30-year concessions in which operators must meet minimum investment
targets. State-owned Ferrocarriles Argentinos will run passenger trains,
which will pay tolls for use of tracks. Companies will bid on price,
investments and tolls to be charged Ferrocarriles. The Buenos Aires suburban
and underground rail systems are also being privatised, but will continue to
receive subsidies: instead of cash, bidders will offer the lowest subsidy.
Candidates for the 30-year concession to run OSN, the Buenos Aires water
company, will bid by offering the lowest water price. They will recoup their
investments in the collapsing system by installing water meters and cracking
down on water theft.
