FT  27 OCT 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Planning on a good
impression
Most business plans are not very good, says Brian Finch, in the introduction
to his guide* to the subject of making business proposals.
This is hardly surprising since most business people will usually produce
only one or two in their careers.
Start with a short, preferably one-page introduction, Finch suggests. You
have only a few minutes to make a good impression and by the time the reader
has finished the summary, you have either won or lost.
The summary should be written after you have written the rest of the
business plan because it must tell the whole story of what you are
proposing. Establish why you are writing the plan. Is it to raise finance,
to help sell the business or as a general management aid?
Never use jargon. Your plan may be passed on to non-specialists and even the
expert appreciates ideas being expressed in plain English.
Make it easy to read, says Finch, a corporate finance associate with
London-based accountants Blackstone Franks. The plan may be the most
important thing in your life but it does not have the same importance for
your potential readers. So if the plan is more than three or four pages long
put in an index. Number the pages and use a clear type face with plentiful
spacing.
Remember you are telling a story so the narrative must flow. Do not devote
too much time to particular aspects such as the history of the company or
your personal details in the main text. But at the same time do not assume
the reader knows how your company or its market place work.
Your readers will expect that you have put a positive gloss on your
achievements but do not try to deceive them by forgetting to mention, say,
pending litigation. Any deal will depend on trust so be careful not to
destroy that at the outset. Investors also have legal redress against
directors who misrepresent matters.
Do not leave it too late to present your business plan. Financial backers
tend to distrust people who want an immediate answer.
*Business Plans: 25 Ways to Get Yours Taken Seriously. Kogan Page. 86 pages.
Pounds 5.99.
