FT  28 AUG 92 / Leading Article: How to advance British science
THE ANNUAL ritual of the British Association meeting, going on all this week
in Southampton, shows the strength of tradition in science - and journalism.
The BA attracts far more media attention than any other scientific event in
the UK. Several national newspapers have two or three correspondents at the
conference and they devote half a page or more to it every day. Yet serious
new research findings are hardly ever announced to the BA any longer, except
in the social sciences; even the great debates about scientific issues that
lit up Victorian meetings are now absent.
The journalistic endurance of the BA meeting is explained partly by its
timing, at a point of the year when papers are normally short of news. And
it is, for all its faults, the best showcase UK science has - an opportunity
that neither scientists nor those who popularise their work would wish to
abandon.
At this year's conference the president, Sir David Attenborough, launched a
corporate plan for the next five years. It envisages building on the
visibility of the annual meeting to expand the BA's other activities, which
remain largely invisible and, some scientists would say, ineffective.
The plan would increase the BA's promotional work among children and
teenagers - much needed in view of the continued decline of science in
British schools - and the general public. Another worthwhile expansion
scheme is to set up a network of 16 regional offices throughout the UK, each
with a full-time co-ordinator to stimulate year-round local activities.
Raising money
Its implementation depends on raising more money, with spending scheduled to
rise from Pounds 870,000 this year to Pounds 1.54m in 1996-97. Since the BA
relies largely on corporate and charitable funding (government grants making
up only 16 per cent of this year's income, and membership fees and
subscriptions 23 per cent) it will be appealing for more support from
industries such as chemicals, pharmaceuticals and electronics.
Companies whose prosperity depends in the long run on the health of British
science should respond generously, because the BA plan is soundly based as
far as it goes. But at the same time they should be pressing for a
fundamental realignment between the three ancient organisations charged with
promoting science in Britain: the BA (founded in 1831) and its two older
sisters, the Royal Society and the Royal Institution.
Meagre resources
Although the three already work together to a limited extent through Copus,
the Committee on the Public Understanding of Science, there is scope for far
more productive co-operation between them. Indeed, if they were not so
inhibited by their venerable traditions, it would make sense for the smaller
and poorer pair, the BA and Royal Institution, to merge. They could make
much better use of their meagre resources by joining forces. And the BA,
which is likely soon to have to leave its rented accommodation in Mayfair,
could find a splendid home around the corner in the neo-classical
headquarters of the Royal Institution.
In recent years the RI has been even less visible than the BA, with the
exception of its televised Christmas lectures, and is arguably in greater
need of revitalisation. Unlike the BA, the RI does some research in its own
laboratory. That has produced excellent results in the past, for example in
chemical crystallography, but the RI should ask itself whether a Mayfair
basement is still a sensible place for world-class physics or chemistry. If
not, the remaining research should move to a university and the building
should be renovated to provide a joint home for the BA and RI - a fitting
'Parliament of Science' for the 21st century.
At the same time the BA annual meeting must continue to move around
Britain's universities, as the country's leading festival of science. An
encouraging sign is the BA's recruitment of Mr Brian Gamble, head of the
successful new Edinburgh Science Festival, as its programmes director. His
challenge is to make the annual meeting more popular, while persuading
leading scientists to divulge genuinely newsworthy results.
