FT  23 JUN 92 / International Capital Markets: Five NHL bonds marked down
over UK property fears
NATIONAL Home Loans (NHL), the UK centralised mortgage lender which
completed a debt restructuring package with banks earlier this month, has
had five mortgage-backed bond issues downgraded by Moody's Investors
Service, the US rating agency.
The move surprised many market participants because there has been no
serious deterioration in the condition of the UK housing market this year.
Moody's said that the downgradings reflected both the performance of the
mortgage pools underlying the bonds and 'structural and legal aspects' of
the issues.
The agency was concerned about the impact of re-possessions, especially
where re-possessed properties are then re-sold at a loss.
The bonds were issued by special purpose companies and formerly assigned the
top triple-A credit rating by Moody's on the basis of subordinated loans
provided by NHL itself.
Mr Nigel Terrington, NHL treasurer, said that the legal issues were
'technical'.
'We are disappointed by these ratings and do not believe the issues
highlighted by Moody's are significant,' he said.
Standard &amp; Poor's, the other big US rating agency, maintains three of the
five bond issues at a higher credit rating than Moody's. It rates
mortgage-backed bonds issued by CMS No 3 some four notches higher than
Moody's.
'One of the rating agencies has to be wrong,' commented one banker
yesterday. 'There is obviously a fundamental disagreement about the level of
credit protection available to bondholders.'
Dealers said that the downgradings had little impact on bond prices in the
secondary market. NHL has bought back bonds trading below par, balancing the
impact of any selling. The five issues amounted to Pounds 960m, although
only some Pounds 600m is still outstanding.
Bankers were yesterday anticipating new issues of mortgage-backed bonds from
other lenders. However, Midland Bank, which was expected to make a debut
issue of at least Pounds 200m, has pulled back from the market.
