FT  04 JUL 92 / The superbug destroying our defences: New and virulent
strains of TB are posing a worldwide health threat
'I kept imagining all the things that were going on physiologically: the
lungs aren't getting enough air into the blood, which makes the brain fogged
out and the heart weaker, which makes the breathing more difficult. I kept
expecting some sort of an avalanching effect, with everything caving in
altogether in a dramatic collapse. But it didn't appear that way at all: she
just slowly got more foggy, and her breathing gradually became less and
less, until there was no more breath . . .'
THUS Richard Feynman, Nobel Prize-winning atomic physicist, describing the
death of his wife, Arlene, from tuberculosis in 1946. Such scenes are
enacted to this day, even in the most advanced western hospitals. There are
at least four doctors dying of TB in New York, and the incidence of the
disease is rising alarmingly. Tuberculosis is back - with a vengeance.
This lingering and fatal disease has been endemic for thousands of years.
Skeletons from a Neolithic site near Heidelberg in Germany bear its scars;
it has been identified in Egyptian mummies, and it was described by
Hippocrates and Galen (the Greeks referred to it as phthisis).
Shrouded for centuries in myth and superstition, the cause of TB was first
identified in 1882 by the German pathologist Robert Koch, who isolated a
previously unknown species of bacterium, mycobacterium tuberculosis. During
the slow, inexorable course of the disease, these bacteria evade their
host's defences and gradually eat away at tissues - hence the popular name,
consumption - producing increasingly severe bouts of fever and weakness.
The impact of any disease on a population is governed by two main factors:
the efficiency of its spread to uninfected individuals, and the resistance
of those individuals to attack. For TB, the most important route of
infection is through the air, when infectious droplets are coughed up by
sufferers and inhaled by other people.
Minor routes include contaminated food, especially milk from
tuberculous-infected cattle. Contagion is encouraged by crowding and
mobility. Resistance to infection is governed by individuals' general
health, specifically nutrition and freedom from other sickness.
In Britain's agrarian economy of the Middle Ages, consumption was a familiar
but relatively unimportant disease. Although the population was often
undernourished, it was fairly small, scattered and immobile. Only during the
stressed conditions of the Civil War in the 17th century, which brought
crowding, mobility and poor nutrition, did the incidence of tuberculosis
increase dramatically.
As trade and commerce developed throughout Europe, towns began to grow
rapidly, and people started to live in cramped conditions. By 1750 the
incidence was rising again, and in Naples in 1783 consumptive patients had
to be reported to the authorities. Their belongings were cleaned or
destroyed and their houses replastered - all at public expense. There were
heavy fines for non-compliance.
In England, the labouring poor were forced into mill towns and swelling
cities. In Victorian times, TB was responsible for a fifth of deaths in
English industrial towns. The US was similarly affected: between 1829-1845,
eastern seaboard cities had an average annual TB mortality of around 400 per
100,000.
Unlike the other great killers of the 18th and 19th centuries, such as
typhoid, cholera and diphtheria, TB is a slow, wasting disease which sends
its victims to their deaths only gradually. To the Victorians, with their
almost obsessional interest in death, a consumptive's unhurried decline had
an air of heroic, macabre romance, and the disease developed a cult
following.
By 1824, Alexander Dumas could record: 'It was all the fashion to suffer
from a chest complaint; everybody was consumptive, poets especially; it was
good form to spit blood after each emotion that was at all inclined to be
sensational, and to die before reaching the age of 30.'
What helped create this popularity was the perceived increase in vitality of
sufferers when in a feverish state. The 'romantic' artists and poets were
impressed by the similarity of the flushed face and delicate disposition of
a consumptive to those of a passionate lover. English literature owes a
considerable debt to TB.
At the height of this misguided romanticism, Lord Byron said he hoped he
might die of consumption 'because all the ladies would say: 'Look at that
poor Byron, how interesting he looks in dying'.' John Keats, ironically a
licensed apothecary and general practitioner of medicine, died of TB thought
to have been contracted while nursing his consumptive brother.
Robert Koch's discovery of the biological basis of TB brought an end to this
romanticism, and heralded the beginning of a medical counter-attack. Once
contagion was understood, action could be taken to reduce it as much as
possible. Alleviation of poverty was an early and important step, increasing
resistance and reducing crowding. Campaigns of information about the
disease, often funded by private unions and societies, helped educate the
public; the newly-invented process of pasteurisation prevented infection
from cow's milk, and the introduction of sanataria in the latter part of the
last century isolated severely contagious patients.
In 1912, TB was made a notifiable disease in England and Wales, providing a
means of state-organised control. Careful hygiene proved enormously
effective, even in the absence of more advanced medical techniques.
The first truly medical, rather than sociological, weapon to be developed
against TB was the BCG vaccination. In 1906, the bacteriologist Calmette
isolated a culture of bovine TB bacteria, which he and Guarin mutated and
bred in the laboratory until they had a non-virulent strain. The first
successful trials of BCG took place in 1921; by 1954 more than 60m people
had been vaccinated worldwide.
The second medical defence, and the first to be of great use to patients
already suffering from the disease, was the arrival of antibiotic
chemotherapy in the years following the Second World War. The combined
strategies of improved hygiene, elimination of bovine TB from milk herds,
vaccination and antibiotic therapy effectively ended TB's reign: in the
early 1900s, 0.16 per cent of the British population died of consumption
each year; by 1961 this had dropped to 0.0074 per cent.
However, while the West has enjoyed the results of its battle against the
disease, there remains an immense reservoir of TB in the rest of the world.
Individual travellers and migrating populations provide a continuous source
of virulent bacteria to challenge healthy developed countries. The challenge
used to be resisted, but in recent years tuberculosis has managed to gain a
new and lethal hold, and is becoming a crisis in 'advanced' First World
cities such as New York, which has more than 25,000 TB sufferers. Again,
critical factors of spread and susceptibility provide a means of
understanding the threat.
A partial explanation of the rise of infection lies in the socio-economic
conditions prevalent in large cities, which are once again a focus of
endemic poverty, homelessness and over-crowding. Areas of New York, Los
Angeles and perhaps even London have degenerated into the very squalor whose
abolition was so important in the battle against disease last century.
The rest of the explanation arises from people's resistance to infection,
which is decreasing for several reasons. The first - general ill-health - is
inseparable from poverty. The second is the appearance of individuals with
significantly defective immune systems, either because they are under
immuno-suppression to prevent transplant rejection, or more commonly because
they suffer from leukaemia or Aids. The third reason is the decreasing
ability of antibiotic chemotherapy to protect those infected by TB bacteria.
In New York, almost half the TB samples taken from new patients are
resistant to one antibiotic, and one strain is resistant to 11. Our capacity
for chemotherapeutic treatment of the disease is being eroded quickly.
Clearly, action needs to be taken.
Global eradication of the disease is not feasible (only smallpox has been
eradicated so far). Practical strategies mostly echo those of the past. The
problem of urban poverty and homelessness has proved disappointingly
intractable. It is estimated that New York alone has 90,000 homeless, a
third of whom are infected with HIV or have Aids.
Education has been of great service in the past, but its present lack of
success in controlling drug abuse is worryiong. A programme of vaccination
offers great hope of increasing the resistance of uninfected individuals,
and New York's governor, Mario Cuomo, has proposed that state funds be used
to purchase vaccine for the city's poor.
Faced with the threat of epidemic, basic science has taken arms once again
against TB. After the initial success of chemotherapeutic approaches in the
1950s, little further work was done and much remains to be learned about the
basic biology of mycobacterium tuberculosis. Even the composition of its
unusual outer coat, the part of the bacterium detected by the immune system,
is not understood in any detail.
Increased knowledge of this parasite's biochemical composition is deemed so
important that the Human Genome Project - the immense international
collaboration aiming to read the entire genetic code of human beings - is
being extended to include reading the (much smaller) genetic code of the TB
bacterium. With luck, the work will result in new 'designer drugs' aimed at
specific weaknesses. However, these will need to be used with caution, lest
further resistant strains are generated.
More immediately, science is coming to the aid of busy clinicians through
the development of tests for the presence of TB which take hours rather than
weeks, and a rapid means of testing for antibiotic resistance.
The re-conquering of tuberculosis is likely to be slow, difficult and
expensive. TB's reappearance should remind us that our accustomed freedom
from infectious disease was not easily gained, and requires vigilance and
care.
