FT  31 JUL 92 / Walbrook salvage plan rejected by creditors
WALBROOK Insurance, the insurer and reinsurer which has net liabilities of
Pounds 170m, has failed to gain approval from its creditors for a proposed
package to stave off liquidation.
The collapse of the agreement raises the prospect of a call on the funds of
the Policyholders' Protection Board, the UK insurance industry safety net,
and exposes creditors to liquidation procedures before any assets are
recovered.
Walbrook, which is a subsidiary of London United Investments, a property and
investment company placed in administration in 1990, was one of the leading
insurers and reinsurers of US liability business in the London market during
the 1980s. It covered US doctors, hospitals, accountants and lawyers, and
their insurers, against legal awards for negligence.
The company said yesterday: 'The level of support for the directors'
proposals, while encouraging, was insufficient to continue developing the
plan even though the number of those replying adversely was small.'
The news followed a deadline last Friday for the proposal to receive
non-binding approval from sufficient creditors to cover net liabilities and
a safety margin totalling Dollars 814m (Pounds 425m). It is believed that
about 90 of the 200 main policyholders, representing about Dollars 500m,
voted in favour.
The main policyholders owed more than Dollars 1m each in outstanding claims
were asked to accept a plan which would have left the directors to run an
informal plan of arrangement. They would have received a 100 per cent
dividend but immediately returned 60 per cent in exchange for redeemable
preference shares. Other creditors would have been paid in full.
However, some creditors, including Transit Casualty, a Missouri-based
insurance company which went into receivership in 1985, said provisional
liquidation would be quicker and cheaper. Transit has brought a winding-up
petition in the High Court in London which proposes the appointment of a
provisional liquidator.
The directors may still attempt to create a scheme of arrangement which
would allow them to remain in charge of Walbrook.
However, the scheme will need to be approved by 75 per cent of creditors by
value, and it is likely that Walbrook will be forced to appoint a
provisional liquidator.
Unpublished 1991 accounts for Walbrook show underwriting losses of Pounds
178.5m, and negative net assets of Pounds 170m after new estimates of Pounds
461m for outstanding claims and claims incurred but not reported were drawn
up in April. It has gross liabilities of more than Dollars 2bn.
