FT  23 JAN 92 / Economic Viewpoint: Don't jettison the fiscal autopilot
Question. Does the Treasury want to see the savings ratio go up or down?
Alan Budd (Chief Economic Adviser to the Treasury): The question is what is
meant by 'want'? Our forecasts are based on the view that the savings ratio
will fall. In that sense, for our forecast to be correct, this does imply
that the savings ratio will fall, though it is currently at a very high
level. If one wants to talk about broader, longer-term issues, about what is
a desirable savings ratio, one might expect that a sustained higher savings
ratio would be desirable for this economy. So we are distinguishing between
whether a fall in the savings ratio might help the recovery, and where we
want that ratio to settle in the longer term.
Nicholas Budgen, MP. Is this not very confusing, because Mr Major's last
Budget as chancellor was designed to be a Budget for savings?
(Proceedings of Commons Treasury Committee, November 20 1991)
Fiscal policy is back in fashion. President Bush is planning to ask a
willing Congress for a stimulus despite the large amount of red ink in the
US Budget. If the British chancellor, Norman Lamont, cuts taxes and adds to
public spending in the next Budget, cynics will ascribe it to the
forthcoming election. Insiders will know that - so long as the headline size
is not too grotesque - the boost will have some official support. In any
case, any stimulus will take effect much too late to affect the election,
and can therefore only be justifiable on its merits.
The special reason that will be given for departing from the medium-term
approach to fiscal policy of the 1980s is that discretionary moves in
monetary policy are blocked by the European exchange rate mechanism.
The government may well say that the unexpectedly high German interest rates
following unification created a special situation for the UK, which
justifies the departure from the medium-term guideline of balancing the
budget over the business cycle. Under this guideline, which was adopted in
the 1980s, both deficits and surpluses are meant to be limited to the
automatic effects of recession and boom - the so-called built-in
stabilisers.
We should now pause for breath. After all the efforts to persuade people to
save, are policymakers now to stand on their heads and try to find
inducements to make consumers spend more, and move more slowly out of debt?
Contrary to what many suppose, this was not the view that John Maynard
Keynes usually espoused.
The real-life Lord Keynes was not happy with budget deficits on current
account. In the 1930s, he went around talking about the immense
opportunities for improving the public capital stock, including the visual
improvement of cities and the construction of buildings such as concert
halls and art galleries, while at the same time reducing unemployment. What
he wanted to see was a public-sector capital account split from the current
account and which would be used to finance investment projects.
It was only when Keynesianism took over from Keynes that the budget balance
was set aside and that tax cuts came to be regarded as even better demand
stimuli than public capital works. This was due not so much to pure theory,
as to Treasury convenience. While public spending projects take months or
years to come on stream, taxes can be changed on Budget day.
A genuine problem is how to distinguish capital from current public
spending. The old 'line' with which Keynes was familiar was a legislative
accident. If one looks at the more modern national income accounts, not
everything that is called capital expenditure is true investment. For
instance, the building of extra school lavatories counts as capital
expenditure, whereas paying more for science teachers would add to the
current deficit. The absence of a profit test makes assessment difficult.
There are many reasons why discretionary fiscal adjustments of all kinds - a
better term than 'fine tuning' - were abandoned in the 1980s. One standard
objection was to do with lags. By the time the diagnosis had been made, the
government acted and its measures took effect, the economy would already be
on the upturn.
A more profound caution is that demand management of any kind can only be
safely used to achieve nominal objectives - that is, a reasonable growth of
demand in money terms. Too many pronouncements, especially in the US, give
the impression that the president and the Fed have the power to determine
the economy's real rate of growth by injecting more spending power,
irrespective of inflation. There is less of this growthmanship in the
British Treasury, but there is still a danger of its re-emerging in the UK
in an election year.
Another objection used to be that if the money supply is kept to an
unchanged target path, a fiscal stimulus would be ineffective and simply
raise interest rates. As a result, private investment would be 'crowded
out'. This formulation is out of date at a time when an exchange rate
commitment has replaced the money supply objective, and when free capital
movements mean that government can borrow more in world capital markets
without bidding up local rates of interest.
There is still, however, a constraint at the international level. If several
governments start borrowing more, interest rates will rise in the face of a
money supply which in the EC at least is ultimately determined by the
Bundesbank. A fiscal stimulus in the ERM would be like the US states
borrowing more without any support from a Fed relaxation. They can try (if
their local constitutions permit); but I would not place too much hope on
it.
The one incontrovertible effect of budget deficits is the tax burden they
will represent in future years. The higher the present deficits, the higher
will be the future tax rate to service the national debt.
A further reason for caution is that the underlying British fiscal position
is not nearly as sound as it looks. In the Autumn Statement, the Public
Sector Borrowing Requirement of 3 per cent of gross domestic product was
projected for the coming financial year. The Treasury Committee estimates
that this becomes 5 per cent if privatisation receipts, council house sales
and the like are added back. A thorough separation of capital from current
items might trim this total back to some 3 per cent of GDP - which is
already up against the presumptive limits agreed at Maastricht.
If we add together these underlying fiscal worries, the inconclusive nature
of the evidence for a prolonged recession stretching for years ahead, and
the fact that inflationary psychology is far from dead in the UK (as small
businessmen who receive rent review demands all tell me), the argument for
caution about a discretionary stimulus is overwhelming.
If something has to be done, my top priority would be to add to the capital
stock. If anything is done on the personal tax side, it should be
automatically reversible. The reason is not only to safeguard the fiscal
position, but also because people - and especially if they are in a careful
mood - will be more likely to respond to tax incentives which will run out
by a named date.
Thus the first candidate should be some improvement in business capital
allowances, which would run out within two years, and would not interfere
with the structural reforms of corporation tax in the 1983 Budget.
My second priority would be an increase in public capital spending - despite
all the difficulties and problems of abuse. For even if a conjunctual
mistake were made, we would still be left with some structures of lasting
value.
My third priority would be temporary reductions in indirect taxes. But in
contrast to past use of consumer tax as a regulator there would be an
announced date of when they could go into reverse.
The very last relief on my list - I am sorry - would be an income tax
reduction. No-one would believe that this would be temporary if the
Conservatives were returned; and public spending trends leave no scope for a
permanent reduction.
Thus I am still for limiting government discretion and for tying the hands
of the present and future ministers. This, after all, is one of the many
arguments for the ERM and an independent central bank.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPOSITION OF GENERAL GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE: % OF GDP
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   UK                   Germany
                           -------------------     ------------------
                             1989      Change       1988      Change
                                     from '79               from '79
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Total expenditure            41.2        -1.6       46.8        -1.2
TRADITIONAL DOMAIN
Public goods                  8.3        -0.1        8.2        -0.1
  Defence                     4.1        -0.4        2.6        -0.2
  Gen. public service         3.6         0.3        5.6         0.1
  Other functions             0.6         0.0        0.0         0.0
THE WELFARE STATE
Merit goods                  12.8        -0.8       12.7        -0.6
  Education                   4.8        -0.4        4.3        -0.7
  Health                      5.0         0.4        6.5         0.4
  Housing and other           3.0        -0.8        1.9        -0.3
Income transfers             12.9         1.0       18.5        -0.9
Income maintenance            9.6         0.4       15.8        -0.7
  Pensions                    6.2        -0.2       11.3        -1.0
  Sickness benefits           0.3        -0.1        0.7        -0.1
  Family allowances           1.6         0.0        0.8        -0.4
  Unemployment compensation   0.7         0.0        1.5         0.6
  Other income support        0.8         0.7        1.5         0.2
Admin and other spending      1.5         0.2        2.4        -0.1
Other transfers               1.8         0.4        0.4         0.0
  (non-profit institutions etc)
THE MIXED ECONOMY
Economic services             3.0        -0.7        4.6        -0.8
  Capital formation and       1.0        -0.1        1.5        -0.8
   capital transfers
  Subsidies                   0.5        -0.6        1.9         0.0
  Other                       1.5         0.0        1.2         0.0
Public debt interest          3.6        -0.8        2.8         1.1
Balancing item                0.6        -0.2        0.0         0.1
Net lending                  -0.1        -3.3       -2.1        -4.7
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: OECD Economic Studies, Autumn 1991
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
