FT  06 JUL 92 / A piece of the American dream comes to Poland: Levi's plant
was fought over like its jeans
ON THE outskirts of Plotsk, a dreary town of 110,000 people 70 miles
northwest of Warsaw, a brightly painted Levi Strauss plant is bringing a
piece of the American Dream to Poland - at a price equal to a third of the
country's average monthly wage. Yet to judge by the long queues outside
Levi's store in the centre of Warsaw, there is no shortage of customers
ready to pay. Indeed, the store has the biggest sales for its size of any
Levi's outlet in Europe.
Though Levi's products were a scarce commodity under communism, its brand
has long been one of the best known in central Europe. Says Mr Claude
Flauraud, general manager of Levi Strauss Poland: 'The one thing we were
sure of was that we had a willing consumer.'
What Levi's did not know when it decided 18 months ago to manufacture in
Poland was that its plant would be fought over as fiercely as its jeans.
The company wanted to produce locally, both to take advantage of Poland's
low costs and to avoid import duties. When it advertised for a greenfield
site, it drew more than 100 replies. The initial choice was Lodz, a textile
centre west of Warsaw.
Then a group of politicians and municipal officials in Plotsk came up with a
more attractive deal on an empty 10,000 sq m warehouse complex. 'They really
wanted us to go there, while the people in Lodz didn't get their act
together,' says Mr Flauraud.
When Levi's accepted, Lodz hit back with a salvo of angry propaganda, which
grew into a war of words between the two cities during last year's spring
election campaign. 'It was rather embarrassing for the company,' says Mr
Flauraud, a 39-year-old Swiss.
Since then, events have moved at dazzling speed, partly because of the help
of Plotsk authorities in cutting through red tape locally and in Warsaw.
Local contractors took four months to fit out the warehouse, and last
December the machinery started going in. In March the first pair of jeans
rolled off the line.
Recruiting the 230, mostly female, staff was no problem in a city with
rapidly rising unemployment. Each receives up to six months on-the-job
training from locally hired supervisors, who had been trained for several
weeks at a Levi's plant in Hungary. There are five full-time expatriate
managers in Plotsk.
'At first, all the employees were holding their breath to see what would
happen,' says Mr Bill McNee, Levi's operations manager. 'They were very
suspicious that once they reached their production targets, we would raise
the targets or cut their pay.' But only three of the original recruits have
left.
At 2m Zlotys (Pounds 78) a month plus bonuses for a 40-hour week, average
pay is relatively high for Poland, though well below western levels. But
wages account for only about 15 per cent of total costs at the plant, as
highly automated as any in the world. Absenteeism is negligible, and reject
rates are near western levels. 'You could be in a Levi's plant anywhere,'
says Mr McNee.
The biggest problem is importing cloth, supplied to all Levi plants
worldwide from one US textile mill. Mr Flauraud complains bitterly of long
delays and inefficiency at Polish customs, which mean the plant has to carry
twice the normal stock levels.
Production is expected to reach 1.5m pairs of jeans annually by the end of
this year and 3m two years later. But Levi's recognises that, at a retail
price of Dollars 50 (Pounds 26) for a pair of 501s, that is far more than
Poland can absorb. For some time to come, over half of the production will
be exported to the EC, which has already guaranteed access. Exports will
also provide a currency hedge for Levi's total planned investments in Poland
of Dollars 20m over four years.
Compared with setting up production, local distribution has been much more
difficult. Levi's jeans had been sold since the 1970s through state-owned
hard-currency outlets. But their dingy facilities were light years away from
the smart, up-beat environment in which the company likes its products to be
displayed.
The problem has been to find a replacement. After looking in vain for
suitable retail partners, the company decided to distribute through its own
branded stores. Since April, it has opened eight and plans four more by the
end of July.
Poland is the only country where Levi's owns its outlets, which everywhere
else are franchised. Few Poles can afford the Dollars 200,000 needed to set
up a franchised store, though the company recently signed its first
agreement with a franchisee. Even going it alone has been a struggle. Levi
has three staff members permanently hunting for sites, a process which can
take six months.
Mr Flauraud, who is also Levi's business development director for eastern
and central Europe, has travelled widely in the region since 1979. But this
is the first time he has been responsible for setting up a plant and
managing a national business. He reckons the experience will stand him in
good stead when he is called on to spearhead the next stage of Levi's drive
east - the revival of stalled plans to build a plant in the former Soviet
Union.
