FT  09 OCT 92 / The Conservative Party at Brighton: Bottomley 'will honour
health pledge'
THE GOVERNMENT will honour its manifesto pledge to make annual increases in
real National Health Service spending, in spite of the pressure being
brought to bear on departmental budgets, Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health
secretary, said yesterday.
Speaking after her enthusiastically received conference address, Mrs
Bottomley told reporters that she 'stood by' the manifesto commitment to
'year by year increase the level of real resources committed to the NHS'.
Although they will surprise many in the light of indications that the
Treasury may want to lower further the Pounds 244.5bn public-spending total
agreed for 1993-94, her comments do not rule out cash reductions in the
health budget, which was slated to rise by more than 6 per cent - or well in
excess of the rate of inflation.
Mrs Bottomley told representatives that a further 128 hospitals and
community health services would be joining the ranks of NHS trusts from next
April, bringing to two thirds the proportion of such care that will be
provided by the trust regime.
A total of 150 hospitals had applied to join the third wave of NHS trusts
altogether, she said.
Later, Mr Rodney Bickerstaffe, general secretary of the National Union of
Public Employees, said: 'The health secretary has read the last rites for
the NHS with her government's go-ahead for 128 new hospital opt-outs.
'The first two waves have done nothing to cut closures, cancellations or
queues for treatment,' he said.
After last week's announcement of funding arrangements for next year's
community care reforms, she gave a stiff warning to Labour-run councils
'still harbouring an ideological grudge against the independent sector',
saying there was 'no place for out-dated socialist spite when it comes to
caring for the elderly and frail'.
Next April, local authorities will become responsible for co-ordinating a
policy designed to help elderly and handicapped people to remain in the
community, receiving Pounds 539m in community care grants in the first year.
'We have kept our promises: to fund community care fairly and properly,' she
said.
Announcing that the patients' charter was to be extended to cover primary
care and 'unacceptable' outpatient waiting times, she also laid out a
blueprint for a new 'quality initiative' intended to disseminate best
practice.
'We will seek out quality wherever it can be found and particularly where it
can be achieved more widely by making best use of existing resources,' she
said.
'We will draw together the most successful initiatives at the bedside, in
the clinic and in the community. We will distil this work into a checklist
of key questions . . . about the quality of services for patients.'
She made no response to repeated calls from the floor for the government to
ban cigarette and tobacco advertising, however. Questioned later, she said
she was committed to further reductions in the number of people who smoked.
