FT  10 MAR 92 / Zurich suffers withdrawal symptoms on drug park: The city's
liberal treatment of addicts has left an aftermath that's straining
alliances
IT HAS been a month since the Zurich authorities drove drug addicts from the
notorious Platzspitz park in the heart of this otherwise tranquil city, but
city leaders are still feeling their way clumsily towards an effective
policy for dealing with their outsize drug problem.
Superficially, the Platzspitz closure has been a success. The hundreds of
addicts who converged on the park every day for drugs, free syringes and
needles have dispersed. The big underworld dealers who really frightened the
authorities have also vanished and the park itself is fenced shut and
deserted.
The police claim that the drug-related death rate in the city in January and
February has tumbled to one from 13 in the same period of last year. The
crime rate has halved in the central districts of the city, but only thanks
to a massive and controversial police presence. Drug prices have soared.
According to Mr Josef Gatzi, deputy chief of the police drug squad, heroin
on the street has jumped from SFr50 (Dollars 33.50) to SFr200 per gram.
The closure of the park came as the city's socialist-green government
finally acknowledged that its decade-long experiment in liberal treatment of
drug addicts had been a failure.
The idea had been that by concentrating the addicts in one place, medical
treatment, counselling and other services could be provided.
But the concentration also attracted big-time dealers and led to soaring
crime rates in central Zurich. Local businessmen eventually became impatient
and demanded that Platzspitz be closed.
It has become apparent in the past few days that the city was also under
fire from the country's powerful banking establishment. Two senior bankers,
speaking at press conferences, have claimed that Platzspitz has been one of
the factors contributing to the widening view abroad that Switzerland is no
longer the stable, well run country it used to be.
When the park closed, the authorities set up a plan for dispersing the
addicts. Those who came from other parts of Switzerland - and they were the
majority - were to be sent home. Those from Zurich were sent to one of
several small shelters established around the city.
That plan seems to have worked well, with only minimal complaints from
residents in the districts where the shelters are located.
However, the shelters are open only at night. Ideas for dealing with the
addicts during the day were more sketchy, with no clear programme or
additional facilities for counselling and rehabilitation.
For example, a bus to dispense methadone was promised by the cantonal
government, but its approval continues to be delayed. The result is that
many addicts have simply moved from Platzspitz to an adjacent run-down
neighbourhood, known as Kreis 5, to try and re-establish a trading centre.
'We are very pleased that Platzspitz has been closed, but it is obvious the
city was not sufficiently prepared about what to do afterwards,' said Mr
Hans Georg Luchinger, president of the Zurich Shopkeepers' Association.
The police have moved into Kreis 5 in force, constantly trying to disperse
the addicts. There have been complaints of excessive harassment, including
confiscation of needles and small amounts of drugs, contrary to official
policy. Addicts staged a protest demonstration in front of city hall two
weeks ago.
All this is straining the political alliance that agreed on closing
Platzspitz. Ms Emilie Lieberherr, the socialist head of the city's social
affairs department and a member of its three-person drug committee, last
week tried to distance herself from what she considers an unnecessarily
brutal implementation of the new policy. 'This situation is bad for the
addicts and bad for the people of Kreis 5,' she said.
Mr Robert Neukomm, head of the police department and another member of the
drug committee, claims that his forces have been instructed not to take away
needles from the addicts.
Ms Lieberherr also complains about the inadequacy of treatment programmes.
She argues that heroin should be provided under medical supervision to the
150 serious addicts in the country, but the federal government is resisting.
Mr Neukomm says that rehabilitation programmes are improving. Addicts are
more inclined to seek help now that the magnet of Platzspitz is no longer
there, he says.
