FT  12 MAR 92 / Election '92: TV networks urge US-style debate
BRITAIN'S broadcasters have asked the leaders of the three main political
parties to take part in an American-style eve-of-poll debate.
As they launched their plans for election coverage yesterday, both
Independent Television News and the BBC said they had independently invited
the party leaders to debate the issues.
Mr Tony Hall, director of BBC news and current affairs said yesterday that
no one had formally declined yet. If the debate went ahead, it would be so
important that it should not go exclusively to one broadcasting
organisation, he said.
The Hansard Society had agreed to host it, he added.
Mr Stewart Purvis, ITN's editor-in-chief, promised that ITN's Pounds 1m-plus
coverage would be better than the BBC's 'because it will be sharper, it will
not be ponderous, and will address the issues directly'.
Mr Purvis said the BBC had in the past confused public service broadcasting
and comprehensive broadcasting with 'simply being boring'.
ITN will use three mobile satellite dishes to bring coverage from all over
the country, run profiles filmed at the homes of the three main party
leaders, and use 'focus groups' of uncommitted voters to predict trends.
The BBC said it would use a 200-strong combined team of broadcasters to be
'the nation's debating chamber during the general election campaign'.
Innovations include The Vote Race, a BBC1 series interpreting what the party
managers and manipulators are up to with a studio audience deciding whether
they believe them or not.
The BBC also said yesterday that it would consider broadcasting some of the
material from the Panorama programme on Thatcherism and the recession that
was replaced on Monday by a studio discussion.
Mr Hall emphatically denied that there had been any political interference
in the decision to pull the programme.
Mr Samir Shah, editor of weekly news and current affairs programmes, had
asked for changes that could not be made in time. He said it had been an
editorial decision to shelve the programme. Ms Glenwyn Benson, editor of On
The Record, was yesterday appointed editor of Panorama. She is believed to
be the first woman to edit the flagship BBC current affairs programme.
