FT  05 NOV 92 / US Election (The Results): Invading the gentlemen's club
CALIFORNIAN voters have broken ground by electing two women to the US
Senate, the first time that any state has done so.
'Washington, ready or not, here we come]' declared Mrs Dianne Feinstein,
pictured above (right), at a joint victory rally in San Francisco with
fellow-Democratic Senator-elect Barbara Boxer.
In all, women won six seats in the Senate, often derided as 'the most
exclusive men's club in the world'. Ms Carol Moseley Braun of Illinois
became the first black woman to win a Senate seat, and only the third black
person to serve there.
She had faced controversy in the final weeks of her campaign over alleged
financial irregularities, but overcame them to beat her Republican opponent
Mr Rich Williamson.
Democrat Ms Patty Murray, a self-styled 'mom in tennis shoes', won a Senate
seat from Washington State. Senator Barbara Mikulski of Maryland was
re-elected.
Ms Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas, whose seat was not at stake, remains the only
Republican woman senator.
'We will be the Cagney and Lacey one-two punch for the state of California,'
Mrs Feinstein said, referring to the two female detectives in a popular TV
show. Mrs Feinstein, former mayor of San Francisco, unseated Mr John
Seymour, the Republican picked by Governor Pete Wilson to fill out the rest
of his term in the US Senate. With just two years to run in this partial
term, she will face re-election in 1994.
Well known throughout the state following her failed 1990 campaign for
governor, Mrs Feinstein, 59, won 54 per cent of votes against 37 per cent
for her opponent.
Mrs Boxer, a five-term member of the House of Representatives, narrowly
defeated right-wing Republican Bruce Herschensohn.
She won renown for blowing the whistle on Pentagon spending on overpriced
toilet seats and coffee pots. However, she was rated the biggest spender in
Congress by the National Taxpayers Union.
In one of the bitterest fights, Senator Alfonse 'Al' D'Amato, two-term
Republican from New York who spent millions of dollars on negative
television commercials, won a narrow re-election victory over Mr Robert
Abrams, his Democratic challenger. Mr D'Amato took 51 per cent of the vote
against 49 per cent for Mr Abrams.
The plain-spoken Mr D'Amato's favourite campaign greeting was: 'How are ya
doin', Big Guy]' When he gave his victory speech at 1.20 in the morning, the
senator told his supporters: 'I'm not a diplomat. I'm your advocate. I'm a
fighter.'
Mr Abrams, a traditional New York liberal Democrat who is the state's
attorney-general, made much of the repeated investigations into alleged
ethics violations by Mr D'Amato. In exchange, the senator accused Mr Abrams
of not paying his taxes on a country home.
