FT  15 JUL 92 / International Company News: Boise Cascade posts Dollars 45m
loss
BOISE Cascade, the US forest products group, yesterday announced a
second-quarter net loss of Dollars 45m and indicated it would remain in the
red until 1993.
'If the economy continues to grow at a modest rate, and if we are able to
obtain further modest increases in paper prices, Boise Cascade should return
to profitability during 1993,' said Mr John Fery, the chairman.
The second-quarter loss, which worked through at Dollars 1.38 a share,
compared with losses of Dollars 32.6m, or 95 cents a share, in the same
period of last year. Sales totalled Dollars 922m, down from Dollars 978m.
The US paper industry has been suffering from a sharp cyclical downturn for
the past two years, but analysts have been forecasting a modest recovery
during 1992.
However, another leading manufacturer, Georgia-Pacific, depressed Wall
Street expectations last week when it announced it would only make a small
second-quarter profit.
Boise Cascade said the operating performance of its paper and paper products
division in the second quarter continued to be severely affected by weak
paper prices, which were on average modestly below the very low levels
reached in the first quarter.
Results compared unfavourably with a year ago.
Prices for business and printing papers and market pulp strengthened
modestly in the second quarter, relative to the first quarter, but
newsprint, coated and uncoated ground-wood paper prices reached new lows in
the cycle.
The group's office products segment, hit by the weak US economy, saw profits
down from a year ago on slightly higher sales volume. The dip was attributed
to a seasonal swing from the first quarter, pressure on margins and the
divestiture of the wholesale office products distribution operations.
Building products saw income modestly stronger than the second quarter of
last year but down on the first quarter of this year. Lumber prices rose to
record levels in the first quarter but have moderated since then.
