FT  31 OCT 92 / UK Company News: 'Disastrous' write downs push Control Sec
to Pounds 192m net loss
ASSET write downs at Control Securities of nearly Pounds 250m were
'disastrous by any standards' according to Mr Sydney Robin, who took up the
role of temporary executive chairman of the property, hotels, brewing and
pubs group in April 'with some natural caution and reluctance'.
Mr Robin joined on the dismissal of Mr Nazmu Virani, former chairman and
chief executive, following his arrest on charges related to the BCCI
collapse in March. Mr John Kerslake joined as finance director six weeks
ago, and a shortlist for the job of chief executive has been drawn up
although an appointment is unlikely until the group's talks with its bankers
are successfully concluded.
The write downs covering the year to end March cut net assets from Pounds
293.5m to Pounds 37.6m and caused a net loss of Pounds 192.4m (Pounds 4.1m)
or 51.8p (1.1p) per share. The accounts were prepared on a going concern
basis, as the group cannot continue to trade without the support of its
banks and bondholders which are owed a total of Pounds 259m.
The group is presenting a business plan to its bank creditors on Monday. The
bank loans and overdrafts of Pounds 182m are secured on the group's assets
which are still valued at substantially more than that.
Control's shares were suspended a year ago at 16 1/2 p when the Serious
Fraud Office raided the company's offices. The group hopes to have them
relisted once the business plan has been agreed, possibly early in the new
year.
Mr Robin told shareholders: 'Let me emphasise that your company is not now
and has not been the subject of investigation by the SFO.' The group spent
Pounds 467,000 to establish that deals between the group, BCCI and other
parties had been on an arm's length basis.
Mr Robin said the group had been 'in public disarray' which had damaged the
trading businesses such as the Belhaven brewery.
Results for the year showed a fall in turnover from Pounds 130.6m to Pounds
97.9m, and a drop in trading profits from Pounds 36.1m to Pounds 24.4m,
insufficient to cover interest charges of Pounds 27.3m (Pounds 21.2m). The
group's property trading activities suffered in the recession but profits
from the brewery and the pub estate rose, while those of the Spanish hotel
operations were slightly down.
Exceptional costs, including write downs of property and investments,
including a Pounds 11.5m provision for the fall in value of the stake in
Stylo, the loss-making footwear group, amounted to Pounds 193.4m (Pounds
18.2m).
