FT  19 MAR 92 / Afghan veteran shocked by Vukovar: Russian soldiers join UN
peace-keepers in Yugoslavia
'I NEVER saw anything like Vukovar in Afghanistan,' said Colonel Aleksandr
Khomchemkov, a Russian battalion commander of the United Nations
peacekeeping troops, of the devasted town in eastern Croatia.
Col Khomchemkov, who is part of the first ever Russian peacekeeping mission,
earlier this week arrived in Dalj, just 15 miles north of Vukovar. He says:
'It is a second Stalingrad, a terrible scene'. Just then a civilian officer,
anxious to adhere to the strict UN code of neutrality, nervously interrupts
to point out that Col. Khomchemkov's comparison refers only to the level of
destruction and not to the nature of the conflict.
Major Kumal Budhathoki, of the Royal Nepalese army, a veteran of two
previous peacekeeping missions in Lebanon, says everyone was shocked by
Vukovar, the town which bears grim witness to last year's three-month-long
battle between Serb irregulars backed by the federal army and Croat national
guards.
In Dalj, the scars of war are not as appalling as in Vukovar. The local
school building which last August was littered with the corpses of Croat
policemen and civilians and splattered in blood has been repainted. Here Col
Khomchemkov and some 45 UN officers are billeted as part of a reconnaissance
mission working to define the exact boundaries of the peacekeeping zone, set
up communications and find accommodation for the 14,000 troops due to be
despatched next month to three UN protected areas in Croatia.
Major Jan Mulder, of the Royal Dutch signal corps, said: 'Five years ago I
never would have said it was impossible to be in a joint force with
Russians. Now there is no enemy.'
All the officers appear to agree the main task is to keep the peace. Maj
Mulder did not appear concerned about the distant gunshots he heard
overnight.
Despite the optimistic predictions of success from the Belgian, Dutch,
Russian and Nepalese officers, they are aware of perils awaiting them. A
peace-keeper, who asked to remain anonymous, said he had served in Lebanon
but called the situation in eastern Croatia more dangerous. He says: 'In
Lebanon we were welcomed by all but a small segment of the population. Here
there is a great danger of being perceived as the enemy, either by the Serbs
or the Croats. Then there will be no hope at all of keeping the peace.'
