FT  14 NOV 92 / Arts: The great deceivers - Screen
SIX YEARS ago director Ridley Scott declared: 'A lot of people don't talk
about production design nearly enough. Blade Runner was well photographed,
but what was being photographed was what had been built, over a period of
months, and carefully thought about and selected by the designer (Lawrence
G. Paull). For me, the designer is as important as anyone else on a film,
bar none.' This month Blade Runner's visual glories are about to go on show
in the film's restored version. In the intervening years, though, little has
changed in terms of credit and kudos for the unsung craftsman in movies.
Ten years ago, when I first researched film design, I discovered that nearly
all the great coup de foudre visual moments we remember in cinema - the
ghostly Xanadu in Kane, the Babylonian elephants of Griffith's Intolerance -
were the designer's inspiration more than the director's.
Who gave The Wizard Of Oz its fantasyland charm: the film's four
chop-and-change directors or its two stay-the-course designers (Cedric
Gibbons, William Horning)? And who imprinted the epic tableaux of Gone With
The Wind on our minds? As much as the two directors and their capricious
producer (D. Selznick), it was surely William Cameron Menzies, fresh from
Britain where he had designed and directed Things To Come.
Every craft guild fanfares its own importance. But the film designer's
Cinderella status has been a long-lived injustice. Patrizia Von Brandenstein
(Amadeus, The Untouchables, Billy Bathgate) was supervising set-building on
the new Robert Redford film Sneakers, which opened in Britain this week,
when I visited her on a noisy Universal soundstage. I began as a devil's
advocate. Film has long been fanfared as the most realistic of the arts, a
'window on the world.' Why do we need production design at all?
'It is very hard to tell a dramatic story except in the barest documentary
terms without someone interpreting it visually. Design is an emotional
reinforcement to the story. It is giving the audience visual clues; it is
leading them in and fooling them a little or illuminating them. A screenplay
is like a novel with three quarters of the words missing and we have to fill
them in.'
So here she was, building this loft where Redford and his surveillance
cronies will pore over their computers and data-banks. Brandenstein soon
gets metaphorical about her work on Sneakers, whereupon the designer's job
shifts up yet another gear.
'The interest in this set' - a wave at the Piranesi pattern of girders and
struts - 'comes from the geometrical complexity. The strength of the beams
and girders are strong and sheltering, but they're also part of our theme of
'rectangles.' We talked a lot about painters who used squares and rectangles
in their images - Chuck Close, Jasper Johns - and what interested me was the
motif of squares a circuit-boards: squares representing pieces of
information, because data-banks feature so much in the story.'
So the designer's job is not just a craft, it can be an art with its own
poetic encodings. Note Brandenstein's work in Silkwood, where she 'wanted
the nuclear plant to be very clinical and claustrophobic like a modern
prison, while the heroine's home was more close to nature, almost a log
cabin.' And in The Untouchables: 'All that Beaux Arts architecture in
Chicago weighed down the characters who were trying to rise. So you had the
motif of weight: in the buildings, in Al Capone, in the weaponry, even in
the clothes designed by Armani.'
Richard Sylbert (The Graduate, Chinatown, Reds, Dick Tracy) takes Chinatown,
the broad-daylight film noir he designed for Roman Polanski, as an example
of a through-designed film. 'What are the basic elements of the story?
Drought, 1939, Los Angeles. No clouds. The sun must beat down. You make a
choice that your palette will be variations on burnt grass. Beiges, ochres,
browns. The actual wallpaper we bought to use in the Water and Power
Building is called 'Burnt Grass.' What's the hottest colour?'
Er - red? 'White. If it is hot every building must be white. And if the hero
is a detective, every building must be above eye level.' Why? 'Because he is
searching, he is struggling, and it is always harder to go uphill.'
We are a long way from slapping paint onto six-by-ten canvas flats, which is
how Sylbert started, c1950, in the infancy of live television. Henry
Bumstead (Vertigo, The Sting, Cape Fear, Unforgiven) started even earlier,
in the glory days of 1940s Hollywood, where he was schooled in the even
bolder artifices of pre-TV cinema.
'Everything was done on soundstages' he says. 'If you wanted to make Gone
With The Wind you made it in Culver City (MGM's Los Angeles home). The
master of this was Hitchcock. He carried it on right on into the 1950s. Just
about the whole of Vertigo was shot on stages. Even the 'location' scenes
were mostly actors acting against back-projection.'
Bumstead also remembers his search for a perfect street in Hitchcock's
Family Plot: the eerie, sloping city street with the lock-up garage. He
found such a street; the players were assembled and the lights and camera
set up; then Hitchcock said the actors were too cold and ordered everyone
back to the studio. Here, at enormous cost, Bumstead had to build an exact
duplicate of the location.
But Hitch may have had more than his cast's warmth at heart. There is
something tantalising about a set that looks slightly unreal. Bumstead
achieved the same effect with the one-street town he built for Clint
Eastwood's Unforgiven: a collage of clapboard buildings that Bumstead put up
'in just 32 days', for which he was given complete artistic licence by the
director. The result, like a hilltop ghost town come insidiously to life,
imparts its haunting neo-Gothic mood to the whole movie.
Backlots masquerading as landscapes; DIY timberlands as real Western towns.
The designer's art is a deceiver's art and Richard Sylbert thinks the
deceptions prove the rule: that these pieces of visual magic and metaphoric
enrichment give a movie its power and personality. So if the designer is
this all-influential force on a film's making, why is he so undervalued?
Sylbert: 'There is a great confusion about the parameters of his role. We
know what a scriptwriter does, or a cameraman or a director. But what does
the designer do? 'The other job descriptions are clearer. So is the
patronage factor. The cameraman works half as long on a movie as a designer,
but he gets paid more. Why? Because he is attached to the star's ego. An
actress does not say, 'I want So-and-So to design my movie.' But she might
want So-and-So to direct her or So-and-So to costume her. And sure as hell
she would want a cameraman she knows to photograph her. So the job kudos
follows the money; and the money in Hollywood - it hasn't changed, whatever
they tell you - still comes with the star.'
