FT  20 JUL 92 / The European Market: EC probe and over-supply hit PVC makers
 -Without further price rises or rationalisation, the outlook for PVC
manufacturers is bleak
THESE ARE tricky times for west European manufacturers of PVC. Their latest
problems began at 9.30am on Tuesday July 7 when European Commission
officials raided the Newton Aycliffe offices of Hydro Polymers, a PVC
subsidiary of Norsk Hydro.
Over the next two days, startled executives in eight other companies faced
questioning from the Commission trustbusters. The raids signalled a new
investigation into alleged price-fixing in the DM6bn-a-year European market
for PVC, the plastic widely used in the construction industry and in
packaging.
But if PVC manufacturers are fixing prices, they are doing it badly. Prices
are depressed by poor demand and rising imports. All suppliers are suffering
heavy losses.
The companies raided this month were BASF, Huls, Hoechst, Wacker Chimie,
Atochem, Shell, Limburgse Vinyl Maatschappij, Norsk Hydro, Solvay, Cires and
EVC, a joint venture between ICI and Enichem. Some were among the 23
plastics groups fined Ecu60m (Pounds 42.4m) by the Commission in 1989 for
price-fixing in the early 1980s. The decision was overturned by the European
Court of First Instance in March for procedural reasons.
The raids followed complaints by UK customers of rises of some 30 per cent
in February and March. A similar rise was achieved by German manufacturers
in January. EC officials must decide if the rises were because of a tighter
market or an orchestrated effort to raise prices.
The industry certainly needed price rises if they were to stem losses. In
Germany, Europe's largest market, the price of high-quality PVC slumped last
year from about DM1.75 per kilogramme to DM1, according to Mr Denis
Gatfield, managing director of Hydro Polymers. The industry reckons it needs
prices of DM1.45 to break even.
'In periods of over-supply we get screwed,' says Mr Gatfield, 'We were in a
period of over-supply.'
Demand for PVC last year was about 5.3m tonnes, down about 4 per cent on
1990, according to Mr Erich Schnitzler, executive vice-president of PVC at
Hoechst. The fall in demand was aggravated by rising imports, which have now
reached about 12 per cent of the west European market. Imports were about
515,000 tonnes in 1990 and could be as high as 700,000 tonnes this year,
according to Mr Jacques Stevens, manager responsible for PVC at Solvay.
The US remained a significant importer last year, and countries such as
Mexico, Brazil and Libya all increased production. But it is increasingly
aggressive eastern European manufacturers that now provide more than half of
all imports into the EC.
Mr Stevens explains: 'Imports from the eastern countries are a long way from
being cost-calculated. There's no demand locally and they need hard currency
desperately. That affects prices.'
Although UK and Scandinavian markets are depressed, German demand is
buoyant, growing at about 5 per cent. Growth in France and Italy is also
strong at about 4 per cent.
The problem of US imports has also eased, according to Mr Stevens. With US
domestic demand stronger than last year, products previously exported have
been diverted to the home market.
Nevertheless, margins remain poor, according to Mr Robert Genin, marketing
director of polyolefins and PVC at BASF: 'Actually, to tell the truth,
margins are lousy. This is still a non-profitable sector. We need another 15
pfennigs to be profitable.'
Demand for new PVC could fall as more is recycled. Moreover, although
European supply is static, two large US manufacturers, Shintech, a
subsidiary of the Japanese group Shin-Etsu, and Georgia Gulf, are
considering new capacity. Mr Schnitzler at Hoechst fears that if the US
market slows and the dollar weakens further, there could be US dumping into
Europe.
He believes that the European market will grow at only 0.5 per cent a year
over the next five years. Others are more optimistic. Mr Genin at BASF and
Mr Stevens at Solvay reckon that the market could grow at between 1.5 to 2
per cent a year.
'If this sort of unprofitability continues, we can expect some changes in
ownership and some plant closures,' says Mr Gatfield at Hydro Polymers.
The industry needs rationalisation or further price rises. Otherwise, even
without the Commission's attentions, the outlook for PVC manufacturers will
remain bleak.
