FT  06 NOV 92 / Ardent author of a revolution: Nigel Lawson's memoirs as
chancellor under Mrs Thatcher
Nigel Lawson was a Treasury minister for nearly nine of the 10 1/2 years of
Margaret Thatcher's term as prime minister, financial secretary for two
years and a bit and chancellor for six years and four months. He was second
only to Lloyd George as the longest-serving chancellor of the century. In
between, he was energy secretary for 21 months from 1981-83.
His book* is, he says, 'not an autobiography, but a ministerial, and in
particular a chancellorial, memoir'. It is not 'an essay in the higher
economic scholasticism', but 'an account of the period, and of my part in
it, as I saw it and see it'.
Two things call for judgment, the book itself and Lawson's record in high
office. The book is quite simply a great achievement, grippingly readable,
fascinating, lucidly organised and meticulously produced. I read it in my
garden on a sunny Saturday morning; and it was not until eight hours later
that the cold, hunger and the dusk finally broke my riveted attention. The
story itself is absorbing; the writing is plain and muscular.
It is several books in one - a political memoir and a record of economic
policymaking during an exceptionally controversial decade. But it is, too, a
manual for ministers, for civil servants and for students of government.
It is, thirdly, a set of theses, including two main economic ones: that a
profound, lasting and benign transformation of the British economy was
accomplished in the 1980s, despite its messy ending; and that British
membership of the EC's exchange rate mechanism (or European Monetary System
as Lawson prefers to call it) is the best basis for monetary policy, which
alone is the correct weapon of macro-economic stabilisation (except perhaps
in a slump). Equally, membership of economic and monetary union (that is, a
European single currency) would be a fatal mistake.
And finally the book is a devastating chronicle of the progressive
deterioration of the prime minister he served: 'The picture she liked to
present of herself as a uniquely doughty fighter against inflation was . . .
largely mythical'; 'profound hostility to raising interests rates or
maintaining any kind of sterling target'; 'never objected to lower interest
rates'; 'came increasingly to believe that she was the government and had no
need of allies . . . these traits led to the isolation and behaviour pattern
that contributed to her eventual downfall'; 'the two ministers (Geoffrey
Howe and Lawson) who . . . had probably done most over the previous 10 years
to roll back the frontiers of socialism, very often against Margaret's
cautious hesitation . . . were now at the top of her blacklist'; 'increasing
numbers of . . . voters saw her as disagreeably strident, excessively
authoritarian and unbearably bossy'; but also that 'the achievements of the
Thatcher era will survive its messy disintegration' and, despite all, she is
still 'one of the greatest prime ministers this country has known'.
However superb the book the record is another matter. Lawson's own view is
clear: he was an (at times, the) originator and chief executor of an
intellectually driven political revolution - including inventing the word
'Thatcherism' - which transformed Britain and, indeed, the world: 'The tide
of ideas, which I had first invoked in my 1986 party conference speech, was
flooding into areas that I had never then envisaged.' It was a source of
inspiration not yet acknowledged by Mr Gorbachev.
As to Britain, Lawson defines his 'economic theme . . . that free-market
Toryism proved both a success in the UK and a beacon to much of the rest of
the world and that my own stewardship, whatever its shortcomings, was an
important part of that success'. And the success was that 'the reforms have
indeed improved the economy's long-term growth potential'.
Hundreds and hundreds of pages describe the genesis and details of those
reforms. Only two pages (pp. 976-7) examine the question of whether the
medicine which the doctors were so convinced would restore the health of the
patient actually did so.
The inescapable conclusion is that, however strong the faith, the healing is
not confirmed by the evidence. Specifically, the non-oil GDP (Mr Lawson's
preferred measure of total economic output) rose by an average annual 2 1/4
per cent during the Howe/Lawson cycle (1979-89), compared with 3 per cent in
the 1964-73 cycle and  3/4 per cent in the 1973-79 cycle.
Only one question matters: did the potential output of the economy (when
operating at the lowest level of unemployment consistent with stable
inflation) rise faster after the reforms than it did before?
When it is borne in mind that every proper measurement for any reasonable
period prior to 1973 puts GDP long-term growth at between 2 and 3 per cent a
year, the only significant thing to come out of Lawson's table is the very
low number -  3/4 percentage point - for the 1973-79 cycle. The simplest
explanation of that is given in another of Lawson's tables (p 281), namely
that the 1979 'peak' was hardly a peak at all, compared with the 1973 and
1989 peaks, in terms of the percentage utilisation of the capacity of the
economy as measured by the CBI. There is no suggestion whatever in these
figures of any historic improvement at all in underlying growth performance.
To make that even remotely plausible would require some worked-out and
corroborated hypothesis that capacity growth itself had nose-dived in the
late 1970s, completely at odds with its remarkably stable trend throughout
the rest of the post-war years, and that this trend would have continued but
for the 'Thatcher miracle'. For this there is no systematic evidence
whatever.
None of this is in any way affected by the arguments, which nonetheless
exercise Lawson himself greatly, over the causes of and responsibility for
the late 1980s boom and the consequent plunge into recession. He is entirely
candid about his regrets over diagnosis of its origins, which include Mrs
Thatcher's primary responsibility for what he sees as the pivotal error at
the end of 1985 and throughout 1986 - namely her refusal to enter the ERM in
November 1985, and the ensuing de facto devaluation of the pound during
1986.
This acknowledged error is evidence neither for nor against the 1980s
miracle thesis. The only qualification of this goes to weaken the evidence
of 'miracle'. To the extent that some of the output recorded in 1989, and
therefore of the growth between 1979 and 1989, should be deducted as having
been a 'mistake', the recorded growth exaggerates the achieved underlying
growth, although some analogous adjustment of the 1979 figure should also be
made to the extent (less than in 1989) that this too was a mistake.
After throwing in the general world slowdown in achieved growth after the
1973 oil price explosion, Lawson claims that 'Britain's growth performance
in the 1980s emerges quite creditably'. Even if true, which is dubious, this
falls a long way short of corroborating the claimed success of 'a great
adventure . . . to rescue Britain from economic and political decline'.
As to his passionate advocacy from 1985 of British membership of the ERM,
there does seem to be a profound internal inconsistency in Lawson's
thinking, quite apart from the oddity of a six-year chancellor's central
policy idea being something that he was never able to implement, even
partially.
His overriding reason for wanting the pound to be in the exchange rate
mechanism was not to suppress short-term fluctuations in floating exchange
rates, which may cause some nuisance to trade, but to reinforce and guide an
anti-inflationary monetary policy both by forcing governments to keep
interest rates high enough and by encouraging low inflationary expectations
by those who set pay and prices.
He scorns, as only he can scorn, a Foreign Office plan for joining the ERM,
but envisaging 'automatic realignments in order to cope with the different
inflation rates in different member states - which rather destroyed the
point of joining in the first place'. The 'point' is that the adopted parity
should be seen to be and should, at least by intention, be immutable in
order to drive inflation down to zero or at least to the lowest in Europe.
But, when Lawson comes to explain his passionate hostility to Emu and a
single currency, he writes, 'locking into a single currency and thus
depriving member states for all time of the possibility of adjustment
through devaluation should not require any growth of regional assistance
whatever . . . But politically . . . the demands for increased regional
assistance would be very strong indeed . . . (which) also feeds the
centralising appetite of the European Commission'.
He is absolutely right about this; but the problem and the political
pressures would not arise for Lawson if he did not believe that unadjusted
competitiveness problems lead to unemployment and depression, and that the
possibility of devaluation is therefore essential.
Lawson in fact believes that the correct answer to these political demands
is for the economy to adjust its competitive deficit through devaluation.
But, if he believes in an ERM with realignments, as he clearly does, then he
cannot pray in aid of the anti-inflation argument for membership, which
depends on outlawing realignments.
And, if he believed in outlawing realignments, which he does not, he could
not argue against Emu, which is the ERM without realignments. And if,
finally, he believes in realignments, but only in extremes, he can hardly
disdain Messrs Major and Lamont for carrying matters to extremity or argue
that ERM membership will prevent turbulence in the foreign currency markets.
And if he does not disdain them for thus mishandling ERM membership, he has
difficulty in meeting the argument that Black Wednesday demonstrated that
the policy was fatally flawed, not just in the timing of entry, but in its
basic concept because it depended on an overriding political commitment to
an economically and financially undeliverable result.
Meanwhile, everyone should be obliged to read before next Thursday's Autumn
Statement Lawson's recollection of the cabinet's follies exactly 10 years
earlier: There was 'an unwise decision made by the cabinet in the autumn of
1982 to encourage the nationalised industries and local authorities to
increase their capital spending. The view was that, given the persistence of
high and rising unemployment, the government should listen more seriously to
the demands from the construction industry for more capital investment. . .
I was concerned at the signal Margaret's message was bound to convey that
the period of public spending stringency was over. To make matters worse,
the spending forecasts on which Margaret's uncharacteristic and ill-advised
exhortations were based turned out to be false, as she was duly furious to
discover.'
The reviewer is economics editor of the BBC.
*The View from No 11, Memoirs of a Tory Radical, by Nigel Lawson. Bantam
Press, 1,119 pages, Pounds 20.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
               THE MAN WHO PUT THE 'ISM' IN 'THATCHERISM'
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Per cent changes (annual average)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1964-73    1973-79   1979-89   1979-83  1983-89
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
3           1 1/2      2 1/4      1/4     3 1/2 UK Growth
3             3/4      2 1/4     -1/4     3 3/4 Non-oil real GDP
                                                Output per head:
3 3/4         3/4      4 1/4    3 1/2     4 3/4 Manufacturing
3           1 1/4      1 3/4    2         1 3/4 Whole economy
3             3/4      1 3/4    1 3/4     2     Non North Sea economy**
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
* Output measured as GDP (0)
**Treasury estimate
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: CSO, Treasury
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
