FT  22 SEP 92 / Technology: Molecules muscle in / A look at a faster method
of getting drugs to market
A visit to a biotechnology or pharmaceutical company these days may yield
some surprises to the casual observer.
The labs, complete with test tubes and scientists in goggles and white
coats, are still there. Increasingly prominent, though, are computer rooms,
where researchers sit in the dark looking at coloured pictures on the
screen, and designing the drugs of the future.
'These new molecular design methods will become increasingly significant for
the industry, and in 10 to 30 years will account for many of the new drugs
on the market,' said Jaqueline Siegel, an industry analyst at Hambrecht &amp;
Quist in New York.
The new method, sometimes referred to as 'second generation biotech', is
really a convergence of biotechnology with more conventional molecular
design.
The biotech industry's traditional products are proteins for which a useful
application has been discovered. But the problem with using proteins as
drugs is that they are too big to get through biological barriers in the
body. 'They are simply too large,' explains Joshua Boger, chief executive
officer of Boston-based Vertex Pharmaceuticals.
Their size means they must be injected straight into the blood. If taken by
mouth, they are broken down in the digestive system. Insulin, considered the
first biotech product and one of the smallest proteins in existence, has a
molecular weight of 7,000, compared with aspirin, which has a weight of 150.
This is a particular problem because the greatest medical challenge to
scientists is fighting diseases like cancer and Aids. 'Biotech products are
too big to be taken orally, and if you want to treat chronic diseases, which
require continuous administration, you really need an oral product,' Boger
said.
Scientists agree that the industry's familiarity with protein structure is
invaluable in the search for useful drugs. But the new second-generation
techniques require a change in philosophy in the industry. Under the new
methodology, the protein is no longer thought of as a possible product;
rather it is considered a target.
'What we realised is that many chronic diseases are caused by reactions of a
single protein within the body,' said John Maraganore, head of biological
research at Boston-based Biogen. 'So if we can design molecules that bind to
the protein to somehow affect the reaction, we may have a useful drug.'
Vertex is using the new method to work out a cure for the Aids-causing HIV
virus. The company has discovered an empty space in the protein where a
chemical process causes the virus to become active. The hope is that by
plugging up that space, the molecule would simply lay dormant in the body.
The product which will probably come on market first is one developed by a
traditional pharmaceutical group, Merck, to prevent glaucoma. In late
clinical trials, the product may be on pharmacy shelves as early as 1994.
Squibb and Hoffmann-La Roche are also using second-generation molecular
design techniques to come up with new drugs. '(Second-generation) is a
powerful approach which is being heavily utilised in the industry,' said
Peter Lomedico, senior director of molecular biology at Hoffmann-La Roche.
Traditional pharmaceutical companies are approaching the new technique from
a different direction than biotechnology firms. Unlike biotechnology
companies, pharmaceutical groups were always in the business of looking for
small molecules. The problem was that there was little method to the
madness.
'Old-fashioned research methods call for years of random testing,' said
Boger, who worked for many years in the pharmaceutical industry. 'What the
scientists do is experiment with substances to see what works. They often
use soil samples because they contain so many different compounds. If
something accidentally works, they turn it into a drug.'
The problem is that this method is costly and lengthy. Traditional drug
discovery takes an average of seven years. And the average cost of
traditional drug development is a hefty Dollars 220m (Pounds 124m) per
product. 'It's trial and error with too much error,' said Boger.
The aim of second-generation biotech is to get drugs on to the market
faster. 'The new techniques are a lot better than the traditional grind and
find approach,' said Siegel.
Another problem with traditional drug development is that it creates a
product which often has side-effects. 'The compound may cleave to the
protein you want, but it may bind to other proteins as well,' said Boger.
'That's what causes side-effects. With new molecular design methods, we try
to get as specific as possible, trying to come up with a molecule that binds
to just one specific protein.'
Whatever direction they are coming from, both biotechnology and
pharmaceutical companies are now using similar methods in the new molecular
design approach. The latest techniques take advantage of a process called
X-ray crystallography, which enables researchers to take a three-dimensional
picture of a protein. The protein is then entered on to a computer screen,
where scientists design drugs they believe will react with the target
molecule. This method is sometimes referred to as 'structured rational drug
design'.
'It's becoming increasingly like a recipe,' explained Maraganore. 'If you
want to make the compound longer to fit on to the protein better, you add on
some amino acids - shorter, and you take a few beads off. What you come up
with is not something found in nature, which would be a traditional biotech
product, but a unique, designed drug which binds to a specific protein.'
Structured rational drug design uses both the protein expertise of the
biotechnology firms and the molecular design methods of the pharmaceutical
groups. For that reason, many companies find that joint projects are the
best road to take.
'It's the development of this new technique, which uses the expertise of
both industries, which is inspiring a lot of the partnerships now forming
between biotechnology and pharmaceutical groups,' said Siegel.
The latest method of drug research is just beginning to take hold in the
industry, and no products developed through the technique are yet available
on the market. But few doubt that it is the wave of the future. 'This is the
permanent trend of the industry,' said Lomedico of Hoffmann-La Roche.
'There's no turning back now.'
