FT  13 MAY 92 / Business and the Environment: Temperatures raised by free
market fever - Bolivia's tropical woodlands are being chopped down at a rate
which rivals Brazil
Yet another tropical rain forest disaster is in the making. This time the
culprit is Bolivia. Its thickly forested eastern lowlands are being
devastated by logging companies and migrants in a repeat of the blunders in
neighbouring Brazil.
From the air, the virgin forests look like an endless dark green carpet,
occasionally slashed by broad rivers which reflect the sun in blinding
silver flashes.
Yet international aid officials estimate that the forests are being cut down
at a rate of 200,000 hectares a year. That represents a loss of about 0.5
per cent of the forest cover every year, among the world's highest depletion
rates.
The problem is free enterprise. Bolivia is one of Latin America's pioneers
in experimenting with free market reforms. It was even the first debtor
nation in 1987 to allow 'debt-for-nature' swaps, in which foreign debt is
swapped for local currency and used to pay for conservation projects. It
also claims to have some of the continent's most progressive environmental
legislation. But the weak, lame duck government is paralysed by indecision
and is in thrall to special interest groups. Bolivia may have released
companies from the weight of state control, but it has not prevented them
from committing environment plunder.
According to Cedoin, an independent La Paz information centre, the
government has granted 22.5m hectares of logging concessions - half the
country's forests. Aid officials complain that agencies like the World Bank,
which was implicated in Brazil's environmental catastrophe and is active in
Bolivia, are not doing enough to temper the free market fever.
The government did act in January 1990, when it approved the grandly-titled
'Historical Ecological Pause'. In theory this truce suspended all
environmentally aggressive activities while new policies were drawn up. But
environmentalists say no attempt was made to stop logging.
'It is frightening, it is uncontrollable - it is enough to make you cry. You
see areas being plundered, but there is no control. Nobody is responsible
for anything,' said one scientist.
Loggers only harvest the most valuable trees. This both reduces ecological
diversity and lowers the forest's economic value, which in turn reduces the
incentive to protect the jungle. Forestry officials earning Dollars 100 a
month do not think twice at taking bribes to let convoys of trucks loaded
with hardwoods past their checkpoints.
Land-hungry migrants, many of them miners who lost their jobs when
loss-making state-owned mines closed down, are also entering into the
lowlands.
Close to the deforestation front line is the ecological reserve that was
established under the pioneering 1987 debt-for-nature swap. The Estacion
Biologica del Beni, a 135,000 hectare reserve, lies in the forested
foothills of the Andes.
An important part of its work is developing sustainable development
strategies. 'Increasing agricultural production reduces pressure on natural
resources. Settlers do not destroy the forest for fun, they do it to grow
food. So we try to take our knowledge to them,' said Carmen Miranda,
assistant project co-ordinator. However, her work is being swept aside by an
avalanche of migrants.
Aid workers say the government has done nothing to organise the new
settlers. They receive no support or technical guidance, so they quickly
degrade the fragile forest soils. And as crops fail, they advance deeper
into the forest.
Meanwhile, promising mineral deposits have just been found in eastern
Bolivia. The government's draft legislation may meet international
environmental standards and multinational mining companies are taking more
care in protecting the environment; still, mining would represent yet
another threat to the region.
Yet, as Carlos Arze of the government's National Environment Fund, points
out: 'You have to balance the deterioration of the environment against the
in-flow of resources to a very poor country.'
The drug trade, the most extreme form of free enterprise and Bolivia's
largest source of hard currency, is also wrecking the environment. Farmers
plant coca bushes in unsuitable soils which are rapidly denuded, forcing
them to drench the soil with pesticides and artificial fertilisers. As if
that were not enough, huge soyabean farms that have sprung up around the
boom town of Santa Cruz de la Sierra, the eastern region's principal city,
eroding the soil and creating small deserts. The sand dunes have even become
a tourist attraction.
The World Bank is encouraging the government to limit the damage by
introducing land use controls, environmental impact studies and land pricing
mechanisms to curb land speculation. But officials are at a loss as to how
such policies would be made to work in a country where effective government
barely exists outside big cities.
Even so, there is hope. Growing environmental awareness and disgust at
corruption, plus pressure from aid donors and international development
agencies, is beginning to make the government take the environment
seriously.
