FT  10 SEP 92 / Schools inquiry launched to boost Queen's English
THE government's mission to put Shakespeare, the Queen's English and
traditional teaching back into the classroom took a significant step forward
yesterday with its decision to establish a full inquiry into English in the
national curriculum in England and Wales.
The inquiry, to be conducted by the National Curriculum Council, a
government quango, will concentrate on the teaching of 'standard English',
the reading of 'great literature', and the mastering of 'basic writing
skills'.
Ministers have repeatedly urged teachers and examination boards to give
those aspects greater emphasis, but the new curriculum orders set to result
from the review are likely to force them to do so.
Mr John Patten, education secretary, said he 'strongly supported' the NCC's
objectives 'of encouraging pupils to develop the habit of reading, critical
judgment, and an understanding of the love of English'.
He added: 'Children must develop a proper grasp of the essentials of grammar
and spelling and of the skills of using language competently and
appropriately if they are not to be seriously disadvantaged in many aspects
of their lives.'
Mr Patten also accepted recommendations from the School Examinations and
Assessment Council, another quango, that from next year English tests for
14-year-olds should include questions on three Shakespeare plays - Julius
Caesar, A Midsummer Night's Dream and Romeo and Juliet.
Justifying the inquiry, Mr David Pascall, chairman of the NCC, pointed to
reports by the schools inspectorate indicating that up to a third of English
lessons were 'unsatisfactory'.
He emphasised the desirability of a traditional curriculum. The present
curriculum was 'too general', he said, because it listed only the Bible,
William Wordsworth, Jane Austen, Charles Dickens and the Brontes as examples
of classic works, with Shakespeare the only author whose work was required
study.
Mr Pascall emphasised that he wanted children to be taught standard English,
which he defined as 'grammatically correct but which can be spoken in any
accent'.
The review is to be completed by February.
The announcement of the inquiry was met by a hostile reaction from moderate
teachers' unions. Mr Peter Smith, general secretary of the 140,000-strong
AMMA union, said: 'Teachers will be grossly insulted by the innuendo that
they are not concerned about spelling, grammar, punctuation and clear
expression.'
Mrs Ann Taylor, shadow education secretary, accused the government of
'hastily forcing change without due consideration for the views of teachers,
parents or pupils'.
