FT  18 JUL 92 / Summertime, but the living isn't easy for MPs: Suggestions
that the recess is an extended playtime provoke indignation
IT'S TOUGH being a member of parliament. Take this week. After debating
proposals to reduce the sitting hours of the Commons and voting themselves a
38 per cent rise in expenses, MPs rose for a 13-week summer recess.
The popular perception is that this is an extended playtime for most
honourable members. But nothing is as likely to provoke self-righteous
indignation as the notion that MPs spend the summer on a beach with buckets
and spades.
Any such suggestion will be met with allusions to bursting mailbags and a
backlog of constituency business.
If they are as good as their word, a fine summer's day in the recess might
find Mr Malcolm Bruce, Liberal Democrat trade and industry spokesman,
touring his vast Scottish constituency of Gordon in a mobile caravanette; or
Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, opening a fete in Somerset; or Mr
Ian Bruce, Tory MP for Dorset South, presenting prizes at the East Dorset
Golf Club or firing off tank rounds at a local military range.
Government ministers such as Miss Ann Widdecombe might be engaging in the
sort of ministerial visits to social security offices and the like that the
government's slender majority prevents them from conducting while the
Commons is sitting. After Mr John Smith's anointment as Labour leader,
shadow cabinet members might be 'reading themselves in' to new portfolios.
When pressed, most MPs will admit that the summer pressure does drop in
comparison with the 'loony' 60-to-90-hour weeks they claim to work when the
House is in session. They feel their constituents do not begrudge them the
chance to reacquaint themselves with their families. 'For three months I
actually get to tuck my kids into bed,' says Mr Paul Boateng, a Labour
frontbench Treasury spokesman and father of five.
Mr Keith Vaz, Labour MP for Leicester East and prominent campaigner over the
collapsed Bank of Credit and Commerce International, is one of a handful who
claim that the pressures on their time will preclude any break. 'The
interest is Robin Leigh-Pemberton-hunting,' he says when asked if he will at
least pursue some leisure interest.
When MPs do wind down for a 'real' holiday, it is usually for between two
and four weeks rather than the full three months.
Few of those straw-polled planned to spend this 'real' holiday in Britain.
Experience has taught Mr Roger Freeman, transport minister, that 'if you
want a rest with the family you have to go abroad'. Their quest for
tranquillity is taking them to Iceland for a two-week walking holiday.
France, Spain and the US are the most common destinations, although some
have more exotic plans. Mr Alan Duncan, Tory MP for Rutland and Melton, will
spend much of August trout-fishing in north Pakistan. Mr Peter Viggers, Tory
MP for Gosport, alludes mysteriously to a 'Boys' Own-type' helicopter trip.
Contrary to popular belief, MPs are not immune from the recession. Shortage
of cash has prompted Mr Michael Meacher, shadow social security secretary,
to engage in a house-swap with a family living north of Biarritz. Mr David
Amess, the celebrated Tory victor of Basildon, has friends in Hawaii but
fears he cannot afford the air fare for his wife and five small children.
Several MPs intend to supplement 'genuine' holidays with work-related, often
part-expenses-paid additional trips. Into that group falls Mr Freeman, who
is visiting Japan 'to see how the railways operate'.
The Republican party convention in Houston, Texas, is a popular destination,
with Mr Charles Hendry, Tory MP for High Peak, Mr Matthew Taylor, Liberal
Democrat campaigns chairman, and Mr Bill Cash, Tory MP for Stafford, all
planning to drop in.
The recess will also provide some spare time for MPs to catch up on other
pursuits. Some are writing books: Mr Amess is engaged on a work entitled The
Road to Basildon, and Mr Dafydd Wigley, Plaid Cymru leader, will be
endeavouring to meet a September 30 deadline for an autobiographical tome he
refers to as 49 Not Out.
Those with new jobs can do some concerted swotting. Mr Kenneth Baker, former
home secretary, will be familiarising himself for his new role as a board
member with Hanson, the acquisitive conglomerate - and 'doing some writing
and cultivating my garden'.
