FT  20 OCT 92 / Moscow seeks fresh debt relief: FT writers on rescheduling
talks with Paris Club
MORE THAN seven decades after slamming the door on the capitalist world with
a repudiation of Tsarist debts to the west, Russia is trying to regain entry
to that club with a rescheduling of debts contracted during its communist
past.
In consultations with western officials, due to begin in Paris this week,
Russia will seek to hammer out a deal to ease the burden of Dollars
70bn-Dollars 80bn owed by the former Soviet Union to western governments and
banks.
With Moscow already way behind on payments this year and saying it can pay
only Dollars 2.5bn instead of the Dollars 20bn falling due next year, debt
relief is recognised by all sides as a necessary plank of western efforts to
help Russia switch to a market economy.
But disagreements between and among creditors and debtors make it unlikely
an agreement will be ready in time for October 29, the tentative date for a
formal meeting of the Paris Club - the grouping of western creditor
governments which takes the final decisions on such matters.
Russia, which is trying to persuade other former Soviet republics to give up
claims on Soviet assets in recognition of the fact that it is the only
republic to be making debt repayments, has already announced it will
probably have to ask for an extra two months of temporary debt relief when a
deferral of principal payments expires at the end of this month.
The creditors are divided over how generous they should and can be. The US
government, which has a relatively small exposure, favours writing off some
of the debts, but opposition to anything more than rescheduling is led by
the biggest creditor, Germany, which is owed 40 per cent of the debt and is
fed up with doing more to help Russia than other western countries.
The chief concern of German and other western banks, which are owed about
Dollars 16bn of the former Soviet debt, is to avoid the sort of deal
concluded by the Paris Club with Poland in 1990, when governments forced
banks to accept write-downs of 50 per cent on outstanding debt. Although
they are obliged to mirror any concessions made by governments, banks
believe that they can get better deals if left to their own devices.
'The Polish case looms dangerously in the background,' said Mr Klaus
Friedrich, chief economist at Dresdner Bank, the second-biggest bank in
Germany. 'We are obliged to wait for the governments to do something, but we
wait with misgivings . . . . We think it is economically necessary to
provide debt relief but that must be differentiated from debt forgiveness.'
Mr Yuri Gromushkin, the debt expert at Russia's foreign economic relations
ministry, denies that Moscow is looking for debt forgiveness. But he wants a
rescheduling package to include a reduction of interest rates on some of the
outstanding loans and a more recent cut-off date - the sacrosanct point
after which debts incurred are excluded from a deal. The cut-off date used
for the temporary debt relief granted until now has been January 1 1991. Mr
Aven has said that even if the cut-off date is brought forward to January 1
1992, a standard Paris Club formula of a ten-year rescheduling with a
five-year grace period would not be enough.
Mr Gromushkin also appealed for western help to persuade Ukraine to agree to
a special arrangement allowing Russia exclusive management of relations with
western creditors but giving the second most populous republic a share of
Soviet assets in return for debt repayment contributions. Although Ukraine
agrees that a system of joint and several responsibility imposed on former
Soviet republics by the west last winter has failed, it has yet to publish
counter-proposals it says it is working on.
But Ukrainian officials claim bitterly that Russia is liquidating assets
which belong to all republics to gain favour with the west as the only
republic worth dealing with.
That charge is rejected by Mr Gromushkin, who says the only assets being
sold are some debts to the Soviet Union by former allies in the developing
world. The proceeds are being used to help repay debts and unblock personal
and charity accounts 'frozen' by Vneshekonombank, the state-owned bank which
used to monopolise foreign currency payments and is still the official
channel for debt repayments.
Even after a rescheduling of medium- and long-term debts is agreed, chronic
arrears on short-term debt, which totals 12.7bn, are likely to remain a big
headache. On July 1, uninsured overdue import payments came to Dollars 4bn.
Balance of payments figures agreed with the International Monetary Fund
suggest that Russia will still need about Dollars 18bn in external financing
next year even if it is allowed to pay just Dollars 2.5bn for debt
servicing.
The government is hoping to convert some short-term debts into medium-term
debts, and has also offered creditors some swaps of debt for physical
assets. In the end, creditors have no choice but to take what Russia agrees
to pay.
But the advantage of rescheduling is presented as enabling debtors to keep
borrowing and perhaps ultimately repay some debt, while banks can still
treat a loan as performing instead of having to write it off.
Some bankers in Moscow were pessimistic however that Russia would be able to
honour a rescheduling agreement even if it won the terms it was seeking.
Many agreed Russia's control of foreign currency revenues is still far too
chaotic to provide a reliable flow of cash to service obligations which
would remain after a rescheduling.
