FT  29 MAY 92 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (12): Optimism about union dims -
Europe has embarked on the arduous task of making Emu a reality
THE DRAMA is over; now comes the hard work. After the excitement of the
Maastricht summit at the end of last year which settled on the terms for
European economic and monetary union, Europe has embarked on the arduous
task of making Emu a reality.
In its third and final phase, Emu is aimed at ushering in a single currency
for a large part of western Europe. Monetary policy across the region would
be set by a new European Central Bank (ECB).
According to the Maastricht timetable, the final phase is to start up
between 1997 and 1999. It would involve a core group of countries - not
necessarily the whole of the existing European Community - with membership
of the union set by which countries wish to join and how many meet the
economic criteria.
As a prelude to phase three, stage two of Emu is intended to start in 1994
with the creation of a European Monetary Institute (EMI). This body will be
based on the existing committee of European central bank governors, and will
oversee policy co-ordination and preparation for the final phase.
Ultimately, the EMI would evolve into the ECB.
Progress towards Emu has been disrupted by a variety of developments:
Political arguments. In several community nations a debate has broken out -
rather late, given the detail of the Emu protocol sketched out at Maastricht
 -about whether handing over monetary sovereignty to the new pan-European
central bank is in their interests. Discussion along these lines will
surface during the rest of the year, when the Maastricht treaty is due to be
ratified in all 12 EC countries.
Particular worries are being expressed in Germany - Europe's strongest
economic power - over whether Germany's interests will best be served by
giving up the D-Mark for the uncertainties of a single European currency. It
looks as though the Maastricht terms will be subject to ratification by the
German parliament around 1996.
This will probably give Germany the same powers to opt out of Emu as Britain
has by dint of the special treaty clause which it negotiated at Maastricht.
Since an Emu without Germany would look like Hamlet without the Prince, the
rumblings from Germany could easily scupper the project.
High borrowing. Inflationary forces in several EC countries remain strong,
much of this due to the rising prices sparked in Germany by unification in
1990. That has led the German Bundesbank to increase interest rates, leading
to tight monetary policies across much of the rest of Europe and weakening
growth prospects.
As a result, several European countries, particularly Belgium, Italy and
Ireland, may find it difficult to reduce government borrowing quickly enough
to meet the tough fiscal targets set as part of the Emu timetable. According
to the Maastricht fiscal policy criteria, countries should bring down their
budget deficits to no more than 3 per cent of gross domestic product while
outstanding government debt is required not to exceed 60 per cent of GDP.
Effects of high interest rates. The high German rates have - due to
Germany's anchor role in the European Monetary System - required other
countries to keep their borrowing rates high also. Some regard this
development as underlining the inherent lack of flexibility in semi-fixed or
fixed exchange rate systems. They contend the problems would be still worse
in a monetary union with only one currency for Europe. In the past year or
so the problems of high German interest rates have been particularly intense
for countries such as Britain, France and Italy which in all cases would
probably have liked to cut rates to stimulate their flagging economies.
Role of the ECB. There remains much work to be done on defining the powers
of the bank - especially in the area of financial regulation and acting as a
lender of last resort. If the bank is to function efficiently, it may also
need to play a part in the area of pan-European fiscal policy, a role which
could place it in conflict with national governments.
Lack of economic convergence. Emu will make sense only if the nations that
seek to enter a union have similar economic performances, as measured by
criteria such as growth and inflation. The Maastricht protocol set out tough
specific criteria that have to be met if countries want to join Emu. These
include the stipulation that average inflation over one year in each member
nation should be within 1 1/2 percentage points of the rate of the three or
fewer European countries where inflation is lowest.
But there is a question mark over the number of countries likely to make
progress in moving closer to each other on such criteria. In particular,
this could make it difficult for some of the southern European nations such
as Portugal and Greece to qualify.
If such countries made such a determined effort to meet the inflation
criteria that they opted for policies which led to large rise in
unemployment, then it could be argued that the social costs of meeting the
Emu conditions are too high.
Practical details. No one has worked out the arrangements for minting or
printing the coins and notes of the new European currency units. Also to be
settled would be the way in which pounds, D-Marks and francs  - assuming
these currencies are ultimately subsumed in a monetary union - are replaced
by the new currency. The decisions would have to focus not only on ordinary
transactions at the consumer level but on arrangements for financial markets
covering currencies and bonds. Bearing in mind the huge disruption which can
be entailed by just one nation changing currency - as happened in Britain in
1971 when it introduced a new decimal coinage - the potential for
difficulties in this area could be immense.
Emu optimists can, however, point to one area where the Emu process has got
off to a reasonable start. The exchange rate mechanism of the European
Monetary System has proved successful in keeping its 10 member currencies
within set limits according to either 6 per cent or 2.25 per cent
fluctuation bands. The ERM is a vital part of planning for Emu; assuming Emu
proceeds as planned at Maastricht, ultimately the ERM should disappear to be
replaced by a system of irrevocably locked exchange rates. In other words,
the room for fluctuation in the current bands would be brought down to zero,
leading to the single currency.
