FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Economic boost from the ballot box - Will the
Conservative victory lift Britain out of its current recession?
The Conservatives' surprise general election victory has strengthened the
chances of a durable economic recovery in Britain.
Against all the pundits' predictions, the government has been given a second
chance to achieve what was in its grasp after the election in 1987. If Mr
Major has learnt anything from the difficulties of the past three years, it
will be that his overriding economic priority must be to lock the country
into steady non-inflationary growth and bring the economic and political
cycles back into synchronisation.
The realisation that the Tories would have a clear majority brought sharp
gains in equities, bonds and sterling yesterday. Indeed, the Bank of England
sold so many government gilt edged securities by yesterday lunchtime that it
had funded Pounds 5bn of the Pounds 28bn government budget deficit forecast
for 1992-93 in the first 10 days of the financial year.
But the City's euphoria was tempered by the realisation that this particular
election victory does not presage a new economic boom and that much remains
to be achieved before the recession can be considered at an end.
Unemployment will continue to rise for some months yet. Bankruptcies and
company liquidations will continue at a high rate. Families will still be
subject to the trauma of house repossessions.
But Mr Major's new government will be able to build on some promising signs
of economic recovery that were overshadowed in the excitement of the
election campaign. The victory 'should boost consumer confidence which is
the key to bringing the recession to an end,' Sir John Banham,
Director-General of the Confederation of British Industry said yesterday.
Over the past fortnight, three business surveys - from business information
group Dun &amp; Bradstreet, the Institute of Directors and the UK Institute of
Purchasing and Supply - have carried the same message of revived business
confidence and increased orders and sales. Company liquidity has improved,
indicating increased resources for investment.
Better news has come from the High Street: retail sales volumes have edged
higher for two months and consumer confidence indicators have risen. Helping
business and consumer confidence, Britain's annual rate of inflation
continues to fall.
The election result means that Mr Norman Lamont's March Budget, with its
modest reductions in income tax for all and its limited stimulus for small
businesses and industry, can fully take effect. Labour's threat of sharply
higher taxes on people earning more than Pounds 22,000 a year has been
banished.
Labour's tax plans posed a particular threat to the economy of the affluent
south east of England, which accounts for 35 per cent of UK gross national
product.
The return of the Tories with a clear majority is expected to unblock an
unquantifiable but potentially large mass of investment and consumer
spending held up for fear of a Labour victory. The car industry and the
housing market are two crucial areas of the economy that expect to benefit.
Mr David Gent, head of the Retail Motor Industry Federation, said the result
'should stimulate the economy in general and the car market in particular.'
He predicted that it would release 'considerable pent-up demand' and provide
the retail motor trade with 'a busy time in the coming months'.
According to Mr Jim Birrell, chief executive of the Halifax, Britain's
biggest building society, the end of election uncertainty was good news for
the housing market. 'Confidence should now return with more house sales and
a gradual recovery in prices,' he said. 'The fundamentals are in place,
affordability is back to mid-1980s levels, interest rates have come down and
should fall further and the removal of the threat of higher taxes will help
the important southern housing market, which has been hardest hit by the
slump.'
Housing market transactions collapsed last year to around 1.3m from 2m in
1988, contributing significantly to last year's record 1.7 per cent drop in
consumption. Mr Peter Spencer, UK economist of Lehman Brothers International
in London, believes that transactions could now recover to 1.7m next year,
adding about 1 per cent to total consumption in Britain.
Some analysts expect house prices will recover as turnover in the housing
market picks up. Mr John Wriglesworth, who specialises in housing at
stockbrokers UBS Phillips &amp; Drew, said he expects house prices should stop
falling by mid year and then rise by 5 per cent in the second half with
further gains of 6 per cent in 1993.
That would go some way to alleviating the financial fragility that has been
a steadily growing feature of the UK economy in the long recession. Falling
house and commercial property prices have chipped away at individual and
corporate wealth, putting bank balance sheets under strain and raising the
spectre that Britain might be caught in a downward spiral of debt-deflation
that would frustrate other forces of recovery.
Such fears put pressure on the UK authorities to cut interest rates even
before the Conservative victory. This fueled hopes of an early cut in bank
base rates from the current 10.5 per cent. On the domestic money market, the
three month interbank rate, which often acts as a bellwether for base rates,
tumbled to around 10 3/8 per cent yesterday afternoon from around 10 3/4 per
cent the day before. But the Bank of England gave no hint in its money
market operations that a rate cut was imminent.
To some extent, the Bank's reticence indicated a wish to see calmer
conditions in financial markets before deciding on rates. There was also no
incentive for the Bank to act ahead of the announcement of Mr Major's
cabinet and a decision as to whether Mr Lamont should continue as
chancellor.
But other considerations are likely to encourage a cautious approach to
interest rate cuts. The problems that Mr Nigel Lawson brought on himself and
the last government by easing monetary and fiscal policy in the wake of the
1987 general election will be engraved on Mr Major's heart. Britain is still
in a long recession caused by the high interest rates that were needed to
curb the inflationary excesses that resulted from the mistakes of Mr Lawson
and Mrs Thatcher. At the very least, the prime minister will want to ensure
that he does not have to fight another general election with political and
economic cycles out of synchronisation.
As the new government has a secure majority, there is no need to court the
electorate. A modest cut in rates may be announced in the coming weeks if,
as expected, sterling maintains its strength. But Britain's membership of
the European exchange rate mechanism sets a limit to the amount that UK
rates can fall so long as Germany's interest rates are held high to combat
inflation.
Although the government wants a recovery, the authorities may prefer to see
how far the forces unleashed by Mr Major's victory can stimulate economic
growth. There will also be a temptation among officials to argue that the
government should take this opportunity to crush inflation once and for all
with a view to entering the narrow 2.25 per cent band of the ERM at
sterling's present DM2.95 parity during Britain's presidency of the European
Community in the second half of this year.
According to Mr Michael Saunders, UK economist of Salomon Brothers in
London, Britain would then be ideally placed to cut its bank base rates in
the second half of this year when Germany should at last be able to cut its
own key interest rates.
Much can go wrong with this rosy scenario. The US recovery could falter and
recessionary forces in Germany and Japan could strengthen. The danger of a
crisis on world financial markets can never be ignored.
But Mr Major's unexpected victory holds out the hope that his premiership
will see Britain enter an era of stable non-inflationary growth, and so
realise a goal which has eluded successive governments for more than 30
years.
