FT  01 AUG 92 / War prompts rampant nationalism in Croatia: The mood in the
former Yugoslav republic on the eve of elections
ON THE EVE of presidential and parliamentary elections, thousands of Croats
in Zagreb at a rally for the Croatian Party of Rights raised their hands in
a Sieg Heil salute, and vowed to defend their homeland.
Ultra-nationalism in Croatia, embodied by the Croatian Party of Rights
(HSP), will be on the rise until an agreement is reached to end the war
between the former Yugoslav republic and Serbia.
Mr Milorad Pupovac, a leader of the Serbian Democratic Forum, says: 'Mutual
recognition by the two countries would be an important and necessary step
towards a political solution.'
The need for Croatia to reassert control over its territory has been the
single most important issue of the month-long election campaign. The war,
which began in June last year, gave rise to nationalism and appears to have
eclipsed all other issues.
Elections posters throughout the capital call for a 'free and strong
Croatia'. One of the HSP posters portrays a handsome Croat soldier pointing
a machine gun.
Mr Branko Horvat, a Zagreb economist, says: 'Only when you can walk freely
from one end of the country to the other, can you have democracy.
'If you wish to have a democratic Croatia, then you must stop the war,' says
Mr Horvat, whose Social Democratic Union party stands little chance in
Sunday's poll. While the bloodshed has eased in Croatia, people say the war
will not be over until the Croatian government gains control of the third of
its territory patrolled by UN forces.
Diplomats in Zagreb say progress towards democracy will not begin until the
question of sovereignty is resolved. One said: 'Democracy is simply not the
main issue at this point. People are concerned with territory.'
Mr Horvat says only when the war is over will people address the economic
decline in Croatia. Industrial production is 50 per cent below that of 1989,
he says. Inflation is running at 25 per cent a month. Unemployment is
vaguely estimated at 15-30 per cent, not counting the 700,000 refugees in
Croatia and the UN-controlled zone. Mr Horvat says economic renewal is
contingent on the government giving up control over the economy. He sees
economic reform as a crucial step in achieving real democracy.
While the international community searches for a political solution to the
Yugoslav crisis, many Croats believe the only solution is to intensify
pressure on Serbia. Most are unwilling to make any compromise with Serbia
until Croatia controls its own territory.
Masa Silic, a 22-year-old student, says: 'Until they (the Serb militia) stop
the killing in Bosnia, we need the strongest government to protect Croatia
and help unite the territory again.'
