FT  08 JUL 92 / Anglian Group's share offer shunned by nervous investors
ANGLIAN GROUP, the double glazing company, yesterday became the latest
victim of apprehension among investors when the public took up only 6 per
cent of shares on offer to them.
When the offer closed yesterday morning, private investors had subscribed
for only 1.3m of the 21m shares on public offer in the flotation, which
values Anglian at Pounds 183.5m.
The balance of these shares was left with underwriters and institutions who
last week had subscribed to the other 21m shares in a placement at 210p.
The failure of Anglian's retail share sale puts additional pressure on other
companies that joined the race for a stock market quotation soon after the
Tories won the election in April.
Last week investors shunned shares in The Telegraph Group, leaving more than
three-quarters of the public offer with underwriters. When the shares begin
trading this morning, they are expected to trade at a discount to the 325p
offer price.
Next in the firing line will be MFI Furniture Group, the retailer, whose
offer closes on Friday after the offer price was sharply discounted to 115p
last week. Shares in Wellcome, the pharmaceutical company, went on sale this
week in the largest non-privatisation offer seen in the London market. The
offer closes on July 24.
Mr Bill Hancock, Anglian's chief executive, said he was disappointed but not
surprised by yesterday's low public interest.
'I suppose it is the expected result in a very poor market,' he said. 'The
company has not changed; the market has. We have achieved what we set out to
do - we have repaid our borrowings and we have a listing.'
Taunton Cider, the drinks group, yesterday set the price for its flotation.
The public is being offered 29.1m shares at 140p, in an offer valuing
Taunton at Pounds 153m. The same number of shares was successfully placed
with institutions that also took part in the underwriting.
At that price, Taunton is valued at a pro forma price earnings multiple of
15.1, a slight discount to Bulmer Holdings, the other quoted UK cider
company. It will carry a notional dividend yield of 4.5 per cent and pro
forma earnings per share of 9.3p for the year to March 1992.
Lex, Page 22
Tokyo gives cautious response to Wellcome, Page 26
London stocks, Page 42
