FT  13 JAN 92 / Monday Profile: A railway renaissance off-track - The career
and record of Sir Bob Reid, chairman of British Rail
A poisoned chalice, people call it; or, leaving aside the metaphor, simply
the worst job in Britain. Whatever the description, the chairmanship of
British Rail is not a task to be undertaken lightly.
Small wonder, then, that transport ministers reportedly trawled through a
list of 20 or more industrialists in late 1989 before finding a candidate
willing to succeed Sir Robert Reid on his retirement.
They seemed to have struck lucky when Mr Bob Reid (no relation), the highly
regarded chairman and chief executive of Shell UK, agreed to take up the
challenge. Tough, intelligent, sincere and well-liked, he looked just the
man to bring a railway renaissance.
Knighted shortly after accepting the appointment, the then Mr Reid relished
the task that lay ahead. 'I want the trains to run on time, to be safe, to
give a good service, and to improve morale,' he told the Financial Times.
'If I achieve that, I really don't give a damn who gets the credit for it.'
Two years later, it is no longer a question of who gets the credit: more one
of who gets the blame. With Sir Bob's stated objectives patently unachieved,
it is time to ask: is the chairman up to the job?
Hopes had ridden high on Sir Bob because of his demonstrable grit. This,
after all, was the man who overcame the loss of his right arm in a mincing
machine when he was nine years old to become not just a captain of industry,
but also a golfer with a single-figure handicap.
Initially appointed part-time to the BR chairmanship in April 1990, Sir Bob
became the Pounds 200,000-a-year full-time chairman in October 1990. Since
then, the hopes have faded amid BR's inability to extricate itself from
perpetual crisis.
Last year began with the notorious 'wrong kind of snow' affair in which BR
blamed the weather for paralysing the system; ended with severe disruption
to services caused by leaves on the line; and was punctuated by two fatal
crashes, fare rises well above the rate of inflation, and relentless
complaints about the unreliability of trains, the run-down of services and
the lack of passenger information.
It would be wrong to heap all the blame for these shortcomings on Sir Bob.
Some are attributable to a management culture which will take time to
change; others to a history of under-investment or the current cash squeeze.
But operational failings are only part of the story. On the political front,
too, BR has performed particularly badly: and relations between BR and the
government are an area for which Sir Bob is wholly responsible.
Here, it could be argued, Sir Bob has been just plain unlucky. While his
predecessor had enjoyed rapidly rising revenues during the economic boom and
was able to keep the government sweet by reducing his subsidy requirement,
Sir Bob arrived just as recession sent BR's revenues into a downward spiral.
Set against this is the fact that Sir Bob enjoys the patronage of a prime
minister and transport secretary far more sympathetic to the railways than
their predecessors. Notwithstanding this advantage, virtually every
encounter between BR and the government, on issues great and small, has left
the railways defeated.
To take one instance: while BR succeeded in winning more government money in
the last public spending round, the amount was far short of what was needed
to compensate it for declining revenues. When it tried to plug the gap with
big fare rises, the government very publicly intervened to trim the
increases.
The result is that BR's investment programme is in tatters, with all
projects except those already commissioned on indefinite hold.
Still more humiliating was BR's defeat over the planned high-speed link
between London and the Channel tunnel. After battling for four years amid
government vacillation for its favoured route through south London, it was
astonished to have its recommendations overthrown at the last minute by a
political decision in favour of an eastern route.
Now, another humiliation is looming with the government's plans for the
privatisation of BR. Whatever the eventual form of the privatised railway,
it seems probable that the government will override Sir Bob's wishes in at
least two respects: first, in refusing to countenance the preservation of
any organisation resembling BR in its present form, and second, in insisting
on as rapid as possible a transition into the private sector rather than
taking the slow-track approach favoured by Sir Bob.
The puzzle in all of this is that Sir Bob's background at Shell did not
prepare him better for the rough and tumble of politics. Two years ago, Sir
Bob told the Financial Times that the oil industry was even more exposed to
public comment and government interference than the railways.
'From that point of view, BR will be a relief after this business,' he said.
'An absolute relief.'
That the prophecy has not been borne out may reflect Sir Bob's lack of wider
experience. Until his move to BR at the age of 55, he had spent his entire
working life at Shell UK, determinedly climbing the corporate ladder. Even
in his last five years as chairman, he was answerable to the company's
parent, Royal Dutch/Shell, and never served on the parent's board.
Although evidently competent at Shell UK and well-regarded by his staff, he
kept a fairly low profile. Apart from his role in defending Shell UK after
an oil spill in the Mersey in 1989, his time as chairman was marked mainly
by his efforts to underline the company's community work and by his role in
founding the Management Charter Initiative, an industry-led management
training body.
Some managers at BR suggest that Sir Bob's career as an oil man may have
been an inadequate preparation for a task as large, as complex and as
politically charged as the railway chairmanship. He is also criticised for
purportedly having a poor grasp of the detail of the railway's finances and
operations.
The latter might be less of a criticism than it sounds. As at Shell UK, Sir
Bob's policy is to entrust his staff to get on with the day-to-day running
of the railway, seeing his own role more as the policy-maker and strategic
thinker.
But here, too, he has disappointed. His big chance to set out his thinking
was the publication last year of Future Rail, BR's vaunted prospectus
setting out its policies for the next 10 years.
When it appeared, the document turned out to be an insubstantial brochure of
public relations material which had almost no impact and was forgotten the
moment it appeared.
Meanwhile Sir Bob's public performance has been bafflingly inconsistent.
Soon after taking up the chairmanship full-time, he came out fighting with a
series of robust public statements calling for the government to invest
Pounds 1bn a year in the railways to the end of the decade.
Then he went quiet, apparently in the belief that if he played fair by the
government, the government would play fair by him.
That trust was misplaced, as subsequent events have shown. But apart from
his famous outburst after the Channel tunnel link decision ('when you are in
the middle of a pantomime, you want to stay with it'), he has more or less
disappeared from view. The run-up to the privatisation white paper, far from
triggering a ferocious lobbying campaign, has seen him on an extended family
holiday in Australia.
The temptation is to contrast Sir Bob's record with what might have been
expected from some of those who turned the chairmanship down: Lord King, the
British Airways chairman, for example, or Eurotunnel's chief executive, Sir
Alastair Morton. Is it right, however, to go as far as some Tory MPs do in
suggesting that he should be replaced?
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the transport secretary, says in a remarkably telling
observation on Sir Bob's qualities that the chairman is 'on a learning
curve' in terms of his relations with the media and MPs. In the same breath,
however, he says he thinks highly of his abilities and looks forward to
working with him for the foreseeable future.
It seems unlikely, then, that he will be pressed to step down. Quite apart
from anything else, it would be near-impossible to find anyone prepared to
act in Sir Bob's place as undertaker for the funeral of the British Railways
Board when the planned privatisation takes place. The bigger question is
whether Sir Bob will go of his own accord.
The odds are against it. To quit now would be an appalling admission of
defeat for a man whose reputation was built on his determination. But if
ministers reach agreement on a form of privatisation which makes his
position untenable, it is perhaps just conceivable that he could take the
opportunity to wreak one last, marvellously embarrassing act of revenge on
the government that made his job so hard.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                        PERSONAL FILE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1934 Born in Cupar, Fife. Educated St Andrews University, Edinburgh - MA
politics, economics and modern history.
1956 Joined Shell to serve overseas in Africa, Asia and Australia until
1983.
1985 Chairman and chief executive of Shell UK.
1990 Chairman of British Rail. Knighted.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
