FT  28 SEP 92 / Brown to keep up pressure over ERM
MR GORDON BROWN, the shadow chancellor, has re-affirmed Labour's medium-term
objective of returning Britain to a system of 'managed exchange rates'.
However, he may today face pressure from delegates for an economic policy
which takes advantage of Britain's suspension from the exchange rate
mechanism to loosen monetary policy still further in order to promote
economic revival.
Mr Brown insisted yesterday that Labour would not advocate Britain's return
to the ERM until an industrial policy along continental European lines was
in place.
He also demanded reform of the mechanism, saying it was necessary to enhance
co-operation on exchange rate management between the European Community's
member states.
But, in spite of Labour's past opposition to devaluation, he is likely to
face pressure in today's economy debate for cuts in interest rates in order
to kick-start the economy even if that results in a further fall in
sterling.
Mr John Edmonds, general secretary of the GMB general union and past
supporter of an ERM realignment, warned yesterday that without a
2-percentage-point cut in borrowing costs by the end of October there would
be more 'massive redundancies' by Christmas.
'If the 2-percentage-point cut pushes the pound down by a few more pfennigs
then so be it,' Mr Edmonds added. 'The important thing is the relieve the
burden of debt on industry.'
Mr Brown said Labour would also seek international collaboration to inhibit
foreign exchange speculators whose activities have provoked turmoil across
Europe. In his introduction to today's debate - bought forward from
Wednesday to keep up the pressure on the government - Mr Brown will tell the
conference that the government has failed to fulfil its manifesto commitment
to deliver an economic recovery.
Mr Brown will use his speech to demand that Mr Norman Lamont, the
chancellor, explain his policy to the public, and to outline Labour's
strategy for reviving the economy.
The composite motion on the economy, which was backed by the party
leadership yesterday, warns that Britain's economic problems will worsen if
the government continues to refuse to 'intervene constructively'. The motion
calls for co-operation between 'social partners' including a dialogue
between industry, unions, financial institutions and government.
