FT  26 AUG 92 / The Markets Under Strain: Bank of England battles the fear
of devaluation
EVEN if Britain's efforts to prop up the pound succeed over the next few
days without a politically damaging rise in interest rates, it faces a long
battle to remove fears about a devaluation from the financial markets.
Partly explaining the pound's slide against a strong D-Mark - it finished
last night in London at DM2.7875, its lowest close yet in the European
exchange rate mechanism (ERM) and less than 1 pfennig above its floor - is
the dollar's fragility.
The markets are also worried that a 'no' vote in the September 20 referendum
in France on Maastricht might lead to large selling of the weaker ERM
currencies, including the lira as well as the pound.
Another key factor is persistent doubts in financial markets about whether
Britain might devalue the pound by leaving the ERM. That decision might be
forced on Britain should public disquiet grow at the economic effects of
maintaining high UK interest rates, now at 10 per cent, as a result of
continuing ERM membership.
Although the UK government has repeatedly stressed its resolve to keep the
pound within its existing ERM band, the pressures on Britain to bring down
interest rates are particularly strong. The UK is suffering its longest
peacetime recession since the 1930s, with little recovery in sight.
Mr John Lipsky, chief economist at New York investment group Salomon
Brothers, said: 'The markets doubt whether the economic costs of high
short-term interest rates in the UK are sustainable politically.'
Mr Steve Hannah, research head at IBJ International, securities wing of the
Japanese bank, said the UK had a 'special credibility problem' about its ERM
commitment that did not apply to other members.
Doubts in financial markets about Britain's resolve in sticking to the ERM
are apparent in the UK's high long-term interest rates, as measured by
yields on 10-year government bonds, relative to those for most other ERM
nations.
In the past three months, the difference between 10-year interest rates on
UK and German bonds has increased from about 1 percentage point to about 1.3
percentage points. In other words, the 'risk premium' demanded by financial
markets for holding sterling securities as opposed to those denominated in
D-Marks has worsened, indicating a heightened perception of devaluation.
Mr Philip Tyson, a bond analyst at the London office of UBS Phillips &amp; Drew,
the Swiss bank, said: 'Whatever the government might say about not wanting a
devaluation, it has to earn its credibility with the markets and that will
inevitably take some time.'
Supporting Mr Tyson's interpretation is the view that the Treasury and the
Bank of England are preparing for a prolonged struggle to stave off the
pressure on sterling. The Bank's action in failing to intervene publicly to
buy sterling, which would almost certainly boost its value, can be explained
by its keenness to keep the measure in reserve.
For the time being, the Bank and the Treasury appear to be hoping that
recent intervention by central banks in buying dollars for D-Marks has taken
the sting out of the rise of the German currency, and has reduced its effect
on depressing sterling.
It is a dangerous game, however. Market observers yesterday commented that
the Bank might have done better several days ago to seize the initiative and
intervene to support sterling, leaving investors in no doubt about the UK's
willingness to maintain its value.
The markets are divided about what course of action is correct. Mr Peter
Spencer, chief economist at Kleinwort Benson, London investment bank, said:
'The Bank is moving forward (to defend the pound) in stages. The attack on
sterling might have got past the first line of defence, but there are still
plenty of trenches to breach.'
Mr Tyson of UBS has a different opinion: 'The effort to earn credibility is
not an easy one. We could find that sentiment about sterling is so poor that
even if Britain raised interest rates immediately by a full percentage
point, this is not enough to keep the currency above its ERM floor.'
