FT  04 JUN 92 / Accountancy Column: Auditors applaud as boat remains
unrocked
A STRONG gale blew across Britain last week, when hundreds of accountants
sighed with relief as they read the favourable findings of the Cadbury
report on the financial aspects of corporate governance. Their opponents
might have mistaken it for a blast of hot air.
As something created, housed, funded, widely lobbied and partly staffed by
accountants, the Cadbury committee was likely to take a sympathetic view of
the profession.
Accountants, their firms and representative bodies often publicly lauded the
work of the committee chaired by Sir Adrian Cadbury since its creation in
May 1991. Some even seemed to regard it as a panacea for the recent
high-profile criticisms of auditors.
But many other accountants - as well as the relatively small number outside
the profession aware of the committee's existence - privately conceded the
report was likely to be a damp squib. They were not disappointed.
Some interesting and worthwhile proposals are contained in the 70-page
report - even some radical ideas, in earlier drafts and suggestions. But
most of the strong words have been diluted in the final version, while those
that remain have been drowned in a round of congratulatory back-slapping.
'The accountancy profession has done much recently to improve its standards
and procedures,' the Cadbury committee says. It supports the work by the
professional bodies on ethical rules and disciplinary arrangements. It
endorses the work of the Financial Reporting Council, the Accounting
Standards Board, the Financial Reporting Review Panel and the Auditing
Practices Board. It welcomes the utterings of the Institutional Shareholders
Committee.
As a result, it comes as no surprise that the report has been widely
welcomed by these very bodies as well as the accountancy firms and some of
their blue-chip clients which are already preaching if not practising many
of the enlightened ideas on corporate governance put forward.
But some would suggest there is a danger that the committee has been a
little too eager to endorse changes already being put in place. One analogy
might be the work of the National Audit Office.
NAO reports provide often excellent, searching scrutinies of government
departments. But by the time (generally many months) the senior civil
servants responsible are summoned to the Commons' Public Accounts Committee
to respond to NAO criticisms, the report has already been widely circulated
and remedial action taken.
At best, that saves bureaucratic face. At worst, it may imply the managers
have helped the consultants identify issues they have already identified and
feel comfortable rectifying. The result is not always an objective way to
look for failures.
In the same way, the heady praise in the Cadbury report needs to be read
with a little scepticism. A number of its recommendations sound impressive,
but add little that is new. For example, it calls for directors to state
whether their company is a going concern, and auditors to report and give
guidance on this judgement. Yet the Auditing Practices Board made just this
proposal last month.
The Cadbury committee suggests non-audit fees received by accountancy firms
from audit clients should be disclosed. This was made mandatory in an
amendment to the Companies' Act for financial year ends beginning after
October 1 last year.
It also calls for guidelines on rotating audit partners, to ensure a fresh
approach. New ethical guidelines published by the Institute of Chartered
Accountants in England and Wales in February state that safeguards against
'loss of independence' should include rotation of the engagement partner on
audits.
Just because these ideas have been launched elsewhere does not make them
wrong. The new bodies created and codes put in place appear promising. But
it is too early to judge them and some would argue it is disappointing to
see recommendations mirroring so closely the action already being taken by
the accountancy profession.
Equally disappointing is the failure of the Cadbury committee to add much to
the debate over two of the more contentious issues facing accountants.
First, the Caparo judgement in the House of Lords, which says that auditors
have a 'duty of care' to the company and its shareholders collectively, but
not to shareholders as individuals or to third parties.
Second, the potential conflicts facing an auditor conducting non-audit work
such as consulting for its client, thus receiving large fees which may
threaten independence and being in the position of auditing the work of
other parts of its own firm. Other than suggesting disclosure of non-audit
remuneration - which does nothing to identify conflicts which may arise -
the report rejects calls for change on either of these two issues.
There are, however, positive aspects to the report. Its suggestion of an
auditors' review of interim statements - which should include balance sheet
and even cash flow information - may help reduce the scope for manipulating
figures in the period between audited annual accounts. Legislation to
protect auditors in non-regulated industries if they alert the authorities
of fraud would also be welcome.
Outside the remit of the accountancy profession, there are also some
excellent recommendations. Ensuring that directors' contracts are
re-approved by shareholders every three years, increasing the powers of
high-quality, independent non-executive directors, developing strong
internal control systems, and creating effective audit committees are among
the more praiseworthy objectives.
But all these findings ultimately boil down to enforcement. As the report
itself notes, 'The machinery (for raising expectations of corporate
behaviour) is in place. What is needed is the will to improve its
effectiveness.'
Yet that pressure relies on an entirely voluntary system of compliance. The
backbone of the report is a code of practice. Companies must cite whether
they have complied with the code in their annual reports, on threat of
de-listing by the Stock Exchange if they do not. It is then up to
shareholders to exert pressure if they are not complying.
Whether shareholders and other users of accounts will exert such pressure is
questionable, certainly if their apathy in responding to the draft proposals
so far issued by the Accounting Standards Board is anything to go by. The
quality of corporate governance is likely to be less important to them
(particularly after the end of the recession) than a good return on their
investment.
Equally, whether the Stock Exchange will embrace the concept of the
de-listing threat - at a time when it is concerned to ensure London is an
attractive financial centre - remains to be seen.
The wider recommendations in the Cadbury report ultimately come back to the
auditors. As well as their involvement on particular points - such as
'reviewing' interim statements - they are called on to review the company's
overall compliance with the code of practice.
The firms may balk at the idea of taking on this additional responsibility,
which could make them a good deal more vulnerable to criticism.
Alternatively, they may be able to hide behind the ambiguities that a
'review' rather than a full, legally-defined audit permits. Their agreement
to play along with the spirit of Cadbury may be the last chance for a
voluntary code to work.
