FT  18 DEC 92 / Sauna diplomacy of Kohl and Yeltsin: Quentin Peel reports on
how two leaders went to extremes to reach a finance deal
IF THE irrepressible Mr Theo Waigel, Germany's finance minister, is to be
believed, then the key to the complex package deal negotiated between Bonn
and Moscow this week lay in the chilly conservatory of Mr Boris Yeltsin's
hunting lodge at Zavidovo, north of Moscow.
'It was cold enough to concentrate our minds,' Mr Waigel said when he got
back to the splendid surroundings of the Vladimir Hall in the Kremlin to
sign the joint declaration, and a string of bilateral treaties. 'Either we
reached agreement, or we got the flu.'
While Chancellor Helmut Kohl and President Boris Yeltsin went hunting boar
(the Russian got one, but none for the nervous Chancellor), their ministers
thrashed out the last tricky details of the debt-and-compensation deal,
after more than a year of hard bargaining.
Then Mr Kohl, Mr Yeltsin and Mr Waigel all repaired to the sauna, with
nothing but an interpreter and a few birch twigs between them, in a display
of intimate camaraderie with which no other western leaders can compete.
As the German delegation flew back to Bonn on Wednesday night, it was
obvious they were relieved and elated to have emerged unscathed by the
political upheavals surrounding Mr Yeltsin. Mr Kohl had demonstrated his
support for him, sorted out their outstanding disputes over compensation for
Soviet military installations, and Moscow's debts to the former East
Germany, and put Bonn back on top of the list of Russia's most helpful
western partners. It was no mean achievement.
And yet there were dissident voices in the back of the aircraft, suggesting
that the entire exercise was little more than sticking plaster.
It would buy Mr Yeltsin's embattled government a few more months before they
are faced with the next desperate need for another round of debt relief.
There were really four elements to the deal. Germany agreed to suspend its
claim, until the year 2000, for repayment of a small mountain of debt run up
with the former East Germany in the last six months before unification. The
sum is 6.4bn transferable roubles - the accounting unit used by the former
Comecon states, and valued in the German unification treaty at an exchange
rate of DM2.34 (96p).
The money is owing for goods which were ordered and delivered before Moscow
had to pay for its imports in hard currency, and the Russians dispute the
true value of the debt.
Now both sides have agreed not to talk about it at all for eight years, and
then try to negotiate a deal. Most Germans admit the money is as good as
written off, but the fact the debt exists is accepted by Moscow. In
exchange, Mr Yeltsin has agreed to abandon claims for massive compensation
for the Soviet military property in East Germany: Bonn's claims for
environmental reparations, and Moscow's claims for property payment for its
243,000 hectares and 20,000 buildings, have simply been cancelled out in a
'zero solution'. The Soviet military is decidedly unhappy, but Germany is
delighted with a reasonable compromise, even if the environmental clean-up
costs billions. The only new cash in the agreement is DM550m, to be paid by
Bonn in extra housing grants for returning Russian soldiers.
There were many fine words about future economic co-operation, and the green
light for potentially the biggest joint venture of all - an oil and gas
exploration scheme by Germany's Deminex near Volgograd. But the businessmen
who came with Mr Kohl were very tough and sceptical about investment
opportunities when they met Mr Yeltsin.
