FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (20): Nice Pep . . .
Pity about the charges and performance - Only when figures start to outstrip
building society returns can the industry recover lost popularity.
Fortunately, the crash will soon cease clouding the five-year numbers /
Survey of Unit Trusts
THIS YEAR has seen both crisis and opportunity for the unit trust industry.
During the gloomy summer stock markets, investors deserted the sector, with
net repurchases running at Pounds 141.7m in July. Prospects for equity
returns seemed unappealing, and the trusts could hardly champion their past
performance figures - many had recorded a loss over the five years since the
peak of the bull market in 1987.
Nevertheless, unit trust managers were handed one marketing advantage. The
budget allowed unit trust personal equity plans (Peps) to qualify for the
full Pounds 6,000 annual limit. Previously, the sector had been losing a lot
of Pep business to investment trust new issues.
And even in bear markets, the sector's inherent flexibility means that it is
able to switch its marketing effort to bond funds and cash trusts  - an
option not available to investment trusts.
But the unit trust industry still needs to take action in two areas: charges
and performance. Over the past few years, while the latter has been
dreadful, the former have increased, creating a double squeeze on investors.
Charging has represented a thorny problem for trusts. The bulk of the
initial charge has traditionally been needed to pay financial intermediaries
a 3 per cent commission to sell the product. So abolishing the charge would
mean finding a way of selling the trusts directly to the public.
But selling directly requires a substantial advertising campaign - and
without an initial charge, the fund managers would have no cash flow to fund
such a marketing drive.
There are ways of making money in fund management without an initial charge
 -as US managers have shown. The trick is to build up a sufficiently large
fund, so that the managers can earn their profit from the annual fee alone.
But the US market is much bigger than the UK, and has a greater tradition of
direct selling to the public - so the feat is a lot easier to achieve on the
other side of the Atlantic.
This year, British fund managers have shown signs of trying to address this
problem. A succession of management groups has cut the initial charge, in an
attempt to stimulate investor interest in their funds.
They have 'reclaimed' the charge in different ways, but normally via a
higher annual charge or an 'exit' fee. The former has the benefit of
simplicity, and allows the manager to use the extra portion to pay
intermediaries. The exit-fee route is designed to encourage long-term
investment, by gradually reducing the charge over time.
Part of the impetus for this change has been provided by Peps. In order to
take maximum advantage of the tax break, intermediaries have been urging
investors to write out a cheque for more than the Pounds 6,000 limit - with
the excess representing the initial charge. The effect has been to draw
charges to the attention of the investors, and thereby create consumer
pressure for change.
This factor may dent the industry's enthusiasm for single pricing. The idea
sounds good; the whole paraphernalia of bid, offer and cancellation prices
could be swept away in favour of one price, which investors would get
whether they were buying or selling. Unit trusts would become far easier for
the average investor to understand.
But the corollary to such a change is that charges would have to be shown
separately. Instead of investing Pounds 5,000 at the offer price (and thus
effectively paying Pounds 300 in charges via the bid-offer spread),
unitholders would invest Pounds 4,700 and pay Pounds 300 in charges on top.
The difference would be cosmetic, but it might open the eyes of investors to
what they had previously been paying.
Eventually, the UK market might develop into something like its US
counterpart, with no-load, low-load and high-load funds (all named with
reference to the size of their initial charge) all competing for investors'
money.
However, although the issue of charging is important, it should not be
allowed to obscure the issue of performance. What the sector really needs is
a bull market in equities. Only when unit trust growth figures start to
outstrip building society returns can the industry recover some of its lost
popularity.
The performance factor is about to improve. From November, the crash of 1987
will disappear from the five-year figures. Since the crash pushed the UK
markets down by around 35 per cent in a month, there should be a substantial
revision in the unit trust performance tables, with many funds moving from
negative to positive territory.
Nevertheless, the past few years have made private investors view any
equity-linked product as a quick way to lose their capital. The answer could
be guaranteed funds, where the investor is ensured that, whatever happens,
his original capital will remain intact.
It is possible to offer such products by using the options and futures
markets. In so-called 90-10 funds, 90 per cent of the money is invested on
deposit and grows to repay the original capital; the other 10 per cent is
used to play options and futures in order to get the exposure to equities.
To date, however, it has been impossible to offer this facility within an
onshore, open-ended fund structure.
Even if managers get round these difficulties, sophisticated investors will
always realise that a guarantee comes at a price - normally the lack of any
income return.
Experienced equity investors will probably be increasingly attracted by
tracker funds - trusts which aim to match the index. Although professional
fund managers claim that they can beat the index, few are able to do so. A
tracker fund will nearly always have above-average performance in a rising
market - and thus bring a measure of certainty to investors bewildered by
the 1,400 or so trusts currently on offer.
In the ideal world, a British investor would be able to choose from a range
of tracker funds with no initial charge - and place them in a Pep just in
time to enjoy an old-fashioned bull market. Unitholders, dream on.
