FT  02 OCT 92 / Arts: Isaacs to stay at Covent Garden - The Arts Council has
temporarily let the Royal Opera House off the hook, but redevelopment and
public funding problems remain
After months of rumour and recrimination the Arts Council report into the
running of the Royal Opera House was released yesterday in a truncated and
bland form. There is nothing in the findings to rattle the management at
Covent Garden.
Not surprisingly, the Covent Garden Board has announced that Jeremy Isaacs
has had his contract as general director extended for another two years. He
will finally quit at the end of the 1994-95 season when he will be 63. He
was looking for a three year extension, but even so Isaacs' overall position
has been secured.
The Arts Council Committee, chaired by Lady Warnock, criticises the Royal
Opera House for running up a deficit which is now approaching Pounds 4m; for
making artistic decisions first and worrying about the cost later; for
failing to push through the productivity improvements recommended in the
1983 Priestley Report; and for generally poor management and bad staff
relations. It also suggests that the Birmingham Royal Ballet should, in
time, become a wholly separate organisation.
But Warnock acknowledges the pre-eminent position of Covent Garden;
generally approves of the artistic performances in the past season; and
confirms that the Royal Opera House should continue to receive substantial
public funding.
As well as the Arts Council investigation, the Royal Opera House asked the
consultants Price Waterhouse to conduct an independent investigation into
its working practices. Its findings do not greatly differ and it recommends
cost savings of over Pounds 1m a year. The Board has set up a sub-committee
which will study in detail the two reports and come up with conclusions and
recommendations in the near future.
There is one glaring area of dispute between the Royal Opera House and the
Arts Council. The Warnock Committee considered that Covent Garden's large
scale Pounds 250m re-development plan, which will involve the Opera House
raising Pounds 90m and closing the house for at least two years, should be
abandoned in the face of the collapsed property market and the current
financial crisis of Covent Garden. It suggested a less ambitious project,
sufficient to improve the antique and dangerous back stage conditions.
But the Board intends to carry on with its redevelopment appeal. It will
quietly try to get pledges from business and individuals before approaching
the Government for a top-up grant, presumably from Lottery money. Jeremy
Isaacs will wish to get the closure and rebuilding programme settled before
his reign ends.
The Arts Council has to a great extent let the Royal Opera House off the
hook. It approved the summary of the findings of the Warnock report released
yesterday but has made it clear that much of the report's content was more
highly critical. It is adamant that unless the Opera House eliminates its
deficit over the next three years the Arts Council will reduce its subsidy.
It will expect substantial management changes at Covent Garden in the very
near future and a much greater commitment to efficiency and economy.
After all the fuss of recent months it will be surprising if the Royal Opera
House does not realise that it has been given one last chance to put its
house in order. But the key issue still does not seem to be grasped. Covent
Garden is under-funded in comparison with every other leading European opera
house. That is why it has been forced to raise seat prices to unacceptable
levels in recent years. There is nothing in the Warnock summary which
relates to seat prices. These can only be reduced if the Arts Council gives
more subsidy or if it accepts a lower level of performance.
Price Waterhouse suggests that in future some of the Arts Council's subsidy
should be earmarked for reducing seat prices. That at least approaches the
heart of the matter.
