FT  07 MAR 92 / Warm Welsh wool for real beds: Colourful classics produced
by small weavers
REAL BEDS are back. Throw away the duvet. Forget the polyester pillow. Get
out the feather bolster and the Welsh wool blankets for really snug nights
between the sheets.
The homespun look is here again. People are once more turning to natural
handmade products for the bedroom as well as the rest of the home.
This should prove good news for a wet and windy corner of west Wales,
Pembrokeshire, the old county name for the south west corner of Dyfed.
There, in the last century, the only industrialised craft activity was
weaving. Hundreds of little woollen mills were scattered around the county
but, sadly, only a handful remain. Those that do are still turning out
quality goods made to last.
Using traditional materials some are recreating the kind of blankets,
bedspreads and eiderdowns that kept great granny warm at night. For those
who like their natural fabrics given an up-to-date look there are plenty of
other craftspeople turning out quilts, sheets, rugs and wallhangings with
original and modern designs.
For traditional Welsh woollen products a favourite place of mine is Melin
Tregwynt, near Castlemorris, Haverford- west, Dyfed (tel. 03485-644/285 or
fax 03485-694). This picturesque working mill, operated by the Griffiths
family since 1912, weaves 100 per cent pure new wool for furnishing and
fabrics.
Their 'from the wood' range of bedspreads and blankets comes in wonderful
colours and patterns - wood- smoke, ember, spruce and forest berry. The
textures and styles evoke the smell of autumn, the first nip of frost . . .
and the need for an extra covering on the bed.
Most mills have their own designs and Tregwynt is no exception. One example
is a bedspread with a simplified St David's cross pattern for Pounds 79 -
pure wool and machine washable.
Tregwynt's work is the complete antithesis of the throwaway society. Amanda
Griffiths, wife of Eifion whose grandfather founded the business, told me:
'Our products certainly wear well. We have a chequerboard cloth on our table
at home going back 200 years.'
She is anxious to stress that although the company is not really fashion
conscious it does keep up with new colours and themes and brings out a new
collection at least once a year.
The company does bespoke work - for example it has completed an order of 30
items for a small hotel - and is hoping a new computer-aided facility will
enable it to go in for more complex patterns. A fringed doubleweave
bedspread is based on an early 19th century original and is available in
indigo and claret.
It is the memory of how bedspreads and blankets ought to be that has
inspired the company's latest Cofion range. Blankets come in a choice of
simple designs all finished with traditional stitching. Pram blankets start
from Pounds 11.50 up to king size at Pounds 90. Bedspreads range from Pounds
75 for a single to Pounds 105 for king size. In London, Liberty, Conran and
the General Trading Company take a limited range of Tregwynt products.
Not far from Tregwynt, at Ambleston, David and Margaret Redpath run the 200
year-old Wallis Woollen Mill. They specialise in organic dyes and have even
grown an indigo crop on their Welsh site.
Their most recent commissions have been yarn for a carpet at Spencer House,
London, now being woven in Turkey, and a priest's cope, stoles and altar
pieces for an Oxford church.
The Redpaths produce dyed wool for everything from carpet repair yarns to
rugs, blankets and clothing fabric. Their embroidery wool, in more than 70
shades, is spun from fine worsted of 100 per cent lambswool.
The dyes used have good fastness to light and washing. Madder (red) indigo
(blue) and weld (yellow), the three great historical dyes, are the main
sources of colour. Colours can be dyed to order.
It is quite hard to describe the special quality of organic dyes. Apart from
the ecological value there is a subtle and harmonious depth and variety of
colour that is that bit superior to its chemical counterpart.
As specialist weavers and dyers the Redpaths are interested in individual
commissions and can be contacted at Renaissance Embroidery, Wallis Woollen
Mill, Ambleston, Haverfordwest, SA62 5RA (tel. and fax 0437-731-297).
For Pounds 1.50 the Redpaths will send Weekend FT readers a colour
photograph of their embroidery yarns, full details and a sample skein.
A few miles further west, near the coast at Solva, Middle Mill specialises
in floor rugs and carpets. There, the Grime family, Robert, Cynthia and son
Thomas, provide a very individual service.
'People send us their wallpaper and we weave a rug or carpet sample and send
it to them,' says Cynthia.
Their robust floor coverings are proving popular with locals and abroad  -
some 10 per cent of the mill's output is exported. It is the homely, solid,
hand-finished look to the products which is proving popular in the US. I
particularly liked a range of rugs based on the traditional Welsh trellis
pattern.
Pricing is relatively modest; stair carpet sells at Pounds 8.15 per yard for
a 27in width and Pounds 10.75 for 36in. Double weave carpet sells at Pounds
11.75 a square yard. Widths can be varied to suit the individual.
The mill offers a full postal service so write to: The Woollen Mill, Middle
Mill, Solva, Haverfordwest, SA62 6XD (tel. 0437-721-597; evenings are the
best time). Orders take from one to three months to process depending on the
individual requirement.
For further details of craft workshops in Pembrokeshire and other weavers in
the wider area of Dyfed a booklet entitled Dyfed Craft Trails is available
from the Wales Tourist Board, Davis Street, Cardiff, CF1 2FU (tel.
0222-475-226).
