FT  11 JUL 92 / How to Spend It: Hot on the trail of antiques - Lucia van
der Post discovers some of the secrets of Celine, a chic Paris fashion
business. She also goes in search of objets d'art
ANYONE trundling around England, either on holiday or on their way to and
from the traditional summer events being held around the country, might like
to invest in Carol Fisher's new book, The Touring Guide to Antique Shops in
England*.
She lists most of the best antique shops - from country ones in little
villages in Derbyshire or East Anglia, to the tourist routes of the
Cotswolds and the west country.
For obvious reasons she does not attempt to cover London, concentrating on
countrified areas which are less well documented and where more guidance is
needed. She gives maps and details of 12 different touring routes listing
all the shops in the historic towns, cities and village on the way.
I could have done with fuller, more opinionated entries on each individual
shop. For instance, I long to know exactly what sort of furniture, country
or formal, 18th century or 19th century, and precisely what sort of ceramics
are on sale, but she contents herself with simple lists. Nonetheless it is a
very handy guide which I propose to keep in the car's glove compartment.
*Pounds 7.99 from Harrods, the British Tourist Authority shop in Lower
Regent Street, London SW1 or direct, by mail (Pounds 1 extra to cover
postage and packing) from Carol Fisher at 162a Balham High road, London SW12
9BW.
Still on the theme of antiques, if you are heading into Essex or East Anglia
in search of country furniture, you might like to stop in at Hay Green
Antiques at Hay Green Farmhouse, Hay Green Lane, Blackmore, Ingatestone,
Essex CM4 OQE. (Tel: 0277-821275).
There Valerie and Tony Harding run an antique and reproduction pine
furniture business from the barns adjoining their Georgian farmhouse. Much
of the furniture comes from abroad and quite a lot of it is fairly ornate -
antique pine tables from Denmark (about Pounds 400 for a table 3 ft by 4
ft), carved wooden sofa frames (a Victorian chaise longue in stock is for
sale at about Pounds 850), armoires and corner cupboards, bureaux and
side-tables.
A good glazed dresser, with a cupboard base and a glazed top and some pretty
carving, would be about Pounds 595. Besides the real antiques, all of which
are restored on the premises, there is a selection of reproduction pine
furniture - made to look as if it had been around for years.
The shop-cum-home is open every day of the week except Mondays from 10 am to
5 pm.
