FT  03 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Restructuring lifts Devenish to Pounds 4.2m
 -Boddington attacks 'disappointing' pub operating profits
JA DEVENISH, the west country-based pub operating company, which may face a
renewed bid from Boddington, the pubs, hotels and healthcare group, later
this month, more than doubled interim pre-tax profits from Pounds 2.09m to
Pounds 4.24m.
The outcome for the six months to March 31 reflected the effects of
restructuring, including the sale of the loss-making Redruth brewery and a
Pounds 1.2m reduction in interest charges, that followed Boddington's
unsuccessful bid last year.
Turnover fell from Pounds 46m - Pounds 17.9m of which related to
discontinued activities - to Pounds 30.4m.
Boddington has retained a 20.3 per cent stake and may resume hostilities
after June 18. Mr Denis Cassidy, Boddington's chairman, seized yesterday on
a 'disappointing' fall in Devenish's pub operating profits for the half year
from Pounds 6.05m to Pounds 5.85m. 'Operating profits have shown no growth
since 1990,' he remarked.
Devenish, which announced yesterday that it is to acquire 28 pubs from
Whitbread for Pounds 16.9m cash, stressed its determination to maintain its
independence.
'Trading conditions have been difficult with the recession continuing,' said
Mr John Clark, chief executive. 'Traditional pubs, which form the majority
of our estate, have proved resilient; and the cost of repositioning a number
of our operations on more traditional lines has been the prime factor in the
small decline in operating profits.
'Everything is now in place for growth,' Mr Clark added. 'Our strategy is
clearly focused on pub retailing and our acquisition policy has given us the
pubs to work on. We aim to ensure that it is our shareholders who will
benefit.'
Earnings per share more than doubled to 5.8p and the interim dividend is
raised 25 per cent to 1.5p.
The purchase from Whitbread, which follows the leasing of 115 pubs from the
national brewer in April, will increase the Devenish estate to 539 houses
compared with 376 last September.
The latest acquisitions include 18 Roast Inns and nine Henry's Cafe Bars.
They are located mainly in the Midlands and the south of England, Devenish's
targeted growth areas.
'These are high quality outlets operating in good sites with strong turnover
and fit perfectly into our development criteria,' said Mr Clark.
Devenish will pay Pounds 14.9m on completion of the deal - expected in
August, subject to shareholders' approval - and the Pounds 2m balance in
February next year. The acquisition will increase borrowings to about Pounds
40m, less than 30 per cent of shareholders' funds.
