FT  09 JUN 92 / Indian ministers accused in stock market scandal
INDIA'S parliamentary opposition was yesterday preparing to launch a fierce
attack on the government over the Bombay stock market scandal with the
allegation by one of their senior leaders that three cabinet ministers were
involved.
Mr George Fernandes, a former socialist industry minister and a Janata Dal
leader, claimed at a press conference that four ministers were involved,
including three of cabinet rank.
He declined to name them but said he was seeking an appointment with the
prime minister to brief him about aspects of the scandal requiring urgent
attention.
In similar vein, Mr L K Advani, former leader of the militant Hindu
Bharatiya Janata Party, said that fraud on such a large scale would not have
been possible without the direct or indirect support of senior members of
government.
Mr Advani claimed that the failure of the Reserve Bank of India (the central
bank) to take action sooner was proof that the brokers and bank employees
involved had well-placed political patrons.
A report of a Reserve Bank committee of inquiry published last week said
that banks and financial institutions stood to lose Rs30bn (Pounds 577m) as
a result of illegal securities trading.
In an effort to minimise the bank's losses, the government has yesterday
impounded the assets of 31 people and companies, including those of Mr
Harshad Mehta, the Bombay broker still detained by police for questioning,
members of his family and companies associated with him.
The seizure was made as a result of a decree published over the weekend
under which the government is also setting up a special court to try fraud
charges connected with the scandal.
A judge of the Bombay high court was yesterday expected to be named to
preside over the hearings.
The decree provides that impounded property shall be used to pay outstanding
taxes and debts to banks and financial institutions.
Mr PV Narasimha Rao, the prime minister, in an attempt to dispel a widely
held belief that there will be no criminal convictions in the affair, told
an Indian daily yesterday that 'there will be no cover-up, no shielding of
anyone.'
He added: 'We are absolutely clear in our mind that anyone who is at fault
will have to pay for his deeds.' The law would take its course and at speed.
The interview was published by the conservative Hindustan Times which on
Saturday called in an editorial for the resignation of Mr S Venkitaramanan,
the Reserve Bank governor, as 'unfit to hold the job he was entrusted with.'
Mr Fernandes called for the resignation of both the governor and Dr Manmohan
Singh, the finance minister.
