FT  06 MAY 92 / Heseltine pledges to 'help British industry to win'
MR Michael Heseltine pledged yesterday to respond positively to business
leaders' calls for the government to do more to champion the cause of
British industry at home and abroad.
But despite the political clout that his appointment brings to the
Department of Trade and Industry, he was careful to play down speculation of
radical changes in the government's relationship with business.
In his first public comments since his appointment last month as president
of the Board of Trade, Mr Heseltine told the Financial Times that his first
priority would be to 'help British industry to win'.
He said he would spearhead an effort across Whitehall to improve the
'delivery' to more businesses of the advice and assistance which are
available from government departments.
Speaking in his 11th floor office in London's Victoria Street, he added: 'If
industry comes to talk to us . . . they should believe that the people to
whom they talk understand their problems.'
In the past, Mr Heseltine has advocated a more prominent role for the DTI.
He has suggested that the department should take the leading role at
meetings of the National Economic Development Office and in a new cabinet
committee dealing with industrial policy.
Yesterday, however, he appeared to recognise that the Treasury would not
surrender easily its current authority.
He had not arrived in his new job with a bagful of instant solutions for the
problems faced by British companies: 'There is no tailor-made set of
policies which instantly delivers results.'
His focus would be on 'incremental excellence' - the promotion, across a
range of government responsibilities from education and training to
deregulation, of policies which encouraged wealth creation over the long
term.
He intends to develop that theme tonight in his first set-piece speech to
industrialists.
Mr Heseltine's strategy involves recognition of the 'real partnership'
between the wealth-creating and public sectors. It did not represent any
'temptation to put your hand in your pocket and pay people to do things they
should properly do themselves'.
Reinforcing that point he added: 'I know that industrial success, commercial
success, is essentially a long-term phenomenon. The great danger is to try
to adopt the psychology of the fairy godmother.'
Mr Heseltine has to decide whether to refer to the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission either or both of the bids for Midland Bank from Hongkong Bank
and from Lloyds. He would give no clues about whether he is ready to broaden
the existing competition criteria for referrals.
Prince Charming finds his Cinderella Page 9
