FT  05 JUN 92 / London Stock Exchange: Topic problem blindfolds the market
A VOLATILE if eventually successful recovery in London equities from this
week's shocks on the Maastricht front was confused yesterday by a prolonged
breakdown in the Stock Exchange electronic information network. The lack of
reliable price information drove the institutions to the sidelines for much
of the day.
Equities closed little changed on the session with the FT-SE Index finally 1
point up at 2,681.9. But the session started badly when renewed selling of
the FT-SE June futures contract from Europe, and also further losses in UK
gilts, drove the stock market down by about 15 Footsie points.
At this stage, just after 9.00am, the Stock Exchange Topic system ran into
software problems which left the market effectively without trading screens
until late in the afternoon. Share prices were quoted on the screens, but on
an 'indicative basis', with the marketmakers left to negotiate with clients
by telephone.
The confusion was all the greater because of the selling of the futures
contract. Marketmakers struggled to arbitrage between futures and the
underlying blue chip stocks. Investment clients, including the full range of
institutional funds, tried to evaluate share prices which were changed
during the course of telephone conversations.
The market steepened its fall, although most investors had no way of
measuring its performance. Both institutional and private clients
effectively abandoned trading, depriving marketmakers and brokers of the
day's commission business, and tempers grew increasingly frayed.
Share price data and information was available to most stock market firms by
means of direct digital links with the Stock Exchange, but not many
investment clients have these. Further confusion was generated when it
became clear that substantial blocks of shares in Midland Bank were changing
hands as the market braced itself for the meeting of the Lloyds Bank board
today - a meeting that could produce new developments in the battle for
control of Midland.
By mid-session, genuine share trading was virtually at a standstill, and the
marketmakers were left to deal with one another as they arbitraged between
the stock market and an index futures contract which was at a discount to
cash on several occasions.
However, a recovery set in when the Paris bond market, the immediate cause
of Wednesday's upset in UK equities, rebounded strongly. UK Government bonds
recovered from early losses which have ranged to around a full point and the
stock index futures market quickly turned better. Much of this good news was
lost on the average investor since the trading screens remained 'indicative
only' until barely 45 minutes before trading ended for the day.
The day's Seaq total of 505.9m shares compared very favourably with
Wednesday's 473.6m, but these figures make no distinction between customer
and intra-market business. Traders expect to see confirmation of a large
fall in the customer business total, which will be disclosed today.
