FT  14 NOV 92 / Dying for a drink? Then die if you do: A deadly treatment
for Russia's drinkers
the hardened alcoholic has drunk every possible liquid that ignites. But
now, he would not even think of taking a sip of wine, even if his life
depended on it.
Alexie Rogozhin thinks his life does depend on it. Last week, a drug was
sewn under his skin, which, he is convinced, will kill him if he drinks any
sort of alcoholic beverage. The treatment is administered to desperate
alcoholics. Fear of death becomes the only way to prevent them reaching for
the bottle.
Of the thousands of Russian alcoholics who seek treatment in state-run
clinics each year, Rogozhin is one of about 5,000 patients who receive one
of two drugs designed to control the disease.
The first, Esperal, comes in 10-pack tablet form and is sewn under the skin
near muscle tissue. A milder liquid version, dubbed the 'torpedo', is
injected intravenously.
Both stay in the body five to 12 months and remain inactive until alcohol
intake. The widely administered drugs in Russia cause an allergic reaction
if alcohol is consumed. If the alcoholic does drink, excruciating pain
results. Ultimately, doctors say, the allergy can have fatal consequences.
Although the method is highly controversial treatment at Moscow's
Narcological Hospital No 17 seems to work. 'I don't drink anymore, because I
know it will kill me,' Nikolai, a lanky 42-year-old engineer, explained
seated on a bed at the clinic. A near-death experience has convinced him
that a torpedo is no laughing matter.
At a different hospital four years ago, Nikolai was given an injection by a
doctor which made him 'die'. 'I could hardly breathe anymore and I got
incredibly hot,' he says, turning red just thinking about it. The doctor
resuscitated him and told him that next time he drank the same would happen
to him, only there would be no one to bring him back to life.
'It worked,' says Nikolai, proudly pointing to his mouth. 'For the past four
years, not one drop has passed these lips.'
Rogozhin, too, has not come near liquor in a year. 'I once sniffed at a
glass of vodka and it made me sick right away,' the actor says. 'I'm cured,
for life. I can't remember the time that I wasn't drunk every day. I even
ate bread drenched in shoe polish. If you leave it on the radiator
overnight, scrape off the cream and eat the bread, you can get a buzz,'
Rogozhin smiles. 'But those days are over,' he sighs. He pulls a document
out of his wallet, which testifies that he has an Esperal and that he is
aware of the possibly fatal consequences. He points to his stomach and says:
'There she is, right there.'
Alcoholism has been called Russia's most serious ailment, and for many
kicking the habit is basically impossible in a country where not raising
your vodka glass at dinner is perceived as an insult to the host.
According to official reports, 14 out of every 1000 people in Russia are
alcoholics. Aleksandr Sergeyev, deputy chief of the clinic, believes the
actual number of cases to be much higher, however. Although he has no
statistics, he judges 60 per cent of the nation to have serious drinking
problems.
Although patients do get ill, no one has died from torpedoes or Esperal,
said Sergeyev. He added that over the past 10 years 200,000 alcoholics have
been treated at the clinic. Every fourth patient received a torpedo. What
happens at private clinics, however, he says, is uncertain. 'If a patient
dies, then it is because of alcohol misuse of course, not the drugs we give
them,' Sergeyev contends.
Sergei Golovin, a psychiatrist at hospital No 17, does not approve of the
drug. 'It is bad to stimulate fear and I discourage the use of medication to
treat alcoholism, but it is up to the patient to decide how to deal with it.
We only give torpedoes or Esperal to healthy people. If a patient has a bad
heart, we would not think of it.'
Vladimir S, who considers himself to be an alcoholic although he has not
drunk in three years, calls torpedoes and Esperal 'barbaric'.
'The drinker simply fools himself, it's crazy,' says Vladimir. He believes
the Alcoholic Anonymous program, introduced to the clinic by a group of
Americans last year, is the only sensible way to treat the disease.
'This sort of thing is condemned in the West and with good reason. An
alcoholic with a torpedo simply counts the days until the drug wears off and
then he starts drinking again, and harder. Although it may keep someone from
drinking, ultimately it is not a real way to treat the problem.'
Ryastoslav Prochorov, a counsellor at the clinic, is cynical, saying that
drunks are smart and will not even be deterred by death. He clicks his thumb
and middle finger against the side of his throat, the Russian gesture that
means 'drunk'.
'Russians enjoy drinking, it's our national pastime,' he states
matter-of-factly. He says he can cite many cases of 'sewn-up' alcoholics who
simply took a bottle to the entrance of the clinic and drank there knowing
they would be treated if things went wrong.
'After all,' he says, 'neither the prospect of death nor anything else can
keep a Russian man from drinking.'
