FT  18 NOV 92 / Survey of Turkish Finance, Investment and Industry (6):
Innovative showman - Profile of Erol Aksoy, of Iktisat Bank
MR Erol Aksoy has acquired, in Turkish banking terms, a formidable list of
titles.
Born in Istanbul in 1946 (thus the age of fifty still beckons), he is
vice-chairman (but leading light) of Iktisat Bank, with a net worth of
Dollars 50m and representative offices in New York, London and Moscow.
The bank handles between 8 and 9 per cent of Turkey's two-way trade finance.
Already in 1991, in its investment role, it accounted for 17 per cent of
commercial paper issued and 11 per cent of corporate bonds in Turkey.
Mr Aksoy is also chairman of: Iktisat Leasing, the first company of this
kind to be set up in Turkey; Hayat and Emek Sigorta, life and non-life
insurance companies; Banque Internationale de Commerce (BIC), with more than
Dollars 1bn on loan tombstones in Paris (75 per cent owned by Iktisat); BIC
International Credit, in London; and the Park Avenue Bank, in New York, a
small bank with equity of Dollars 15m.
Turkey, he protests, had become, in banking terms 'very introverted'. He has
tried to change this.
His ambitions, interests and career achievements have not necessarily
endeared him to his closest associates. But he is persuasive in
conversation, as one who has gone out to be first in whatever fields he
attacks. He occupies an office that is dimly-lit and hung with many
paintings in heavy gilt frames. The intended impression is of old money  -
though it is not. Books include 'Leadership Secrets of Attila the Hun'. Mr
Aksoy also has the largest collection of Iznik tiles in Paris (half his
personal collection) - a harmony of aquamarine and turquoise.
At the same time, his rise to banking influence and authority reflects other
aspects of his life. His education includes a BS degree in electrical
engineering from MIT, 18 months in the Turkish army, an MBA from Harvard
Business School and a baccalaureate from the Lycee Michelet in Paris.
More intriguing than the facts and figures of the organisations that he
controls is the way in which he was involved with the largest family-owned
conglomerates - Koc and Sabanc.
In 1976, Mr Aksoy became vice-president in charge of finance at the Koc
group, and then general manager of Garanti Bank, owned by both Koc and
Sabanc. This bank's operations were not a success, not least because Sabanc
was reluctant to have it succeed in a way which would have provided
competition with Akbank (wholly-owned by Sabanc).
In 1980, he became managing-director of Interbank, owned by Mehmet Emin
Karamehmet, head of the troubled Cukurova family group, developing the bank
into the country's first wholesale trade finance bank - thanks, in part, to
being able to draw on his US background by introducing into the office
marble, roses and clean-limbed executives.
In 1984 came a turning-point, when he managed to acquire, for next to
nothing, a small regional bank - Iktisat Bank. He expanded its activities to
the growing capital markets in Turkey through its subsidiaries.
There were financial links between Interbank and Iktisat, which helped the
latter out of its troubles, thereby enabling it to provide a basis from
which to move overseas.
For, through 75 per cent ownership, he is chairman of the bank in Paris and
has also acquired control of ownership of the small New York bank - the Park
Avenue Bank. It was another first for Mr Aksoy, in that it made him the
first Turkish banker to venture to issue Turkish paper overseas and to
syndicate loans for Turkish companies there.
Meanwhile, he has displayed his showmanship by having one of the largest
ocean-going yachts in Turkey, and by defying, legally, TRT, the government
broadcasting agency, through the direct beaming of private television
programmes from Paris to his homeland. It has not made him loved, but he has
shown that the Turkish banking system has room for ingenuity and innovation.
