FT  10 JUL 92 / Survey of European Finance and Investment, Ireland (1):
Market's nerves steadied by Maastricht vote - Ireland has proved more
resilient to the recession than its main trading partners, and on economic
convergence criteria it is better placed for an early incorporation into
European monetary union than most of the EC's member-states
IRELAND is staying on the fast track to European monetary and political
union. The republic's overwhelming approval of the Maastricht Treaty, last
month, has steadied market nerves and steeled government resolve to forge
ahead with plans to place Ireland among the first group of EC countries to
adopt a single European currency by the end of the decade.
The 70:30 majority in favour of the treaty has given a powerful mandate to
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister. The tough economic policies
that economic convergence requires, which are vital to continuing investor
confidence in the Irish economy, will continue.
The doomsday that had been depicted by Mr Reynolds (German fund managers
shouting 'Sell' down the telephone to their Irish gilts brokers, foreign
investors abandoning their factories and workforces, panic-stricken dealers
watching helplessly as the Irish stock market index dived off trading
screens in the wake of a No vote) was clearly sufficient to outweigh any
nagging doubts the average Irish voter might have had about abortion,
neutrality, and the environment within Greater Europe.
Pre-referendum tension has been replaced by a balmy, midsummer preoccupation
with more mundane affairs: Catholic schoolgirls sneak a lunchtime smoke in
the park, and lament having missed the recent Prince concert in Dublin; last
week's TV reports from Wimbledon caught the interest of beer-bellied
pub-goers; and the discovery, by a turf cutter, of a woman's skeleton in the
Wicklow mountains, occupied the imaginations of the tabloids' headline
writers.
But if the Irish government can afford itself some self-congratulation on
the Maastricht result, it cannot allow itself the luxury of complacency.
On the positive side, Ireland's economy has performed remarkably well over
the past year. It has proved more resilient to the recession than its main
trading partners, and on economic convergence criteria it is better placed
for an early incorporation into EMU than most of the EC member states. The
Central Bank's 1992 summer report records a 1.5 per cent growth in GNP in
1991, and a projection of 2.5 per cent growth for this year.
It notes 'an impressive performance of exports' in 1991, a further
improvement in the trade balance in 1992, and it predicts that the
government borrowing requirement of 2.4 per cent of GNP this year 'will be
broadly in line with budget targets.' Inflation was down to 3.2 per cent per
annum last year, and the currency stayed comfortably within the limits of
the upper band of the ERM.
None the less, a number of problems lie in ambush. Inflation is creeping up,
projected at 3.7 per cent for 1992. A tranche of public sector pay awards
has been deferred into 1993 and 1994, waiting to explode like a time-bomb
under the government's finances if economic growth over the next two years
is insufficient to increase tax revenues to meet the additional bills.
Failure to meet the awards would put an end to five years of relative peace
on the industrial relations front in Ireland.
An increase in EC structural and cohesion funds has been vectored in to the
government's budget calculations, to help fund essential infrastructural
projects, to offset anticipated losses of revenue resulting from EC tax
harmonisation measures, and to confront the rising unemployment problem
caused, in part, by the measures undertaken to put Ireland on course for
Emu.
Should the increase not be forthcoming, and economic recovery is delayed in
the UK and the US, two of Ireland's most important trading partners, then
the Irish government will face serious financial difficulties.
Privatisations offer some room for manoeuvre. But a lingering whiff of
scandal in several state enterprises, and a lack of political will in the
face of stiff union resistance, rule out any significant initiatives before
1994.
A continuing flow of inward investment thus remains the key to the
government's strategy for sustained economic growth.
Mr Bertie Ahern, the Irish finance minister, told a visiting group of US
businessmen recently: 'We are extremely dependent upon international trade.
That fundamental fact is the single greatest influence on our economic
policies.'
He declared that Ireland's commitment to a low-inflation economy, a strong
exchange rate policy and a responsible fiscal stance are central to
maintaining Ireland's competitiveness within the EC - and to provide a
stable platform for inward investment. 'Ireland can be your gateway to that
market,' he said.
US investment comprised 52.5 per cent of all overseas investment in Ireland
during the past two years. The Industrial Development Authority (IDA) notes
in its annual report, published at the end of June: 'There are over 1,000
overseas companies in Ireland employing 93,000 people and contributing
approximately IPounds 4.1bn to the Irish economy in wages and purchases.'
About 8 per cent of Ireland's total workforce, and almost 45 per cent of its
manufacturing workforce, are thus employed by foreign companies, which have
been attracted by low corporate tax rates, generous grants and Ireland's
skilled labour. But serious questions are now being raised as to whether
Ireland is getting value for its money.
The IDA reports that its grant-aided schemes created 12,439 new first-time
jobs in 1991 at a cost of IPounds 14,000 per job. Over the same period,
unemployment grew by almost 30,000. The unemployment total is expected to
hit 300,000 by the end of the year and, at 21 per cent of the workforce, is
already the highest rate in the EC.
Emigration has been the traditional escape valve to ease the demographic
pressures swelling the workforce, but in the past year this has proved to be
a two-way street. Not only has emigration halted, but emigres are returning
home to Ireland as jobs also disappear in the UK and the US. The Central
Bank estimates that in the absence of emigration an additional 20,000-25,000
jobs need to be created each year, to prevent unemployment rising higher.
Earlier this year, an important re-assessment of industrial policy was
elaborated, on behalf of the Industry ministry, by a think-tank of Irish
industrialists, financiers and trade unionists.
Their recommendations (published in what is known as the Culliton report)
are that the more labour-intensive food industries should be specifically
targeted for growth; that tax reform and a widening of the tax base should
be carried out urgently; that equity stakes rather than grants should be
increasingly used by the IDA to finance projects, and that the concessionary
10 per cent corporate tax rate for manufacturing industry should be phased
out after the year 2010.
Mr Ahern's Finance Bill this year has sought to address the report's
recommendations on taxation. He has closed many tax avoidance loopholes,
lowered the basic and top rates of income tax - and mounted a witchhunt to
catch evaders. But his move to encourage short-term savings, with a
concessionary 10 per cent tax rate on interest earnings, has angered the
investment community, which says that long-term savings are being adversely
affected - especially those destined for the equity markets. Brokers
identify this as one of the reasons for the poor performance of the equity
market at present. Mr Ahern has promised to review the bill.
The government is also under pressure to intervene in the insurance
industry, where non-life insurance business has suffered heavy losses in
recent years, pushing up premiums and making insurance very expensive in
Ireland.
Mr Brian Duncan, the outgoing president of the Irish Insurance Federation,
said recently: 'If the cost in Ireland exceeds the norm in other European
countries then it represents a real competitive disadvantage to Irish
firms.'
Awards on claims are increasingly settled through the courts in Ireland; the
result has been awards running at levels well above those in other European
Community countries. However, the government is wary of wading in with
legislation to limit court awards, partly for fear of a confrontation with
the judiciary, and the possible constitutional implications, but also
because it is from the courts that the next political crisis in Ireland may
emerge.
The scandals which led to the resignation last February of Mr Charles
Haughey, the former prime minister, have still to be cleared up. They are
currently bogged down in what appear to be interminable official inquiries.
Failure to nail the culprits will be seen as a political failure by the
government.
But the beef tribunal, the most explosive issue, will reach its denouement
in the coming weeks. Some of those expected to testify - regarding
allegations of political favouritism in the allocation of government export
credit insurance to beef processors such as Mr Larry Goodman, Ireland's and
Europe's biggest - are none other than Mr Haughey, Mr Reynolds, Mr Des
O'Malley, the Industry minister, and Mr Goodman himself.
The initial verbal sparring outside the courts indicates considerable
divergences of opinion over what actually happened in the granting of the
insurance for beef sales to Saddam Hussein's Iraq in 1988.
A cartoon recently published on the front page of the Irish Times summarised
a man-in-the-street's view of what went on. It portrayed a man holding out a
collecting can for contributions to different party funds to a housewife
replying 'No - I already gave at the butcher's'
Mr Reynolds and Mr O'Malley, the leaders of the two parties in the
government coalition, have so far made contradictory statements on those
events in 1988.
The Tribunal will either resolve them, or else they could lead the country
to an early general election.
