FT  23 JAN 92 / Kinnock vows to reverse pre-poll basic rate tax cut:
Decision to hold Budget on March 10 fuels election fever
MR NEIL KINNOCK gave an unequivocal pledge yesterday that an incoming Labour
government would reverse any pre-election cut in the basic rate of income
tax as the government fuelled election fever by setting the Budget for March
10.
But in a wide-ranging interview with the Financial Times - in which he
predicted a Labour majority at Westminster of 20 seats - Mr Kinnock hinted
he would be loath to campaign on a promise to overturn a Budget move to
raise tax thresholds.
In confident mood, the Labour leader said he would continue to encourage
'constructive debate' on constitutional reform - including the introduction
of a proportional voting system for Westminster. But he dismissed
suggestions that such a change might be part of a deal with the Liberal
Democrats if the election result left a hung parliament.
The announcement by the government of a relatively early Budget date
confirmed that Mr John Major wants, if possible, to call a general election
for April 9. But Mr Kenneth Clarke, the education secretary, signalled that
the government should keep its options open by confirming a personal
preference for May 7 or, possibly, late June.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, accepted in the Commons yesterday that the
promised economic recovery had not yet materialised. He insisted, however,
it would become 'firmly established' in the course of the year.
Facing a continuing Conservative onslaught on his tax and spending
proposals, Mr Kinnock sought in his FT interview to dismiss recent confusion
over the timing of proposals to abolish the present Pounds 20,280 salary
ceiling on National Insurance contributions.
Confirming also that Labour policy eventually will limit tax allowances to
the basic rate of income tax - in line with the present treatment of
mortgage interest relief - Mr Kinnock said the aim always had been to
minimise the disruption of family budgets by seeking to phase all changes.
He said: 'No opposition in history has ever been as candid as we are . . .
What is certain is that we will raise pensions and child benefit, we will
remove the ceiling on National Insurance contributions. There will be a 50
per cent top tax rate. And that tax change will apply only to those earning
well in excess of Pounds 30,000 a year.'
Beyond that, the timing of both the tax and NI contributions increases
needed to pay for the higher child benefit and pensions would depend on the
'the details available to us in government'.
Mr Kinnock added, with specific reference to NI contributions: 'We're only
going to open the door . . . but there will be a choice, as to whether we
open the door wide, or we open the door a little.'
If Mr Lamont used his Budget to cut the basic rate of income tax by 1p to
24p in the pound, Mr Kinnock had no doubt Labour would fight the election on
a policy of reversing it. The party's long-established policy had been that
it should neither be increased nor decreased, he said.
But he was equivocal about the response if the same Pounds 2bn was used to
raise tax thresholds: 'You are giving me an invitation which I can't take
up. We could not have a policy relating to thresholds - or a variety of
other options open to the chancellor - unless and until we know what he is
going to do in terms of the resources available'.
That response is likely to intensify the pressure on Mr Lamont from a
growing number of Tory MPs to launch the election campaign with a 1p cut in
the basic rate.
Page 18
Many options, no favours: Neil Kinnock
spells out his plans for government
Page 10
Lamont cornered by Commons pragmatism
Page 19
Samuel Brittan: Don't jettison fiscal autopilot
