FT  08 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Ready to take a leap forward - Tadpole
Technology's move to the main market
FOLLOWERS of Tadpole Technology, a small electronics company with
headquarters in Cambridge, England, and Austin, Texas, have waited long
enough to see their loyalty rewarded.
Now the moment of metamorphosis may be at hand. Tadpole, distinguished by
world class technology and intermittent profitability, last week leapt from
the over-the- counter market to a full listing, raising sufficient funds on
the way to put its finances on a sound footing for the first time since its
foundation in 1984.
The placing of just over 7.4m shares at 65p a share was fully subscribed,
leaving the company with Pounds 4.8m minus expenses.
The shares started trading yesterday, closing at 85p.
After clearing its accumulated debt, Tadpole will have some Pounds 2m to
buffer what could prove to be explosive growth.
Investors' hopes are pinned to Tadpole's disclosure last week that in
addition to an existing relationship with Sun Microsystems, one of the
fastest growing and most aggressive US workstation manufacturers, it has
secured a strategic alliance with International Business Machines, the
world's largest computer manufacturer, through which IBM will market a
yet-to-be-announced Tadpole product and the US giant will take up to 10 per
cent of the enlarged equity stake in the company.
Tadpole is one of an elite group of electronics companies founded in the
Cambridge area over the past two decades by graduates anxious to remain
within bicycling distance of their alma mater. Chief executive, Mr George
Grey, was 23 when he founded the company in partnership with Mr Martin
Jackson. Mr Jackson now works for EO, also based in Cambridge, which is
developing an innovative personal communicator.
Mr Grey says that from the first the company was technically overambitious
and undercapitalised. Its four-year track record - it lost money in 1989,
1990 and 1992 - is awful. In 1992 it incurred a loss of Pounds 1.69m.
Closer inspection reveals that turnover has been rising rapidly; from Pounds
5.7m in 1989 to Pounds 12.5m last year. And most of the company's business
is now either in the US (76 per cent in 1992) or mainland Europe and
Scandinavia (18 per cent).
What does Tadpole do that warrants such recognition abroad but has so far
failed to make it a commercial success? It is a specialist in the design and
fabrication of complex printed circuit boards, tailored to its customers'
exact specifications. US customers include GE, Unisys and Polaroid. Its
expertise is centred on the Unix-operating system, widely tipped to become
the world standard for business computing over the next decade.
The company is generating most excitement these days through its
developments in portable workstations.
Workstations are personal computers writ large - in performance terms
anyway. When aeronautical engineers put a Boeing 747 through maintenance
tests they taxi the jumbo jet into a hangar where it is connected through an
umbilical cord to a desktop workstation, typically made by Sun Microsystems.
Tadpole has exploited its board technology to develop a notebook-sized
version of the Sun workstation that can be carried aboard the airliner on
the runway.
Tadpole calls its computer the 'Sparcbook', after Sun's high performance
Sparc microprocessor chip. A few hundred have been sold for evaluation;
orders in lots of 1,000 or more are expected next year. An important feature
of Sparcbook is a software system which enables it to link into and form
part of the user's network while away from the office.
Last week Tadpole announced that it had agreed to develop workstation
notebooks for IBM based on the US maker's 'Power PC' designs. Tadpole will
develop the computers and IBM will market them.
The agreement is contingent on the completion of equity negotiations between
the two firms. IBM's total investment in Tadpole in equity and development
funds will be not less than Dollars 3m.
George Grey said: 'The Power PC architecture is one of the key
microprocessor architectures of the next decade'.
Mr Grey explains the company's precarious finances to date as the result of
an indulgence in research and development that was not supported by
corresponding sales. Changed accounting conventions resulted in one set of
losses; failure on the part of the US semiconductor manufacturer, Motorola,
to deliver a new chip on time was another.
The company has taken steps to strengthen its financial management,
appointing as deputy group chief executive Mr Jeremy Woan, a 32-year-old
former investment analyst with Citicorp Scrimgeour Vickers and Hoare Govett.
The group finance director is Mr Robert Booth, who joined in 1991 after 10
years in the pharmaceuticals business. Mr Richard King, who prior to
retirement was chief executive of Cambridge Electronic Industries, was
appointed non-executive chairman this year.
Could Tadpole emulate Microfocus, the UK software company whose share price
is now hovering around Pounds 24, pushed up by US investment? There are
strong parallels.
Both companies have bigger businesses abroad than at home and both sell key
components to large US electronics companies.
An ADR offering from Tadpole could be on the cards in a few years. The task
at hand, however, is to turn the company round and manage the anticipated
growth surge.
Observers think that pre-tax profits in 1993 could be about Pounds 1.3m, or
earnings per share of 6p.
