FT  11 JAN 92 / Books: Half unreal worlds of childhood - From Nabokov to
Tolkien, the FT critics review the most interesting of the recently
published volumes of biography and memoir
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE by Forrest Carter Rider Pounds 14.99, 231 pages
DRINK TO THE BIRD by Benedict Kiely Methuen Pounds 14.99, 180 pages
A WRITER'S past is a half unreal world: things that happened woven into
things which might have happened, or should have happened. Its geography and
climate are subtly re-arranged as the writer's recall changes with the
coral-like accrual of his or her life's experience. Truth is a Protean thing
at the best of times. Never more so than in the case of childhood
recollected in maturity. Therefore, unless a memoir is of historical or
political significance, it is best judged on purely literary merit. On this
score, each of the two memoirs under review is a gem.
Little Tree, alias Forrest Carter, is half Cherokee. Orphaned at the age of
five, he goes to live with his grandparents in the mountains of east
Tennessee. Grandma was full-blooded Cherokee, called Red Wing. Grandpa was
half Scotch, half Cherokee, and was named Wales. Grandma is the literate
one, who can make out the number of the right bus, a skill, which along with
reading, she imparts to Little Tree. Grandpa fetches books from the library
in the nearby town, which Grandma reads out to them. So, writers, including
'Mr Shakespeare', set landmarks in Little Tree's developing mind.
But his real education is in 'The Way' - the Indian's perception of Man's
place in Nature and its concomitant ethics.
Grandpa, who makes a living brewing whisky which he sells in town, teaches
Little Tree how to hunt: only what one needs - the smaller, weaker deer,
allow the better ones to grow; how to attune his senses to the moods of the
mountains and the woods. How to accept death as natural passage in nature's
cycle.
As a part of his growing up, Little Tree learns about the Cherokees' forced
exodus from their land: 'Government soldiers rode before them, on each side
of them, behind them . . . The Cherokee men walked and looked straight ahead
and would not look down, nor at the soldiers. Their women and children
followed in their footsteps and would not look at the soldiers . . . Far
behind them, the empty wagons rattled and rumbled and served no use. The
wagons could not steal the soul of the Cherokee. The land was stolen from
him, his home; but the Cherokee would not let the wagons steal his soul.'
Deceptively simple, the language is in harmony with the experiences it
narrates. How much of the latter is factually accurate is irrelevant, for
here is poetic imagination fired by evocation, which has its own undeniable
truth.
Forrest Carter grew up to become Storyteller-in-Council to the Cherokee
Nations, and author of Gone to Texas, the basis of Clint Eastwood's classic
western The Outlaw Josey Wales.
In Drink to the Bird poetic imagination allied with sheer, delectable Gaelic
gift of the gab, turn what might otherwise have sounded like a fairly
ordinary account of boyhood and manhood in Ireland in between the two world
wars, into a literary feast.
'Sound' is an operative word here, because this book should be read aloud.
Memory speaks, sings, recreates scenes and characters. Anecdotal,
hilariously funny, and replete with verse, this memoir has the cadence of a
discursive outpour and Joycean resonance. Moreover, you can open it at any
point and happily read on without regard for sequence. In the opening page,
Mr Kiely gives a hint of what is to come: 'The meticulous reader may detect
digressions.
'But the mind, such as it is, may surely, in this business of remembering,
be allowed to meander. Even take off for a while to fly, say, to Atlanta,
Georgia, or the Blue Ridge mountains, or the hoarse Trinacrian shore of
Oregon. Francis Drake, who was no Ariel, got as far as that in a little
wooden boat.'
Here there is a huge diffusion of people, places, and events, with the
narrator sitting back, as it were, pointing out the directions.
Kiely, who was raised in County Tyrone, lives in Dublin, and nearly became a
priest, probably has had a happy life so far. But he is able to register
poignantly Ireland's unhappy violence. His humour is generous. It is
immediately evident that here is an experienced writer of outstanding
accomplishment.
