FT  09 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Ossory Pounds 41.6m in the red
OSSORY Estates, the property group, yesterday announced pre-tax losses of
Pounds 41.6m for the year ended June 30 after heavy write-downs of its
property portfolio.
The company's accounts have been qualified because it is in talks with its
banks following the breach of its banking covenants. 'Whilst the accounts
have been prepared on a going concern basis, such a basis will be valid only
if agreement with the group's banks is forthcoming and if sufficient working
capital is raised from property disposals,' the company said.
Ossory said it was hopeful that an agreement would be reached with the banks
and it anticipated writing to shareholders shortly.
The company described its results as 'a very serious setback'. It blamed its
difficulties on excessive borrowing, speculative development, cost overruns
and a level of overheads that was inconsistent with the size of the company.
'The board takes no consolation from the general problems in the property
sector and it is not content to await an economic recovery for a revival of
the group's fortunes,' it said.
The company said it intended to maintain stringent controls over overheads
and to address the anomalies of yield, location and quality in the property
portfolio. It made sales of Pounds 41.1m during the last financial year.
The board underwent substantial changes during the year including the
resignation of Mr Brett Allen and Mr Joseph Shaoul, joint managing
directors. The company said it intended to strengthen the board of directors
and the company's management within the agreed overhead targets, as soon as
practicable.
The provisions stemmed from a Pounds 11.1m write-down against investment
properties, a Pounds 15.4m write-down against development properties and
Pounds 16.1m write-down against interests in associated undertakings,
investments and debtors. There was also a Pounds 4.6m write-down against the
revaluation reserve.
Net assets per share fell from 79.41p to 19.32p. There were losses per share
of 53.15p, compared with earnings per share of 5.15p. No final dividend is
proposed.
