FT  08 DEC 92 / Korean election probe 'biased'
MR Kim Dae-jung, the leading opposition candidate in South Korea's
presidential elections, said yesterday the government was conducting a
biased investigation of alleged electoral malpractices in order to deny him
victory.
The government is investigating alleged secret funding of the campaign of Mr
Chung Ju-yung by the Hyundai industrial conglomerate which he founded.
Police have also raided a group of political activists closely associated
with Mr Kim's Democratic party on suspicion of illegal canvassing.
Mr Kim stands to benefit from a recent surge in the popularity of Mr Chung,
who is thought likely to win votes in the December 18 elections from Mr Kim
Young-sam, the ruling Democratic Liberal party candidate who is the
front-runner.
In an interview yesterday Mr Kim Dae-jung said: 'It is obvious that Chung
Ju-yung does not have a chance of being elected but he will take away votes
from Kim Young-sam. Therefore this (investigation) is an attempt to reduce
my chances of being elected.'
He accused the government of breaking its pledge to remain neutral in the
campaign and said the DLP was also guilty of vote-buying. 'How can the
government say that one party is conducting an illegal election campaign and
the other is not? This is clearly a biased attitude on the part of the
government, which should conduct a fair investigation.'
Mr Hyun Soong-jong, the caretaker prime minister, denied that the government
was partial in its investigation of Hyundai. 'The basic government position
is to punish every violator of the election law,' he said.
The Hyundai affair has aroused fears in Korea, where no opposition candidate
has ever won the presidency, that the government is using its powers to keep
the ruling Democratic Liberal party in office, thus undermining the
country's progress to democracy.
'I believe it has very negative effects on the democratic process,' Mr Kim
Dae-jung said.
Police said yesterday that Hyundai Heavy Industries, the group's
shipbuilding arm, had created a secret Won55bn (Pounds 46.3m) fund and that
they were investigating whether any of this money had been illegally
transferred to Mr Chung's United People's party. They were seeking to
question the company's president.
Mr Kim Dae-jung, though he attacked the government's probe, also accused Mr
Chung of undermining Korean politics by improperly using Hyundai employees
in his campaign. 'He has confused relations between Hyundai and his
political party by making politics and business one and the same.'
