FT  09 DEC 92 / Warburg to lead third BT share offer
S. G. WARBURG was yesterday appointed to act as global co-ordinator,
financial adviser and lead broker in the UK government's third sale of
shares in British Telecommunications.
The government is expected to sell most, if not all, of its 22 per cent BT
shareholding, which is worth Pounds 5.4bn at last night's closing price of
401p. However, ministers are expected to make their final decision on the
size of the sale as late as possible to ensure that demand exceeds supply.
The BT share sale is part of the government's plans to raise Pounds 5.5bn
from privatisation over the coming year and a similar sum in 1994-95. The
structure of the last BT sale will be used as a springboard for the next
sale, involving offers to both retail and institutional investors.
Retail investors will be offered some inducement to buy shares. Last time,
they received a 45p discount on the 350p price paid by institutions.
The Treasury plans to develop last year's use of 'share shops' to promote
its goal of wider share ownership. Cheap dealing rates were available to
investors registering with a share shop in the last sale.
It may increase the number of preferred retailers to issue the third tranche
of BT shares. Last year's BT sale involved just eight share shops, which
excluded smaller share service companies which specialise in selling shares
to the public.
The role of regional lead managers in Europe may also change. While no
decision has yet been taken, the government may feel it unnecessary to
appoint formal lead managers throughout continental Europe.
S. G. Warburg may decide it has sufficient access to the main investors and
therefore take a more direct role in selling the shares to big institutions.
Ministers expect it will be easier to market the shares this time because
the regulatory and political environment is more stable. The last sale was
dogged by uncertainty before a general election and a price review by Oftel,
the regulatory body.
The government has already sold two tranches of shares in BT. The first was
in 1984 and the second was last December. Investors who took part in the
last sale still have to pay their third instalment on March 2.
Lex, Page 18
