FT  26 JUN 92 / Survey of India (13): Monolith faces pressure - Unit Trust
of India
IMAGINE AN investment institution which raised almost enough new cash last
year for it to have bought up all the new equity issued on the stock market.
Its vast appetite is fed by a national network of 75,000 agents. Many of its
customers believe its investment returns carry a government guarantee.
The Unit Trust of India's place at the heart of the country's investment
community is unchallenged - for now. But this gargantuan group is about to
come under pressure as India's potentially vast mutual fund market is opened
up to the private sector.
UTI has had a purple year, even by its own standards. At the end of June
1991, it had 10m account holders. Now, it has 20m. It collected a net Rs10bn
(Pounds 2bn), taking its funds under management (at book value) to Rs31bn.
UTI both benefited from the dizzy rise in Indian share prices last year, and
fed it. As prices rose, more investors gave their money to UTI to invest -
and as UTI received more cash, it bought more shares, driving prices higher.
More than half of the new money raised by UTI last year was aimed at growth
(or equity) funds - some Rs5.5bn, compared with the Rs6bn or so of new
equity raised on the stock market as a whole.
'We are hungry for equity,' says Mr S. A. Dave, UTI's genial chairman. Such
buying pressure has helped to keep Indian share prices at price/earnings
multiples which seem unsustainable by the standards of many markets, even
after the sharp decline in the past two months.
Even before this spurt, the institutions involved in India's investment
markets looked monolithic. Alongside the LIC and GIC, UTI (which accounts
for around 80 per cent of all mutual fund investments) has a firm grip on
the country's capital markets.
It controls around 10 per cent of India's quoted companies - a significant
proportion, given Mr Dave's estimate that only around a quarter of most
companies' shares are freely traded in the market, rather than being tied up
in family or other long-term hands. It is also one of the handful of
institutions that buys corporate debentures and underwrites equity issues.
Money flows into UTI through a vast network of tributaries that spreads
across India. Besides its 75,000 agents, the group also piggy-backs on other
national distribution networks, such as those of fertiliser companies. Units
in UTI schemes are available at many petrol pumps, or mobile collection
points in some urban areas.
The returns paid on its fixed income schemes account for much of UTI's
attraction. It paid a dividend of around 16 per cent last year, some 3
percentage points more than was available on bank deposits. Unlike banks,
UTI is not weighed down by the directed credit policies which have forced
banks to take on large volumes of low-yielding or non-performing loans.
It now plans to launch a money market fund, investing in corporate
certificates of deposit and other short-term debt instruments.
The question for supporters of deregulation is how to break UTI's
stranglehold on the mutual fund industry. Set up in 1964, UTI was
unchallenged until 1986, when some other state-owned financial groups were
allowed into the market. Now, private sector mutual funds are on the horizon
(the Securities and Investments Board of India has yet to publish
regulations governing how such funds are run).
UTI's powerful distribution network and track-record of paying steadily
rising dividends will make it tough to beat. Mr Dave says of his agents:
'They are freelancers, so they are not prohibited from doing business with
others.' However, whether in practice rival mutual funds can feed off the
UTI's network remains to be seen.
As India's capital markets develop, other aspects of UTI's dominance could
also give the reformers pause for thought. How,for instance, can the state
be sure of getting the top price when selling stakes in public sector
companies if UTI is the only bidder of any size?
In February, stakes of up to 20 per cent in 30 state-owned companies were
sold off, the first disposal of its kind. UTI bid successfully for
two-thirds of the shares on offer - only to run into a political storm later
over claims that the shares were sold off too cheaply. Shares in the Steel
Authority of India, the first of these companies to be listed on the stock
market, began trading at around Rs200 each in May. According to one merchant
banker involved in bidding for shares in February, they had been sold by the
government for less than Rs20.
'It's all hindsight,' says Mr Dave. 'Many of the packages of shares offered
by the government were not even taken up. The market grew very fast after
the sale.' Nevertheless, it seems likely that politicians will experiment
with other ways of selling shares in public companies next time.
UTI's power also gives rise to concern in some quarters because of the
implicit political control over its operations. The group is owned by a
variety of state-owned financial institutions, and its chairman is a
political appointee. Could that mean its power as a leading shareholder in
many of India's biggest private companies is susceptible to political
interference?
'We are an investors' organisation. Government has no control over us,' says
Mr Dave. He points to the row that erupted earlier this year between rival
factions in the senior management of Tisco, the steel company owned by the
powerful Tata family. Both factions canvassed support among politicians, but
neither won the backing of the politicians, he says.
However, a political establishment that has grown used to controlling and
directing the financial system through state-owned banks is likely to find
it difficult to allow UTI complete freedom. That is particularly true as the
capital markets develop as an increasingly important source of cash for
Indian companies.
