FT  04 JAN 92 / UK Company News: US court agrees plans for MCC proceedings
THE US bankruptcy court last night gave its backing to an agreement which
will harmonise the conflicting laws of the US and the UK in the insolvency
proceedings against Maxwell Communication Corporation.
The agreement was hammered out earlier this week between Price Waterhouse,
the UK administrators of MCC, and Mr Richard Gitlin, the attorney appointed
by the US bankruptcy court as examiner in the MCC case.
Mr Peter Laister, MCC's chairman, surprised the company's bank creditors
last month when he filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in the US,
where most of MCC's assets are located.
Under US bankruptcy law, a company's board usually plays a major role in
attempting to reorganise the business. However, yesterday's move means that
both the US and UK proceedings now recognise that the executive powers of
the MCC directors have been suspended.
The UK High Court approved the agreement on Tuesday and Judge Tima Brozman,
of the US bankruptcy court in New York, added the necessary American
approval last night.
Price Waterhouse said that Mr Laister would remain as chairman of MCC but in
a non-executive capacity. Two directors, Mr Ron Woods and Lord Rippon of
Hexham, had resigned. Mr Basil Brookes, the group's finance director, would
continue to assist the administrators.
Mr Laister said yesterday he wanted to stay at MCC to defend the interests
of the group's pensioners. About Pounds 50m of funds were transferred out of
the MCC pension scheme by Mr Robert Maxwell.
Mr David Shaffer, chairman of Macmillan and Official Airline Guides, MCC's
principle US subsidiaries, would remain in those positions.
The administrators plan to discuss strategy with creditor committees in both
Britain and America. Price Waterhouse said one approach to be explored was
the disposal of peripheral activities coupled with a financial
reconstruction of the remaining core business, which is likely to be centred
on Macmillan and OAG.
The US ruling is provisional and lasts until January 15, a period designed
to give creditors the opportunity to comment on it.
The US order recognises Price Waterhouse as the 'corporate governance' of
MCC, with the US examiner helping in the harmonisation process and
monitoring certain of the administrators' actions which are subject to
approval by US authorities.
