FT  30 APR 92 / South prepares common stance for Rio summit: Developing
country talks on the environment
MALAYSIA had some success this week in portraying the negotiations over the
forthcoming Earth Summit in Brazil as part of a century-old fight between
the rich, polluting, industrialised countries of the north and the poor,
developing nations of the south.
Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the outspoken Malaysian prime minister who opened a
pre-summit meeting of 55 developing countries in Kuala Lumpur, declared that
the north's fears of global environmental degradation had given the south
new leverage in its quest for development aid.
The north, he said, was responsible for 80 per cent of pollution and had
destroyed its own environmental heritage; it should clean up its own
backyard instead of laying claim to the environmental resources of the
south.
'It is wrong that we should be made scapegoats for the past sins of the
north,' he said. 'The north is still subjecting us to imperial pressures.'
His audience applauded because they agreed with much of what he said, but
delegates (from the south) and observers (from the north) said privately
that there was no point antagonising potential donors or turning the Earth
Summit in June into just another political battle between north and south.
Despite the profound differences within both the developing and the
developed worlds, it is now possible to discern a common set of opinions
which the poorer countries will present in Rio de Janeiro and a common set
of responses from most industrialised countries.
Broadly, the governments of developing nations believe that some
environmental assets must be sacrificed for the cause of development, and
that they have the right to a fair proportion of 'environmental space' - or
the earth's ability to absorb environmental damage; they have the right to
exploit their sovereign natural resources as they see fit.
Because the industrialised countries have grown rich on over-exploiting the
world's environmental space, the south says, they must release some space
(by reducing their pollution), create some more space (by reafforestation on
their own territory) and compensate the south by paying for more
environmental and development aid.
'The average North American consumes more than 36 times as much energy as
the average South Asian,' Mr Kamal Nath, India's minister for the
environment and forests, told the conference this week. 'The prudent route
to adopt is not limits on economic betterment in the already deprived
countries but rather a fundamental change in wasteful patterns of
consumption in rich countries.'
Developing nations insist that the north should transfer technology, in
particular environmentally-friendly technology, at concessional rates and
should not allow the issue of intellectual property rights to hinder the
process.
Furthermore, they want a new fund to finance programmes associated with the
Earth Summit.
The existing Global Environment Facility (GEF) managed by the World Bank
(and therefore by the north) is regarded as unacceptable for a number of
reasons; governments say they cannot undertake legally-binding commitments
if they have no control over the disposal of funds for those commitments,
while environmental pressure groups in the south complain that the World
Bank is notorious for the environmental damage caused by its programmes.
Ms Vandana Shiva of the Third World Network said this week that it was
absurd to say that 'the world's finance ministry and industry ministry can
also be the world's environment ministry'.
In most cases the industrialised countries admit that they have damaged
their own national environments in the past and that they need to curb their
output of pollutants, although they hesitate to lay themselves open to
demands for compensation by taking responsibility for global damage. They
are prepared to reform the GEF, but not to hand over billions of dollars in
cash and technology with no strings attached.
'The best way to manage technology transfer is through normal aid and
commercial channels,' said Ms Ros Kelly, the Australian minister responsible
for the environment.
She was, she said, 'surprised' by the tone of Dr Mahathir's speech, which
she thought was aimed at a Malaysian and southern hemisphere audience.
Privately, Dr Mahathir was more optimistic than he had been in the past that
the Earth Summit would be constructive, she said.
North and south may indeed still be at loggerheads, but some
environmentalists attending the conference said they were more concerned by
the fact that the developing south is imitating the north - in all its
wasteful and environmentally destructive ways - than by the fight between
the two.
That, at least, was something on which everyone could agree. 'Our policy
must be towards not following the path that many developed countries have
taken,' said Mr Delfin Ganapin, undersecretary for the environment of the
Philippines. 'That's why we don't want to accept old technology.'
Mr Nath said: 'We are not talking of how to get there. We are talking of how
not to get there. We are talking of a different path, an ecologically
sustainable path.'
Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the Malaysian prime minister, who earlier threatened to
boycott the June Earth Summit, will attend the Rio de Janeiro conference,
Kyodo reports from Kuala Lumpur.
Angered by western-led anti-tropical timber campaigns against Malaysia, Dr
Mahathir had vowed to boycott the summit if it turned out to be a forum to
'bash' tropical logging. Timber is the second biggest commodity export
earner for Malaysia.
