FT  13 MAR 92 / Politics and drought trap Brazil's poorest: Christina Lamb
visits the north-east where aid workers describe conditions as 'African'
FRANCISO Soares Alamedo laughs when asked when he last ate meat. Standing at
the doorway of his wattle and daub hut, he stares at the sky, praying for
the first rain for three years. The surrounding land is scorched and cracked
and last year the beans he planted died. Through the Dollars 3 a week he
earns labouring on a plantation the family survives on a breakfast of coffee
without sugar and a lunch of flour and water. Dinner they save on by going
to bed early.
The scene might be typical of a famine-struck African nation but is hard to
credit in Brazil, the world's ninth-largest economy with a vast richness of
resources and a per capita income of Dollars 2,200. While the country is
consistently among the world's top three agricultural exporters, two-thirds
of the population have an inadequate daily calorie intake, according to the
World Health Organisation.
Mr Alamedo lives in the interior of Pernambuco state and like many
north-eastern farmers is a vivid example of the inequality of Brazil's
income distribution - often cited by the World Bank as the world's worst.
National Institute of Nutrition figures show more than half the 20m rural
population of the north east suffering some form of malnutrition.
'The rest of Brazil may be a France but what we see here is a Ghana,' says
Dr Malaquias Batista from the Maternal Institute in Recife, capital of
Pernambuco. 'I'm ashamed that in a country as rich as Brazil we still have
so many going hungry. Countries with far lower per capita incomes have
better health indicators.'
He points out that infant mortality in Brazil's nine north-eastern states is
100 per 1,000 (the national average is 60 per 1,000) compared with 15 in
Costa Rica.
The north-east, with vast sugar plantations, was once the economic and
political centre of Brazil. But it has always been synonymous with
inequality and most of the region's music and poetry is based on two themes
 -waiting for rains and exploitation by the coroneis, the prominent figures
granted large tracts of land when the Portuguese colonised the area in the
early 16th century.
The north-east has not kept pace with the development of the industrial
south and, during the 'economic miracle' of the 1960s and 1970s, was left
way behind. While the rich south spawned world-class companies and glitzy
shopping malls, north-eastern farmers must compete with goats for
subsistence during the region's periodic droughts. In Ouricuri, where Mr
Alamedo lives, a state of emergency was declared last September and in
December alone 23 children died of malnutrition.
Yet with an average 800mm precipitation a year the area generally has enough
rain - 'the problem is lack of infrastructure to take advantage of it', says
Mr Eliezer Menezes, superintendent of Sudene, the regional development
authority for the north-east. Ms Constance Clark, a specialist in hunger,
says: 'Other countries such as Egypt with far worse aridity do not suffer
such misery. Only the most primitive degree of technology is needed to
maintain water in place.'
But in Brazil, rather than tackle the problem, governments have reacted on
an emergency basis, waiting for things to become critical then sending in
food parcels or creating emergency projects to provide work. Ms Clark
believes the reason is political - a deliberate suppression of the
population to keep them backward and maintain a hold over them through
paternalism. The buying of votes and siphoning off of emergency funds by
corrupt authorities even has a name - the drought industry.
President Fernando Collor's reaction has been no different, recently
ordering the distribution of food baskets to 650,000 families. Mr Manuel
Santos, president of the Pernambuco Rural Workers Federation, complains:
'This is an ancient tactic to keep the peasant dependent and divided. It is
not hard to see the connection between who gets the baskets and the way they
vote in the municipal elections in October.'
Mr Collor has called on Sudene to draw up a strategy for a definitive end to
the problem. However he is not the first president in the organisation's 33
years of existence to suggest this and Mr Menezes admits: 'The problem is
that governments each want their own projects so they abandon those of their
predecessors and if there is no drought during their mandate they do
nothing.'
Those irrigation projects initiated by governments have been aimed at big
exporters rather than small farmers. Uneducated and rarely owning their own
land, farmers have made little improvement themselves though some grassroots
organisations are being formed to teach how to survive drought.
It is the plight of people such as Mr Alamedo which is at the root of two of
Brazil's main problems - the deforestation of the Amazon and the growing
slums of the big cities. During the 1970 drought, rather than tackle the
problem and fearing social unrest, the Medici government decided to open the
Amazon and colonise it with north-easterners.
Between 1970 and 1988 more than 1.5m left the north-east and 60 per cent of
all Brazil's migrants are from that region. The policy was a failure -
migrants were not given credit or technology for farming and resorted to
burning trees or fleeing to cities.
Today, with the south undergoing its worst recession for a decade and the
world watching Amazonian destruction, this safety valve no longer exists.
The last decade of high inflation has made the situation worse, widening the
gap between rich and poor.
Recently rain returned to the north-east, ending three years of drought. But
the next drought is never far off.
