FT  13 OCT 92 / Survey of Computers and Communications (3): Fending off the
fraudsters - Security Systems
OPEN systems have been portrayed by almost all in the computer industry as
'a good thing' - but they have also made life more difficult for those who
design security systems for computer systems.
In a true open system - where systems from different manufacturers can
connect with one another - the security of the whole system is no weaker
than the weakest link in the chain. The weakest of those links has
traditionally been the personal computer.
The PC was originally designed as a personal productivity tool - only one
person was expected to use it and few considered the possibility that
crucial corporate data would ever appear on its screens. The PC was
something you would use to do word-processing, a little spreadsheet work and
perhaps keep electronic versions of your address book.
Today's PC is far more powerful and is used for all manner of applications -
many of which involve 'networking' these PCs together with one another as
well as with minicomputer and mainframe systems. For this reason, PC
industry local area network (LAN) market leader Novell has had to serious
come to grips with implementing credible data security technology.
According to Novell UK spokesman Mr Dominic Storey, many companies do not
think about LAN security. He said a recent survey suggested few companies
conducted risk analysis, developed security guidelines, set up security
configurations, co-ordinated security training or periodically reviewed
security compliance for the networked PCs.
'LANs are basically distributed multi-user computer systems and, as such,
have similar security requirements,' he says. 'The computer needs to be
protected from physical damage, the software programs from virus attack and
the data from accidental or intentional damage.'
He says that the advent of viruses make the PC much more prone to breaches
of security than minicomputer systems or mainframes - and therefore sensible
precautions must be taken.
'Virus detection can be performed by specialised programs which look for
sequences within program code,' explains Mr Storey. 'No virus detection
program is foolproof, as new viruses are created on a distressingly regular
basis. The best form of cure is prevention - and to do this, users must be
discouraged from uploading suspect software or else have their rights
restricted to prevent virus contagion.'
One of the other keys to building a secure PC network lies in the features
contained in the network operating system - such as Novell's NetWare. It
starts with the 'log-in' password, which must be entered every time a user
starts working on the network.
Passwords under NetWare are stored in special files on the file server
called 'bindery' files. Within these files, all user passwords are stored in
encrypted form using a one-way or 'trap-door' encryption function. When a
user logs in, the password is never seen. Instead, a special code (called a
key) is passed to the PC. The PC uses the password to encrypt the key, and
the encrypted key is passed back to the server.
Passwords under NetWare must also be of a minimum length (thus reducing the
statistical chances of a hacker guessing them) and can be 'force-changed' by
the network administrator, must be unique (so that no two users have the
same password).
Most network system also allow network administrators to specify which
system features each user will have access to. These can limit the times of
the day the system can be used, the amount of time, the amount of disk space
they use and the way they use dial-in 'modems'.
Mr Storey says that PC networks also need to offer an 'audit trail' of their
use. He admits that NetWare is still not ideal in this respect. 'No security
system is perfect; it is essential to log information, so that a security
compromise can be traced,' he says.
'System audit information is available in a limited form for NetWare and
will be extended to full file system audit in future releases. At present
various logs are stored - the error log logs all hardware and system errors,
and account information (bindery logs) can be generated using a supervisor
utility.'
In the end, however, security on PC networks is all about using common
sense. And that means instituting company-wide procedures for PCs in the
same way as for minicomputer and mainframe systems.
'To maintain good standards of security, companies should employ tried and
tested authentication procedures,' says Mr Storey. 'Use of initial passwords
during account generation ensures that new accounts do not represent a
security hole. Use of existing security features make a system which is
flexible to the user, yet secure.
'If implementing a secure system with high expectations of data integrity,
lock the file server away. A system will never be truly secure while the
file server is easily accessible.
Above all, train users to think securely. Make sure, for example, that they
use hard to guess passwords and do not place the password under the desk.
This will reduce the possibility of user ignorance leading to unexpected
security compromises.'
