FT  19 MAY 92 / SE reviews privileges of its market makers
THE Stock Exchange has launched a wide-ranging review of the market-making
system introduced to its markets at the time of Big Bang in 1986.
Under the chairmanship of Sir Andrew Hugh Smith, the exchange's chairman,
the review will examine how market makers are regulated and whether their
duties and privileges have kept up with the changes in the stock market.
By quoting firm prices at which they will buy or sell shares, market makers
are at the heart of the UK stock market. In return they are given certain
privileges, such as freedom from stamp duty on share transactions and the
exclusive right to borrow stock.
The future of this system, unique to the UK among leading stock markets, has
come under threat from a number of quarters. Market makers are likely to
lose their most significant privileges in the months ahead, as both freedom
from stamp duty and the right to borrow stock are extended to other
investors.
At the same time, some securities houses are more involved in proprietary
trading - acting as principals in trading for their own account - rather
than pure market making, raising questions about whether they should
continue to benefit from special privileges.
Also the nature of the business has been transformed by the development of
derivatives markets, which allow traders or investors to hedge their risks
in other markets. That raises questions about how market makers are
regulated.
For instance, a put option, which allows a market maker to sell shares at a
predetermined price to an investor, effectively puts a floor under a
company's share price, since the market maker will be willing to buy shares
if they fall below that price in the market.
The Stock Exchange examined a put option granted by the late Robert Maxwell
to Goldman Sachs, the US investment bank, but decided that Goldman had not
breached market-making rules.
The exchange is to delay changes to its rules that would have significantly
reduced the amount of information which is published on activity in the
stock market.
It had planned to abandon publication of large trades altogether, in an
attempt to buttress its market-making system - a controversial proposal that
has in the past aroused the concern of the Office of Fair Trading.
The change, which was to have taken effect within weeks, will not now be
made until the exchange has completely overhauled its existing market
systems - a process likely to take months.
