FT  24 FEB 92 / EC agrees to accelerate the elimination of CFCs
THE European Community has agreed in principle to phase out
chlorofluorocarbons and all other ozone-depleting substances by the end of
1995.
This is 1 1/2 years earlier than the EC's original target, which was for
CFCs only, and four years earlier than stipulated by the Montreal Protocol,
the international agreement.
Environment ministers of the Twelve, meeting informally in Portugal at the
weekend, took the decision even though the European Commission - which
initiates all EC legislation - has yet to draw up a formal proposal.
Mr David Trippier, the UK's junior environment minister, said at the weekend
he would meet representatives of the chemical industry on Friday to
negotiate reductions even faster than the EC envisages.
The EC's move follows the US decision two weeks ago to advance by five years
its own date for phasing out CFCs and 'most other ozone depleting
substances' from the end of 2000 to the end of 1995.
It also follows a wealth of new scientific evidence about the destruction of
the ozone layer, including predictions of a new ozone 'hole' above the
Arctic circle, and forecasts of an increase in eye cataract conditions and
skin cancer caused by the ultra-violet radiation which the ozone layer
serves to filter out.
The 12 environment ministers expect formally to approve on March 23 the
earlier end to CFCs, which are used mostly in refrigeration, aerosols, air
conditioning and insulation.
The other chemicals whose production and use will be phased out are: carbon
tetrachloride, a dry-cleaning solvent; halons used in fire-extinguishers;
and methyl chloroform, used to clean precision engineering components and
printed circuit boards.
Mr Carlo Ripa di Meana, EC environment commissioner, said his proposal would
call for an 85 per cent reduction in all these chemicals by the end of next
year. He also wants the new targets written into the Montreal Protocol.
Germany, Denmark, the UK and Luxembourg had decided independently to
accelerate the CFC phase-out to 1995 in what Mr Ripa di Meana called 'an
escalation of virtuous behaviour'.
The EC's precipitate move on ozone is partly an attempt to wrest back the
environment policy initiative from the US ahead of June's 'Earth Summit' in
Rio de Janeiro.
Mr Ripa di Meana in particular wants to keep up momentum behind his
controversial plan to introduce a mixed carbon and energy tax in the EC,
equivalent to Dollars 10 (Pounds 5.70) on a barrel of oil, by 2000.
John Hunt writes: Imperial Chemical Industries, Europe's main CFC producer,
welcomed the EC decision. The company has already said it will phase out
production by 1995 and announced last week that by 1993 it will stop making
CFCs 11 and 12, the two main ozone-destroying products, at its plant in
Runcorn, Cheshire.
Friday's meeting with Mr Trippier will consider an ICI proposal that a
national council be established to co-ordinate and speed up the phasing-out
of CFCs.
Background, Page 2
