FT  23 JUL 92 / International Company News: Banc One plans ATM venture
BANC ONE, the expansionist Ohio-based commercial banking group, has acquired
an Illinois-based bank in a stock deal valued at about Dollars 125m. In a
separate deal it said it was joining forces with three other regional
banking companies to form an electronic payment services company.
Banc One will form a new company, Electronic Payment Services, in a joint
venture with CoreStates Financial, PNC Financial and Society Corporation.
It said the new company will be the largest US processor of automated teller
machine transactions, with about 20 per cent of the national switched
volume. The new company will also be a leading provider of electronic
point-of-sale transaction process services.
Banc One said the new company will process about 1bn annual ATM
transactions, with core markets in the Middle Atlantic and Midwest regions.
Its annual revenue will be more than Dollars 200m.
The four banking groups will all be equity partners in the company. The
joint venture will not have a material effect on the financial statements of
Banc One, PNC and Society. CoreStates will realise a gain of about Dollars
23m and a rise of Dollars 100m in its tangible equity.
Banc One's merger with Illinois-based First Community Bancorp will not be
completed until the first half of 1993. It is structured as a tax-free
reorganisation and is subject to shareholder and regulatory approval.
The terms of the deal are based on Banc One's common stock price. If the
market value of Banc One's stock is between Dollars 47 and Dollars 51 a
share, the exchange rate will result in a market equivalent value of Dollars
31.96 in Banc One common stock.
If the market price of Banc One climbs above Dollars 51, First Community
shareholders will receive 0.6267 shares of Banc One stock for each share in
First Community. If the market price of Banc One stock falls below Dollars
47, First Community Shareholders will receive 0.68 Banc One shares.
They will also have the right to terminate the agreement if the market price
of Banc One falls below Dollars 43 immediately before the transaction
closes. At midday yesterday, Banc One shares Banc One were Dollars  1/2
lower at Dollars 43 3/4 .
First Community Bancorp operates three banks and seven offices with assets
of Dollars 797m. Banc One, with assets of Dollars 48.4bn, is establishing
itself as an important financial institution through a series of
acquisitions. It expects total assets to stand at over Dollars 75bn by the
end of the year, when it completes several previously announced
acquisitions.
