FT  27 AUG 92 / Arts: Salome - Salzburg Festival
SETTING aside the Seven Veils, Richard Strauss's Salome has been
over-dressed these many years: too many kootch-girls, eunuchs and catamites,
the Dance itself too often a swollen production-number. None of this popular
campery stems from Wilde's play, to which - as translated by Mike Nichols'
grandmother] (not many people know that) - Strauss made judicious cuts, but
added no 'decadent' titivation whatever. In the original text Herod's party,
far from being an orgy, was more like a 'political breakfast', with visiting
Roman dignitaries and local Jewish ones.
For the Salzburg Festival, the producer Luc Bondy has stripped the phoney
accretions away. This is a co-production with the Theatre Royal de la
Monnaie; Brussels has struck lucky, for the result is dismaying in exactly
the right way. The opera becomes an intimate drame a trois,
Herod-Herodias-Salome - or rather a quatre, since John the Baptist is here
not an abstracted, visionary ascetic but a hulking youth, desperately
tempted by Salome's nubile blandishments.
There are no supernumerary guests; even Wilde's gigantic black executioner
is reduced to a janitor-figure, woken from dull sleep to do his job.
Salome's dance is a private, improvised affair, and the seven veils are
passing props, not stages in a striptease. On the other hand, the five
disputatious Jews (and their ingenious fugue) get an unusually clear run for
their money; and the two converted Nazarenes pass through  - a happy
inspiration, this - with their whole family, eager pilgrims seeking their
Saviour.
In this context, Catherine Malfitano's baby-faced Salome is no unhappy
daughter of a decadent court, but an imp of wilful perversity, sung with
great imaginative command.
The cistern from which Bryn Terfel's sonorously impassioned Jokanaan emerges
is no more than a hole beneath the cracked parquet of Herod's dusty terrace,
in Erich Wonder's stark setting. Hanna Schwarz's Herodias is a tough cookie
out of Dynasty. Kenneth Riegel's clever Herod, familiar from Covent Garden,
has altered subtly for Bondy's production - less arch, more bumbling and
beleaguered.
He has to work hard to be heard, for in the Kleines Festspielhaus Christoph
von Dohnanyi's approach to the score is scathingly violent, once past the
exquisite first pages. It is easy to treat this music as ripely tonal at
bottom, with dissonant overlay; Dohnanyi does the opposite, gleefully
highlighting every cross-grained line and chord. The score fairly shrieks -
and yet Bondy fits gestures to music with precise, penetrating effect. An
uncomfortably memorable production.
