FT  18 APR 92 / UK Company News: Worcester holders angry over Pounds 72m
German offer
ANGRY SHAREHOLDERS of Worcester Group said that the central heating boiler
maker had accepted an offer which undervalued the company.
Robert Bosch, the German automotive components, telecommunications and
domestic appliance group, has offered 225p a share for the company, valuing
it at Pounds 71.8m.
The row is set to enliven the current debate about corporate governance.
Worcester shares rose 30p to 218p on Thursday.
Commitments to accept have been given by the company's management and their
families, holding 38.4 per cent of the shares, and some institutional
investors, with 13 per cent, giving a total of 51.4 per cent. Mr Michael
Davies, the only independent director of Worcester, is recommending it as
'fair and reasonable'.
Gartmore Investment Management and TSB Group are thought to be among the
accepting institutions. But others believe a higher price could have been
obtained.
Mr Jim Fisher, director of Scottish Amicable Investment Management
responsible for small and medium-sized companies, said 'we are not at all
pleased about this bid'.
He said a bid should be at 'a much, much higher price', and challenged
Worcester to 'test the price in the market'.
He was also angry that the group's directors would receive a different offer
from outside shareholders. Worcester directors will take a 32.3 per cent
stake in the new subsidiary of Bosch and will continue to run the business
within Bosch.
This stake will be bought out in 1996 at a performance-related price of up
to 393 1/2 p, and not less than 100p. Meanwhile, dividends will be paid on
the shares, though with a higher level of cover than in the past.
The Takeover Panel said the deal was not unfair to outside shareholders.
Advisers to both sides - JO Hambro Magan for Bosch and Smith New Court for
Worcester - had assured the Panel that the value of the management shares
was no more than the cash offer.
Mr Cecil Duckworth, chairman and chief executive of Worcester, and a holder
of 9m shares, said the price gave an historic multiple of 21.6. The
directors will be bought out at 20.4 times average earnings for 1993, 1994
and 1995.
On forecasts for earnings from Smith New Court, the 225p offer gives a p/e
of 17.6 for 1992 and 13.4 for 1993.
Mr Clemens Boersig, associate member of the Bosch board, said the merger
would bring substantial synergies.
See Lex
