FT  14 OCT 92 / Germany warned of threat from far-right
RADICAL right-wing movements will present the most serious threat since 1945
to Germany's political stability, two German specialists warned this week.
A large number of Germans in the east and west already supported militant
right-wing opposition to asylum-seekers entering and living in Germany,
according to Mr Ernst Uhrlau of the Hamburg Agency for the Protection of the
Constitution, which collects and evaluates information about German
extremist movements. They had become disillusioned with the existing main
parties.
Mr Uhrlau said the current wave of violence, mainly against refugees, was an
alarming signal. He feared that extremist parties would come to represent
the 'silent majority' of Germans who were being pushed towards the extreme
right. Right-wing extremists, who numbered at least 60,000, according to Mr
Uhrlau, had provoked 1,400 assaults this year.
Ms Barbara John, head of the Berlin office for foreigners, said she believed
Germany's political system could cope with 'this last flare-up of an old
ideology'. But she added that for the first time in the postwar era
right-wing parties had found a central issue - the growing number of
asylum-seekers entering the country. This is expected to exceed 400,000 this
year.
Mr Uhrlau said he believed grass-roots support for the right was growing,
especially among disaffected young people between the ages of 17 and 21.
Extremists were also profiting from the anger many disadvantaged east
Germans felt towards west Germany. Mr Uhrlau was speaking at a conference in
Germany organised by the Aspen Institute in
Berlin.
Mr Claus Leggewie, professor of political science at the University of
Giessen, said he believed that as much as 20 per cent of the German
electorate had passively supported right-wing extremist views in the past.
He feared such people would actively support parties espousing those views
in the 1994 national elections.
This was the reason the Bonn government was reluctant to crack down
forcefully on the extreme right, he claimed. 'By the time Chancellor Kohl
got around to condemning the violence no one believed him,' Mr Leggewie
added.
In Bonn yesterday, leaders of Germany's governing parties agreed that asylum
seekers from states deemed free of political persecution should be expelled
immediately without a court hearing.
However, the draft plan requires a constitutional amendment which depends on
the backing of the opposition Social Democrats.
512 words from
