FT  13 JAN 92 / UK Gilts: Investors shrug off auction doubts
ALTHOUGH thrown out of their stride by news of a further tranche of
gilt-edged securities to go on sale later this month, investors continued to
show firm support for the bonds, with yields being pushed down.
Prices rose for most classes of gilts, with yields coming down by about 5
basis points (0.05 percentage points) during the week for long-dated bonds,
and by up to twice this much for instruments at the shorter end of the yield
curve.
The yield fall for the week would have been greater, without the
announcement by the Bank of England on Friday that it will auction an
unspecified amount of gilt-edged stock on January 29.
It seems likely that up to Pounds 2bn of securities, maturing between 1998
and 2002, will go on sale in what has now become a regular series of
auctions. The announcement caused a price drop of about  3/4 percentage
point on Friday, prompted by worries that a large amount of bonds coming on
to the market will force up yields. The Bank is to announce on January 21
further details about terms for the auction and stock to be sold.
However, since the start of 1992 the gilt market has firmed, with fears by
many gilt investors about the consequences of a glut in supply falling into
the background. According to the calculations of some gilt specialists,
action by the Bank in selling Pounds 1.5bn of the securities at this month's
auction would virtually end the requirement by the UK authorities to fund
the public-sector borrowing requirement for this financial year.
According to the Treasury, the UK must borrow Pounds 10.5bn on financial
markets in the year to April, to supplement the government's public spending
funds. Assuming the auction succeeds, the Bank will have sold about Pounds
15bn during the year, more than enough to cover the borrowing requirement,
after taking account of payments on gilt redemptions.
The reduction in funding pressure was illustrated on Thursday when the Bank
disposed of the final components of a tap stock of Pounds 1bn worth of 8.5
per cent Treasury bonds maturing in 2007, which became available in
mid-December. Last month, few buyers had emerged for the instruments,
because of weak demand for gilts generally.
So far this month, the underlying demand patterns have been different.
Investors such as pension funds have demonstrated more interest in switching
money out of equities and into debt-related instruments, due to growing
indications of a long and slow UK recovery which is likely to dampen
inflation and cause downward pressure on interest rates.
The buying activity has increased in spite of problems for the pound. Last
week, the unit traded nervously, often close to its effective floor in the
European exchange rate mechanism of about DM2.832. Should the pound weaken
more, prompting intervention by the Bank, gilts could suffer due to overseas
investors holding back from buying.
However, the mood on currency markets about sterling is relatively calm. The
pound's effective ERM floor is set by the peseta, the system's strongest
currency, If currency investors were to sell the pound in high volumes, the
limit could relatively easily be brought down. According to this view, alarm
bells at the Bank and the Treasury about sterling would ring only when the
pound fell close to the bottom of its 6 per cent band against its central
DM2.95 ERM rate - an 'ultimate floor' of about DM2.78 and some 6 pfennigs
beneath Friday's close.
Figures released by the Bank last week illustrated the strong demand for
gilts by UK institutions in November, when they snapped up Pounds 1.1bn
worth of the instruments. December was a poor month in which yields rose,
mainly due to jitters about sterling, but since the beginning of the year UK
bonds have outperformed all other main government instruments. While yields
on 10-year gilts have fallen 25 basis points since the end of December,
yields on 10-year French, German and Japanese government bonds are down just
17, 10 and 5 basis points. Over this period, yields on US Treasury bonds of
equivalent maturities have increased by 14 basis points.
