FT  20 OCT 92 / Survey of World Car Industry (23): Seven may not be a lucky
number - South Korea moves up in the world table of car producers
SOUTH Korea's motor industry is hoping that sharply rising exports to
Western Europe will help reverse a decline in earnings.
Although total car sales last year rose by 15 per cent to 1.5m units,
profits for Korea's big three automakers - Hyundai, Kia and Daewoo - fell
due to heavy financial costs stemming from production investments as well as
a series of labour disputes.
The expansion of industrial facilities is expected this year to make Korea
the world's seventh largest car maker in terms of production capacity with a
maximum annual output of more than 2m vehicles, according to the Korea
Automobile Manufacturers Association (KAMA). But Korean companies now have
excessive production capacity, with the utilisation ratio falling to 61 per
cent.
The car companies believe earnings will recover this year due to the
introduction of new models and increased sales in Europe, the Middle East
and Latin America, which will compensate for falling demand in the US.
The Korean car industry remains heavily dependent on the home market, which
accounted for 74 per cent of sales last year with 1.1m vehicles sold.
Domestic sales are likely to grow by 15 per cent this year following a
similar rise in 1991, according to KAMA.
But this may be achieved at the cost of slimmer profit margins. Korean
carmakers have been forced to offer longer interest-free consumer loans,
which are adding to their financial costs, in order to reduce a growing
inventory of vehicles.
The car backlog increased after the recent introduction of new car-ownership
taxes, already among the highest in the world, as well as increased petrol
prices. Moreover, the rise in car sales is mainly concentrated at the lower
price end of the market.
The big three producers are launching new models to revive consumer interest
in the middle and upper range car market.
Hyundai, Korea's largest car company with a 46 per cent domestic market
share, is introducing new versions of its top-of-the-line Grandeur, the
Excel, its most popular domestic and foreign model last year, and the Sonata
sedan.
Kia Motors has launched the Potentia to compete against the Grandeur. A new
version of the Pride, the best selling car in South Korea, will follow next
year. Daewoo Motor has produced new models of the Espero, Prince and
Supersalon.
The intense competition at home is forcing Korean carmakers to concentrate
more attention on export markets to recover profits.
Sales of Korean cars in the US, the main overseas market, have dropped
sharply since 1988 due to the US economic slowdown and the poor reputation
for quality that Korean cars gained in the late 1980s.
The downturn in the US caused total Korean car exports to fall from a peak
of 576,000 in 1988 to a low of 347,000 in 1990, although exports this year
will rise to an estimated 465,000.
With US consumer resistance still considered strong in spite of a noticeable
improvement in quality of Korean cars, the makers have shifted their
marketing focus to Western Europe.
Europe this year has emerged as the Korean industry's biggest export market
for the first time. Exports to Europe accounted for 27.6 per cent of total
overseas car shipments during the first eight months compared with 14.3 per
cent last year. Hyundai, which has rapidly expanded in the European market
in the past two years, provided 95 per cent of the Korean vehicles sold in
Europe.
Meanwhile, the US share of total Korean car exports has fallen to 23.5 per
cent from 43.9 per cent a year ago. While Korean car exports to Europe grew
by 130 per cent during the first eight months of 1992, exports to the Middle
East rose by 300 per cent and to Latin America by 351 per cent. Europe is
expected to remain the leading importer of Korean cars next year, with the
opening of several new national markets including France.
Korean cars remain price competitive against their Japanese rivals due to
the depreciation of the Korean won and the rising value of the yen.
As part of the overseas push, Korean carmakers are also locating production
facilities abroad. Hyundai now has a plant in Canada. Kia is establishing a
joint venture car plant in Indonesia, while Daewoo plans to produce cars in
Uzbekistan by 1995. The automakers are planning to set up facilities in
China.
Although exports rose by 19 per cent during the first eight months of 1992,
the buoyant growth has so far been unable to halt a slide in profits. But
analysts believe that earnings could rebound in the second half of the year.
Hyundai's net profit for the first half of 1992 fell by 37 per cent to
won26bn, although sales rose by 18 per cent to won2,940bn. But it blamed the
drop on a month-long strike in January as well as financing costs associated
with the expansion of production capacity.
It predicts earnings will reach won95bn this year against won54bn in 1991,
while sales will climb from won5,605bn to won6,200bn due to strong export
growth.
Kia Motors, the second largest car producer with 25 per cent domestic market
share, reported that net profits fell by 37 per cent to won3.5bn as it
increased its production capacity by 30 per cent. Sales rose by 18 per cent
to won1,530bn. Analysts estimate that Kia will make net profits of won11bn,
against won15.8bn in 1991, on sales of won3,200bn.
Analysts estimate that unlisted Daewoo Motor had a loss of won50bn, although
this represents an improvement over its deficit of won146.7bn a year ago.
The earnings performance of Daewoo Motor remains uncertain following General
Motors' decision to sell its 50 per cent share in the joint venture to
Daewoo's parent company for an estimated Dollars 170m.
The Daewoo group has also started producing cars through another unlisted
subsidiary, Daewoo Shipbuilding. The introduction of its Tico mini-car last
year proved popular since it is exempt from special excise taxes and uses
less petrol.
Daewoo Motor, which has 13 per cent of the domestic market, is considered
the most vulnerable among the big three carmakers if Samsung possibly enters
the industry within the next few years. Samsung has a strong financial
position and invests heavily in research programmes, making it a formidable
competitor.
Samsung Shipbuilding was recently allowed by the government to begin
building commercial vehicles in what some analysts believe is a preliminary
step to its manufacture of passenger cars.
Samsung's truck operations could also pose a threat to Asia Motors, a
subsidiary of Kia, and Ssangyong Motors since a large share of their
business is in the commercial vehicle segment. Both Asia and Ssangyong also
make jeeps.
Asia had a loss of won4bn during the first half of 1992 as it completed a
new vehicle factory.
Ssangyong reported a 34 per cent profit to won3.16bn as jeep sales slid to
increased competition from Hyundai.
