FT  02 APR 92 / Government Bonds: UK bonds shaken sharply by election fears
ELECTION jitters shook the UK government bond market sharply yesterday,
wiping nearly a percentage point off gilt prices early in the day and
pushing yields on 10-year bonds at one stage to 10 per cent. Ten-year gilts
now yield around 2 per cent more than German bunds - though the widening gap
has yet to bring out many buyers.
The cause of yesterday's fall was three opinion polls which pointed to the
possibility of outright victory for the opposition Labour party. With the
general election a week today, the market seemed to feel the ruling
Conservative party has little chance of regaining ground to secure an
outright majority. One immediate effect was a sharp hike in short-term
rates, with three-month money rising to around 11 1/4 per cent,  3/4 per
centage point above the current UK base rate.
The move reflects concern that a Labour government would have to boost
short-term rates to defend sterling's position in the exchange rate
mechanism.
Ten-year yields rose from 9.9 per cent on Tuesday to 10 per cent yesterday,
later falling slightly. Meanwhile, the benchmark 9 per cent gilt maturing
2011 lost  3/4 of a point, falling to 93 27/32 , or a yield of 9.7 per cent.
Although there was a widespread view yesterday that the market had fully
discounted a Labour victory, some parts of the yield curve could still be
vulnerable: at the short end, for instance, where few expect a  3/4 point
rise in interest rates to be enough to protect sterling in the aftermath of
a Labour victory, and in the three to four-year area, where a yield of 10.5
per cent may not fully reflect pressure in short-term interest rates.
LONG-DATED US Treasuries posted strong gains yesterday afternoon as the
market prepared for Friday's release of the March employment report.
In late trading, the Treasury's bellwether 30-year bond was higher at 101
5/32 , yielding 7.89 per cent, while the three-year note rose  1/4 to to
yield 5.99 per cent.
Although yesterday morning's release of the National Association of
Purchasing Management's report for March showed continued economic growth,
bonds firmed on the back of the weak employment component of the report.
The index indicated that the overall US economy in March grew at its fastest
rate since September, with the NAPM index rising to 54.1 per cent. In
addition, new orders for March, at 62.4 per cent, were at their highest
since June 1988.
The bond market, however, took strength from a decline in the March
manufacturing employment index, which dropped to 42.8 per cent from 44.5 per
cent in February. A reading of less than 48 per cent is generally consistent
with a decline in the Bureau of Labour Statistics' (BLS) data on
manufacturing employment.
THE long-awaited cut in Japan's official discount rate, from 4.5 per cent to
3.75 per cent, was greeted yesterday by a bout of profit-taking and gloom
about the prospects for further gains in the government bond market. It was,
said one analyst, 'too little, too late' to lift confidence.
Any further rate cut may not arrive until the summer, and with most of the
bad economic news apparently already priced into the market, and further
pressure on the Japanese yen, there seemed little prospect yesterday for
government bonds to gain much ground in the weeks ahead. The yield on the no
129 bond closed at 5.36 per cent, up four basis points on the day.
FRENCH government bonds gave up their gains of Tuesday, slipping by 1/2
point, as the hoped-for cabinet reshuffle failed to materialise yesterday
and the market was pulled back by profit-taking. June bond futures fell by
0.26 on the day, to 107.36.
Weakness in France also set the tone for German government bonds, though
losses in the bund market were less severe (the yield gap between the two
markets opened up again to over 70 basis points, reversing the tightening
seen earlier in the week).
Further unease came with the Bundesbank's latest weekly repurchase auction.
The hike at last week's auction had been widely put down to technical
factors. There was a further tightening yesterday.
