FT  09 JUN 92 / Bad year for Colombian president: Power cuts and guerrilla
warfare torment Gaviria as he waits to meet Major
unlike the British prime minister to whom he plays host today and tomorrow -
1992 has been a bad year. As recently as four months ago, everything seemed
to be going his way: his main economic and political reforms were in place
and peace talks with Colombia's two main guerrilla groups were still alive.
Now electricity rationing, an escalating guerrilla war, a recalcitrant
congress and hostile trade unions have contributed to a collapse in his
government's popularity.
Power cuts of at least seven hours a day have been the main factor in
reducing forecasts for economic growth this year: 2 per cent, barely enough
to keep pace with population growth, instead of the 4 per cent previously
forecast.
A survey by the association of small industries found that four-fifths of
companies have had to cut production and one-fifth have laid off workers.
Agriculture output has also been hit.
The direct cause - the country is 80 per cent dependent on hydro-electricity
for its power - is outside the government's control: a prolonged drought.
But bad planning, corruption, heavy debts and inefficiency have contributed
immeasurably to the crisis.
Firm - if somewhat belated - handling of the electricity disaster has
improved the president's standing. But, as he himself pointed out, sacking
top officials and emergency measures to restore full power by the end of the
year cannot compensate for economic and other losses.
On top of this, peace talks with guerrilla groups collapsed more than a
month ago, resulting in an escalation in violence. Mr Gaviria, endorsing a
military offensive against the groups, has said the aim is to force them
back to the negotiating table.
However, the whole idea behind the peace process is being jeopardised by a
judge who is asking for warrants to be issued against the leadership of the
former guerrilla movement M-19, now converted into a political party after
making peace with the government in 1989. The warrants are being sought in
connection with the M-19 takeover of the Palace of Justice in 1985, in which
more than 100 people were killed.
Faced with the dynamiting of power lines, air navigation aids, television
transmitters and pipelines, as well as daily kidnappings and bomb explosions
in cities, the majority of Colombians now rate the guerrilla war as the
country's main problem.
Foreign oil companies are the main target for the National Liberation Army,
one of the active guerrilla groups. Mr Major will be landing close to their
territory when, as planned, he goes tomorrow to BP's big discovery at
Cusiana in the Andean foothills northeast of Bogota.
British investment in Colombia, especially in the oil sector, has grown
significantly in the last decade. BP alone is spending Dollars 200m (Pounds
110m) on exploration this year. This presence, combined with Mr Gaviria's
dedication to liberalising the economy, laid the foundation for talks
between the two heads of government in the presidential guesthouse on the
shore of Cartagena Bay.
Drugs - both heroin and cocaine - continue to be an important issue.
Colombia has a wide range of subjects on the agenda, particularly economic
issues such as EC trade access and the revival of the coffee pact. Despite
the slump in coffee prices to near 22-year lows, greater export volumes have
kept Colombia's earnings close to last year's level.
Overall, export income was slightly down in the first five months of 1992,
but this did not dampen growth of international reserves. The figure for
reserves - Dollars 7.3bn last week - is more a discomfort than a joy, partly
because it increases inflationary pressures.
Income from 'tourism' rose from Dollars 139m in the first five months of
1991 to Dollars 391m in the same period this year, though the tourist is a
rare species in Colombia.
Reserves are now forecast to grow by Dollars 2.2bn this year, instead of
Dollars 1.2bn originally expected.
The main reason for the continuing inflow is the higher return on money in
Colombia, together with a tax amnesty. Although analysts have given up
trying to separate the bad money from the good, the tightening of banking
legislation in the US to reduce money-laundering has probably helped
encourage the return of funds.
The administration is also having one of the cornerstones of its economic
policy chipped away by congress, despite a majority for Mr Gaviria's
Liberals. This is tax reform designed to replace the fiscal income lost as a
result of lowering import tariffs and to allow for transfers to local
government required under the new constitution. But, even after frantic
negotiating to push through a mutilated version of the reform, the outcome
remains uncertain.
However, despite current setbacks, Mr Gaviria has already committed Colombia
to the free market road and seems prepared to battle his way along it for
the second half of his presidency.
