FT  24 AUG 92 / Economics Notebook: Spotlight turns on investment in Latin
America
LATIN America's bid to turn its recent economic advances into sustainable
growth will turn in large part on one issue: investment.
The signals appear more hopeful than at any time since the onset of the debt
crisis a decade ago. Of the Dollars 40bn (Pounds 21bn) of capital that
flowed into Latin America last year, Salomon Brothers, the Wall Street
securities house, estimates that foreign direct investment jumped to nearly
Dollars 14bn. Executives at many multinational companies say they are
seeking to boost investment in Latin America, after a decade of, at best,
holding on.
None the less, it is not yet clear, even in the most successful economies,
whether enough investment will arrive to sustain growth.
Furthermore, the amount of investment isn't everything: investment was
plentiful during the free-spending 1970s in Latin America - and hugely
inefficient.
As JP Morgan, the US investment house, points out in its latest issue of
World Financial Markets: 'For most of Latin America, emphasis on investment
quantity is less critical than the need for sustained improvement in its
quality.'
The Brazilian economy is a case in point. The level of fixed investment in
Brazil was the highest in Latin America during the 1980s, accounting for at
least a fifth of GDP throughout the period. However, because the economy was
riddled with price distortions and controls, the results in terms of growth
of output have been unimpressive: a meagre 0.7 per cent a year from 1987 to
1991.
Over the next five years, Morgan calculates that Dollars 960bn of gross
fixed investment will be needed to generate annual growth of at least 5 per
cent in the seven biggest economies - Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Mexico, Peru and Venezuela. This represents a relatively modest 11 per cent
increase on the Dollars 863bn invested in the five years to 1991, when
investment was depressed.
The calculation depends on the economies coming close to the level of
investment efficiency already achieved by Chile, where economic reforms are
the most advanced.
The indication of Chile's productivity achievement is the growth over the
last decade in the country's co-called total factor productivity (TFP), the
amount by which output growth exceeds growth in inputs of capital or labour.
The higher a country's total factor productivity, the higher the output
generated by any given amount of capital.
TFP encompasses a variety of influences on productivity such as
technological advancement, economies of scale and education. It is also
influenced heavily by the economic and regulatory environment in which the
investment is made.
In Chile, and Colombia, growth in total factor productivity during the 1980s
exceeded that in the industrialised countries.
Morgan reckons other Latin countries may be able to match their
performances, partly because their investment patterns are becoming more
like those in rich countries. For example, current rapid growth in service
industries in Latin America will require the same high-tech investments,
such as computers, as in the rich countries. The dropping of tariff barriers
and government controls also means that, unlike in the past, Latin economies
are able to import the latest technologies.
Most of Latin America has also taken great strides in rehabilitating market
mechanisms, thereby allowing prices to provide accurate signals for the
allocation of resources.
As a result, the Morgan economists say it is not fanciful to believe that
investment can be generated sufficient to secure the 5 per cent target.
However, meeting the investment requirement will be harder for some
countries than for others. According to Morgan's calculations, Brazil -
which accounts for half the region's investment outlays - could secure the
growth target by investing 9 per cent less than the Dollars 445bn it
invested from 1987-91. But it would have to introduce competitive technology
and wide-ranging economic reform to do so. Brazil is so far behind on
implementing structural reforms it is 'unlikely to achieve the investment
efficiency within the grasp of the others,' Morgan concludes.
At the other extreme, Argentina would need to boost investment by 145 per
cent over 1987-91 levels to achieve 5 per cent growth. 'This may be too
ambitious,' says Morgan. Fixed investment fell to 8.9 per cent of GDP in
1990, the lowest in Latin America, and rose to only 10 per cent last year,
in spite of a successful reform programme.
Peru and Venezuela would also need substantial rises in investment - both of
22 per cent. But Mexico requires only a 16 per cent rise, and Colombia an
increase of 5 per cent to meet the growth target. Investment in Chile
dropped sharply in 1991, a result of government attempts to stop the economy
overheating, but fixed investment is again on the rise. 'It should exceed 20
per cent of GDP this year - more than enough to meet the 5 per cent target,'
Morgan says.
The report, while acknowledging the importance of foreign investment as a
catalyst for growth, underlines the central role of domestic saving in
capital formation. Here the news has not been good, as saving rates have
been falling in the region.
It suggests initiatives in three areas to correct this: more public saving
(ie, reduced government borrowing); social security reform - following the
example of Chile whose pension system reforms have transformed the country's
capital markets into the most mature in the region; and restructuring
domestic banking systems.
The report concedes that over the next few years Latin governments will be
constrained in their attempts to cut spending by pent-up demand for
investment and for spending on social services. Infrastructure has
deteriorated so badly in some countries, such as Peru and Venezuela, that it
may now constitute a bottleneck to future growth.
Public saving will therefore probably be increased by continued
privatisation, resisting public sector wage increases and sustained efforts
to broaden inadequate tax bases.
