FT  21 OCT 92 / Survey of European Business Locations (8): Mickey Mouse sets
the pace - France
THIS spring the chairman and chief executive of one of the biggest US
companies flew into Paris to cut the ceremonial ribbon on his company's
biggest investment project to date.
The project, which is probably also the single largest corporate investment
programme by a foreign company in France, includes suites of corporate
offices for the company's European headquarters, a railway station, a
telecommunications network capable of servicing two small towns, six hotels
with 5,200 rooms, a golf course, several dozen shops, a mock-medieval
castle, a couple of merry-go-rounds, a giant Runaway Mine Train
roller-coaster, a replica of the Swiss Family Robinson's tree house and a
Mad Hatter's Tea Cups waltzer ride.
The project is EuroDisneyland, the giant theme park built by Euro Disney, an
associate of Disney, the US leisure group, at Marne La Vallee on the
outskirts of Paris. EuroDisneyland is the product of years of painstaking
negotiation between Disney and the French government, which fought fiercely,
notably against stiff competition from Spain, to win this particular piece
of corporate investment.
For the French government, the benefits of Euro Disney are obvious. First
there are all the jobs that EuroDisneyland has created, not only its own
12,000 employees (two thirds of whom are French), but also the thousands of
construction workers hired to build the park and the employees of the
'satellite' companies set up in the Marne La Vallee area to service it.
There is also the advantage of EuroDisneyland's allure as a tourist
attraction. Paris was one of the few European capital cities not to have
experienced a fall in tourism this summer. One only has to glance around the
Paris Metro at tourists sporting plastic Mickey Mouse ears to realise that
EuroDisneyland was one of the main attractions.
Pierre Beregovoy, the prime minister, highlighted both benefits earlier this
month when he pinned the Legion d'Honneur, one of France's highest honours,
on Michael Eisner, chairman of Disney. 'Six months after (the park's)
opening, the results for both parties are eloquent,' he said. 'The expected
economic advantages are also there.'
Mr Eisner replied by praising France as 'a particularly hospitable land for
foreign investments'. But Disney has had a rocky ride in France, not least
when, only a few weeks before the opening, EuroDisneyland was lambasted in
the Figaro newspaper by a group of French intellectuals, one of whom called
it a 'cultural Chernobyl'. However idiosyncratic it may seem as a piece of
corporate investment, EuroDisneyland is an apt illustration of the
experience of other companies that have chosen France as a corporate
location.
EuroDisneyland's economic potential was so enormous that Disney was in the
enviable position of being able to take its pick of European locations. It
plumped for France, in spite of the damp climate of Marne La Vallee, for the
same reasons so many other foreign investors have done so; because of its
prime location in the heart of western Europe and its buoyant domestic
market.
The TGV rail network, which the French government has extended to take in
EuroDisneyland as part of its deal with Disney, is one of the fastest and
most efficient in Europe. France also has an ample motorway network and good
air and sea links with other countries.
France is one of Europe's largest economies, with a population of more than
56m and GDP of Dollars 958bn, according to the Organisation of Economic
Co-operation and Development. It has proved much more resilient to the
present economic slowdown than most of its European competitors, being on
course for growth of between 1.5 per cent and 2 per cent this year.
Conversely, the cost of operating in France is high. Property is expensive,
as are wages and employers' social security contributions. This is partly
offset by the low rate of inflation, which has hovered around 3 per cent
since the late 1980s thereby giving French companies, and foreign investors,
a stable financial base from which to operate.
But even low inflation can not compensate for the cost and complexity of
rationalising an operation in France. Once a company has set up in the
country, the process of closing plants or reducing its workforce is both
elaborate and expensive.
Another disadvantage is that, however welcoming the French government may be
to foreign investors, France is such a bureaucratic country that local rules
and regulations, particularly planning laws, can be cumbersome, as
EuroDisneyland has discovered.
The company behind France's most ambitious exercise in foreign corporate
location may, after all, have won the government's permission to press ahead
with the second phase of its theme park development, but it is still
haggling with local officials over how often and for how long it can run its
night-time firework spectaculars.
