FT  24 JUN 92 / European Finance and Investment, Spain (7): No gold from the
Maastricht rainbow - The Madrid stock market is in the doldrums as
foreigners withdraw
THREE YEARS ago, Madrid's bolsa, after a long period as flavour of the
month, posted an historic high of 325 general index points. Since the summer
of 1989, a rotten smell of sorts has emanated from the dominant domestic
stock market, as well as from Madrid's puny sister bolsas in Barcelona,
Bilbao and Valencia.
Madrid hovered close to 290 in the second quarter of last year, but it has
still not recovered its pre-Kuwait invasion index of close to 300. Currently
it appears to be holding firm on a 245-250 support level after reaching a
266.5 points high this year on February 28.
Statistics of bolsa bearishness abound. It is news now if daily trading
volume rises above Pta10bn (Pounds 54.3m), whereas in January Pta20bn was
the norm. Last year's annual trading volume of Pta3.693bn was similar to the
1987 figure, and the Madrid market's capitalisation of Pta13.457bn narrowed
last year to an estimated Pta13.000bn.
One revealing statistic illustrates how the foreigners have beaten a
retreat. During the bolsa's heyday in 1988-89, a period when it was
regularly written up as one of the best global performers, non-Spanish
transactions accounted for some 28 per cent of the Madrid market's
transactions. Currently, such funds are reckoned to represent between 15 and
20 per cent of the total.
When it was the repeated flavour of the month, Madrid's weighting was around
8 per cent in the European stock market ranking, standing fourth behind
London, Frankfurt and Paris. Now, some fund managers have trimmed the
weighting down by as many as four points.
The diminishing foreign presence is a key factor behind the doldrums. It
was, after all, the non-Spanish funds that pushed the bolsa towards giddy
heights in the late 1980s.
The foreigners invested in the Madrid market at a time when Spain's GDP
showed annual increases of 5 per cent and more. It began to shy away when
growth peaked at the end of that decade, and it stayed away when the 2.4 per
cent GDP growth posted in 1991 indicated that something just short of
recession could be round the corner.
In 1990, corporate profits in Spain were still rising annually by more than
14 per cent. Last year, profits across the board fell by at least half, to 7
per cent at best. Just as high growth brought the foreigners in, so did the
absence of it frighten them away.
The result is that, with the Madrid market currently languishing at nine
times earnings, Spanish stocks are, by most international standards, at
bargain prices, for their price-to-cash-ratio is 4.4 times - despite which
there are no takers.
That is the bleak reality of the situation. What are the chances of change?
The question is an embarrassing one, for the much-heralded catalyst for
change towards a bullish bolsa was the EC's Maastricht treaty. Following
Denmark's 'no' referendum, that beckoning beacon on which all eyes were
trained has proved, as far as the markets are concerned, to be as chimerical
as the crock of gold at the end of a rainbow.
Maastricht had become an obsessive buzz-word for bolsa players. Mr Ignacio
Gomez Montejo, the chief strategist at FG Inversiones Bursatiles, one of
Madrid's major broking houses, opened a recent presentation in typical
fashion: 'A previously obscure Dutch town jumped a few months ago to the
status of most-mentioned place by capital market professionals -
Maastricht.'
Mr Gomez Montejo painstakingly explained how, before the end of the present
decade, Spain's spiralling budget deficit would shrink, and with it
inflation and interest rates, because of the government's commitment to be a
founder member of Economic and Monetary Union (Emu) within the EC, according
to the convergence criteria agreed at Maastricht.
The bottom line, delivered by the respected Madrid analyst was: 'The bolsa
will be revalued by around 30 per cent, thanks to the impact of Economic and
Monetary Union.'
If Maastricht is now in doubt, then so is Spain's convergence commitment,
and so is a sustained Emu-linked market rally. Bolsa players certainly
understood it that way, and the Madrid stock exchange dropped by some 5 per
cent in the week following Denmark's referendum.
In the absence of a clear Emu framework - analysts are now furious with
themselves for ever having coined the so-called Maastricht factor - it is
now up to the Spanish government to give a clear signal of its continued
willingness to converge with northern European economies.
The first real opportunity for displaying such a sentiment will occur after
the summer parliamentary recess, when the government unveils its 1993
budget. The markets will be looking for substantially reduced government
spending, despite tha fact that general elections are due next year.
If the government does deliver the goods with a restrictive budget, then
some of the havoc by the Maastricht question mark may be repaired.
Additionally, the profile of those playing the Spanish markets might change
and this, at the end of the day, should be far more important.
A government bent upon correcting economic imbalances - with or without
Maastricht - will not ensure the sharp growth that attracted the speculative
funds of the late 1980's. But it will, in time, bring in long-term investors
who see eventual profit in Spain's spare capacity, in its underemployment
and in its determination to catch up.
