FT  22 JUN 92 / Havel urges poll over Czechoslovak split
MR VACLAV Havel, the presi-dent of Czechoslovakia, put his personal prestige
on the line yesterday and called for a referendum on the future of the
country.
The president's appeal followed an agreement on Saturday between the newly
elected Czech and Slovak leaders which call on the parliaments of both
republics to prepare the peaceful break-up of the 74-year-old federation.
'Citizens have the right to express themselves on such a fundamental issue
in a clearly worded question,' the president said in his regular Sunday
radio address to the nation. 'A referendum is the only constitutional manner
in which the common state can be divided into two states.' The agreement
itself is ambiguous. While it does not specifically call for a referendum,
it leaves that option open.
Saturday's accord signed by Mr Vaclav Klaus, the Czech winner of last
month's elections, and Mr Vladimir Meciar, his Slovak counterpart, allows
for the Czech and Slovak parliaments to decide the framework for dividing
the republics by September 30. Their decision must then be ratified by the
federal assembly.
Mr Meciar wanted a referendum in Slovakia toward the end of the year. The
Czech side, anxious to end political paralysis which would deter foreign
investment and hold back economic re-forms, pushed for a speedy solution. Mr
Meciar has also said he will block the re-election of President Havel in the
federal parliament on July 3 because Mr Havel's warning to voters not to
support a candidate with 'dictatorial tendencies' was seen as a thinly
veiled attack on him.
Attempts to reach a compromise which would keep the federal state together
failed after the Czech side rejected the Slovaks' demands for a
confederation of two sovereign and internationally recognised states.
Mr Klaus, leader of the Civic Democratic party (ODS) which won 30 per cent
of the vote in the Czech lands, and Mr Meciar, whose Movement for a
Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) won 37 per cent there, ended their negotiations
by signing a political declaration and a limited programme for the new
interim federal government.
The Civic Democratic party said it 'does not consider the confederation of
two sovereign states as one common state . . . and prefers the
constitutional separation of the current state to this confederation'.
The programme of the federal government states that 'its mandate is limited
in time', and that 'it must prepare the conditions for the functioning of
two sovereign and internationally recognised states'.
The new federal government will be reduced from 16 ministries to five,
including finance, defence, and foreign affairs. The governments of each
republic will assume other functions.
A velvet divorce, Page 15
