FT  03 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Basic issues that remain unsettled - Norma
Cohen on the latest round in the takeover war for the UK's smallest clearer
/ The Battle for Midland
An institutional shareholder in Midland Bank, summing up the latest round in
the bidding war for the UK's smallest clearing bank, said: 'It doesn't seem
to be a knock-out blow by any means. We're waiting to see what Lloyds is
going to say.'
Hongkong and Shanghai Bank yesterday increased its offer to the equivalent
of 480p per share from 410p, and promised shareholders that they could
receive cash for the portion of their holdings that had previously only been
exchangeable into 10-year subordinated bonds.
So far, Lloyds Bank has said only that it believes the deal does not
represent a significant increase in value from the original offer and that
its own board will be meeting on Friday to discuss the matter.
Shareholders yesterday referred to market speculation that Lloyds will write
to Midland shareholders offering the equivalent of 500p per share,
conditional upon the Monopolies and Mergers Commission clearing the bid on
competition grounds.
The introduction of a cash element by HSBC was one of the key sweeteners
that shareholders had previously specified they would have to see before
becoming convinced that the deal was attractive.
HSBC has also dramatically increased the yield on the subordinated debt to
2.4 percentage points above a comparable maturity government gilt - a yield
close to that offered on speculative-quality bonds. Indeed, many said that
while they continue to have reservations about the offer themselves, they
viewed the introduction of a cash element as too tempting for most other
shareholders.
'Many will simply take the money and run,' said one fund manager, adding
that Lloyds will have to increase its offer enough to sufficiently outweigh
the risk that the MMC will forbid it from proceed-ing.
Significantly, HSBC has said its offer is final and will not be improved.
Shareholders have until June 25 to decide and the MMC report is not due out
until August. Therefore, shareholders who do not tender their shares will be
gambling either that the deal will get a green light from the MMC or that
HSBC is bluffing.
'Hongkong Bank will never get another bite of the cherry like this,' said
one shareholder, expressing the view that Midland offers it the one
opportunity it will have to break into the UK market on a significant scale.
Most believe that HSBC badly needs to shift its reliance on the Hong Kong
market precisely because of its own concerns about the future post-1997.
Thus, it needs Midland even more than Lloyds does. Should Lloyds be denied
the chance to bid, HSBC is likely to come back with yet another offer, they
said.
Meanwhile, institutional shareholders said yesterday that while the offer
went a long way towards satisfying their basic complaint that the HSBC offer
undervalued Midland, it left many other basic issues unsettled.
In short, institutions have two nagging concerns about the HSBC offer that
go beyond the arithmetic of the deal.
First, there is considerable uncertainty among UK institutions about
long-term prospects in Hong Kong after 1997, and there is concern about the
focus of HSBC's other international operations.
'Frankly, we'd much rather be shareholders in Lloyds Bank,' said one
institutional shareholder with a significant stake in Midland.
'The offer is quite rich and quite tempting but Lloyds is a natural holding
for us and a more logical fit for us than a vague global bank.'
The efforts of Lloyds' own management over the past few years to pare costs
and hone operations has left institutions vastly impressed with its
management style.
Indeed, they take great comfort from the view that Lloyds' chairman, Sir
Jeremy Morse, is likely to slash branches and dispose of operations if
Midland came under his control. Its management has been the most respected
of the four UK clearers.
But shareholders are also concerned about the HSBC bid because they largely
share the view that the UK market is over-banked to begin with.
The entrance of yet another leading institution with fresh capital is going
to do little to improve the profitability of the industry as a whole, they
say.
However, even those shareholders inclined towards Lloyds concede there are
risks in waiting for an offer to materialise and receive the blessing of the
MMC.
Without any bid on the table, Midland shares could well drift back towards
300p, they said. And even those uneasy with holding the shares of an
enlarged HSBC are taking comfort from the thought that the shares will be
included in the FT-A All-Share Index and the FT-SE 100 Index by next year.
The combined capital of HSBC and Midland will make it one of the largest
companies in those indices, greatly increasing the liquidity of the shares
and hence, their value.
Overall, shareholders do not expect the MMC to reject the Lloyds offer on
competition grounds.
'They will say there are a few problems in a few areas and some things will
have to be sold,' one shareholder said, explaining why he thought waiting
for Lloyds is worth the risk.
