FT  16 JUL 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Germany calls the EMS tune
ALL EYES were on the D-Mark yesterday, with dealers convinced that the
Bundesbank will tighten monetary policy when it meets today, writes Peter
John.
The worries left the German unit stronger against most European currencies,
although most dealers had already taken their positions. Apart from a spate
of D-Mark buying late in the day, activity was low.
The market's sense of unease began to build when yesterday morning's
Bundesbank repurchase tender resulted in a rise in the minimum-accepted
one-month rate to 9.65 per cent from 9.60. There were also comments from the
French, Belgian and Italian central banks suggesting they would remain in
line with German rates.
The market's conviction was given further impetus after the Bundesbank
announced that it would hold a press conference at the end of its council
meeting today.
The Bank of Italy had to intervene throughout the afternoon, selling D-Marks
to support the lira, which is languishing near the bottom of the EMS ladder.
By the close of European trading, the lira had weakened to L760.6 to the
D-Mark against a previous close of L758.2. The Italian central bank was
still operating into the European evening to defend the lira against heavy
speculative selling.
While most observers believe Germany will tighten its grip in some way,
there are three possibilities. The most worrying is that the Bundesbank will
alter the Lombard rate. This would almost certainly prompt a rate rise in a
number of European countries but was thought unlikely yesterday.
There is also a chance that the German bank will make a technical adjustment
to the amount which banks can borrow. However, the consensus was that the
Bundesbank would raise the discount rate, which affects domestic rates.
A dealer argued that if there is a technical adjustment or the discount rate
is tinkered with, there would be general relief and a jump in most
currencies against the D-Mark.
Nevertheless, Mr Akis Karayiannis, head of foreign exchange dealing at
Lehman Brothers, said the D-Mark's continued strength at a time when
everybody expects a discount rate move was a sign that the Bundesbank might
have to be more restrictive in the future. 'At this late stage we should
have seen short-covering of the dollar or selling of long D-Mark positions.
The worrying thing is that despite the consensus of a discount rate rise
rather than a Lombard rise, the mark was still strong.'
The dollar fell to DM1.477 from DM1.490. The pound was down to DM2.845 from
DM2.850, while the yen slipped to DM11.81 per Y1,000 from DM11.91. In New
York the dollar steadied to end at DM1.4815.
