FT  12 JUN 92 / Iranian mullahs see first rumblings of discontent: The
country's citizens are still searching for the economic fruits of the
revolution
TRAVELLING west of Tehran on a featureless plain towards the Holy City of
Qom one's eye is caught by a huge gold-domed structure. On the roadside, as
you draw closer, battered signs extol the virtues of Iran's revolution and
the privilege of martyrdom.
'We shall stand firm until the last breath and last drop of blood, until we
erect the world of Allah,' reads one, among several, blood-drenched sayings
of Ayatollah Khomeini on display outside a large concrete and metal
structure like an aircraft hangar.
This is the shrine of Iran's late spiritual leader. With kebab shops near
its entrance, it is a place so tawdry and aspiritual that it is hard to
accept that it commemorates one of the more significant figures of the late
20th century. A young man who had come to pay his respects had a point when
he muttered: 'The old man deserved better than this.' On this, the third
anniversary of Khomeini's death, Iran stands uncertainly on the threshold of
a new era under the rule of President Hashemi Rafsanjani, known as a
liberaliser and risk-taker; but the new order seems fragile and so, too,
does a Tehran spring in which political constraints have been loosened.
Four-days of rioting last month in the holy city of Mashhad in the
north-east were a sign of serious disaffection, and followed disturbances in
other centres such as Shiraz, Arak and Tabriz. Not surprisingly, the
troubles have drawn calls for a tightening up.
In Mashhad rioters burned down the city hall, the main library and assaulted
revolutionary guards, the foot soldiers of the revolution, killing nine.
Ostensibly, the riots followed attempts to clear away shanty settlements
that have grown up around Iranian cities since the revolution, but it seems
there were deeper causes.
While the authorities, predictably, blamed 'foreigners, enemy agents and
opponents of the Islamic revolution,' and also hinted that hardliners routed
by supporters of Mr Rafsanjani in recent parliamentary elections had been
stirring up trouble, the disturbances were probably due more to deep-seated
anger over economic deprivation.
Judging by attitudes in the narrow streets of South Tehran, home to small
traders and the less well-off, the regime's popularity could hardly be
lower. Asked to comment on the fruits of the revolution, a shopkeeper named
Ali said it had 'brought nothing but corruption, the destruction of morale
especially among the young and widespread drug-taking.
'During the Shah's time,' he went on, drawing on a hubble-bubble pipe in a
small back-lane coffee house, 'policemen did provide a minimum of security.
Corruption did stop at a certain level. Now policemen come into my shop and
take goods on credit, but they never pay me. I have no reason to be
optimistic,' he added.
No conversation with an Iranian these days strays far from economic
concerns. The poor are becoming poorer, and the middle class, with the
exception of the privileged few, is being squeezed by soaring prices.
Salaries are barely sufficient to 'put bread on the table,' as one
longstanding acquaintance put it, and few can survive without working two or
even three jobs.
In his modern office, an elegantly-dressed Iranian businessman, speaking
almost perfectly accented English, noted down figures on a scratch pad which
showed, he said, Iran's truly desperate straits.
Earnings this year from oil, which accounts for about 90 per cent of
exports, will amount to about Dollars 12bn (Pounds 6.55bn) against estimated
requirements of about Dollars 30bn to keep Iran ticking over, let alone
taking care of the huge costs of reconstruction following the war with Iraq.
When the Shah left, Iran's population was 34m. Now it has nearly doubled.
Financing needs then were about Dollars 20bn.
'Frankly, we are in very bad shape,' the businessman declared. 'There is a
lack of foreign exchange. Financially, this is going to be a very bad year.
Fourteen years ago we had Dollars 28bn in reserves, we had diplomatic
relations with the entire world, our warehouses were full and our factories
were operating properly with new machinery.
'Now, there is no sign of the Dollars 28bn, 4m people have fled Iran, our
warehouses are empty and our factories are broken down. Morale is extremely
low, and there is bribery at all levels,' he said.
'There is no alternative to the rule of the mullahs,' he added. 'But the
only way out of the mess is for the government to be honest with the people
of Iran about the economic crisis, to release political prisoners, and to
give clemency to Iranians who return.'
Last month's troubles in Mashhad and other towns across Iran would seem to
carry a warning for President Rafsanjani: that unless he acts fast to deal
with the country's economic malaise he runs the risk of seeing his reform
efforts engulfed by popular unrest.
Iran has executed four people and condemned five more to death for rioting
in the southern city of Shiraz in a fierce crackdown on opponents of the
Islamic Republic, according to Irna, the Iranian news agency, Reuter
reports.  Irna did not say when the executions took place but its report
followed the hanging on Wednesday of four men who were convicted of taking
part in riots in the north-eastern holy city of Mashhad last month.
