FT  22 FEB 92 / S Africa 'wins US backing for new IMF aid'
MR Harry Schwartz, South Africa's ambassador to the US, yesterday said his
country had won US support for new monetary assistance from the
International Monetary Fund, but was not yet ready to apply for help 'at
this stage'.
'We are in a position that when it is appropriate we can apply,' he said,
welcoming a favourable US State Department pronouncement.
The statement had been long in preparation but was made 'more pointed' after
the by-election defeat of the National party at the hands of the right-wing
Conservative party on Wednesday. It acknowledged that economic conditions in
South Africa, with severe unemployment, will 'have a direct and decisive
impact on the success of the new democracy which emerges from the current
negotiations'.
The State Department, while vague on its IMF policy, said the US was
'prepared to consider a proposal' for an IMF facility.
A provision of law, the Gramm amendment, prohibits US support for an IMF
facility unless four conditions are met. A Department spokesman said three
had been, but it was not yet clear the fourth had. That requires South
Africa to seek balance of payments support from the private markets before
going to the IMF.
Mr Michael Christie, Washington director of the South Africa Foundation, a
private-sector South African group, said he had been privately assured the
US would now back an IMF facility. The timing was subject to debate because
inflation was now 15 per cent. But he said the country, which now
desperately needs to expand its economy through imports, had the option of
going to the IMF.
A formal finding by President Bush earlier this week that South Africa has
made 'significant progress toward the elimination of apartheid' has paved
the way for new Eximbank lending to the South African government.
'We are also encouraging US exports to non-governmental South African
importers who have endorsed and proceeded toward the implementation of fair
labour standards,' the state department added.
'If the Secretary of State certified that a South African firm meets these
standards, US exporters to such a firm would also be eligible for Eximbank
support.' Companies owned by non-whites are exempt from any requirements.
