FT  05 NOV 92 / Housing starts show drop of 7 per cent in quarter
FURTHER evidence of the gloom in the construction industry emerged yesterday
with official figures showing that housing starts - a key leading indicator
of economic activity - fell 7 per cent in July-September period compared
with the corresponding months last year.
The figures from the Environment Department came as the Royal Institution of
Chartered Surveyors said shortages of work, competition on fees and lower
tender levels were producing a 'vice-like squeeze on profitability'.
The British Aggregate Construction Materials Industries reported a marked
decline in sales of all materials through the third quarter, with demand in
September down sharply after being stable in July.
Although September's 12,600 housing starts were 300 up on the previous
month, they were still 800 lower than the 13,400 recorded in September last
year. For July to September, housing starts slipped to 39,100 from 42,300 a
year earlier.
On a seasonally adjusted basis, total housing starts in July-September were
down 4 per cent compared with the previous three months. Completions were up
4 per cent. The department said that starts and completions by local
authorities, new towns and government departments remained low.
The RICS survey, issued today, says small practices have suffered a 28 per
cent fall in workload in the past year, compared with a 23 per cent fall for
the whole profession.
In the three months to the end of September, workloads fell 10 per cent at
small practices, compared with a 3.5 per fall across the profession.
Mr Christopher Vickers, construction spokesman, said: 'While larger
practices may be able to ride out the storm, small practices who form the
backbone of the profession cannot. The future of the profession depends on
their survival, but the future looks very gloomy.'
The biggest fall in workloads was in the south-east, with a 'worrying
downward trend' in Scotland after earlier signs of weathering the recession.
