FT  07 FEB 92 / International Company News: FAI Insurances shows signs of
recovery
FAI Insurances, the Sydney-based general insurance group, remained in the
red in the first half to December, but showed signs of recovery from its
ill-fated 1980's investment binge.
The company reduced its net loss in the half to ADollars 17.2m (USDollars
13.2m) from ADollars 31.7m on an 8 per cent revenue slide to ADollars 453.6m
from ADollars 494.4m. The dividend has again been passed, and Mr Rodney
Adler, chief executive, said yesterday there would be no payout until the
group returned to profits.
FAI emerged last year as one of the main sufferers from Australia's
corporate and property collapses with losses of ADollars 219.2m. The company
was particularly exposed to the commercial demise of Perth businessman, Mr
Alan Bond.
But Mr Adler said there had been a significant reduction in the company's
insurance underwriting loss and a marked improvement in operating efficiency
in the latest half.
'The underwriting loss for the half year was ADollars 50m as compared with
ADollars 66m for the previous corresponding half year and ADollars 124m for
the period 1 January to 30 June, 1991,' he said. 'More importantly, we
believe the trend will continue and our budgets indicate that the
underwriting loss for the second half of the year. . . should be lower
again.'
Mr Adler said the group held cash and liquid securities of more than
ADollars 230m at December 31 and had raised more than ADollars 30m from
property sales in the half.
'Unfortunately, the financial environment is still very tough and there
continue to be significant bankruptcies throughout Australia,' he said.
'This has caused us to review all our outstanding loans at the half year end
which has resulted in an increase of ADollars 7.1m in general provision
against these loans.'
Mr Adler said reinsurance rates charged to FAI had risen about 25 per cent
in the past year and insurance premiums would have to rise further.
The result followed a tax credit of ADollars 6.7m against ADollars 15.7m
previously. Interest payments fell to ADollars 14.9m from ADollars 20.6m and
depreciation provision rose to ADollars 12.5m from ADollars 9.3m.
