FT  02 JUN 92 / Survey of Investment in Quebec (5): The power utility is
fighting back - Profile of Hydro-Quebec
THE past few years have not been kind to Hydro-Quebec, North America's third
biggest power utility.
Recession has slowed growth in demand for electricity, two successive
winters of low snowfall have reduced generating capacity at hydro-electric
dams, a heavy construction programme has forced up Hydro-Quebec's
electricity rates faster than the rate of inflation.
To cap it all, this bastion of Quebec pride has found itself on the
defensive in an intense battle with environmentalists and the province's own
aboriginal community over the enormous hydro-electric scheme which it plans
to build on the Great Whale river flowing into Hudson Bay.
The New York Power Authority, which was to be the lead customer for the
electricity from Great Whale, cancelled its CDollars 17bn contract with
Hydro-Quebec earlier this year.
It's a matter of debate whether the NYPA was swayed by the environmental
protests or simply by the recession's impact on its customers' appetite for
electricity.
But there is no doubt that the decision has set back Hydro-Quebec's plans to
stitch together one of the world's biggest hydro-electric grids in northern
Quebec.
Mr Richard Drouin, the utility's amiable chairman, acknowledges the problems
of the past, as well as the challenges which remain.
He is confident some of the pressures will ease over the next few years.
Hydro-Quebec had a glimmer of welcome news in the first quarter, with an 8.1
per cent rise in electricity sales thanks to an unusually cold winter, a new
export contract in New England, and the small matter of an extra leap-year
day in February.
In the longer term, Mr Drouin predicts that the competition hydro-electric
power has faced from cheap, clean natural gas will wane when consumers
discover that gas prices can go up as sharply as they go down.
He adds that as the utility's construction programme slows down in the
mid-1990s, price increases could drop to, or even below, the overall
inflation rate.
Finally, Mr Drouin has no hesitation in predicting that the New York Power
Authority will be back in the market for hydro-electric power from Quebec
before long.
'We're not trying to get the whole New York market,' he says.
'We're only trying to get one-thirtieth of it.'
Hydro-Quebec has always insisted that none of its new projects are driven
entirely by export contracts. While Great Whale will no longer be needed to
supply power to New York in 1998 as originally planned, the utility still
plans to press ahead with the CDollars 12bn project once a thorough
environmental assessment by the federal and provincial governments is
complete.
It expects construction to start towards the end of next year, with the
first generating station being commissioned around the turn of the century.
The second and third phases will probably be postponed. They are tentatively
scheduled for completion in 2007 and 2008, five years later than planned.
Lengthy environmental reviews may delay two other northern Quebec projects,
known as Eastmain-1 and Laforge-2.
Although Great Whale is on a more distant horizon, Hydro-Quebec still has
its hands full with projects on the La Grande River, about 150 miles to the
south.
Four generating stations, with a capacity of almost MW4,700, are scheduled
for completion by 1995, largely to meet demand from new aluminium smelters
along the St Lawrence River.
In an effort to spread its risks, Hydro-Quebec has begun encouraging
co-generation projects, mostly in partnership with local pulp and paper
mills.
It aims to buy up to MW750 of power from co-generation plants by 1996, and
is sifting through a pile of applications from potential suppliers.
The busy construction programme requires heavy borrowing on both domestic
and international capital markets. Mr Michel Labonte, vice-president for
finance, estimates the utility's borrowing needs, including refinancings, at
CDollars 4.5bn this year, CDollars 3bn in 1993 and CDollars 4.5bn in 1994.
The utility is leaving few stones unturned in its efforts to tap outside
sources of finance. In April, it became the first buyer outside the aircraft
industry to finance new equipment, in this case four gas turbines, through a
US Ownership Foreign Sales Corporation.
These deals are a complex form of lease, driven mainly by tax advantages for
investors.
Hydro-Quebec completed its first global bond issue last year. It made its
debut in the Euro-French franc market last March, and has become
increasingly active in the US medium-term note market.
It expects to expand its commercial paper programme to about CDollars 500m
by the end of this year.
Mr Drouin says that contrary to some press reports, the cancellation of the
New York contract will not affect Hydro-Quebec's ability to service its US
dollar debt.
The new aluminium smelters, which will be Hydro-Quebec's biggest new
customers in 1992 and 1993, will pay for their electricity in US dollars.
'We don't feel threatened at all, currency-wise,' Mr Labonte says.
Nonetheless, the row over the NYPA contract has taught Hydro-Quebec some
lessons it won't easily forget. 'It made us more aware that in the 1990s
there were people around us who could affect our operations, and that we
should be more aggressive than passive,' says Mr Drouin.
