FT  11 DEC 92 / Survey of Scotland (3): Caledonia grows stern and wild -
James Buxton finds a shortage of green shoots in the economy
MR CHARLES LOVE, the new chief executive of the Clydesdale Bank, was blunt
about Scotland's short-term economic prospects when he presented the
Glasgow-based bank's results last month.
'There are no green shoots in Scotland,' he said. A colleague added: 'The
recession has gone on too long for a lot of our customers in Scotland.' But
they did not foresee recovery in the Scottish economy until 1994.
The remarks are typical of the pessimism that has engulfed the Scottish
economy in the last few months.
For the past two years, as much of the rest of the UK economy laboured in
recession, Scotland remained immune from its worst effects. In the summer
there was even an upturn in business confidence in the wake of the UK
general election held in April.
In October, however, the Fraser of Allander Institute, Scotland's main
economic research organisation, declared that the full effects of recession
had finally reached Scotland.
People in Scotland did not like being told that they were suffering a much
milder form of recession than people in the south. This was not just any
penchant they may have for gloom; it simply did not accord with their
experience.
For the past two years the Scottish economy has been virtually stagnant,
with few new business ventures, a stream of small and medium-sized
businesses going into receivership, property developments being stalled or
abandoned, intense financial pressure on companies with large borrowings and
a lack of new job opportunities, so that anyone with a job wanted to hang on
to it.
Yet something remarkable has been happening in this recession in Scotland:
it has not been as bad as in England.
In September the seasonally adjusted uneployment total for Scotland was 9.7
per cent, compared with a UK average of 10.1 per cent, putting Scotland on
exactly the same level as the south-east of England and below Wales and the
northern half of Britain. That, as Professor Gavin McCrone of Glasgow
university pointed out recently, 'is nevertheless much too high to be
acceptable.'
But it is indicative of the changed way in which economic forces have been
working in Britain.
Scotland and the north of England have done better in strictly relative
terms because people in those parts of the UK never built up the enormous
levels of personal debt which their counterparts in the south of England
accumulated.
This may partly be because in Scotland house ownership is just over 50 per
cent of the total housing stock; in England it is 69 per cent. So when
interest rates went up from 1988 onwards, Scotland and the north of England
suffered less.
Consumer spending continued fairly strongly, house prices went on rising
(they have even advanced slightly this year while those in southern England
have collapsed) and the Scottish economy grew faster than that of the UK as
a whole in 1988, 1989 and 1990, while the contraction in Scotland in 1991
was less severe.
Scotland benefited in other ways. There has been an investment boom in the
North Sea oil industry, which particularly helped Grampian and Highland
regions.
Scotland's main manufactured products - whisky, computers and heavy
engineering equipment - are mostly exported, and until about a year ago
their markets had been holding up well.
Yet the gloomy prognostications of the executives of the Clydesdale Bank
seem convincing.
Commentators have for some time forecast that once interest rates came down,
the south of Britain would benefit most - for the same reason that it
suffered most when interest rates were high.
While Scotland hopes to keep its advantage over England, it is more
realistic to trust that the economy of southern England gets going soon, and
that it generates some demand for Scottish goods and services.
Export markets for many different kinds of Scottish goods are weakening,
because of world recession. But perhaps more serious for Scotland's recovery
is the fact that structural factors which formerly worked in Scotland's
favour are now turning against it. Furthermore, there are black spots of
economic decay caused by industrial closures.
The investment boom in the North Sea oil industry is running down, as shown
by the fact that some of the yards which build platforms - one of the first
stages in the process of developing production operations - are now staring
at slender or empty order books, with one of them, McDermotts near
Inverness, currently moving from employing 2,500 people in mid-summer to
going onto a care and maintenance basis.
Offshore oil output is expected to decline in the next year or two, while
pressure on margins is making oil operators cut costs, reducing offshore
employment.
The Shetland islands, where unemployment is about four per cent, will have
to face the fact that the Sullom Voe oil terminal on which much of its
prosperity is based could close by the end of the decade.
Scotland, it has been said, had a good Cold War, so it is now feeling the
consequences of peace. Already the US navy submarine base at Holy Loch has
closed, and four Scottish regiments are being amalgamated into two.
More serious still are the consequences for industry. The future of the
naval dockyard at Rosyth on the Firth of Forth is in the balance as the
government decides whether to close it towards the end of the
century and concentrate all naval refitting work at Devonport in south-west
England, or to mainain two smaller dockyard operations.
Rosyth employs more than 4,000 people and is the biggest industrial site in
Scotland, so its closure would have a devastating effect on the economy of
Fife.
Yarrow, the GEC subsidiary which builds warships on the Clyde, currently has
a good order book but is very dependent on UK government warship orders.
GEC Ferranti in Edinburgh, which has almost halved its workforce from 6,700
in 1989 to about 4,000, is watching anxiously as governments decide the
future of the European fighter aircraft project, for which it would build
the radar. But it has other defence work and recently won a civil contract
for a communication system for the Channel Tunnel trains.
There have been some layoffs, but there have been no big redundancies in the
electronics sector, which employs around 45,000 people. None the less,
Scotland could be vulnerable, as International Business Machines and Compaq,
two personal computer makers which have Scottish plants, fight out price
wars.
In June British Steel's complex at Ravenscraig closed and most of the last
1,200 workers became redundant.
The death of most steelmaking in Lanarkshire is likely to mean that about
5,500 people in other employment in Lanarkshire will lose their jobs in the
next four years - and that comes in addition to the 4,400 steelworkers who
have left British Steel plants since 1990.
Yet it is possible to be optimistic about Lanarkshire. It is no longer the
case that local energy is being devoted to preserving the steel industry -
it is turning to creating new industries in a potentially attractive
location at the very heart of Scotland's transport system, with a Channel
Tunnel terminal planned and an enterprise zone being set up.
With the final closure of Ravenscraig another step has been taken towards a
more balanced structure for the Scottish economy - the evolution of which,
says Prof Peter Payne of Aberdeen university, has been 'wholly beneficial.'
Industry in Scotland, he writes, 'is more healthy than it has been for
generations.'
He adds, however, that 'it is no longer Scottish industry' - 'with many
Scottish companies having lost their independence or, in the case of branch
plants, never having had any."
