FT  10 MAR 92 / Arts: From dreams to dead fish - The latest Saatchi
installation
Young British Artists is the title of the new display at the Saatchi
Collection (98a Boundary Road NW8, until August: Fridays and Saturdays from
12 until 6: 071 624 8299). At the more superficial level, this latest
selection demonstrates that Charles Saatchi's collection continues to grow
apace by the wholesale acquisition of the work that takes his eye. Rather
more to the point, it shows that his interest embraces not just the
international mainstream, as determined by the current orthodoxies of museum
curators and major dealers, but also the native and youthful avant-garde, as
determined by . . . etcetera etcetera.
Most interesting of all is the demonstration it makes within its own narrow
compass - only six artists are represented, two of whom work as partners -
of the critical dilemma with which we are now faced, in any consideration of
the latest, newest thing. On the one hand, here are two painters, that is to
say artists who lay paint onto canvas with their own hands in the usual way.
One is a minimalist and subliminal conceptualist, the other an exuberant and
old-fashioned surrealist. On the other hand, there are two sculptors, both
of whom appropriate their imagery from given material. And there in the
middle is the partnership, with its curious amalgam of the conceptual, the
sculptural and the polemical.
As ever, the installation of this farrago is magnificent, the whole initial
experience something of true theatre. Theatre indeed, and Grand Guignol at
that, for dominating the first and greater space are the installations of
Damien Hirst, he of the Serpentine fish-tanks, and the tropical butterfly
cycle of life and death in a vacant shop off Bond Street last summer.
Here again are his shelves of fresh fish in tanks of formaldehyde, his
cabinets of pills and drugs, and yet more shelves of visceral specimens in
bottles and jars. But a single tiger shark, suspended alone in its huge tank
centre stage, is the star turn. It is a beautiful if arresting creature, yet
its qualities are inherent to it. Would it be any the less commanding in its
fascination were it to be presented in the museum, or even an enterprising
shop window? The answer is no, for its frisson comes of presentation, not of
art.
Indeed its status as art is in question from the moment Hirst's pretensions
are betrayed by the title: 'The Physical Impossibility of Death in the Mind
of Someone Living'. The shock and horror of the physical, and the certainty
of death, have been staples of art through the ages, but always their
consideration has been mediated by the intervention of the work of art
itself, that both distils and transcends the reality. For Michelangelo to
have offered a cadaver as a Pieta, or Rembrandt the actual side of beef,
would have been both gratuitous and an evasion.
That has not changed, yet here we have the heresy persisted in, that mere
presention and nomination as art is enough - how the old ironist, Duchamp,
would smile. Nearby the shark, Hirst has a double glass chamber, in one part
of which sits a large box where the gentles thrive; and in the other the
flayed and bloody head of a cow, and above it an electric fly-killer where
the unwary bluebottles their quietus make with a sudden dive into the tray
below. 'A Thousand Years' is the metaphysical proposition: most unpleasant.
The other sculptor, Rachel Whiteread, seems by contrast positively
magisterial. Her more recent work, smartly simple casts of mattresses and
mortuary slabs, may have led her down the same dire path of dubious
metaphysics, but here, with the works by which she first attracted notice,
the evidence of an emerging and potential talent is unmistakeable. Already
the image is the cast itself, but the material is still the working plaster,
practical and unprepossessing. 'Ghost', the off-white block that proposes
the full space of the room within by casts of the four walls without, is
especially impressive, the sense of an intuitive and developing engagement
with both material and idea.
But the work of the painter, John Greenwood, offers the greater contrast.
Here is an artist who does not receive his imagery, even to the extent that
Miss Whiteread does, from given and existing material, but dreams it up
himself and establishes it within a credible space and context by putting
brush to canvas. That this should seem even worth the comment shows how far
we have come in our expectation of what art is, or might be, at least in the
context of the Saatchi collection.
Greenwood's bizarre and frantic structures exist consistent both within
themselves and the pictorial space they occupy. They clearly derive from the
surrealism of Picasso around 1930, and of Dali and Miro to some extent, but
most of all from that of Yves Tanguy, ambiguously erotic amorphous forms set
in an oddly hermetic, perhaps submarine world. Greenwood's paintings are
somewhat larger and, perhaps, prematurely sophisticated, full of cleverly
wrought jokes and pictorial mischief. Were they to be less self-regarding in
their humour, and, well-done as they are, less technically complacent, they
would be the more impressive. As an artist, Greenwood might live a little
more dangerously.
Alex Landrum, with his minimal diptychs, each panel painted in household
vinyl or emulsion and subcutaneously labelled by the trade name of the
single colour it carries; and Ben Langlands and Nikki Bell, with
architectural models of the ground plans of public institutions, shown in
relief, complete the show.
Nicely apropos, the Tate, has just announced that it has accepted a gift by
Charles Saatchi of nine paintings and sculptures by British artists of the
1980s: Deacon, Denis, Milroy, Murphy, Opie, Ryan, Wentworth and Willing.
