FT  05 MAY 92 / Survey of Danish Shipping and Shipbuilding (8): Vessels that
need more brains and less brawn - High technology
THE AGE of high-tech shipping has arrived. The largest reefers in the world
can now be sailed by a single man because of the clever application of
advanced computer technology.
In the old days, when labour was cheap and technology levels were more
primitive, there was little push to update the technology used in the
shipping industry. Large vessels built even in the last five years still
need a crew of 20 men or more to keep the ship sailing.
The problem is that in the wealthy industrialised world, skilled manpower is
expensive. The cost of employing a Danish seaman, compared with his
south-east Asian counterpart, will always have the European coming out the
loser. For some time, the only solution open to European shipping companies
wanting to stay competitive has been to employ low-wage crews.
According to the Danish shipyard and computer specialists behind the most
modern fleet of reefers to be built in the world, the new solution is not
more cheap brawn but more brain. Under the special technology development
project called 'Project Ship' sponsored by the Danish Ministry of Industry,
the Danish shipyard, Danyard, worked for four years with the ship automation
company Soren T. Lyngsoe (STL) and 15 specialist suppliers to build the
'simplest, most efficient vessel in the world.'
In the past, several men were needed on the ship's bridge round the clock to
keep an eye on the different functions of the vessel; checking on the route
or looking at weather forecasts.
With a research budget of DKr25m, STL created a system where navigation and
monitoring and control of machinery could be integrated in a single computer
system which could be run by one man.
In the four new reefers, which were built for the Lauritzen Shipping Group,
all important machinery is linked to the computer system which keeps check
at all times on what is taking place on the vessel. A single man stands
watch on the bridge in front of control panel which resembles an aeroplane
cockpit. Using one screen alone he can see the entire status of the vessel.
Safety levels were a vital aspect in developing the new ships because lower
manning levels are often connected with more accidents on conventional
vessels.
'In other systems the alarm is on its own and can block other pictures or
information. We put in four lines at the top of the screen which are
dedicated to alarms and watch stations which will not disappear no matter
what buttons you press by mistake,' explains Mr Niels Otto Wind-Jensen,
sales manager of Lyngsoe-Valmet Marine, which is the arm of the STL group
which specialises in marine automation and communication.
The Integrated Ship Control computer system developed by STL has four levels
of redundancy. This means that the system runs with two parallel computers.
For critical machinery there is a direct electric connection between an
operator panel and the machinery component. If a screen blacks out, the
operator can go immediately to a new station.
As a final resort, the operator is able to go down to a set of emergency
controls which are purely electrical and have no connection to electronics,
and control the machinery by physically pressing the button at the faulty
pump.
The system is also built with a 'dead man's alarm' which is set off if the
officer on watch were to collapse.
The computer notes every time a control lever is touched or if the radar is
adjusted but if there is no activity for a pre-set number of minutes an
alarm is automatically set off which, if the watchkeeping officer does not
acknowledge, triggers a fresh alarm to bring assistance.
The 16,600 dwt reefer, the 'Ditlev Lauritzen,' which was the first of the
series has proven that the new technology is not just impressive on paper
but workable in real life. After two years of test sailing, the Danish
Maritime Authority has given the nod for the crew to be cut to only six men.
'It is true that the demands on the crew are greater and you need highly
educated officers. But it is interesting to note that theexperienced
officers are just as enthusiastic about the new systems as their younger
colleagues, because once they have learnt them, they find computer
automation is a real help,' says Mr Wind-Jensen.
