FT  31 JUL 92 / Survey of Power Generation Equipment (9): When cleanest is
cheapest - Environmental example from the Mongolian plains
WHEN IT comes to technology, backward societies are sometimes more advanced
than those of developed countries.
In a number of other poor countries, machines are used every day to
renewable sources such as the wind, the sun and flowing water into
electricity and heat.
In cattle-rich Mongolia, for example, a study is taking place, with United
Nations backing, of small, portable 'digesters' that produce valuable
methane gas from animal waste.
The Mongolian demand for renewables led to the import of of several hundred
small solar cell units, rated at about 60 W, supplied from the US, Europe
and China.
Western demand for renewable energy has prompted ambitious schemes such as
large 1 MW wind turbines, being developed to satisfy the rising demand for
base-load electricity. They are intended to compete with conventional power
plants burning fossil fuels such as coal, and with nuclear power.
The technologies and the markets are far from mature. Yet by 1987 renewables
were already supplying an estimated 6 per cent of the world's primary
energy, equivalent to the energy from 476m tonnes of oil. Most of that was
from large hydroelectricity schemes.
By 1990 the world already contained an estimated 20,000 wind turbines, one
of the most developed of the renewables, feeding an annual 3.2bn kWh of
electricity into power grids. Europe has about a quarter of the installed
wind power capacity.
Yet all renewables will become increasingly important. 'Worldwide
development of renewable energy systems on a large scale will be necessary
in the future, due to the inevitable and accelerated exhaustion of reserves
of fossil fuels,' says the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development.
Renewables promise a reduced dependence on imported fuels, a diversification
in power supply to improve energy security, and the freeing of finite fossil
fuels such as oil for premium uses such as processing into valuable
commodities.
Over the past couple of years the clean nature of renewables has added to
their attraction. Burning fossil fuels releases the greenhouse gas carbon
dioxide (CO2) that has been locked up in the fuel for millions of years.
Renewables, however, usually draw on the less polluting physical effects of
the sun, such as the wind. And the CO2 released by biofuels renewables,
including the burning of straw and trees, was taken from the atmosphere only
a few years previously.
The European Wind Energy Association (EWEA) says that about a third of CO2
emissions are from electricity generation. 'For every 1 per cent of
electricity generation capacity which is displaced by renewable energy, a
0.3 per cent reduction in total CO2 emission is therefore obtained,' it
says. That is a cut of 15m tonnes a year in the European Community alone.
There would also be large reductions in the emissions of other pollutants
such as nitrogen oxides and sulphur dioxides that contribute to acid rain,
and 1m tonnes less power station slag and ash whose disposal is becoming
increasingly expensive and contentious.
The EWEA says that only if renewables are combined with more efficient use
of energy will the developed world meet its targets for controlling
pollution.
Yet renewables have their own environmental problems, including noise and
visual obtrusiveness. The latter bedevils wind power. 'The undoubted
benefits of renewable energy sources must not blind us to their
environmental costs,' warns the Council for the Protection of Rural England.
The growth of renewables promises plenty of business for manufacturers, and
operating and maintenance jobs.
The EWEA says that the bulk of the wind turbines will probably be built in
Europe which is home to most of the world's 30 or so established producers.
They include respected engineering concerns such as MAN of Germany and the
UK's British Aerospace, and little known but successful small Danish
companies. Outside Europe the two big wind turbine manufacturers are US
Windpower and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries of Japan.
Many countries are committed to renewables. The European Commission, which
is funding research and development, says small hydroelectric units could
provide 2-3 per cent of the European Community's electricity and solar power
1-2% of its total energy, mostly as heating.
Denmark, one of the world's leading wind power countries, produces about 2
per cent of its electricity from turbines, with a target of 10 per cent by
the turn of the century.
Yet kick-starting a renewables market is not easy. And the sheer size and
cost of large wave and tidal power schemes, such as a proposed Pounds 1.1bn
tidal barrage in the UK's Mersey estuary, make their construction unlikely.
In Europe, subsidies for renewables installations have been backed by
stimulants such as tax relief on investments or earnings, and premium
payments for the power produced.
Denmark, for example, introduced a 30 per cent private turbine installation
subsidy that disappeared in 1989 as the technology improved. Such schemes
are, however, open to abuse and costly to run.
And although the UK government has provided Pounds 180m for renewables
research and development since 1979, and currently subsidises the
electricity from installations, it is unclear whether it will meet its
target of 1,000 MW of renewables, or 2 per cent of the UK's generating
capacity, in place by the turn of the century.
Critics say this is a fraction of the potential and that renewables should
receive more in subsidy than the current 1 per cent of the Pounds 1.2bn
being collected this year from the Non Fossil Fuel Obligation (NFFO) levy on
electricity from fossil fuels. The balance supports nuclear power.
The NFFO subsidy is also due to end in 1998, which critics say is far too
soon for relatively unproved renewables to provide a return for investors.
Technical studies point to 20 year lives for wind turbines although large
machines have yet to clock up that sort of lifetime.
There is also the cautionary tale of the UK company Howden which lost Pounds
13.2m as a result of problems on turbines it supplied to California. In 1989
Howden pulled out of the market.
The turbine market should, however, be helped by the current development of
international standards that investors will be able to trust.
The UK government now intends to review its renewables strategy after the
completion of an independent study in the autumn. Yet the UK's unsettled
approach to renewables is not fundamentally different from that of other
industrialised countries.
The hurdles for renewables are many and the technologies in many cases have
yet to prove economic. However, like is not being compared with like, as few
economies allocate the true cost of the pollution from burning fuels, for
example.
As countries move towards more sophisticated energy and environmental
pricing, typified by the energy and carbon tax proposals from the European
Commission, the renewables market could get a new wind.
