FT  22 FEB 92 / Israeli child killed by Hizbollah rocket
HIZBOLLAH militiamen returning to southern Lebanon within hours of a
withdrawal by Israeli forces fired a rocket into northern Israel yesterday,
killing a five-year-old girl.
Israeli forces responded quickly to the first Israeli civilian death since
Hizbollah (Party of God) began a series of rocket attacks in revenge for
Israel's killing on Sunday of Sheikh Abbas Mousawi, the organisation's
leader.
Heavy artillery bombardments were directed at villages north of the security
zone - now largely deserted by their inhabitants  - including areas from
which Israeli tanks and troops had just withdrawn after their 24-hour strike
into United Nations-patrolled Lebanese territory. Officials said further
action on the ground would be taken if necessary.
The withdrawal - after an operation aimed at stamping out the rocket threat
to the 'security zone' Israel occupies just north of its border with Lebanon
 -followed international protests led by Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN
secretary-general, and urgent US calls on the Israeli, Lebanese and Syrian
governments to exercise 'maximum restraint'.
However, the spate of violence which has gripped the area for the past week
went on unabated and is certain to sour the atmosphere when the Middle East
peace talks resume in Washington on Monday.
Last night Mr Boutros Ghali said he would send two senior aides to Beirut
and Tel Aviv for urgent talks 'in view of the deteriorating situation'.
Mr Marrack Goulding, a Briton in charge of peace-keeping operations, and his
assistant, Mr Kofi Annan of Ghana, will leave for the region today.
Yesterday's attack confounded Israeli army claims that its thrust into
Lebanon had been 'a complete success'.
Hizbollah fighters were reported to have poured back into the two villages
the Israelis had captured, accompanied by gunmen from the Amal militia,
another Shia group which had previously been at odds with Hizbollah.
Mr Yitzhak Shamir, Israel's prime minister, has rejected retaliatory action
on the scale of the 1982 invasion, but promised to use 'all Israel's might'
to end the attacks.
US credit crackdown, Page 3
Realism in retreat, Page 8
