FT  12 AUG 92 / It grows on trees: Biodegradable plastics made from plants
are bearing commercial fruit
Biodegradable plastics are continuing to make commercial and scientific
progress, in the face of scepticism from environmental groups and a
formidable cost disadvantage compared with petrochemical plastics.
ICI, the UK chemical group, has just opened a plant at Billingham in the
north-east of England to make 300 tonnes a year of Biopol, which it says is
the first fully biodegradable commercial plastic. The company plans to raise
annual production of 'Nature's plastic' to 5,000 tonnes by the mid 1990s.
Biopol is made in an industrial fermenter by bacteria that convert sugar
(refined from corn or beet) into a polymer. But US scientists recently
announced an important step towards making biodegradable plastic directly in
plants - raising the vision of farmers growing plastic potatoes in the next
century. Researchers at Michigan State University and James Madison
University in Virginia have made a plastic similar to Biopol in genetically
engineered Arabidopsis thaliana, a type of cress.
At present Biopol costs about Pounds 10 per kilo - 20 times more than
conventional plastic. Although the price will fall as ICI scales up
production, plastic produced in a bacterial fermenter is bound to be much
more expensive than its petrochemical equivalent.
But the US experiments - and similar research being carried out by ICI Seeds
in the UK - could open the way to a cheaper source of biodegradable plastic.
Plants are more efficient than bacteria at producing large quantities of
organic material, says Christopher Somerville, professor of botany at MSU,
and the cost could eventually be reduced tenfold by growing Biopol-type
polymers on farms. For example, potatoes might be genetically engineered to
make and store plastics instead of starch in their tubers.
Even at its current price ICI has no shortage of buyers for the limited
amounts of Biopol available. It has been used in Germany since 1990 to make
bottles for Wella's Sanara shampoo.
Biopol's US launch came this year in the form of bottles for Brocato
International's Evanesce shampoo, and the material is being tested by
Creightons Naturally in the UK for cosmetics containers.
Japan has shown particular enthusiasm for Biopol since its introduction
there in 1991 as a container for Ishizawa Kenkyujo's Earthic Alga shampoos
and conditioners. This year three other Japanese hair care companies started
using Biopol containers and next month Kai will introduce a disposable razor
with a Biopol handle. ICI Japan is developing other applications with local
users - for example, Biopol nets to collect edible seaweed.
However, several environmental groups are distinctly unenthusiastic. 'Our
view of biodegradable plastics including Biopol is that they are a red
herring,' says Sarah Finch of Friends of the Earth.
'They give people the wrong message - that it's OK to throw plastics away -
and distract from the real need, which is to recycle plastics,' she adds.
ICI responds that there are many applications of plastic - particularly when
it is mixed closely with other materials - for which recycling is not
practical. Examples include rubbish bags, disposable nappies, and paper
plates and cups coated with thin plastic film. In these cases a material
such as Biopol, which is consumed by micro-organisms in a landfill site,
should have a clear environmental advantage over petrochemical plastics that
last for decades. A Biopol shampoo bottle disappears within two years in a
typical dump, ICI says.
Biodegradability is not the only environmental claim made for Biopol.
Another point is that it is made from renewable resources - sugar refined
from crops - rather than fossil fuels. And Biopol does not have to be thrown
away; it can be recycled or burned cleanly to provide energy in an
incinerator.
Polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB), the polymer on which Biopol is based, is produced
naturally by a wide range of micro-organisms as an energy store, in the same
way as humans accumulate fat. ICI uses Alcaligenes eutrophus, a common
bacterium, in its fermenter.
Pure PHB is too stiff and brittle for most applications, so ICI adds small
amounts of a simple organic acid to the sugar feedstock, to make the plastic
stronger and more flexible. In technical terms, the bacteria then produce
co-polymers composed mainly of PHB with varying amounts of hydroxyvalerate
(HV).
In this way ICI can produce a range of thermoplastic polymers which can be
processed with conventional techniques to make bottles, mouldings, fibres
and films. High-grade Biopol is being developed for medical applications,
including woven patches for use inside the body to protect tissues from
scarring after surgery; after the wound has healed, enzymes in the blood
dissolve away the patch.
The genetically engineered Arabidopsis plants have so far produced only
small amounts of pure PHB, but Yves Poirier of Michigan State University
believes it will eventually be possible to make a range of PHB-HV
co-polymers directly in crops.
Although PHB-based polymers have set the pace so far, researchers are
developing other biodegradable materials. In the US, for example, Du Pont
and the Battelle Institute are working on plastics based on lactic acid, a
cheap by-product of the dairy industry.
Another approach is to use carbohydrate polymers based on starch. Partially
biodegradable shopping bags are already manufactured from a thin matrix of
conventional polythene filled in with starch. After the bag has been thrown
away, micro-organisms eat away the starch, leaving a flimsy polythene
structure which soon disintegrates. Ferruzzi of Italy and Warner Lambert of
the US are developing fully biodegradable starch-based plastics.
At present, biodegradable plastics represent just a tiny market compared
with conventional petrochemical materials whose production amounts to more
than 100m tonnes per year. But oil and gas prices will rise substantially
over the next 20 years, according to most economists' predictions, and
bio-plastics will become cheaper through a combination of scientific
progress and improved process technology. Farming for plastics could then
grow into a large agribusiness.
