FT  18 JUN 92 / Telecommunications In Business (3): Area with high potential
 -Telemarketing
AT least 50 per cent of all businesses already use the telephone as part of
their marketing activities in a planned and controlled manner, according to
the British Direct Marketing Association.
Mostly it is used to take orders, handle customer inquiries or make
appointments. The trend, however, is to extend the use of the telephone in
marketing to such new areas as establishing new business or managing
relationships with existing customers.
Telemarketing has several advantages over traditional marketing methods. Its
proponents say that it allows most companies to significantly increase
customer contact, lower unit-cost of sales, reduce the number of salesmen
and cars on the road, and add new dimensions of flexibility in relationships
with customers.
But most important, they say, telemarketing can allow organisations to offer
a significantly better level of service to their customers.
Recent technological advances in telephone call-handling such as automatic
call distribution - where rather than hearing an engaged tone when the call
handlers are all occupied, callers are placed in a queue (see article above)
 -and computer integrated telephony (CIT) - where computer databases are
linked to the incoming call, allowing call handlers to quickly access
information about the customer such as payment records, product preferences
or credit rating - are allowing companies to give a much higher level of
service, increasingly the most significant criterion by which customers
choose their suppliers.
Another contributing factor for the increasing use of the telephone in
marketing is the lower cost of phone calls in real terms. New services such
as 0800 automated freephone numbers have also increased the use of the phone
for placing orders, (see page 6: freephone services herald intelligent
network era).
According to Mr Richard Dorgan, the product manager responsible for
Mercury's newly-launched FreeCall and LocalCall freephone services, some
Pounds 150m worth of calls a year are made via Britain's freephone numbers -
'we expect this figure to double over the next five years as organisations
increasingly use the service to help maintain established customer-bases and
to attract new business.'
Customers, too, are increasingly attracted by companies which use the phone
as their main point of contact - as witnessed by the rise in popularity of
those offering their services by phone such as home banking, motor insurance
and travel agents.
Younger people are particularly attracted to buying by phone, according to
Mr Simon Roncoroni, partner in Leiderman and Roncoroni, a London-based
telemarketing consultancy - 'younger people are much more used to using the
phone,' says Mr Roncoroni, 'and these young people are the customers of
today.'
MANY businesses that now operate out of retail outlets or on a face-to-face
basis will move towards the telephone to handle customers, says Elisabeth
Gluck, chairman of Programmes UK, a leading telemarketing agency.
Most banks, also, are looking at home banking as a way of extending their
services and opening hours.
One of the pioneers has been the Midland Bank with its First Direct
subsidiary. Launched over three years ago, First Direct says it is now
Britain's fastest-growing bank with 10,000 new customers joining every
month. Every day, it says, it receives up to 10,000 calls, with nearly 50
per cent of calls occurring outside banking hours.
'There's no longer any doubt that the market for direct banking in the UK
will be substantial,' says Mr Kevin Newman, First Direct's chief executive.
'Our research indicates a potential market of up to six million people by
the end of the decade.'
Business-to-business sales are also increasingly achieved by phone. Even big
purchases, such as computers, are being sold in this way and stationery and
consumables have been sold in this way for many years. But just picking up
the phone is no guarantee for sales success - 'companies put a lot of budget
towards technology but not in developing communications skills,' observes
Elisabeth Gluck. Good communications skills, however, can significantly
improve productivity, she says.
Many in the industry fear what the European Community may soon have to say
on the issue of telemarketing and 'cold calling.' The EC's directive on data
protection will attempt to standardise the free flow of data across Europe.
How this data is gathered and subsequently used is now up for discussion.
