FT  02 OCT 92 / ERM: The Anglo-German Row: Portuguese PM urges caution on
two-speed EC
MR ANIBAL Cavaco Silva, Portugal's prime minister, has called on fellow EC
leaders to give an urgent boost to ratification of the Maastricht treaty in
its agreed form by all 12 member states at the Birmingham special summit.
In an interview with the Financial Times, he warned against discussion of a
'two-speed' Europe, under which some member states would forge ahead with
economic and monetary union (Emu) more rapidly than others, and said that
further debate on the structure and management of the ERM at Birmingham
would run the risk of further destabilising EC currency markets.
'It is necessary to give another impulse to European construction (at
Birmingham) to overcome the idea that the project has fallen apart,' he
said.
'If we don't complete the ratification process, other issues will be
poisoned.' The Portuguese leader said the summit should focus on making a
new effort to explain the European integration process to a sceptical
public, and stressed the need for all 12 member states to act jointly.
Asked about recent suggestions that different EC countries might move at
different speeds towards Emu, he said: 'I think it would be very negative,
and in several countries I think it would create a very negative reaction,
not just in the south but in the north. If two speeds means a small group
with a strong head - that is, Germany - I think that even in those countries
whose currencies are linked to the D-Mark it would cause negative reactions
from public opinion. I think that's not to the advantage of the Germans.'
Mr Cavaco Silva forecast that the pound and the lira would return to the
ERM, and said that recent instability enhanced the case for more intense
monetary co-operation rather than diminishing it.
'When we examine very carefully the EMS, it seems there aren't too many deep
changes to be made,' he said in a gentle rebuff to Mr John Major's demand
for reforms.
'Perhaps some adjustments (are needed) to the way the system is managed, but
if anything is required it is more co-operation among the monetary
institutions, not less. This points clearly to progressing as soon as
possible towards monetary union,' he said.
In the interview, Mr Cavaco Silva:
Reaffirmed his commitment to the current parity of the escudo in the ERM, in
the face of recent market speculation against it;
Promised to press ahead with dismantling remaining exchange controls by the
end of the year, while watching carefully for further signs of speculation
within the country's banking system;
Called for continuing wage restraint by Portuguese employers and trade
unions and warned of spending cuts in the forthcoming budget.
