FT  21 MAY 92 / Governor of Bank waives bulk of his 28% pay rise
MR Robin Leigh-Pemberton, governor of the Bank of England, was given a 28
per cent pay rise to Pounds 198,446 in 1991-92, but he decided to waive all
but 6 per cent of the increase.
Last year, Mr Leigh-Pemberton was widely criticised for accepting a pay rise
of nearly 17 per cent in the year to February 1991, while urging pay
restraint on the public.
Bank directors yesterday defended their decision to give the governor a 28
per cent rise while the government and the Bank were encouraging companies
to make low pay awards.
'There's no way I would apologise for that,' said Mr Gavin Laird, general
secretary of the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union and a member
of the Bank's remuneration committee which set Mr Leigh-Pemberton's salary.
'I believe in the rate for the job,' Mr Laird went on to say. 'My only
complaint was I felt he should have taken the money.'
A Bank official said Mr Leigh-Pemberton's decision to forego most of the
rise was 'entirely his own decision'. The Bank refused to say whether Mr
Leigh-Pemberton had waived any of his wage rise in the current year as well.
After waiving Pounds 34,135 of the rise, Mr Leigh-Pemberton was paid Pounds
164,311 in 1991-92. The 6 per cent increase was in line with that of the
bulk of his staff.
Other executive directors of the Bank saw their remuneration increase by 13
per cent on average. None of them has waived their entitlement to the
additional money.
Sir Adrian Cadbury, chairman of the Bank's remuneration committee and a
campaigner for improved corporate management practices, said it was
essential for the Bank's health that the pay of senior directors should not
fall too far behind the private sector.
He said the committee, which includes Sir David Scholey, chairman of
merchant bank SG Warburg, and Sir Brian Corby, who retired yesterday as
president of the Confederation of British Industry, had established a
framework in 1988 for moving the directors' pay nearer to a 'semi-market
rate'.
'We realised we could not get the pay rates to the proper level all in one
go,' he said. Instead, the committee decided to recommend sizeable pay
increases in each of the succeeding few years.
In November 1990, the committee fixed the precise amount of the 1991-92 pay
rise, opting for a 28 per cent increase for Mr Leigh-Pemberton, even though
there were clear signals from the government that prominent public figures
should set an example by accepting lower pay rises.
Sir Adrian said it was vital that the Bank should be in a position to
recruit outsiders to its top jobs, so its pay levels should be competitive.
But it was difficult to find a private sector equivalent of the governor.
Stricter standards call, Page 10
