FT  10 OCT 92 / The couch potato campaign: From 'infomercials' to Ross
Perot's favourite chat show, television now makes the running in
presidential elections. Jurek Martin reports on the eve of the first
Bush-Clinton TV debate
WATCHING tomorrow night's presidential debate on television will be a
professional duty and it might be very interesting. There is a chance, if
not tomorrow then at one of the other two scheduled debates in the next 10
days, that somebody will say something that will determine who inherits the
White House on November 3. After all, many millions of Americans will be
watching, between digesting their dinners and anticipating the next round in
the baseball play-offs.
However, honesty requires the confession that this year's long campaign has
required altogether too much couch potato life. Televised debates, of
course, have been a feature since 1960, in primaries and down the home
stretch, but at least they were interspersed with a lot of travel around the
country, with or without the candidates themselves.
This is still possible and desirable, except that this year it has been
harder than ever to avoid, from dawn to after midnight, the need to keep
half an eye on the box. The difference is that the eye is no longer looking
for the telling soundbite or attack advertising or even the substantive
interview on the big networks, but for an extended exposition of a
candidate's views on everything from life, love and free trade to
contraception.
Ross Perot is to blame for this. Like a canny businessman he worked out that
some television is free, and, like a true populist, that a lot of people
watch and listen to programmes far removed from mainstream news and current
affairs in the evenings and on Sunday mornings.
So he promulgated his prospective candidacy on his favourite talk show
programme, Larry King Live, which broadcasts on CNN.
He explained why he was getting out in July to Mr King, ruminated about a
re-entry with Mr King, and justified it not only to Mr King but over the
breakfast table.
This week alone, according to an informal count, President George Bush has
appeared twice on Mr King's evening show and three times on ABC's Good
Morning America. Governor Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore, the inseparable
ones, have appeared once with Mr King and once with Phil Donahue, whose
daytime show caters mostly for housewives with problems, while Mr Clinton
has appeared alone on NBC's Today. Mr Bush has said he would never do
Donahue, but nobody is betting on that now.
Mr Perot, nothing if not unpredictable, has temporarily forsaken his old
beat, now offering paid-for - and widely watched - 'infomercials' instead of
enduring the cross-questioning from the journalists whom, Mr King apart, he
so patently dislikes. But his half-hour on one channel on Tuesday night cost
him upwards of Dollars 350,000.
This extension of political discourse from the conventional political
programmes to those which still often resemble freak shows should be seen as
encouraging. It may not be the exercise in democracy that Plato or the
Founding Fathers contemplated, but at least it is an exercise. Televised
'town meetings' are also now a standard campaign tool.
Much onus is placed on the hosts themselves. Mr King, a gravel-voiced
Brooklynite, has been plying his trade for years, but never with such
prominence. This year he has been notably pally with Mr Perot, deferential
to Mr Bush (though not to the point of taking off his trademark braces and
putting on a jacket) and accommodating to Messrs Clinton and Gore. He sees
himself more as a conduit than a pundit, though the frequency of his
interviews with those seeking the highest office threaten to turn him into
the latter.
Much sharper questioning has been forthcoming from Bryant Gumbel and Katie
Couric, who preside over NBC's chatty early morning Today programme. Mr
Gumbel may be as good an interrogator as American television now possesses
and Ms Couric, though less experienced, has her moments. The refusal of both
to bow down to Mr Perot's tirades about the political establishment, of
which he considers the professional media a part, has been conspicuously
admirable.
Mr Donahue performs with a studio audience, as, occasionally, does Mr King,
and is practised at playing to it. He has a tendency to preach and was
firmly rebuked by Mr Clinton this week for going on at length about what the
Democratic candidate may have done in the anti-war movement while a student
at Oxford many years ago.
For Mr Clinton and Mr Perot, as challengers, recourse to the new medium and
its studios has presented few problems. Mr Bush, however, likes to stand on
the dignity of the presidency and prefers sessions to be conducted live, or
taped, in the White House, sometimes in the presence of his wife.
None of this will matter tomorrow, when all three will be on a carefully
constructed podium in Kansas City. On Thursday, the names of the
interrogatory team were announced. Acceptable to the candidates were the
moderator, Jim Lehrer, co-host of public television's excellent evening news
hour, and three panelists, one writing journalist, one television reporter
and one who has done both (actually, many writing luminaries also spend a
lot of time talking on television these days).
There was no room, at least not the first time around, for Messrs King,
Donahue and Gumbel or Ms Couric (some of whom might have refused in any
case). Perhaps the revolution in television politics still has a way to run.
