FT  23 OCT 92 / International Company News: O&amp;Y calls off meeting with
lenders
OLYMPIA &amp; York has cancelled a key meeting with lenders to discuss a new
debt-restructuring plan, amid signs that negotiations between the ailing
real estate developer and its creditors will soon come to a head.
Despite calling off the meeting which was due to take place in Toronto
yesterday afternoon, O&amp;Y still insists that it will meet the October 27
deadline for filing its latest restructuring proposals.
O&amp;Y took the initiative in setting up the meeting, but a representative for
one group of project lenders said they were told that the company was not
yet ready to provide a preview of the plan, which covers more than half its
CDollars 13.5bn (USDollars 10.9bn) debt.
Negotiations with several of the 27 creditor groups came to a halt over the
past 3 to 4 weeks, but are expected to resume in earnest once O&amp;Y unveils
its revised proposals.
The initial plan, presented in August, would have required most project
lenders to accept a blend of extended maturities on their loans, and
tax-exempt 'distress' preferred shares. Other secured and unsecured
creditors would be offered an immediate equity stake of up to 49 per cent in
the parent company, Olympia &amp; York Developments, plus convertible bonds.
Under an Ontario court order, O&amp;Y must take a vote on any revised plan
between November 20 and 30. The court protection granted last May expires on
December 30.
Several creditor groups are laying the groundwork to seize rental income
from O&amp;Y buildings or the buildings themselves if negotiations founder over
the next month.
Prudential Insurance, which holds a USDollars 155m mortgage on a 45-storey
building in central Toronto, has asked a US court to reverse last May's
order granting various of O&amp;Y's Canadian subsidiaries protection under
Chapter 11 of the US bankruptcy code, as well as under the Canadian
Companies Creditors Arrangements Act.
A Prudential spokesman said the insurance group is concerned about the
'inconsistency, delay and confusion' which could result from courts in two
countries having jurisdiction over O&amp;Y.
He said that if O&amp;Y's restructuring plan turns out to be unacceptable, 'we'd
rather have the building now than later'.
