FT  21 MAR 92 / Appointments: Swings and roundabouts in Aronstead's garden
Aronstead, Britain's leading garden and patio furniture-maker, has recruited
three key, and relatively young, executives after the company, which is
suffering significant losses, parted with its managing director and sales
director in the past few months.
David Smallridge, 36, joins as managing director from Coats Viyella, where
he was managing director of lace net curtain maker Stiebel, on the departure
of Geoff Gurling. Aronstead's parent, Headway, formerly Beaverco, just
announced losses for the six months to December 1991 of Pounds 795,000; it
attributes the bulk of the short fall to Aronstead, which was hit by a poor
summer, but also, in Headway's view, would have benefited from stronger
management.
Headway's chief executive Andrew Staniland - himself from Tootal, now owned
by Coats Viyella - knew Smallridge, who had also been at Tootal earlier in
his career, and was attracted among other things by his knowledge of the
mail-order business.
Malcolm Ritchie, 41, is the new finance director, previously finance
director of Chloride's US subsidiary Altus. 'They gave him a heap of
problems and he did an excellent job,' says Peter Hogdson, Headway finance
director. 'We hope he will eat it alive,' he adds, of the task at Aronstead,
a much smaller company, but one with ambitious plans.
Part of the new strategy is to break the seasonality of garden furniture,
with products ranging from toy prams - the Christmas market  - to slides and
climbing frames for the Early Learning Centre. The new sales and marketing
director, who says more than 20 new products are planned for launch next
year, is Linda Oliver, 38. She replaces the previous marketing director who
left last autumn after just six months. Hers is also a main board
appointment.
With her timing 'less than perfect', Oliver left Tootal Apparel shortly
after a management buyout, where she says she was not a major shareholder,
and effectively not on the board. She admits it cost her dearly financially,
but says she is more excited by the Aronstead opportunity. She too knows
Smallridge when they worked together many years ago at Bradgate, then
Tootal's furry carseat cover-maker.
