FT  07 JUL 92 / International Company News: Mexican bank privatisations
raise Dollars 12.9bn
THE MEXICAN government has privatised its eighteenth and last bank by
selling 66.3 per cent of the shares in Banco del Centro for 869,381m pesos
(Dollars 279m).
The bank privatisations will have raised 38,665bn pesos (Dollars 12.9bn)
when all payments are made, far more than the government and independent
analysts expected.
The average bank was sold for 3.068 times book value and 14.75 historic
earnings. In the US and Europe, banks are typically sold for 2.2 times book
value and 14 times historic earnings, according to the Mexican Finance
Ministry.
The government sold 70.7 per cent of Banamex, the largest bank by assets,
for 9,706bn pesos; 56 per cent of Bancomer, the second largest, for 8,559bn
pesos; and 51 per cent of Serfin for 2,827bn pesos The most expensive bank
relative to earnings was Banorie, which went for a multiple of 23.7.
The bank sales appear to have been free of the corruption and string-pulling
that have plagued many developing-country privatisations.
However, questions were raised when the winning bidder for Banco Somex
pulled out, after his investors, whom he refused to name, balked at the
price he was to pay. The bank was immediately awarded to the second highest
bidder.
The privatisations have also been criticised for concentrating wealth and
power in the hands of a few rich Mexicans.
Several Mexican businessmen hold key interests and directorships in a series
of banks to add to their already extensive industrial holdings. Rather than
sell off shares in the banks through large public offerings, as El Salvador
is doing, the Mexican government chose to auction off the banks to
investment groups.
These investor groups were usually headed by owners of brokerages. The
banks's owners have for the most part formed financial groups, housing their
banks, brokerages, and other financial companies under one roof in the
belief that this would give them competitive advantages.
