FT  12 SEP 92 / Winners and losers in the generation game
A NEW SET of long-term contracts for British Coal seems likely to be agreed
as early as next week. They will lead to a big shake-up in the coal and
electricity industries.
The contracts - between British Coal and the electricity generators - will
set out the volume and price of British Coal's sales over the next five
years, clearing the way for privatisation of the state-owned corporation.
The contracts will be based on market prices, ending coal's long-running
subsidies. One crucial issue is how the benefits of lower coal prices will
be shared out.
It already looks as if the negotiations have turned out even worse than
feared for British Coal, judging by an outline deal put forward by
Rothschilds, the merchant bankers advising the government on privatisation,
and approved by Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary.
According to proposals being considered this week, coal deliveries to the
generators will fall from their 1990-91 level of 69m tonnes to 40m when the
new contracts start in April. After three years, they would fall a further
10m tonnes to 30m. Both those numbers are below forecasts made in a report
last year by Rothschilds, and imply shrinkage of pit numbers and payrolls.
They will probably lead to a further 15,000 job losses in British Coal's
60,000 workforce, which has been halved since 1987.
British Coal has been in a very weak bargaining position. The two generating
companies in England and Wales, National Power and PowerGen, account for
more than three quarters of British Coal's market, and they have been
determined to drive a hard bargain.
The price at which coal will be delivered is believed to be Pounds 1.50 a
gigajoule, compared with Pounds 1.85 in existing contracts. The question
that still has to be resolved is how that lower cost will be passed to the
consumer. Talks were taking place yesterday between the generators and the
regional distribution companies at the offices of the Electricity
Association in Millbank, London.
The cynical view is that the government will allow a sizeable portion of the
new profits to stay with the generators to increase the value of the 40 per
cent stake it still holds in those companies. Meanwhile pressures - not
least the competition that electricity faces from gas, where prices are set
to fall sharply next year - are encouraging the generators to pass benefits
to the customer. As coal's role in the generation market shrinks, that of
competing sources such as nuclear power and gas will grow.
The average contract price for electricity is about 3.3p a unit, but one
regional company said yesterday it had been offered a deal by the generators
at 3.25p a unit. The company said it was determined to negotiate that closer
to 3p.
Mr David Morris, the chairman of Northern Electric in Newcastle upon Tyne,
has given a public pledge that his company will pass on the entire benefit
of cheaper coal.
Professor Stephen Littlechild, the electricity regulator, will also have to
give his blessing to the new arrangement. It might all still fall apart if
he disapproves.
It is less clear how the large industrial consumers will fare: they buy
electricity direct from the generators in an unregulated market. Mr John
Topliss of the industrial company GKN and a member of the Major Energy Users
Council said yesterday: 'We expect to see all the benefits passed on to big
users who are suffering sharp price increases.'
Mr Heseltine is pushing the deal in order to get coal privatisation moving
in the next parliament, but he may still face a stormy ride. The numbers
imply that British Coal's sales might halve in the next five years.
He also risks accusations of handing the electricity industry a profits
windfall.
COLLIERY managers who may make a bid for the mining industry have pressed
the government for money to fund redundancies and retraining before
privatisation. Mr John Meads, general secretary of the British Association
of Colliery Management (Bacom), said: 'It does not make sense to privatise
the industry and then make the new owners run down the business. The
government needs to recognise its obligation to provide sufficient funding
for retraining and redundancies before the business is put up for sale.'
