FT  28 APR 92 / Survey of Poland (23): Magic label for sales - ABB is well
placed to seize business opportunities
AT SOME point the modernisation of Poland's pollutived and inefficient
energy system will cease to be a problem of huge dimensions and become a
significant business opportunity for the suppliers of efficient generating
and transmission equipment. ABB, the Swedish-Swiss engineering group, is
positioning itself for that moment.
The decision to move east was taken by Mr Percy Barnevik, ABB's chief
executive, and his board in January 1989. Poland and the giant Zamech
engineering plant in the northern town of Elblag, with which ABB had
longstanding licensing agreements, became one of its first targets. After 15
months of talks, first with the communists and then with a Solidarity-led
government, a new company ABB Zamech was put in place.
ABB took a 76 per cent stake in the new company with the state retaining 19
per cent and 5 per cent reserved for employees. It was also granted a
six-year profits tax holiday. ABB put up Dollars 15m for its share of the
factory and invested a further Dollars 10m in machinery and equipment. It
also pays Dollars 4m a year for a five-year lease on the buildings which
used to build U-boats.
Since then, ABB has invested in seven other Polish factories, its latest
acquisition being the Elta transformer plant in Lodz where it paid Dollars
10.4m for a 51 per cent stake. ABB employs about 10,000 people, making it
Poland's largest foreign employer.
Re-training and skill upgrading is a crucial part of ABB's strategy. At
Zamech, Mr Pawel Olechnowicz, the chief executive, heads a strong Polish
management which enjoys advice and frequent visits from Zurich but is solely
responsible for the plant's performance. Mr Olechnowicz, who once ran the
steel castings department, says: 'Since the company became ABB Zamech the
plant has gained know-how, the management has learned English and the shop
floor has improved work discipline.'
A crucial management tool is direct access to ABB's worldwide sales network
as well as financial backing. He also has the magic ABB label on his
products which eases marketing. But until now, new capital investment has
been relatively light although the medium-term investment plan has a Dollars
50m tag attached to it.
Mr Olechnowicz says Dollars 15m is being invested in the plant. The main
changes have come through better management. The plant has been re-organised
into 'profit centres' with well-defined budgets and tight financial
discipline. Factory space has been cut back and a satellite telephone link
to Zurich has been installed to help head office monitor the company.
