FT  29 JAN 92 / UK News (Employment): Government seeks support on nurses'
pay
THE DEPARTMENT of Health is asking the independent review body on nurses'
pay to endorse 'broad objectives' on performance pay for nurses which it
hopes to implement next year.
The objectives are set out in a confidential paper for the review body this
year. They include freezing existing allowances such as London weighting and
asking the review body to establish 'target average percentage pay
increases'. A further objective covers the use of the money needed to meet
those increases. The review body would be expected to recommend the
proportion to be used on increasing pay for all nurses, and the proportion
to be available for performance pay.
The Department of Health stresses that 'improved performance or productivity
should not mean an automatic increase in the overall pay bill.' It adds:
'Money which might otherwise be used to enhance centrally determined
allowances and other payments could be used to better effect to reward
performance.'
The department gives little detail about how performance pay would be
calculated, beyond saying that both individual and group performance pay
could be used. Nursing union officials believe that the department is
leaning towards the unions' preferred option of group pay. 'Much work on
performance measurement systems in nursing is going on in the NHS at
present, but their use and objectives may be varied,' says the document.
However the department admits: 'We do not underestimate the skills which
local managers will need to sharpen or in some cases acquire if a flexible
pay package is to operate successfully.'
The proposals may have some effect on this year's offer from the pay review
body, which is expected to report next week, as the department is asking
that there be no increase in allowances this year. That will leave more room
for the department to manoeuvre on performance allowances in the future.
The main nursing unions remain suspicious of performance pay, although they
are prepard to discuss it with the department. Some managers and ancillary
workers in the NHS already have an element of performance pay.
Ms Christine Hancock, general secretary of the Royal College of Nursing,
said she was opposed in principle to performance pay. 'You can reward people
for things like punctuality but it is very difficult to introduce
performance indicators into nursing,' she said.
An RCN paper in response to the department says that it confuses the
flexibility needed to deal with local labour-market problems, such as those
encountered in London and the south-east, and performance pay. It says that
allowing the body to decide how much should be allocated for performance
would go beyond its present remit.
Ms Judith Carter, nursing national officer of the health union Cohse, said
there was no real evidence that performance pay improves performance. She
could not agree to nurses' pay in general being held down to allow room for
performance pay. 'The unions will be keeping a close watch on how the
department proposes to measure quality of care,' she said.
