FT  15 SEP 92 / Helping others help themselves: The weekend's currency
manoeuvres
The European Community's exercise in monetary crisis management clears up
some of the short-term obstacles on the road to economic and monetary union
(Emu). But, underlined by the nervous mood on the foreign exchanges after
yesterday's Bundesbank interest rate cuts, the breathing space may prove
limited.
In acting decisively to arrange the European currency realignment, the EC
has tried to surmount the present period of doubt over its political and
economic objectives. Germany took the initiative, with Chancellor Helmut
Kohl personally involved in crucial talks with the Bundesbank last Friday.
The outcome of the French referendum on the Maastricht treaty - and the
course of European co-operation - remains on a knife-edge.
The adjustment in the European Monetary System (EMS) was an attempt to show
that European governments can still co-operate - and not drift apart in the
face of political and economic instability in both halves of the continent.
By explicitly forcing the Bundesbank to look beyond its borders in framing
monetary policies, Europe's finance ministers have chalked up a sizeable
victory - and have also set an intriguing precedent for the development of
Emu.
Europe's economy is weathering a phase of slow growth, high interest rates
and mounting unemployment, adding up to one of the most exacting challenges
for economic management since 1945. Yet governments are trying to win
support for a treaty on political and monetary union which seems likely to
impose further economic sacrifices in pursuit of the Maastricht goal of
irrevocably fixed exchange rates by the end of the decade.
The weekend EMS bargaining, under which the Bundesbank traded a cut in
interest rates for a lira devaluation, was hailed in Brussels yesterday,
perhaps optimistically, as the first step towards a new European economic
order. An alternative view came from a leading banker in Frankfurt who said
that, in orchestrating the lira devaluation, the Bundesbank had been a
victim of 'hysteria' engendered by unprecedented currency inflows of DM 24bn
into Germany last week.
The statutorily independent Bundesbank normally takes international factors
into account in framing its monetary policies. But never has it bowed so
dramatically and so overtly to pressure from European governments for lower
borrowing costs.
One leading Commission official claimed that the Community had now moved
into a new phase of monetary collaboration which put it firmly on track for
Emu. 'The road will be very difficult,' he said, 'but this shows that
governments can co-operate.'
The German government, which has been increasingly irritated during the past
two months by the central bank's tight monetary policies, played a
significant part in steering through the weekend move.
Bonn took the initiative for two reasons. Relaxing the Bundesbank's credit
reins counters the risk that the present period of German economic
stagnation will turn into full-scale recession. Additionally, Mr Kohl,
worried about the consequences of a No vote next weekend, badly wanted a
signal that his country fully backed the cause of European integration.
Yesterday's reduction of only  1/4 point in the Bundesbank's internationally
significant Lombard rate underlined the grudging nature of its response. Mr
Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank vice-president, strained credibility at the
Bundesbank's press conference yesterday by insisting that the bank's move
was a sovereign decision. More important, German financial markets are now
convinced that further Bundesbank rate cuts will be in store in coming
months.
As the debate intensified yesterday on the reasons for the Bundesbank's
volte face, the foreign exchange market was struggling to make up its mind
about the longer-term impact of the move. Four principal questions arise,
both on the immediate future of the EMS, and on the prospects for Emu.
First, now that the most pressing source of EMS instability - the weakness
of the lira - has been defused, there is a risk that speculative pressure
will turn to other vulnerable currencies.
Sterling, still jittery yesterday, is the most likely focus of attack,
followed by the escudo and peseta. These are all currencies which have
become full members of the EMS during the past three years. They benefit
from wider 6 per cent fluctuation margins and have not yet gained the
policymaking credibility accruing to the members of the system's 'hard
core'.
The Bundesbank has made little secret of its feeling that sterling could be
a devaluation candidate. One 'hard core' European central banker argued
yesterday that the realignment has done little to correct basic EMS
disequilibrium. Britain, he said, might still have to take tough interest
rate action to win the trust of the markets. 'The Germans have gone out of
their way to help others. But now the others must help themselves.'
Second, doubts over whether the EC can generate the economic growth
necessary to forge a political consensus for Emu remain as strong as ever.
The  1/4 point cut in German interest rates, by itself, represents no more
than a weak ray of light in Europe's gloom.
All EC governments are trapped in an economic vicious circle under which
faltering growth drives up budget deficits through reducing tax revenues and
increasing social security outlays. The strict budget deficit targets laid
down at the Maastricht summit as conditions for Emu membership looked
difficult to meet nine months ago for most EC countries. Now, with EC growth
this year forecast by the Commission at only 1 1/4 per cent, fulfilling the
targets will be impossible unless the EC rediscovers 3 per cent growth.
Significantly, most European governments and central banks were taking a
highly cautious line yesterday following the Bundesbank's interest rate
reduction. Dashing expectations that the Bank of France would lower rates
this week to rally support for a Yes vote, Mr Michel Sapin, the French
finance minister, made clear that any credit easing would have to wait until
after the referendum.
Third, even assuming France approves the Maastricht treaty, considerable
hurdles remain along the Emu path. The imbroglio caused by Denmark's
rejection of the treaty in June still has to be solved. In addition, during
the period before the target date of 1997-99 for the final stage of Emu,
considerable tensions are likely over interpretation of the Maastricht
criteria for economic performance, according to a European ambassador in
Brussels.
This official predicts aggressive German insistence that there is no 'fudge'
on convergence. This process could lead to Italy, as well as other countries
outside the 'hard core', being left out. Inevitably, this creates the risk
not simply that European integration will proceed at two speeds. Europe
itself could divide between a prosperous north and a poorer south.
Fourth, the spectacle of the Bundesbank being subjected to overt political
arm-twisting could have an important impact on the German debate over the
Maastricht treaty. Chancellor Kohl has declared himself ready to abandon the
D-Mark in return for European union. But the strains of unification have
made the public wary about ceding control over the currency which has served
as the bedrock of post-war stability.
Mr Kohl has insisted that the planned single European currency must be run
by a European central bank as independent as the Bundesbank. President
Francois Mitterrand outlined a contrasting view 12 days ago, by affirming
that the European central bank would execute policies laid down by European
governments, not the independent 'technicians' on its council.
The weekend manoeuvrings, heavily criticised by many commentators in Germany
yesterday, are likely to heighten fears that politicians will run the bank -
and that German voters will be swapping the D-Mark for inflationary
'Esperanto money'.
These concerns are bound to influence the conditions likely to be applied by
the German parliament to the treaty as part of the ratification process
later this year. Already, the two German chambers appear likely to demand a
right of approval for the final stage of Emu before exchange rates can be
finally fixed - a condition which could torpedo the Emu timetable.
In the financial markets, timing is everything. This axiom takes on
particular significance when applied to a process as fraught with
complications as the march towards Emu. The weekend move came at a crucial
time to influence the French vote - but it could also misfire.
One risk is that the realignment did not go far enough. Critics on the
financial markets yesterday argued that the weekend deal will probably leave
nobody happy. The Bundesbank, they argue, has lost domestic credibility,
while the interest rate cut will not be sufficient to restore European
growth.
German officials have hinted that the Bundesbank could have decided a
greater rate cut if more countries had devalued. But the insistence of
France and, above all, Britain, to keep their currencies unchanged against
the D-Mark made this impossible. 'Europe missed the opportunity for a much
further-reaching realignment which would have provided the growth needed to
fulfil the Maastricht targets,' said a London currency analyst.
The currency pact may indeed vindicate Mr Mitterrand's decision to call a
referendum. But officials in Brussels, and in chancelleries around Europe,
yesterday were still highly cautious about predicting which way the French
would vote. If the result is Yes, the governments and central banks which
stage-managed the weekend changes will congratulate themselves on a coup
which tipped the scales in favour of European union.
If the French reject the treaty, the Emu timetable will be dead - but Europe
will still face the challenge of managing an exchange rate system prone to
disorder. That system is at present effectively run by the Bundesbank - a
position which Germany itself concedes is politically untenable.
Finding a form of monetary power-sharing between the Bundesbank and the rest
of Europe will remain a central preoccupation, whatever happens on Sunday.
The currency accord, for all its imperfections, could provide a glimpse of
how Europe could struggle towards that difficult goal.
THE ROAD TO ECONOMIC AND MONETARY UNION
1957:  Treaty of Rome sets up six-member community
1957:  Bundesbank established with statutory independence from
government
1962:  European Commission sets out goal of Emu
1970:  'Werner plan' aim of Emu by 1980
1972:  Final break-up of Bretton Woods System
1979:  European Monetary System (EMS) starts
1987:  European Single Act takes effect, laying down goal of Emu
1990:  France, Germany agree on political priority from Emu
1990:  German unification
1990:  Britain becomes full member of EMS
1991:  Maastricht Summit lays down firm Emu timetable
1994:  'Second stage' of Emu to start, with creation of European
Monetary Institute
1997 or 1999:  'Third stage' of Emu envisaged, with permanent fixing
of currencies for EC countries meeting convergence criteria
