FT  17 JAN 92 / Germany tightens market regulation
THE German government yesterday launched a comprehensive package of measures
aimed at turning Frankfurt into a financial centre to rival London, New York
and Tokyo.
The proposals are also aimed at polishing up the country's tarnished image
in the wake of a series of financial scandals.
At the heart of the plan, is the development of 'effective and
internationally recognised' supervision of securities markets.
The plan, drawn up by Mr Theo Waigel, the German finance minister, would
also:
Make insider trading punishable with up to two years' imprisonment;
Give fairer treatment to investors and provide greater transparency in
companies' share registers in line with international rules of conduct;
Encourage the country's eight regional stock exchanges to establish a
'central stock exchange', providing essential services for the eight from
one base.
The measures also include important technical changes aimed at giving
financial institutions a competitive edge.
Mr Waigel wants the measures approved and written into the statute books by
the end of the year.
He said that as the third most powerful economy in the world, Germany needed
a fully developed financial market meeting the finest international
standards.
This called for a strong, dynamic, banking system, internationally
competitive stock markets and an efficient, flexible, high-capacity
insurance market.
The federal government is likely to face resistance to some of the proposals
from the state governments which fear the loss of autonomy.
The Bundesbank, the independent central bank, has in the past opposed some
of the liberalisation measures embodied in yesterday's plan.
Mr Waigel proposed legal amendments to give investment trusts greater
flexibility. At present these have strict limits on what they may invest in.
Under Mr Waigel's proposals they would be able to operate in the money
markets allowing them, according to a finance ministry document, to deploy a
full portfolio of investment instruments.
The Bundesbank has argued that such liberalisation would interfere with the
reserve requirements which financial institutions are required to maintain.
Mr Waigel also urged the increased use of technology, mainly to reduce
transaction costs.
However, this would also have the effect of increasing market transparency,
liquidity and market security.
Lex, Page 18
