FT  14 AUG 92 / Ghana's tough economic reforms face the ballot box test: A
half-completed programme yet to deliver higher incomes is in danger of
falling to populist appeal
AS GHANA prepares to make the transition from military rule to democracy for
the third time in its turbulent post-colonial history, it faces one of
Africa's most critical questions: will democracy be compatible with
continuing an austere economic reform programme?
Almost nine years of radical and often unpopular economic reforms by the
military government led by Flight-Lt Jerry Rawlings have given Ghana
positive growth and laid stable foundations for sustained development.
However, as with so many African countries that which have pursued reform,
the long-term benefits, in terms of a leap in incomes, are yet to come. In
Ghana as elsewhere, adjustment is too easily seen as 'pain without gain'.
Now, as the half completed programme is being presented to the Ghanaian
electorate, there are concerns that politicians, for short-term political
gain, will pander to populism and exploit the hardships of adjustment.
There has already been a re-emergence of old political parties and leaders
who appear wedded to the discredited, but popular, economic theories of the
past.
In a recent interview Dr Hilla Limann, Ghana's last elected civilian
president and a presidential aspirant this year, attacked the economic
reform programme and devaluation as a 'terrible disaster' imposed on Ghana
by the 'dictatorship' of the International Monetary Fund who want to 'stuff
their own pockets'.
Many Ghanaian businessmen believe that if the next civilian regime, which
will be inaugurated next January, fails to deliver political stability and
attempts to delay or turn back the economic recovery programme, western
donors and foreign and Ghanaian investors are likely to turn away.
'The analysis of the old politicians against economic adjustment is really
horrifying,' says Mr Ishmael Yamson, chairman of the United Africa Company,
a Unilever subsidiary. 'Many of them seem unable to see the enormous changes
which have taken place in the world. If they get it wrong again there will
be no more chances for Ghana.'
Ghana's civilian and military governments imploded throughout the 1960s and
1970s as a result of corruption, economic mismanagement and political
instability. By 1981 Ghana was on its knees with runaway inflation,
collapsing production, an overvalued cedi and a debt burden the country
could no longer service.
Despite his early socialist rhetoric, President Rawlings, who seized power
for a second time in 1981, has pursued an austere adjustment programme which
has given Ghana an average real growth rate of 5 per cent a year, restored
confidence and stimulated investment. But many Ghanaians, especially urban
workers, have suffered and much more, such as privatisation and creating a
better private sector environment, has to be done to achieve what is seen as
necessary growth rates of 8-10 per cent.
Most politicians, looking for an easy vote-catching economic critique of the
government, have so far opted to exploit the constituency of discontented
people hurt during the past nine years by devaluation and cuts in the public
service. It is not yet clear how the electorate will respond to a populist
appeal by old-guard leaders.
In an interview President Rawlings said: 'I think Ghanaians are much more
critical of political leaders today than before and they may be much more
politically conscious than people in western Europe.' But he conceded that
his attempt to instill a participatory political culture into the country
could only be tested at the ballot box.
Mr Joseph Abbey, Ghana's ambassador to the US, said: 'We are hoping that
Ghanaians will have the political maturity to judge the programme not on
their direct material benefits but on the solid foundations we have laid
down for future economic take-off.'
So far the signs are not encouraging. At least seven political groupings
have already been formed and the difference between them is largely personal
and generational. Earlier this week they threatened to boycott the elections
unless President Rawlings accepted demands for an interim government,
international supervision of the polls and the release of all political
detainees.
The key political question is whether President Rawlings is going to run.
For the moment he appears determined to delay any announcement to the last
minute to keep the opposition in disarray. Most political observers,
however, believe he will run.
Mass rural electrification, road building and eight years of economic growth
and stability have won him much support, in particular in the rural areas
where reforms have had their strongest impact on higher incomes. However
many Ghanaians are critical of the regime's poor human rights record which
includes executions, kidnappings, arbitrary detention without trial and
confiscation of property.
The strongest challenge to President Rawlings, widely considered the most
dynamic political force in Ghana, could come from the People's Heritage
Party (PHP) which has developed a strong organisation on the ground and
attracted a younger generation of new politicians. Its two presidential
hopefuls are General Emmanuel Erskine, who led United Nations peacekeeping
efforts in Beirut, and Mr Jonathan Frimpong-Ansah, a former central bank
governor.
Despite the attempt of old-guard politicians such as Dr Limann to exploit
and whip up the anti-adjustment constituency, optimistic businessmen are
hoping that whomever is elected president in November will quickly realise
that there is a logical inevitability about continuing and deepening the
reforms.
