FT  07 MAY 92 / British Gas told to cut prices: Watchdog's tough line over
charges to domestic customers provokes row
BRITISH GAS was told yesterday to cut its prices to 18m domestic customers
or face court action, prompting a further row between the company and Ofgas,
the industry's watchdog.
Sir James McKinnon, Ofgas director-general, demanded average cuts of Pounds
15 a year in household gas bills. If British Gas did not reduce charges, it
would break an agreement which came into force last month, he said.
British Gas said in March that it would freeze residential prices with a
view to cutting them later in the year. The company is bound by a tough
formula imposed by Sir James which limits price rises to 5 percentage points
below the rate of inflation.
Sir James said that, since inflation was forecast to remain at 4 per cent
this year, British Gas should cut prices now by up to 2p a therm.
'We are talking here about customers being knowingly overcharged,' he said.
British Gas said its decision to freeze prices was taken before the election
when the outlook for inflation was unclear. 'These prices are reviewed every
month and an adjustment can be made at any time,' the company said.
Nevertheless, British Gas said it was disappointed with the way the row had
broken, as the company had requested a meeting with Sir James to discuss
prices. Sir James said there was no need for a meeting as the need for a
price cut was so obvious.
'It looks like they're trying to hold on to their money as long as they
possibly can,' Sir James said. 'A price cut of up to 2p a therm was right at
the beginning of April and now needs to be introduced urgently.'
Mr Ian Powe, chairman of the Gas Consumers' Council, welcomed Sir James'
initiative. 'This is a battle that neither side can afford to lose; the
outcome will prove whether or not British Gas puts profit before customer
commitment,' he said.
A cut of 2p a therm would trim Pounds 250m from British Gas's annual pre-tax
profit of over Pounds 1bn.
The stock market reacted immediately to the profits threat and the company's
share price had fallen 8p by mid-morning, but it recovered to close 2 1/2 p
down on the day at 262 1/2 .
British Gas said it did not want to be boxed in by making an early cut in
price, only to have to raise prices again if the inflation rate increased
later in the year. The company still wants a meeting with Ofgas to discuss
the issue.
Some analysts questioned Sir James's calculations on prices, saying they
were not consistent with the price formula. Rather than pointing to a
required price cut of as much as 2p a therm, the current level of inflation
indicated the need for a price cut of just 0.3p a therm, they argued.
Clash of wills over power for the people Page 23
