FT  23 OCT 92 / Islamic zealotry presents Cairo with hard choices
IF ANY doubts lingered about a resurgent Islamic movement in Egypt, they
will have been dispelled by a string of incidents in the past months,
culminating in Wednesday's slaying of a British tourist.
The killing of 28-year-old Ms Sharon Hill by gunmen, who ambushed her tour
bus near the extremist stronghold of Assiut south of Cairo, could hardly
have delivered a more unpleasant message to a government seemingly bereft of
new ideas as to how to deal with the fundamentalist challenge.
For a hard-pressed country whose fortunes are heavily dependent on tourism
revenues - now easily Egypt's main foreign exchange earner apart from
workers' remittances - it was a disturbing development which the authorities
cannot ignore.
The death of Sharon Hill may come to be regarded as a critical moment in the
continuing war between the security forces and Islamic extremists. If
nothing else, it underscored the enormous difficulties faced by the
authorities in combating zealots, now well established in the dusty,
decaying towns and villages of the Egyptian hinterland.
The episode is almost certain to add to persistent domestic criticism, some
of it voiced from within the ruling National Democratic Party, of methods
used to cope with the many faces of the Islamic tendency.
Official tactics have been to seek to co-opt the Islamicists by allowing the
ostensibly moderate mainstream Moslem Brotherhood limited access to
institutions such as parliament, while cracking down hard on militants who
espouse a more confrontational Islam.
But an increasing problem for the authorities is how to distinguish between
the mainstream and zealots committed to the violent overthrow of the
established order. While formal links may not exist, the two streams share a
common interest in getting rid of the status quo.
As President Hosni Mubarak and his advisers review options available to them
in light of the latest rash of incidents - a Nile ferry was fired on earlier
this month, among other instances of Islamic-inspired violence - the
temptation will be to crack down even harder on individuals suspected of
association with the al-gama'a al-Islamiyah or Islamic groups, but this is
likely to prove counter-productive.
The government risks further alienating individuals who already feel
confined to the margins of society without jobs or the reasonable hope of a
better life. Throughout Egypt, disaffected youth is inevitably drawn to the
deceptively simple proposition that 'Islam is the solution' to all their
problems.
Many Egyptian liberals, who feel increasingly beleaguered in the face of the
Islamic tide, are openly critical of what they regard as the government's
failure to deal effectively with the threat of extremism. These critics
advocate more openness rather than more repression, and a greater commitment
to democracy to allow countervailing secular forces to flower.
They fault the government for seeking to co-opt the fundamentalists by
facilitating increased religious influence in the education system and in
the media. These tools are now being used, critics say, to undermine Egypt's
broadly secular institutions.
