FT  24 NOV 92 / Temple threatens to pierce Rao's procrastination policy: The
testing time ahead of India's prime minister
MR P V Narasimha Rao's legendary ability to procrastinate endears him to
many Indians. They seem to prefer this unassuming 71-year-old to some of his
younger and more aggressive rivals.
He has served them well, patiently steering the country through a
balance-of-payments crisis last year and charting a course to India's
biggest economic reforms since independence.
However, with a new session of parliament opening today, Mr Rao's ability to
sit out the harshest storms faces some tough tests.
Top of the political agenda is a potentially explosive dispute over the
planned construction of a temple to the Hindu god Ram next to a mosque in
Ayodhya, a town in northern India. The government has tried to stall efforts
by Hindu militants to build the temple amid fears of further bloodshed at
the site where 2,000 people have died in the past three years.
The right-wing Hindu Bharatiya Janata party (BJP), the main opposition
party, supports claims by the Hindu fundamentalist Vishva Hindu Parishad
(VHP) that wants to build the temple. They accuse Mr Rao's Congress party of
currying favour with Moslems.
Mr Rao has won support among educated Indians for avoiding direct
confrontation with the BJP and VHP by referring disputes over the ownership
of the site to the courts. In the summer, the VHP and its allies in the
Hindu priesthood accepted a temporary delay in construction. But time is
running out for Mr Rao - the fundamentalists' deadline expires on December
6.
The prime minister's problems are compounded as the local government in
Uttar Pradesh state, including Ayodhya, is ruled by the BJP. Firm action by
the central government could involve suspending state government powers - a
move fraught with political risk, not least because Uttar Pradesh is India's
largest state. Refraining from action could be worse given the
fundamentalists' determination. 'We are prepared to die,' says the BJP MP
for Ayodhya, 'We will make any sacrifice for Ram.'
Second only to religion in India are the passions aroused by caste.
As early as 1952, about 27 per cent of public sector entry-level jobs were
set aside for the lowest castes, chiefly untouchables. This month, after
years of arguments, the Supreme Court ruled that so-called 'other backward
classes' - those slightly above the untouchables - should benefit from
positive discrimination by having reserved access to 22.5 per cent of
entry-level posts.
The verdict prompted violent protests on student campuses across northern
India - being barred from 49.5 per cent of public sector appointments
naturally alarmed the educated middle classes.
The issue does not present Mr Rao with any immediate decisions. It will be
up to bureaucrats to put the policy into practice. But it increases tensions
in the same geographical areas as the Ayodhya temple dispute since Uttar
Pradesh and neighbouring states have above-average numbers of low-caste
people who will have the right to jobs previously monopolised by their
middle-class neighbours.
Nor will debate over religion and caste spare Mr Rao from having to do
battle over the economy. The opposition parties will seek to hurt him on two
fronts. First, they are seizing on complaints by people who believe they
have been harmed by reform - chiefly farmers protesting against cuts in
fertiliser price subsidies. The BJP yesterday filed a motion to adjourn
parliament for a day in support of farmers.
Mr Rao tried to defuse the farmers' anger by increasing other cash handouts.
The second economic issue Mr Rao is vulnerable on is the Rs35bn (Pounds
800m) Bombay securities market scandal. The affair, which caused heavy
losses for banks and stockbrokers, hurt the government by revealing
weaknesses in financial supervision.
It exposed Mr Rao's economic reform to attack from those who argue
deregulation increased the opportunities for financial wrong-doing. Mr Ram
Niwas Mirdha, chairman of a parliamentary committee investigating the
scandal, said India should create a 'proper regulatory framework' before
allowing more liberalisation.
Mr Rao has formidable advantages to confront these problems. First, he and
his party are secure in power. According to an opinion poll published this
weekend, 49 per cent of voters support Mr Rao for prime minister, against 14
per cent for Mr L K Advani, the BJP leader.
Congress has local difficulties, notably in Karnataka state in the south,
where Mr Rao sacked the state's chief minister following allegations of
widespread corruption. Overall, it has no real rivals - the BJP is strong in
those parts of the north where it has fanned the flames of fundamentalism.
Moreover, the BJP is a one-issue party. On economic reform, it snipes at the
government over individual measures which can be turned to party-political
advantage.
Nevertheless, there are two distinct risks. One is that the temple dispute
may explode into violence. A military crackdown in Uttar Pradesh would
undermine government efforts to promote India-wide political stability. That
would discourage investment, particularly by foreigners.
The second danger, is that fighting bush-fires will distract Mr Rao from
further economic reform. He admits the financial scandal has delayed banking
and other reforms.
One senior political adviser to the Congress party says Mr Rao needs to show
more active leadership. There is widespread public support for a
'reasonable' solution in Ayodhya and the further pursuit of 'sensible'
economic changes, says the adviser. 'But someone needs to stand up and shout
to drown out the BJP.'
