FT  03 MAR 92 / Price of houses shows fresh fall
HOUSE PRICES fell sharply again last month, according to Nationwide Building
Society.
The fall in prices is likely to dispel remaining government hopes that an
upturn in the housing market might encourage a greater feeling of well-being
among voters before the general election.
Nationwide, the UK's second-largest building society, says the average price
of a home has fallen by 4.1 per cent in the past 12 months, from Pounds
57,661 to Pounds 55,308. Prices have fallen by 3.5 per cent since November
after a brief rally in the autumn. In February, prices fell 1.2 per cent
after a drop of 1.1 per cent in January and 1.2 per cent in December.
The new figures coincide with claims from the Association of London
Authorities that more than two-thirds of Londoners who were first-time
buyers in 1988 are now saddled with mortgages above the value of their
homes. In five boroughs - Croydon, Newham, Waltham Forest, Tower Hamlets,
and Barking &amp; Dagenham - more than four-fifths of 1988 buyers are now in
this position, the association says.
However, Mr Peter Munday, Nationwide's business development director, said
there had been a rise in interest from potential purchasers since the
beginning of this year. But this was taking time to work through to firm
sales.
The government announced plans at the end of last year to waive stamp duty
on house sales of up to Pounds 250,000 and introduced measures to stem the
number of homes repossessed from borrowers unable to meet mortgage
repayments.
Mr Munday said the moves would help to rebuild flagging confidence. But 'the
key to the return of long-term stability in the housing market lies in a
general improvement in the economy, greater confidence in employment
prospects and the removal of election uncertainty,' he said.
Estate agents and housebuilders have recently reported a big rise in visits
to houses for sale. However, many expect activity to subside during the
election campaign when public attention is likely concentrate on the
shortcomings of the economy. In a survey by the Royal Institution of
Chartered Surveyors last month, agents reported that higher interest by
would-be purchasers had failed to translate into higher sales.
Housebuilders, which have been cutting prices heavily to generate a
much-needed cashflow from higher sales, appear to have been more successful
in promoting purchases. But most stress that confidence among potential
purchasers remains fragile.
In spite of the lack of confidence, many people still believe that buying
their home is a good investment, according to a survey by Alliance &amp;
Leicester Building Society.
The society says 92 per cent of those planning to buy a house this year
thought it would be a good investment.
