FT  19 AUG 92 / Lebanese cabinet urged to delay poll
JUST four days before the country's first legislative elections in 20 years
are scheduled to begin, the Lebanese cabinet will today discuss a petition
from five influential Christian parliamentarians that the elections be
postponed.
Opponents of the poll  - the majority of them Christians  - say the presence
of 40,000 Syrian troops in Lebanon will ensure the victory of pro-Syrian
candidates. Syria wants the poll to take place before the scheduled
withdrawal of Syrian troops to eastern Lebanon in September.
More than a dozen members of parliament this week announced that they were
withdrawing their candidacy, citing their wish 'to preserve national unity'.
They include Mr Tammam Salam, the eldest son of former Sunni Moslem Prime
Minister Saeb Salam, who has also spoken out against what he calls 'forced
elections'.
The deputies who petitioned President Elias Hrawi include Mr Fares Boueiz,
the Lebanese foreign minister, who is Mr Hrawi's son-in-law. Never before
has a Maronite president enjoyed so little support from his own religious
community.
Syria's Lebanese allies, including Prime Minister Rashid Solh, have insisted
that voting will begin as planned on August 23. But the divisive issue has
further undermined the ailing Lebanese economy and the decision of the
Christian Phalange party to boycott the poll has ensured that 700,000 of the
country's 2m eligible voters will not participate in the election.
A new legislature therefore risks having even less credibility than the
present assembly, which has repeatedly renewed its own mandate since 1972.
Supporters of General Michel Aoun, the exiled anti-Syrian Christian leader,
have threatened to enforce a 'curfew' on the three successive Sundays of the
election and Christian parties have called a three-day general strike
starting on August 21 if the voting goes ahead.
Prime Minister Solh has twice visited Damascus this month to discuss
Christian demands for a postponement with the Syrian vice-president and
prime minister.
On returning from the Syrian capital on Monday night, Mr Solh insisted that
the elections would take place as planned.
The Lebanese pound reached an all-time low of LPounds 2,800 to the dollar
last week, but has since risen to LPounds 2,340 after the Central Bank
resumed intervention on the foreign exchange market. The European Community
yesterday called for Lebanon's forthcoming general election to be free and
fair, saying that only a fully representative government could restore
national and international confidence, Reuter reports. The EC, in a
statement issued by Britain as current president, reaffirmed support for
Lebanon's 'independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity'. It
said the election was crucial for the country's future and called for the
elections to be conducted 'according to democratic principles'.
