FT  22 FEB 92 / Private View: A mother in waiting to be a priest - Church
leaders debated ordination for women this week. Dilly Baker, a London
curate, talks about her vocation
DILLY BAKER is expecting to become a mother in two weeks' time and an
Anglican priest within two years.
The birth of her first child may be in God's hands. Her ordination is in the
hands of the general synod of the Church of England which debated the
divisive subject of women priests again this week and could give final
approval in November.
Barring parliamentary accident, the crop-headed young curate of St. John the
Evangelist in Goose Green, south London, will then be able to celebrate the
Eucharist and to give absolution - she, and about 1,000 other women, already
ordained deacons, who are priests in waiting.
The church will gain another male priest, too: Dilly's husband, Chris,
curate of the neighbouring parish of St Barnabas, who has delayed his own
ordination in sympathy with his wife.
Dilly Baker's tomboy haircut and progressive views could suggest a militant
feminist, a woman subconsciously trying to be a man. But there is nothing
mannish about her big eyes, wide mouth and giggly laugh - she is younger
than her 30 years - and nothing strident about the way she talks.
I asked her to describe her vocation.
'My sense of vocation has never been the kind of blinding light from
heaven,' she said. 'It's always been something I have a little bit of a
love-hate relationship with. I mean, I'm here because I believe that I am
called to be a priest, but the Church of England does give me severe jitters
at times.'
She wonders what her father would have said. He was a C of E traditionalist
who died when she was only 12. 'I often think about that. I have a hunch he
would have said: 'You go for it]''.
Have you a vocation or do you really mean you want a career?
'It depends how you want to define vocation. I feel that I have. I can
pinpoint the time when I felt very, very strongly that this was something I
had to do: it was during a pilgrimage week at Iona.'
How do you know your vocation is for the priesthood?
'I feel my ministry is incomplete without the priestly part. When you've
been involved in people's lives, birth and death and everything in between,
and then the shutter comes down on Sunday morning that feels very, very
wrong.'
And if ordination were denied you?
'I would find it very difficult to continue in the church in my present
position.'
Do you see it as a woman's right to be ordained priest?
'It's a very loaded term, that.'
Yes, I said; it was deliberate.
The curate sighed. 'I don't think I want to talk in terms of rights because
that just turns people off. I might want to talk in terms of justice. Men
and women are created together in the image of God and to deny women the
ability to represent Christ is, I think, a fundamental break with justice.
But I'm not the sort of person to go around talking about women's rights too
earnestly.'
Is what you're doing part of the feminist movement?
'I'm reluctant to say Yes because feminism is such a dirty word for a lot of
people. But feminism has helped us to see more clearly what has been going
on in the church, the way women have been treated and understood.'
The church was taking its cue from secular society, but would lose all
credibility if it did not press ahead. And there was a precedent - its
renunciation of slavery after centuries.
Just under a third of the laity but slightly more than a third of the clergy
oppose the ordination of women, according to diocesan poll results discussed
this week. Many regard it as the feminist component of a general slide into
trendy theology and secularism.
Dilly Baker (her real name is Hilary) acknowledged a theological connection.
'It's not simply a matter of who says the Eucharistic prayer. We're dealing
with something very important: how we understand God, how we understand
sexuality and relations between women and men. So long as the church says
that women cannot adequately represent Christ at the altar then our theology
is open to question.'
Is the gender of God a separate question from whether women should be
priests or not?
She hesitated. 'I personally don't think it's separate. But let's be honest.
There's no sex to God. It's a convenient metaphor. We're talking metaphors
all the time here and I think we need to enlarge our vision of God all the
time. But 'women priests equals female God' is not what I want to say at
all.'
Devout Anglicans see women's ordination as the last nail in the coffin of
traditional Christianity. (A few have gone further, claiming that in New
Zealand it has caused an outbreak of 'religious witchcraft'.) 'There are as
many, or more,' said the curate, 'who feel it's not fair to dump it all at
the feet of women priests. To have women as priests redresses the balance a
little bit but no way does it alter the fundamentals of the faith.'
Some objectors quote Biblical authority for their views, others are just
shocked by the thought that such a long tradition is to be broken. Yet
Methodists, Baptists, and other English non-conformists have already broken
it, and there are 1,500 women priests in Anglican churches overseas - and
two women bishops.
For Dilly Baker, the fact that Jesus chose male disciples is not persuasive.
They were not chosen as priests, and church hierarchies developed much later
in accordance with social custom. The fact that Christ was a man did not
prevent him conferring important roles on Mary and Martha.
'Jesus came to take on our flesh to understand us as human beings,' she
said. 'It's that taking on of our humanity that is of essential importance,
not the maleness . . . or else the gospel has really nothing to say to
women.'
She also rejected the argument that women priests would damage prospects of
unity with the Church of Rome. 'To suggest that it's just these few pushy
women who are stopping unity is not very accurate. Anyway I would want to
say 'Unity at what cost?''
What about the unity of the Church of England itself? I asked. What will the
cost be if the ordination of women goes ahead?
'Well, I think the Church is going to be greatly enriched by it.' She
laughed. 'I can say no other, can I?'
Don't you take seriously the threat that a lot of people will leave?
'I don't think a lot of people will leave. Some will, just as some people
will leave if it doesn't go through. That's very sad and I'm sorry about
that. I feel it's unnecessary since as the legislation stands there will
still be a place for people who are opposed to women priests. But there are
also people we don't hear about who have left, who don't come to church
because of the way the church treats women.'
What about the church splitting?
'I don't know how seriously to take that. Whether it's scaremongering
tactics I don't know.
'But I do know - and I'm in a High Church here where you expect to find most
opposition - that as people have got used to me as a minister, they have
become comfortable with the idea of women priests. Because I'm standing
behind the altar and the symbol has gradually changed for them, they have
got used to it.'
Some clergymen cannot get used to it. One, after a recent conversation with
a woman deacon, suddenly stopped and said: 'Why do you insist on wearing
that bitch collar?'
The incident prompted me to ask why so many homosexual clergy (they form a
large minority in the London diocese) were hostile. The mother-to-be, so far
serene, looked uncomfortable. Eventually she said:
'I would want to affirm gay people in their sexuality. I don't want to be
seen as opposed to gay people. I feel upset that they can't see the
connection between the way the church has treated gay people and the way it
has treated women. It's all part and parcel of the church's inability to
come to terms with sexuality.'
She agreed that the Church of England could be seen as the last male
bastion. 'Men have been heading this show for so long. Women will bring a
breath of fresh air, a little more imagination and creativity, and will open
the whole thing up. Maybe that is why some men are so very threatened by the
whole issue.'
I asked her how women priests would differ from men.
Once more, she was reluctant to employ 'stereotypes'. She finally agreed
that women might find it easier to extend sympathy, especially to other
women. The family of a parishioner whose funeral she recently conducted had
said as much.
Finally, I asked her: do you think it's God's will that women should be
priests?
'Yes,' she said, very quietly. 'I certainly do.'
Do you kneel down and pray to be told this is the right thing for you?
'Yes. That would be quite an apt way of putting it. I have thought about it
and prayed about it and struggled with the issue for some time and I'm
absolutely certain this is the way forward - not just for me as an
individual but for the church in general.'
So you have God on your side?
'Oh, you wicked . . .] I never talk in terms of God on my side. I do think
it's God's will but I'm not so naive as to say the opposition wouldn't say
the same thing.'
