FT  15 MAY 92 / Press wins praise from watchdog
THE threat of govern-ment-imposed statutory controls on the press appeared
to recede yesterday as the Press Complaints Commission praised the press for
supporting the industry's code of practice.
The commission, which replaced the Press Council in 1990, said in its first
annual report that the press, especially the tabloids, had given it strong
support.
The Calcutt Committee on Privacy, supported by the government, made clear
that the commission would be the last chance for the newspaper industry to
avoid statutory intervention.
Lord McGregor of Durris, commission chairman, said the newspaper industry
had passed the 'stiff test' of showing that self-regulation can work. 'I am
sure that the ethical standards embodied in the code will now be observed
cumulatively, expansively and irreversibly,' he said.
The commission emphasised yesterday that:
Most complaints raising apparent breaches of the code of practice had been
resolved directly with editors without the need for adjudication.
No newspaper or periodical had repeated the same or a similar inaccuracy or
misleading report brought to the commission's attention.
The commission's formal adjudications had been observed.
Lord McGregor also emphasised in his report the 'astonishingly small number
of complaints made against news-papers in general and popular national daily
and Sunday newspapers in particular'. During its first year, the commission
had 1,396 communications from the public. There was judged to be no prima
facie breach of the code in more than 37 per cent of cases.
Of the complaints in which there was a formal adjudication, 43 were upheld
and 48 rejected.
Lord McGregor paid tribute yesterday to the work of the two tabloid editors
who are commission members - Miss Patsy Chapman, editor of the News of the
World, and Mr Brian Hitchen, editor of the Daily Star. He said it was unjust
to suggest their presence was like 'putting criminals on a committee to
reform the criminal law'.
He added: 'We owe a great deal to Mr Hitchen and Miss Chapman, who have been
criticised most unjustly.'
Mr Hitchen said yesterday that a new code of practice for the paper's own
journalists, underlining points in the industry code, had been completed
this week.
It placed considerable stress on intrusion and Mr Hitchen said his staff had
been told: 'Don't do anything you would not like done to you.'
Lord McGregor warned the press against complacency. He said: 'I can't
believe the press will be so foolish as to relax on a feather bed and think
that what the government said two years ago will be forgotten, because it
won't'
Mr David Mellor, the National Heritage secretary, is expected to review the
first 18 months of the commission within the next few months.
Press Complaints Commission annual report. 1 Salisbury Square, London EC4Y
8AE
