FT  13 MAR 92 / Mexico's proposal for dam upsets environmentalists
THE Mexican government is planning to build a hydroelectric dam on the river
bordering the Guatemalan frontier, in a project that could seriously damage
the Lacandona rain forest, according to environmentalists and archaeologists
in Mexico and the US. It could also flood some of the country's most famous
archaeological sites, they say.
The dam would be built on the Rio Usumacinta, which flows through the
Lacandona, North America's largest rain forest. The dam, if sufficiently
high, could lead to the flooding of the ninth century Mayan city-states
Yaxchilan and Piedras Niegras. Ms Linda Schele, professor of art at the
University of Austin, Texas, said she had 'no doubt that one of the greatest
heritages of the human species will be buried and lost forever without ever
having been investigated.'
Mexico's Federal Electricity Commission has said that the project would not
damage archaeological sites and would not be approved until an environmental
and cultural impact study was completed.
The project, an earlier and larger version of which was dropped in 1989, has
particularly enraged environmentalists since President Carlos Salinas de
Gortari last month declared Yaxchilan part of an extended eco-archaeological
reserve in the Lacandona. Mr Homero Aridjis, president of the Grupo de los
Cien environmental group, said: 'It is another example of the government
keeping people in the dark and spreading disinformation.'
Mr Jeffrey Wilkerson, of the US institute for Cultural Ecology of the
Tropics, feared that the building of the dams would lead to new roads, and
settlements that would break up the rain forest's fragile eco-system, and
disrupt the culture of the Lacandon, an Indian tribe that lives in the
forest.
Mexico has just completed a census that shows population growth is slowing,
that the average age is rising, and, amazingly, that Mexico City is
shrinking.
The census estimates that just 81.3m people live in the country, of whom 38
per cent are less than 40 years old  - compared with unofficial estimates of
around 88m. The average age has increased from 16 to 19 years old.
The population as a whole rose by an average of just 2.3 per cent in the
decade.
