FT  21 DEC 92 / Survey of Japanese Industrial Review (8): Nippondenso in
profile
Mr Masaru Yanaka's morning has been dominated by a brain-storming session.
As the assistant general manager of the engine electrical manufacturing
division, he and his colleagues at Nippondenso's alternator production plant
at Kariya, 20 miles from Nagoya, have been thrashing out ways of coping with
and learning from the steepest sales decline ever experienced by the
Japanese car industry.
All manner of cost-cutting measures aimed at reversing the profits slide at
Japan's biggest car components manufacturer have been discussed, ranging
from reducing overtime to curbing basic raw materials waste.
At this plant alone, production is running at 25 per cent below capacity,
while profits from the plant last month were two-thirds of the level
achieved in the corresponding term last year.
'It's like baseball,' Mr Yanaka says. 'For years we just kept hitting the
ball and now we are missing it. We have to learn from this.'
Five miles away, at the head office, the message of austerity and caution is
the same. Mr Tsuneo Ishimaru, the president, speaks gravely about the
problems ahead and the measures which will have to be taken if the company
is to return to the sort of growth pattern which saw profits more than
double during the 1980s.
This pattern came to an abrupt halt last year and the tone for an even
sharper fall this year was set at the interim stage when Nippondenso's
parent company saw pre-tax profits fall 25 per cent to Y30.42bn despite a
slight rise in sales.
'What is clear is that we have to keep costs down,' the president says. 'I
have told every department that they must cut costs by 15 per cent this year
and I am very confident that this can be achieved. At the same time we have
reduced capital expenditure by 20 per cent for the year.'
The financial stringency package does not include wage cuts and Mr Ishimaru
fiercely rejects any possibility of redundancies. In the words of an
industry observer: 'The senior management would take a 50 per cent cut in
pay before making one person redundant.'
Nippondenso has been insulated from the worst of the slump in the Japanese
car industry through its historic link with Toyota - which is also in the
middle of a period of steep profits decline but has fared better than many
of its rivals, particularly Nissan.
Nippondenso grew out of Toyota when it was spun off in 1951 as a separately
listed group. Today, Toyota controls 23.6 per cent of the capital directly
and a further 7.3 per cent through a subsidiary while the board is sprinkled
with Toyota's senior management.
Nippondenso, which does business with eight other domestic car
manufacturers, will not give details about the proportion of its sales which
go to Toyota. Mr Ishimaru says only that it is slightly in excess of 50 per
cent. But in key areas such as air conditioners, car heaters, radiators and
fuel injection units it is believed to be greatly in excess of this figure.
Car heaters and air conditioners last year accounted for 35.3 per cent of
consolidated group sales of Y1,511bn.
One change in the relationship could occur in the automotive electronics
area which, in the age of computer gadgetry, holds the prospect for high
value-added returns in a growth market.
According to one analyst, Nippondenso has been getting 'a bit of a free
ride' from Toyota in this area which has been making increasing use of
electronic equipment, particularly in its prestige Crown and Lexus ranges.
For Toyota, expansion into the area could cut costs and thrust it further
into the electronics industry.
'Because Toyota sees that the Japanese car market is a mature market, it
feels the need to move into areas which offer the prospect for growth and
high value added,' says Mr Peter Boardman, the Tokyo-based automotive
analyst for UBS Phillips and Drew.
The realisation that the Japanese car market is reaching maturity has been
the spur for Nippondenso's increasing belief that international operations
are essential to maintain its growth rate into the next century.
The group set a 10-year strategy which called for an annual growth rate in
consolidated net sales of 8 per cent until 1995 which would boost the total
to Y2,000bn.
The company has been blown off course from achieving this target by the ills
within the global market during the past 18 months but Mr Ishimaru remains
confident that the international aims can be achieved.
Expansion into the US, Europe and Asia has lifted the element of
international sales within the group to 23 per cent and the president feels
that this will rise to the targeted 25 per cent by 1996.
During the 1980s the company, building upon an overseas sales network,
followed Toyota offshore into areas where the car producer had established
production sites. Nippondenso injected an estimated Y100bn into the
establishment of eight manufacturing sites. The showpiece was the Y41bn
Tennessee plant.
Nippondenso's US sales to the big three car manufacturers reached an
estimated Dollars 500m last year, with Ford and Chrysler each taking Dollars
200m and the rest going to GM. In addition to these, the company has
substantial sales to Japanese transplant operations in the US. Mr Ishimaru
would like to establish closer ties with GM and there are those within the
industry who believe that the US group's new management may be more open to
discussion of purchasing accords.
Japanese car component makers have been more cautious about following the
nation's car makers into Europe than they were about moving into the US
market. Nippondenso, however, has established a substantial presence in
Europe during the past four years.
Last July, the company began production of air conditioners and heaters at
its Pounds 65m plant at Telford in Shropshire which forms a cornerstone of
the move into Europe that began in 1989. The English plant has a projected
output of 400,000 air conditioners and the same number of heaters by 1995.
Toyota and Honda will be the two biggest customers.
Nippondenso has formed a joint venture with Magneti Marelli, Fiat's 66.5 per
cent-owned automotive components subsidiary. The Italian company has taken a
25 per cent stake in the Shropshire plant and in ND Marston, previously the
IMI Radiators business, acquired by Nippondenso in 1989 while the Japanese
group has taken a 25 per cent holding in an air conditioning subsidiary of
the Italian company. By the end of 1995, when Toyota and Honda have reached
forecast capacity in Europe, Nippondenso's turnover is expected to have
tripled to Pounds 450m a year, with local production constituting 50 per
cent.
The company has also had a long relationship with Robert Bosch, the large
German automotive parts manufacturer, and although the association has not
been without its problems there is potential for closer ties.
The German company is a 5.6 per cent shareholder in Nippondenso, making it
one of the biggest investors in a share capital structure so tightly
controlled by large banks and insurance groups that there is only an
estimated 7.7 per cent freely traded.
The company's balance sheet is a model of conservative industrial management
in these times when some Japanese companies have low cash reserves and big
loans. But the erosion of the group's profit margins is a cause of concern.
The profit margin peaked in the last decade in 1985 at 8.5 per cent. Since
then there has been a downward trend towards 4.2 per cent last year, with
worse expected in 1993.
The share price has stagnated at about Y1,300 for most of this year - which
can be interpreted as a testament to its underlying strength in the face of
the industry's problems.
'In the next two years,' says Mr Boardman, 'it is hard to see a recovery in
profits unless there is a steep upswing in the Japanese and US economies.
Even though this is a well-managed, great company it is hard to see how the
stock price is going to improve in the short-term.'
