FT  13 JUL 92 / Survey of Japan (3): A Japanese-style recession - The
economy
WORDS such as 'disaster' and 'horror' are increasingly entering the
vocabulary of economists describing Japan. As each month's statistics are
released by the government, economists search for a sign that the economy,
rapidly plunging, is about to hit bottom.
Instead, and despite repeated government assurances to the contrary, the
accumulated evidence points towards an extended period of weak demand,
falling production and dismal corporate profits. The turning point towards
renewed growth is increasingly elusive.
Of course, this is still a Japanese-style recession that is unlikely to meet
the standard economist's definition of two quarters consecutive decline.
Economic growth this year is likely to reach at least 2 per cent, and
employment remains at high levels. But the manufacturing sector is in steep
decline, financial markets are devastated, and the contraction of demand has
stemmed the flow of imports, pushing up Japan's already large trade surplus
and angering its trading partners.
The latest 'horror' came at the end of June, when the Ministry of
International Trade and Industry (Miti) reported a decline of 8.7 per cent
in industrial output during May, compared to a year ago.
A sharp drop in industrial output was by itself expected, and in principle
it was a healthy sign because it showed that manufacturers were making
efforts to cut back high levels of unsold goods in inventory by reducing the
flow from the factory.
Yet in this case, although in May there was the steepest year-to-year fall
in manufacturing since 1975, bloated inventories also edged up by a
seasonally adjusted 0.4 per cent - because the flow of goods out of
inventory to the market also slowed as demand contracted.
The Bank of Japan and the Ministry of Finance officially expect the period
of inventory adjustment - when inventories decline to normal levels that
allow manufacturers to restore production cuts - to last until the autumn.
Salomon Brothers Asia, however, now believes the turning point is unlikely
to come before the spring of 1993.
To bring inventory levels back to historical trends by November,
manufacturers would have to cut output by 1 per cent a month, which Salomon
Brothers believes is unrealistically severe.
The government case for optimism is based in part on the most recent Tankan,
or short-term economic survey. The survey uncovered an unexpectedly sharp
decline in business confidence in May, which hit the lowest level in five
years. But the survey also showed that manufacturers were expecting a modest
improvement in business conditions by September.
Corporate profits were expected to grow in the second half of the fiscal
year by 17 per cent, after declining by 22.5 per cent in the first half. The
government interpreted the Tankan to mean that the economy had hit bottom.
Financial markets plunged after the survey was released, but not so much
because of the Tankan itself. It was, instead, the government's optimism -
which appeared to dampen prospects either for an emergency government
spending package or a cut in interest rates - that sent markets reeling.
The government's relative lack of alarm is easy to understand. Hardly anyone
these days expects the government's growth forecast of 3.5 per cent in the
year to next March to be realised. But the expected 2 per cent or better
would be considered respectable anywhere else in the industrialised world.
The government can additionally comfort itself that unemployment is
negligible, at 2.1 per cent, compared to an average of 6.4 per cent in the
seven largest industrialised economies. The labour market is softening and
overtime and bonus awards are being cut, but the direct human cost of the
slowdown is small.
The government is also deeply fearful about rekindling inflation. With
Japan's consumer prices now increasing at about 2.5 per cent annually, this
fear looks ill-founded. But what haunts both the Ministry of Finance and the
Bank of Japan is the underlying tightness in the labour market, where a
structural shortage of manpower results from Japan's declining birth rate.
Indeed, the frequently proposed solution for the economy - to spend money on
public works - would pour money into the construction industry where the
labour shortage is most keenly felt. The government could easily re-ignite
wage inflation with an overly hasty attempt to jump-start the economy.
In the end, though, the government is certain to act, if only because Japan
has come under intense international pressure to increase domestic demand,
boost imports and help to pull the rest of the world out of the economic
slump. Already, the ruling Liberal Democratic Party has proposed a programme
of public works that would result in some Y6,000bn to Y7,000bn of extra
spending. A decision will come in the autumn.
The rapid growth in the economy in the late 1980s, accompanied by easy money
policies, temporarily put off the day when companies would have to face the
fact that Japan is becoming less accommodating to manufacturing industries.
Now, with labour both in short supply and expensive, land prices sky high,
roads choked with traffic, and the cost of capital having risen sharply,
this fact is inescapable.
