FT  16 OCT 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: US angers Caribbean banana
growers
THE INCREASING concern of Caribbean banana exporters, anxious over continued
preferential access to the European Community market after January, has
turned to anger directed at the US. Leaders of some of the region's banana
exporting countries have accused Washington of attempting to destroy their
economies by supporting arguments for an open market for bananas.
Caribbean officials say that in recent meetings in Washington to discuss the
likely impact of the North American Free Trade Agreement on the Caribbean
region, they were told by state department officials that the US was opposed
to a European Commission proposal for quotas to be applied to the banana
trade when a single EC market is created in January, and would support the
demands of Latin American exporters for an open market for the fruit.
'We were alarmed at the statements being made which affect our economy and
our social order,' said Mr James Mitchell, the prime minister of St Vincent,
one of the four Windward Islands whose economies depend on the European
banana market. The US position has sent the leaders of the banana producing
countries on a diplomatic offensive in Europe to argue in support of the
commission's proposals to place a quota on more competitively priced bananas
imported from Latin America, while safeguarding the access of fruit from
traditional sources.
Mr John Compton, the prime minister of St Lucia, said that the efforts of
the prime ministers have been successful so far. 'The European Commission's
formula, which although not perfect, is one we can live with,' he said. 'But
the US government is absolutely opposed to this compromise and will fight to
ensure that it is not implemented and that there is free trade in bananas.'
He said if the US was successful, the banana industry in the Windward
Islands would be destroyed in within two years.
Mr Mitchell said that diplomatic forays into Europe were intended to tell
the EC countries that the banana producers did not intend to treat the US
position lightly. He explained: 'We cannot afford to give the impression
that we are taking these threats lightly'.
The prime minister said the US position on the banana market was rooted in a
botched attempt to capitalise on economic changes that had made eastern
Europe a large market for bananas and other fruit.
'In order to take advantage of these new markets, a number of American
companies began to expand production of bananas in Costa Rica and other
Central American countries,' the prime minister said. 'Because of a shortage
of foreign exchange, however, the East European countries could not buy
their bananas, so the American companies are stuck with them and are looking
for new markets in Western Europe and Britain'.
The prime minister said the companies had recruited the 'enormous power' of
the US government in an undertaking that would result in the 'destruction'
of the Windward Islands economies.
