FT  11 NOV 92 / Yeltsin would use special powers: Russian president ready to
govern by decree to maintain reforms
MR Boris Yeltsin, the Russian president, told the UK parliament yesterday
that he would use extraordinary powers if necessary to prevent any attempt
by 'anti-reformist adventurers' to turn the country from the path of
democracy and market reform.
He labelled potential coup members as 'leftovers from the old Communist
party and government elite, militant nationalists, incompetent collective
farm bosses and political adventurers'.
Mr Yeltsin then dismissed them contemptuously as 'ghosts of the past,
playing to a theatre of shadows'.
Speaking from the Royal Gallery in the House of Lords, a privilege which
symbolised the high profile given to his visit, he promised members of both
houses of parliament 'if necessary, I'll use the emergency powers given to
me by the people'. These powers allow Mr Yeltsin to govern by decree.
His visit to Westminster followed the signing on Monday of a friendship
treaty, which promised to usher in a new era of close political, economic
and military co-operation.
Yesterday, after lunching with the Queen at Buckingham Palace, Mr Yeltsin
said she had accepted his invitation to visit Russia.
Extolling Westminster's centuries-old practice of democracy, Mr Yeltsin
described himself as the 'representative of one of the very youngest
democracies'. He told legislators: 'One of our central problems is how to
achieve a functioning balance between the legislative, executive and
judicial institutions'.
Russia was looking for solutions in a new constitution to replace the
amended Soviet constitution still in force, he added.
Echoing words which were once the trademark of Lady Thatcher, the former
prime minister, Mr Yeltsin told parliament that 'there is no alternative' to
the painful economic reforms being undertaken by the Russian government.
His words were directed beyond Westminster to domestic critics of the
Russian government's attempt to impose tough monetary restrictions on
loss-making state enterprises and military industries. They drew an angry
response from the speaker of the Russian parliament. 'Any talk about
presidential rule . . . should be condemned as a move which would lead to .
. . an anti-constitutional, anti-state coup,' Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, an
outspoken critic of Mr Yeltsin, said in an interview with Channel Four
television.
Early next month Mr Yeltsin and many of the reformist ministers he brought
to London face a critical session of the Congress of Peoples Deputies which
is expected to demand the resignation of reformers and a partial return to
central control over the economy.
Yesterday evening Mr Yeltsin flew to Budapest to start his first official
visit to Hungary.
Reformers stand firm, Page 3 Risky farewell to the nanny state, Page 21
