FT  15 SEP 92 / The ERM and Maastricht: Sweden cuts marginal rate to 20%
SWEDEN'S central bank cut its marginal lending rate to the banks to 20 per
cent from 75 per cent yesterday and the country's centre-right government
announced SKr20bn (Pounds 1.96bn) of spending cuts to nearly halve the
structural budget deficit and calm the foreign exchange markets.
The central bank's action was taken in response partly to the small drop in
German interest rates but also to the strong inflow of capital into Sweden
over the past few days. The lending rate was increased last Wednesday to 75
per cent in reaction to the floating of the Finnish markka.
'We have re-established credibility in the krona and eliminated doubt about
our ability to maintain a fixed exchange rate,' said Mr Thomas Franzen, the
bank's deputy governor.
The Stockholm bourse bounced back yesterday with a 5.6 per cent increase in
its general index to 757.6, the largest rise in one day since January last
year. Manufacturing sector shares rose 6.7 per cent and banks and insurance
companies 7.1 per cent. There were falls in a wide range of short term
market rates as well.
Mr Carl Bildt, prime minister, said his centre-right coalition intended to
take a firm grip on its expenditure programmes. The proposed reduction in
government spending promises to be the most drastic ever carried out by a
modern Swedish government. It will involve many painful decisions and focus
on large cuts in the value of welfare transfer payments.
The full details will be announced on October 6 when parliament returns from
recess and Mr Bildt makes his state of the nation address.
Mr Bildt and his finance minister, Mrs Anne Wibble, said the government
wanted to eliminate Sweden's structural deficit, which makes up an estimated
SKr50bn of the SKr160bn-Skr180bn budget deficit expected this year. The rest
is cyclical, caused by the country's current recession.
The prime minister said the government was open for unconditional talks on
the contents of the cuts package with the opposition Social Democrats. But
that party's finance spokesman, Mr Allan Larsson, rejected any discussions
with the government unless it abandoned plans for unfinanced tax reductions.
