FT  25 MAR 92 / Closure of Soviet reactors urged: Leak reawakens debate -
improve old plants or scrap them?
THE RADIATION leak at Sosnovy Bor nuclear station near St Petersburg
yesterday has brought fresh calls for the urgent closure of the former
Soviet Union's ageing nuclear power stations.
But it will also re-ignite the row between the nuclear industry, which wants
to spend more on upgrading the stations, and environmentalists, who want to
see them close.
'Western aid is being directed to patching up and bolting on gismos, rather
than developing alternative systems,' said Mr Simon Roberts of the
environmental group Friends of the Earth.
But Dr John Gittus, of the British Nuclear Forum, said thousands would die
of hypothermia if the former Soviet Union's nuclear stations, which supply
around 15 per cent of the region's energy, closed.
However, both sides agreed that, six years after the international nuclear
accident at Chernobyl, not enough has been done to prevent a repeat of the
disaster.
There are conflicting reports as to how much radioactive material has leaked
from Sosnovy Bor. At first, the state nuclear inspectorate Gosatomnadzor
said the leak was 'minor'. Later it described it as 'serious'. By last
night, officials at the plant said the leak was giving 'no grounds for
concern' and radiation readings had returned to normal, indicating the leak
had been contained.
One encouraging factor was that the safety systems were effectively
activated, shutting down the plant before further damage could be done.
The incident was yesterday rated three points on an international scale for
grading the seriousness of nuclear accidents. Chernobyl was rated the
maximum of seven.
The reactors at Chernobyl and Sosnovy Bor were built to the same design.
Both are light-water, gas-cooled reactors of an old style, known as RBMKs.
The incident will fuel international fears of future accidents at RBMKs or
other old-style Soviet reactors.
In particular, it will not silence those who believe the 16 RBMKs in the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), together with the elderly
pressurised water reactors known as VVER 230s, should be shut down.
Germany's environment minister, Mr Klaus Topfer, said yesterday there was no
alternative to switching off all the RBMK reactors. His views were supported
by environmental groups in the UK, which have long called for the closure of
the plants.
But the price of closure will be high. The republic of Armenia recently
closed its one nuclear power station supplying 40 per cent of its energy
needs. Now it faces a crippling shortage of electricity for heating and
industrial needs.
For such reasons, former members of the Soviet Union have avoided closing
plants and have invited western nuclear industry experts to help improve
safety standards and efficiency.
The international nuclear industry, for its part, has put considerable
effort into establishing links with the CIS. Yesterday, by coincidence,
western nuclear industry executives from seven countries met in London to
plan a nine-month review of RBMK safety.
The meeting - attended by the UK, France, Germany, Italy, Finland, Sweden
and Canada - planned to seek funding from the EC, which confirmed late last
year it would set aside about Ecu50m (Pounds 35.8m) to improve nuclear
safety in the former Soviet Union.
About Ecu8m of this is expected to be allocated to the RBMKs; the rest will
focus on a programme to improve the VVER-230 reactors.
So far, no other western money has been dedicated for the reactors. 'There
is a real worry that the west has been nibbling around the edges of the RBMK
problem ever since Chernobyl,' says Mr George Tyror, of the UK Atomic Energy
Authority, who chaired yesterday's meeting and would head the RBMK
initiative.
'The west ought to be ashamed of itself,' agreed Lord Marshall, former
chairman of the UK Central Electricity Generating Board and now chairman of
the World Association of Nuclear Operators.
Cynical observers say the nuclear industry's emphasis on improving rather
than closing eastern European stations reflects its ambition to revive its
flagging fortunes in the west through construction and maintenance work in
the east.
