FT  10 APR 92 / Money Markets: Short sterling rises
A smattering of optimism on a sunny election day helped push rates down in
generally thin trading.
Interbank rates eased over the day on a stronger pound and the belief among
some traders that a late gain for the Conservative party in the opinion
polls on Wednesday night had improved their chances for snatching victory.
However, Mr Nick Parsons, head of the treasury advisory group at Canadian
Imperial Bank of Commerce said the movement was driven by people who had
left themselves short on sterling as much as by sentiment or rumour.
Mr Parsons feared sterling had crept too high. 'The great danger is that it
has now gone too far. I see very little upside for sterling on the return of
a Conservative majority, but at least 3 to 4 pfennigs on the downside on
Labour or a hung parliament,' he said.
The key three-month interbank rate remained down on last week's high of 11.5
per cent at 10 7/8 - 3/4 .
The June sterling contract opened seven basis points higher after
yesterday's gains, at 89.21 before pushing ahead in early trade to reach a
high of 89.30. Volumes dwindled over the day and the contract closed at
89.24
The general sentiment in the markets appears to be that a unilateral
devaluation of sterling has been ruled out regardless of the outcome of the
election. But the interest rate risk has not necessarily diminished, many
dealers declared, in spite of the backtracking from last week's levels.
The Bank of England continued to foster inexpensive funding. Its forecast
shortage in the morning was Pounds 100m. The overnight rate notched up to 8
1/2 - 1/4 per cent when the Bank did not operate at midday. In the early
afternoon the Bank took out the shortage by purchasing Pounds 100m of band-1
bank bills at the established intervention rate of 10 3/8 per cent. The
overnight rate closed at 10 3/8 - 1/8 per cent.
The Federal Reserve added temporary reserves to the banking system through
overnight system repurchase agreements, signalling an ease in credit policy,
economists said.
Funds traded at 3- 7/8 per cent at the time of the Fed's operation. The
Fed's presumed federal funds rate target had been 4 per cent and economists
said the reserve addition probably pointed to a new target of 3- 3/4 per
cent.
