FT  05 MAR 92 / Argentine prices show rise of 2.2%
ARGENTINE retail prices rose 2.2 per cent in February, it was announced
yesterday, fuelling concerns about the government's economic policy which
heavily depends on fixing the Argentine currency against the US dollar.
However, Mr Domingo Cavallo, Argentina's economy minister, said the exchange
rate policy was sustainable and promised 'a hand-to-hand battle with
inflation'.
He also announced that the International Monetary Fund has agreed in
principle to a new Dollars 3.61bn loan package. The deal - which includes
elements of a current Dollars 1.04bn standby loan and a new three-year
extended fund facility loan - should be approved at an IMF board meeting
later this month. Approval would help Argentina win a deal to reduce its
Dollars 31bn debt to commercial banks by mid-year.
Although small compared with a 27 per cent increase in February 1991, last
month's rise showed that retail price inflation is proving remarkably
resistant to Mr Cavallo's orthodox economic policies.
Retail prices rose 3 per cent in January and are expected to increase a
further 2-3 per cent in March, bringing first quarter inflation to 7.5-8.5
per cent. Inflation is fuelled by seasonal factors and a heavy increase in
consumer demand. The cartelised service and retail sectors are also accused
of widening margins: retail prices have risen 42 per cent over the past year
while wholesale prices rose by just 5 per cent.
Prices will continue rising this month because the government raised value
added tax by two percentage points to 18 per cent on March 1.
Although low by Argentine standards, inflation must fall towards US levels
because of the pegging of the peso to the US dollar. Retail price inflation
has risen by 28 per cent in the 11 months since Mr Cavallo made the peso
convertible.
One danger is that this will damage the competitiveness of Argentine
exporters. However, Mr Cavallo insists exporters - whose costs rise in line
with wholesale prices - are not becoming uncompetitive, in part because of
the greater efficiency generated by the government's other reforms.
However, some economists see a danger that high retail price inflation will
bring demands for a return to price and wage indexation.
