FT  29 APR 92 / World Trade News: Israel basks in warmth of post-war tourism
revival - Quick recovery illustrates its role in Israeli and occupied
territories' economies
WITHIN the Ottoman walls of old Jerusalem, the market traders and souvenir
hawkers who crowd the narrow alleyways around the city's holy shrines are
smiling this month. For both Jews and Arabs in the tourist trade are
enjoying a bumper season after the disaster of 1991 when the Gulf war kept
away all but the hardiest pilgrims.
According to initial estimates by the Israeli ministry of tourism, the peak
period Jewish Passover and Christian Easter celebrations drew a record
70,000 visitors. This is slightly higher than the previous record set in
1990 before the Gulf crisis cast its shadow over the Middle East.
To the end of March - before the Passover/Easter rush began - the number of
tourist arrivals was only a few thousand short of the 348,000 for the same
period in 1990. The contrast with a year ago, when less than a third of that
number came and the Old City streets were eerily deserted, could hardly be
greater.
The quick recovery, which began in the second half of 1991, has engendered
more than just relief among Israeli and Palestinian businesses involved in
the trade. It has illustrated the importance of tourism to both the Israeli
economy and the economy of the occupied territories. And it raises the
question of how great the potential for both sides could be if the current
Middle East peace talks yield results.
Smoothing out the effect of conflicts such as the Gulf war and the
Palestinian intifada (or uprising against Israeli rule) which periodically
afflict the local tourism industry, a little less than 1.5m tourists visit
Israel and the occupied territories annually. They leave behind them around
Dollars 2bn.
The vast majority of this revenue goes to Israel and it is a vital
contributor to the current account. Mr Gidon Patt, the tourism minister,
says that if the number of visitors could be raised to 3m - not an
unrealistic target considering the potent draw of history and religion, sun
and sea - the earnings would substantially reduce the country's large trade
gap.
On the Palestinian side, the Arab Tourist Industry Co-ordinating Committee,
an umbrella group of operators in the occupied territories, estimates the
share Palestinian tour operators take of the Dollars 2bn tourism revenues to
be around Dollars 100m. This does not take into account the earnings of the
large Palestinian souvenir industry and related businesses.
'Tourism is and will be one of the main income generating industries for the
Palestinians and will be one of the main contributors to Palestinian gross
national product. It will also be one of the main foreign currency earners
and will help absorb a high number of employees,' says a study by the ATI
committee.
Both sides agree that to exploit the potential of tourism in the immediate
area - and the region as a whole - co-operation and political stability is
vital. Operators in Jerusalem say just the fact that peace talks have begun
has already had a positive effect.
Mr Patt's officials have produced a list of proposals for simple measures
such as free movement of tour buses, hire cars and private vehicles across
borders which at present remain closed. He is anxious to co-operate with
Palestinian operators in tackling the 'Holy Grail' of both sides -
attracting Moslem pilgrims who are currently almost non-existent despite the
Dome on the Rock's status as the third-holiest Moslem shine.
'You cannot distance yourselves from the Israelis because you have to market
the area as a whole,' says Mr Hani Abu Dayeh, owner with his brother Sami of
the Palestinian company NET, the biggest tour operator in Israel and the
occupied territories. 'The future of tourism is going to depend on strong
co-operation.'
There are, however, big obstacles in the way. Co-operation means different
things to the two sides.
The Israelis, financially and politically the senior partners, clearly
envisage remaining in overall control of the industry. The Palestinians,
meanwhile, looking forward to a day when they have some kind of
independence, see themselves taking control of the attractions in east
Jerusalem and the West Bank - which include many of the main draws such as
the Old City, Bethlehem and Jericho.
The Palestinians also want to redress what they see as a deliberate policy
by Israel since the occupation in 1967 to suppress their industry's
development.
There is a chronic imbalance in hotel space, with Palestinians having only
about one-tenth of the Israeli capacity. Lack of investment is partly to
blame, but the ATI committee say licences to build have been withheld by
Israel. There is bitter resentment also at the strict rules governing
licences for tour guides which have meant only a handful of Palestinians
have been licenced as guides against 3,000 for Israelis since 1967.
There are complaints of commercially motivated harassment. Hani and Sami Abu
Dayeh spent 17 days in solitary confinement in 1989 after an armed tax raid
on their offices by the Israeli authorities who said their long-standing tax
return arrangements were illegal. The case is still unresolved and they may
yet return to jail for some months
Still, says Hani Abu Dayeh, co-operation on an equal footing is the only way
forward. 'The potential is vast. With peace we could catch up to the natural
level of tourism here - and that is so big we would not know what to do with
ourselves.
'Israel's travel agents, fighting to preserve their monopoly over cut-price
ticket sales, yesterday accused Lufthansa, the German airline, of publishing
an anti-semitic newspaper advertisement, writes Hugh Carnegy.
Lufthansa has run into opposition from the Israeli Association of Travel and
Tour Agents to its proposal to sell budget tickets direct to Israel
tourists, by-passing the agents and offering a lower price.
The airline ran full-page newspaper adverts on Monday in cartoon form
showing an Israeli couple seeking to benefit from Lufthansa's offer getting
the brush-off from a smug travel agent.
The travel agents association replied with its own adverts yesterday saying
the Lufthansa portrayal of the Israeli couple was anti-semitic. Many
Israelis who saw the Lufthansa ads - drawn by an Israeli artist - were
puzzled by the accusation.
