FT  12 JUN 92 / The Ferranti Saga: The man who used CIA tools to commit a
Dollars 1.1bn fraud
IN two weeks a bespectacled 62-year-old former entrepreneur and local church
leader from the Amish farm country of southeastern Pennsylvania will
surrender at the gates of a minimum security prison and begin a 15-year
sentence.
Nearly three years after the discovery of an international arms trafficking
and financial fraud that crippled Ferranti, Mr James Guerin, the former
deputy chairman of the UK group, is finally going to jail. He was sentenced
on Wednesday evening by a US judge.
For Ferranti, Mr Guerin's incarceration is the end of a long nightmare that
saw the once proud defence company reduced to the role of a bit player in
the international arms market. For Britain, one of the main pillars of its
defence industry has crumbled.
For South Africa, which according to US prosecutors secretly offered asylum
to Mr Guerin and three other executives, the Ferranti affair is an acute
embarrassment. Relations between Pretoria and Washington have been further
strained by South Africa's refusal to respond to the US indictment of its
state-owned Armscorp, a weapons maker involved in the Guerin crimes.
For the US government, which permitted an adviser to President George Bush
to plead for clemency for Mr Guerin and to confirm his claims that he worked
with the Central Intelligence Agency in the 1970s, the sentence may come as
a relief.
The sentence cannot, of course, make good Ferranti's losses, stemming from
Dollars 1.14bn (Pounds 620m) of fraudulent arms contracts and Dollars 950m
of money laundering by International Signal &amp; Control (ISC), the
Pennsylvania company Mr Guerin sold to Ferranti for Dollars 670m in 1987.
The company estimates it lost Dollars 500m - including lost turnover and
overpayment for ISC. The loss to shareholders is hard to quantify.
Nor can the jail term alter the fact - according to US investigators - that
some of the US missile testing equipment and anti-aircraft radar systems
shipped illegally by Mr Guerin were ultimately used by Iraq against allied
forces during the Gulf war.
While the bulk of the fraud was perpetrated in the 1980s, it is ironic that
Mr Guerin used a New York dummy company, called Gamma, that US officials
acknowledge was set up in the 1970s in co-operation with the CIA and the
National Security Agency, the US electronic surveillance agency.
Admiral Bobby Ray Inman, chairman of President Bush's foreign intelligence
advisory board and a paid member of the proxy board of a Ferranti US
subsidiary that carries out classified government work, said on Mr Guerin's
behalf that he worked with Mr Guerin between 1975 and 1978. This work
involved the shipment by ISC - through Gamma - of military communications
equipment to South Africa which helped the CIA track South Africa's nuclear
weapons capability and monitor Soviet activities in the region.
US officials note that in a matter of such importance the CIA director would
have been well aware of Mr Guerin's activities. The CIA director during the
period of the most intense co-operation with Mr Guerin was Mr George Bush.
The CIA thus gave Mr Guerin the tools that, he claims, he later used without
official Washington approval.
Admiral Inman has termed Mr Guerin a patriot. But this week Mr Robert
Goldman, the chief US prosecutor, replied that Mr Guerin was merely 'a
self-annointed patriot'.
It remains unclear, however, why - as US law enforcement officials have
confirmed - the CIA did nothing to halt illegal ISC shipments to South
Africa between 1984 and 1989, despite the fact that the agency was
debriefing some of Mr Guerin's colleagues at the time.
The CIA has declined to comment, except to argue that it always co-operates
with the Department of Justice on matters relating to possible violations of
US law.
Investigators on both sides of the Atlantic were astounded at the
breathtaking scale of the financial fraud, which involved the creation of
hundreds of fake contract notes and invoices. Front companies were created,
including 38 Panamanian entities controlling 51 Swiss bank accounts.
From about 1981 ISC began fraudulently to inflate its sales and profits. By
the time its fraud was discovered in 1989 its operations were masking
Dollars 1.1bn of fictitious contracts. Ferranti has stated that as a result
its payment of Dollars 670m to acquire ISC was far too high.
Mr Guerin apparently exploited the gentlemanly approach of ISC's auditors
who were escorted on pre-arranged site visits to inspect inventory, or were
often simply lied to.
One senior investigator said: 'It was just like the betting operation
created in the film The Sting. There was one office in Greece which was a
hive of activity when it was visited by auditors. Two weeks later it was
empty. The whole charade had been created for the auditors' benefit.'
Some of the biggest fraud involved fake contracts with Pakistan, such as
Dollars 512.9m arranged under the codename KP. To persuade auditors of its
authenticity, Mr Guerin recruited Mr Talat Masood, a Pakistani general and
chairman of the Pakistan Ordnance Factory Board, to confirm the existence of
contracts.
Now Mr Guerin is on his way to prison. Yet several issues remain unresolved.
What will happen to the handful of other former Ferranti-ISC executives
facing sentencing? They have told prosecutors they thought they were
carrying out CIA-approved work and had reason to believe Mr Guerin's claims
of Washington sponsorship since they were debriefed by the CIA during the
1980s. The prosecutors say this is irrelevant.
Mr Guerin may be indicted again, this time in Florida, where US prosecutors
are finding links with Mr Carlos Cardoen, the Chilean arms maker who was
Iraq's biggest supplier of cluster bombs and factories. In the mid-1980s ISC
cluster bomb technology was transferred illegally to Mr Cardoen in Santiago.
A continuing Philadelphia investigation concerns bribes allegedly paid by Mr
Guerin to agents in Pakistan and in the United Arab Emirates (UAE).
In London, the Serious Fraud Office (SFO) has wound down its investigation
into the Ferranti affair. The UK end of the probe will remain technically
open until Mr Guerin's accomplices in the fraud are sentenced later this
year. But the possibility of any UK charges arising out of the scandal is
thought to be unlikely.
