FT  20 JUN 92 / How To Spend It: A slice of history - but the historians
disagree / A report on an archaeological row in York
VISITORS to this month's York Festival (until July 5) will have a chance to
walk round what what York Archaeological Trust has hailed as one of the most
important archaeological reconstructions of recent times - but they will
also be walking into controversy.
The Pounds 1.2m Barley Hall project was planned by the trust as a worthy
sequel to the hugely successful Jorvik Viking Centre, which was opened in
1984, attracts 800,000 visitors and earns Pounds 1m a year for the trust.
Barley Hall is a reconstruction of what is thought to be the UK's only
medieval hospice - a sort of hotel for clerics visiting the city. The trust
plans to turn it into a living and working medieval household - a form of
museum unique in Britain, it says.
However, the project has drawn fire from the verbal equivalent of a medieval
siege engine in the form of the SPAB - the Society for the Protection of
Ancient buildings. SPAB chairman James Boutwood has described Barley Hall as
'yet another contribution to our Disneyland heritage,' while secretary
Philip Venning has dubbed it 'an appalling scheme that should be damned
utterly.'
Venning has applied to the Department of the Environment on behalf of the
society to have Barley Hall de-listed as a building of architectural and
historical interest.
At the heart of the controversy is the fact that the trust took down the
building to ground level before reconstructing it. In the process, says the
SPAB, the restorers destroyed its entire history. 'It is now virtually
worthless as an object of serious study,' Boutwood says.
The response from the trust has been vigorous. Director Dr Peter Addyman
describes the work at Barley Hall as 'the most detailed archaeological
investigation of its kind to be undertaken in this country.'
The result, he says, is that it has been possible to reconstruct an exact
replica of the original building using many of the original timbers. Only
elements of the original building too badly decayed to be re-used were
discarded.
The remains of the original timbers have been blended with 4,000 pieces of
new oak, some weighing up to seven tons, in a massive carpentry operation.
'All survivors of the 520 or so timbers that constituted the original
building were recorded and the whole process was monitored by an academic
advisory committee,' says Addyman. 'The history of the building is now
understood for the first time. So how can it have been destroyed?'
The reaction of the public to the project in the coming weeks will be vital.
Throughout the festival tours of the hall are taking place twice daily.
Members of the public can see inside Barley Hall for the first time and hear
from guides how the building was rediscovered beneath a jumble of buildings
of assorted ages, and the painstaking way in which the reconstruction was
undertaken.
The judgment of visitors will determine the fundraising, which has reached a
crucial stage. Although the project is slightly above budget the recession
has reduced the numbers of companies prepared either to dip into their
funds.
So far Pounds 100,000 has been raised, and although the building work is
complete, the trust needs another Pounds 350,000 by July to enable it to
continue to furnish Barley Hall and turn it into the 'living museum' it is
planning.
The eventual aim is that visitors to Barley Hall will be able to witness
people inside replicating a working household, living in the fashion of
their 15th century forbears, carrying out the same tasks in the same sort of
way, in rooms looking exactly as they did in the 1480s.
The trust's researches have revealed much about the original occupant of the
building, Alderman William Snawsell, a goldsmith and former Lord Mayor of
York, and his family.
July is decision month. when the trust's council must decide whether to
abandon, at least temporarily, completion of the project. If this were to
happen the 'mothballed' building might prove an equally fascinating - if
better preserved - find for archaeologists in 500 years time as its
predecessor's remains did for Addyman's team.
York Archaeological Trust, 1, Pavement, York YO1 2NA.
York Festival and Mystery Plays. 0904-632323.
