FT  28 NOV 92 / Dam experts race to save Danube from toxic waste deluge
THE FIRST stage of emergency repairs to a crumbling dam in Montenegro, a
republic in the rump federation of Yugolavia, was nearly complete yesterday
evening. But United Nations officials warned there was still a high risk the
dam could collapse, sending tonnes of toxic waste towards the Danube.
Mr Sergio Piazzi, relief co-ordinator with the UN disaster relief
organisation in Geneva, said the efforts of the past two days 'have given
the first injection - now we have to keep the dam standing'.
International response has come six weeks after the floods and nearly a
month after international bodies were alerted to the problem's seriousness.
Mr Fred Eckhard, a spokesman for the Geneva conference on the former
Yugoslavia, said Lord Owen and Mr Cyrus Vance, who visited Montenegro on
October 30 as part of peace efforts, had urgently requested money and
materials from the European Commission and the UN sanctions committee. The
first EC experts examined the dam on November 10, and UN experts on November
15.
A quarter of the length of the 600m dam, high in a region of rocky gorges,
was damaged by two flash floods on October 17 and 18 which tore away
supporting concrete panels from the base.
The 12-metre-high dam, made of compacted-earth, holds back 7m tonnes of
mining sludge from the river Tara, which eventually drains into the Danube.
The sludge, the consistency of wet sand, contains lead and zinc, which can
kill fish and poison drinking water. Mr Hans Zimmerman, a senior UN
official, said there also appeared to be traces of lindane, a highly toxic
pesticide.
On Thursday and yesterday materials were hastily collected from all over
Europe - reinforced plastic sheeting from the Netherlands to prevent the dam
absorbing water, and steel cages from Italy to support its foot - and rushed
to Montenegro in a Belgian Hercules aircraft.
Next week Mr Zimmerman will begin a report on the total cost of repairs and
medical supplies for people made homeless by the floods.
The first phase has received Ecu110,000 (Pounds 88,800) from the EC and
Dollars 10,000 (Pounds 6,570) from UN emergency funds. EC experts estimate
the cost of emergency work at Ecu500,000.
Mr Zimmerman said that even though the floods had subsided, the dam was
still threatened because the Tara had broken its banks and was swirling
against its foot.
Phase two, lasting until Christmas, will be the construction of a new
supporting dam next to the river.
