FT  12 MAR 92 / UK News (Employment): Unions to assess NHS offer
UNION leaders in the National Health Service yesterday agreed to consult
their members on a pay offer worth 4.93 per cent to administrative and
clerical workers.
The offer, described as final, is the first of the present pay round to be
negotiated in the NHS, and will be seen as a strong pointer to offers to be
made elsewhere in the public sector.
The above-inflation amount falls short of increases offered to other workers
in the public sector, where the government has agreed to implement
pay-review body recommendations. The average for nurses, doctors, teachers
and members of the armed forces was nearly 6.5 per cent.
The five unions representing white-collar health workers had claimed a rise
of Pounds 16 a week, or 10 per cent, whichever was greater.
Nalgo, the public sector union which represents most of the 140,000 workers
covered by the talks, said: 'After 10 hours of talks, an offer of Pounds 400
or 4.75 per cent, whichever is the greater, was made.' It said the offer
meant 61,000 Nalgo low-paid members would receive a flat-rate increase of
Pounds 400 a year.
The unions said most of the administration and clerical workers covered by
the talks earned between Pounds 6,000 and Pounds 9,000. BT, the
telecommunications group, won a test-case ruling yesterday that it was
within its rights to send home two managers without pay after they returned
from strike action during a continuing wages dispute. That was because the
two refused to sign a pledge when they returned not to take part in any
further industrial action.
The Court of Appeal allowed BT's appeal against county-court compensation to
the two managers for wages lost as a result of not being allowed to work
during the 1989-1990 dispute. The ruling will be applicable to more than 100
other people who took similar action. Leave to appeal to the House of Lords
was refused. Asda, the Leeds-based grocery chain, said yesterday it was
freezing pay for a year for all of its 65,000 employees except a few
low-paid workers covered by the Food Wages Council who will receive a 4.2
per cent rise next month.
