FT  03 JUL 92 / Talks may answer Ulster question
Face-to-face talks between leaders of political parties in Northern Ireland
and the British and Irish governments are expected to start in London next
week. The latest series of political talks started in April but are based on
a programme agreed by the partici-pants in March last year. The structure of
the talks is highly complex, reflecting the sensitivities of the province's
politics. Ralph Atkins answers fundamental questions about progress so far.
What exactly has been agreed this week?
So far the talks process has been on 'strand one' in which local politicians
discussed devolution in Northern Ireland with the UK government. Now
agreement has been reached to move to 'strand two' when the Dublin
government will enter and discussions will turn to relations between north
and south Ireland.
How significant is it?
Perhaps the most momentous development is the broadening of discussion on
Northern Ireland's future. No unionist has negotiated with the Irish
Republic since the 1973 Sunningdale conference.
This time the talks with Dublin will include the Rev Ian Paisley, hardline
leader of the Democratic Unionist Party, making it the first negotiations in
which all shades of unionist opinion have been represented since partition
in the early 1920s.
However, it is still only an agreement to talk, and there is less than a
month before talks are supposed to end. If Unionists had fears about
starting 'strand two' they may have been encouraged by knowing that time
will almost certainly run out. With Northern Ireland's 'troubles' descending
from centuries of conflict, few expect a lasting settlement to emerge in
days.
Why are there three 'strands'?
To reconcile unionists' and nationalists' mutual distrust. The Ulster
Unionist party and the DUP believe the government of Northern Ireland is of
no concern to a 'foreign' government such as that in the Irish Republic. But
they recognise a need for good relations with neighbours. The nationalist
Social Democratic and Labour Party argues Northern addressing the 'totality
of relationships' within the British Isles.
Last year Mr Peter Brooke, then Northern Ireland secretary, agreed with
unionists, nationalists and the Irish government that discussions in the
three 'strands' would be phased. Nothing would be formally agreed until
everything was agreed but 'strand two' would start 'within weeks'. Mr Brooke
failed to get beyond 'strand one' but paved the way for talks to restart in
April this year before being replaced by Sir Patrick Mayhew.
This time, amid continuing unionist suspicion, it took informal meetings in
strand two and three 'formation' over the past two weeks before a formal
start to strand two could be agreed.
Strand three, between the UK and Irish governments and on relations between
the two countries, is also about to start. This is regarded as particularly
significant by unionists because the 1985 Anglo-Irish Agreement - which they
oppose because of the role it gives Dublin - and the republic's
constitutional claim on the province are now on the negotiating table.
Is the talks process likely to make much more progress?
Sir Patrick admited on Tuesway further to go'. But developments so far have
already surprised some commentators who argued that unionist and
nationalists could never work together. Talks could be re-started later this
year.
Are the unionists and nationalists moving towards each other?
Hardly. The process is more about finding political structures to reconcile
their conflicting aspirations. Mr Paisley and Mr James Molyneaux, unionist
leaders, would not be able to sell to their supporters any deal which gave
nationalist undue influence. Mr John Hume, SDLP leader, will not allow a
return to the old unionist hegemony of Ulster. How much agreement on issues
been reached so far?
It is hard to tell. An agreement not to disclose the content of discussions
is holding apart from some selective briefing. There looks to be some
agreement between the two unionist parties and the non-sectarian Alliance
party on a devolved structure with a controlling 'panel'.
But the SDLP's proposals for six commissioners including three appointed by
London, Dublin and the European Community is unacceptable to unionists.
How big are the differences between the UK and Irish governments?
Unlike the worst years of the 1980s there is little 'megaphone diplomacy'
but there are still considerable tensions that should not be underestimated.
Mr David Andrews, Irish foreign minister, has raised the stakes by saying
that, if his country's constitution is to be discussed, so too should the
1920s UK legislation which led to partition. Sir Patrick has played a
'neutral facilitator' role and has never made speeches on his vision of
Northern Ireland. But he is seen as a friend of the Union.
Why has the talks process been time-limited?
Unionists refused to talk while the 1985 Anglo-Irish Agreement was in
operation - including the regular inter-government conferences. The Irish
government refused to abandon it but agreed to a suspension of its workings.
After a conference meeting in April a 'gap' was agreed until the end of this
month. The Irish government has indicated, however, that it will be flexible
 -possibly allowing an extension if talks are making progress.
Why has Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, been excluded?
The UK and Irish governments refuse to talk to Sinn Fein until it renounces
the use of violence. Unionist leaders would walk out if allies of the IRA
joined negotiations.
Will the terrorist killings stop?
No - at least not in the foreseeable future. The IRA wants British troops
and politicians out of Northern Ireland. But if a lasting political
settlement is found the terrorists' strongest argument - that politics has
failed in Northern Ireland - will have been undermined. As long as the IRA
exists, loyalist terrorists will arm themselves.
