FT  26 JUN 92 / UK Company News: First price cut wins approval - Profits
surge at Southern Electric and South Wales Electricity
SOUTH WALES Electricity will drop electricity prices by up to 2 per cent
from January, after cutting more than 450 jobs - around 15 per cent of its
present workforce - and reducing costs by about Pounds 4m.
The announcement, which makes the Cardiff-based regional electricity company
the first to cut electricity prices since privatisation two years ago, won
approval from the Department of Trade and Industry.
'I believe these reductions demonstrate that the benefits of privatisation
are coming through,' said Mr Tim Eggar, the energy minister.
The cuts, which mean about Pounds 1.50 to Pounds 2 off the average Pounds 80
to Pounds 90 quarterly electricity bill, were possible because South Wales
had cut costs by 6 per cent, the company said at its annual meeting
yesterday. That was the highest cut so far from any regional company.
South Wales, which is the smallest of the 12 regional companies, did not
rule out another tariff cut in future.
Southern Electric, which also announced its annual results yesterday, faced
questions from the City as to why it had not rewarded customers with a
similar move.
The contrast was sharp, because Southern only cut 3.7 per cent or Pounds
8.5m from its costs, but gave shareholders a dividend of 16.66p, up 15.3 per
cent, compared with South Wales' 14.8 per cent increase to 19.4p.
Southern Electric's pre-tax profit of Pounds 166.3m for the year ending
March 1992, up 57 per cent on last year's pro forma figure, also looked high
compared with the 28 per cent increase in South Wales' figure, to Pounds
72.5m.
Southern's earnings per share rose by 51 per cent to 47.8p and South Wales'
by 26 per cent to 50.3p.
But the companies' underlying profit growth - excluding exceptional items
and distortions - was closer. Southern Electric's profit grew by an
underlying 30 per cent, and South Wales' by 23 per cent. This came almost
entirely from the core distribution business, although sales were depressed.
Southern Electric sold a modest 2.2 per cent more electricity, and sales in
South Wales were stagnant.
Growth came from cost cutting, and higher tariffs, which gave South Wales a
Pounds 70.4m operating profit in the core business, compared with Pounds
47.5m the previous year.
Southern Electric's core business made an operating profit of Pounds 172.5m,
a rise of 34 per cent.
Both companies incurred exceptional charges as they restructured their
retail operations and shed jobs in the main business - Pounds 11.2m for
South Wales and Pounds 8.5m for Southern Electric.
However, while Southern merged its retail operations with Eastern's in April
1992, South Wales sold its business to South Western Electricity, shedding
355 jobs.
Southern's retail business showed a Pounds 3.3m loss, and is not expected to
break even until the year ending March 1994.
Contracting was loss-making for both companies. Southern lost Pounds 2.6m on
the business, and South Wales about Pounds 1m.
Both companies plan to take more costs out of the core business, though
Southern gave a firmer target of 500 more jobs to go or 6.3 per cent of the
workforce next year.
However, South Wales is targeting a 1 per cent cut in costs overall, while
South Wales is forecasting a dramatic 5 per cent real cut.
Turnover for the smaller South Wales Electricity amounted to Pounds 590m
(567m) while Southern Electric achieved Pounds 1.75bn (Pounds 1.55bn).
COMMENT
Whether or not the halo South Wales was strategically wearing yesterday
slips in future scarcely matters. The company's price cut will please the
City even if it is a temporary sop to the regulator, and the company's cost
cutting was tangible enough. And while Southern's promise of 'critical mass'
from its retail merger made South Wales' decision to ditch the whole
lossmaking outfit look happily straightforward and likely to keep Welsh
Water from making more predatory moves on the company. Southern - with its
seven new businesses and new retail venture - inevitably looks somewhat
uncertain by comparison even though the company has a strong management
record. That uncertainty casts a shadow over the company's hefty dividend
rise, which the company implied would be a one-off. Analysts forecast
pre-tax profit of between Pounds 170m and Pounds 200m for Southern Electric,
and Pounds 85m to Pounds 95m for South Wales. That puts the companies on a
prospective p/e of 6.5 to 7.7 for Southern, and 6.6 to 8.3 for South Wales.
A dividend of between 18p and 18.7p is forecast for Southern, and 21.2p to
21.8p for South Wales.
