FT  17 OCT 92 / As They Say in Europe: GATT and the EC: a French farmer
writes
'VARIABLE geometry Europe is now taking shape' is the slogan I expect will
have emerged from the Birmingham Summit by the time this appears.
The Community's variable nature arises from the contradictory views of the
members on the nature of the creature. To the British, or at least the
English, it represents 11 nations jealous of the island nation's grandeur
and the perfection of its institutions.
For the diminutive northwest Europeans it is the one place where their voice
will be heard. The Germans see it as an austere school where others learn to
be more like them. For Italy the Community represents the last great chance
to get its government out of Italian hands.
For the Iberian peninsula, the Community is a rich source of modernity and
civilisation. In Greece it is a rich source of money. But for the French it
is an association of nations freely coming together that they may better
serve French interests.
Thus in the first two days of the week I counted around 30 editorials on the
subject of the GATT talks and their possible collapse. This is a result of
further US pressure last weekend to gain fair global trading terms for their
farmers. The general thrust of comment in France insisted on the inalienable
right of French peasants to my money.
Le Quotidien de Paris posed the question fairly: 'Are France's European
partners prepared not to sacrifice the vital interests of a country which,
although industrialised, lives by exporting half its agricultural
production?'
The answers came flooding in. La Charente libre said, '. . . these GATT
negotiations constitute a great moment of truth for the European union in
gestation. It is the spirit of the Maastricht Treaty which is put to the
test because it is a question of knowing whether the cohesion and the
solidarity of the Twelve will withstand the terrible American pressure.'
Le Figaro: 'If the (European) Commission gives in to the United States, the
French risk having to pay, in terms of exports, for an agreement from which
only George Bush will draw advantage.' Apart, one supposes, from the rest of
the Community and the developing world.
For Ouest-France there was a danger of France being isolated. US strong-arm
tactics 'open the door for yet another Community identity crisis.'
Nice-Matin saw the issue clearly in its own distorting mirror: ' . . . a
reduction of either our production or exports of grain, as demanded by the
United States, would cost France around FFr10bn. That cannot be permitted.'
L'Est republicain inadvertently rendered the peasants' problem totally
vacuous: 'They are simply asking for a proposal and await a thought-out
answer to the question which preoccupies and worries them: what does it mean
to be a farmworker in a country which is one of the motors of Europe?'
The other great question of the week was 'What does it mean to have
discovered America when you shouldn't have?'
The 500th anniversary of Columbus' landfall also marked the closure of the
Seville Expo which, said El Pais, had at least demonstrated that Spaniards
were not congenitally incompetent. But it added that their creation of Latin
America had not been a howling success.
'At a distance of five centuries, it is not the model of conquest and
colonisation which we would recommend, but we must note the historical
significance of those important episodes which transplanted Spaniards and
without which modern history would be unintelligible. It is the legacy of
Spain in those countries, and in particular the common language, that
permits Latin America to project itself as a cultural community.'
An editorial on the same subject in Komsomolskaya Pravda showed how the
Russians are catching up. 'When the old world felt crowded it discovered
America, but what did America give the old world? . . . The US constitution
and Latin American juntas, modern art, penthouses, pornographic comics,
melt-in-your-mouth chocolate and fizzy drink that destroys your stomach, the
'melting pot' and racial problems.'
But it was not all bad - literature, music and films had benefited from the
rise of the US. KP concluded, 'The history of relations between the old and
new worlds can be compared to Turgenev's Fathers and Sons. The badly behaved
son chose the orphanage, but he accumulated his parents' experience and
learnt from his mistakes . . . Now old Europe's task is to try to avoid the
nursing home.'
James Morgan is diplomatic correspondent of the BBC World Service.
