FT  15 JUN 92 / Letter: Something to learn from a 20-year track record on
forecasting
Sir, In his article 'Economic forecasts can endanger your wealth' (June 1),
Martin Wolf states: 'Despite 50 years of practice . . . the ability of
economists to provide precise forecasts, even for the very near term, is
very much in question.' He goes on to suggest reasons for this 'persistent
failure'.
Why does Martin Wolf make no reference to Prof Wynne Godley and his economic
policy group (CEPG), which has maintained a respectable, if not excellent,
record for more than 20 years? In particular, the most recent recession has
been quite accurately characterised by the CEPG ever since September 1989,
in contributions to the Observer, New Statesman, Financial Times, as well as
other publications. For instance, on January 18 1991, Godley wrote in The
New Statesman:
'With no change in policy, the squeeze on profits and corporate liquidity
will probably cause a big fall in investment this year and next, while
falling real income and reduced borrowing by households will make for lower
consumption; with world trade slowing down and export margins under
pressure, there is unlikely to be much stimulus from exports. . .I expect a
significant absolute fall (in GDP) of 1-2 per cent between 1990 and 1991,
with some further fall thereafter, causing unemployment to rise to more than
2.5m by mid-1992. The balance of payments deficit will improve to 1-1.5 per
cent of GDP, but only because the recession will reduce imports, not because
of any improvement to speak of in competitive performance.
'I expect the underlying inflation rate to improve, though only slowly. . .'
This forecast could hardly be better, even if every statement is not
precisely accurate.
Perhaps Martin Wolf can only watch the herd and cannot see anything which
does not conform with it. He would do well to consider, instead, whether he,
and the mainstream forecasters, have something to learn from Prof Godley.
Bob Rowthorn,
Ken Coutts,
Faculty of Economics and
Politics,
University of Cambridge,
Austin Robinson Building,
Sidgwick Avenue, Cambridge
