FT  22 SEP 92 / Crisis in the UK Economy: Major lives to fight another day
in Europe
A BATTERED Mr John Major will live to fight another day  - and the rest of
Europe is not rushing to write him off. In capitals throughout the European
Community, officials and commentators show more sympathy than Schadenfreude
at Britain's grand economic U-turn.
EC officials in Brussels are emphasising their understanding for the way
that Mr Major is caught between domestic realities and the need to show
leadership during Britain's presidency of the Community
One acerbic comment, however, came from a European ambassador. Pointing to
Britain's stream of requests that the Bundesbank cut lending rates in the
interests of the rest of Europe, the ambassador said: 'It is ironic that the
one country who doesn't want a European central bank is asking the
Bundesbank to behave like one.'
There has been irritation in Bonn over Britain's attempts to make Germany
the scapegoat for its withdrawal from the European exchange rate mechanism.
In contrast to the raucous mass-circulation newspaper Bild, which last week
called the UK 'the great loser of the currency battle', German government
officials have been couching their remarks in tones of studied politeness.
German journalists show similar compunction. Mr Josef Joffe, foreign policy
commentator of the Suddeutsche Zeitung, the Munich-based daily newspaper,
said Mr Major's position had not been devalued. He praised the decision to
break the D-Mark link, saying: 'Sometimes realism is the better part of
valour.'
He said that when the EC's 12 heads of government met at their emergency
summit next month, Mr Major would 'be in good company'. He added: 'Every
single member of the group will be groggy and on the ropes. They all have to
think about what to do next. Chancellor (Helmut) Kohl might say that the
train to Europe has not stopped  - but it has stopped.'
Mr Robert Leicht, deputy editor of Die Zeit in Hamburg, said he believed Mr
Kohl's relationship with Mr Major would not suffer as a result of the
recriminations over sterling. 'Kohl was very proud to have better links with
Major than with Mrs Thatcher (the former prime minister, now Lady Thatcher).
It will soon return to business as usual,' he said. Provided Mr Major could
steer his way through the coming Conservative party conference, his position
would not be unduly weakened, Mr Leicht suggested.
Instead of suggesting that Germany could take a more independent foreign
policy, Mr Leicht said: 'Kohl is now much more reliant on a good
relationship with Major over foreign policy. The whole process of German
unification is dependent on foreign acceptance. We cannot go it alone.'
Mr Gunther Nonnenmacher, foreign commentator of the Frankfurter Allgemeine
Zeitung, pointed yesterday to growing opposition to Mr Major from
parliamentary supporters of Lady Thatcher. But he also warned that Germany
itself could suffer from a continuation of the currency turbulence that sank
the pound.
French commentators, uneasily aware that the franc might be the next to
experience the tender attention of currency speculators, are also in no mood
to sling arrows. Politicians and the press, absorbed by the referendum, have
paid so little attention to the UK's ERM withdrawal that they are now rather
surprised at the domestic impact.
'We are rather astonished to see so many British commentators virtually
writing off Mr Major politically,' said a French foreign ministry official
said yesterday. He added: 'Surely French approval of Maastricht will now
give the markets a chance to calm, and Mr Major a breathing space.'
