FT  10 FEB 92 / Talks to settle Outhwaite case get under way
TALKS are under way in an effort to reach an out-of-court settlement in the
Outhwaite case, the biggest single legal action in the 300-year history of
the London insurance market.
Representatives of the 81 Lloyd's agents named in the suit - including RHM
Outhwaite Underwriting - and the 987 Names who are party to the action said
last night discussions were taking place which might lead to a settlement.
Names are the individuals whose assets back underwriting, while agents
handle their affairs and manage syndicates.
Mr Justice Saville, who has been presiding over hearings at the High Court
since the case opened in October, adjourned proceedings for 'administrative
reasons' last Monday.
A successful outcome may also encourage the settlement of other legal cases
in which another 1,000 Names are involved. Names in the Outhwaite case
allege that their insurance losses of more than Pounds 200m were due to
negligence by Mr Richard Outhwaite, the underwriter of syndicate 317/661,
and the agents who placed Names with his syndicate.
Mr Outhwaite's losses stem from 32 reinsurance contracts, underwritten in
1982, whereby in return for substantial premiums he assumed the exposures of
other insurers to US liability business.
During the 1980s insurance claims arising from court awards to victims of
asbestosis proved to be much greater than Mr Outhwaite had expected and the
business produced disastrous results for Names.
There was speculation yesterday that agents would settle the case for around
Pounds 100m - about two thirds of the amount that the Outhwaite 1982 Names
Association had been hoping to win in the courts.
It can be expected that errors and omissions insurers - Lloyd's syndicates
that insure agents against the cost of legal awards for negligence - will
meet some of the cost.
On Friday E &amp; O underwriters paid an out-of-court settlement worth about
Pounds 4m, including Pounds 1.5m in legal costs, to more than 500 members of
syndicate 553, managed by CJ Warrilow agency.
Legal action, Page 7
