FT  14 FEB 92 / Arts: National Gallery takes a bold line
If you pass near Trafalgar Square any time between now and March 29, this is
your chance to see the 'Madonna and Child with the Pinks' by Raphael. This
lovely masterpiece was painted when Raphael was in his mid-twenties. It was
rediscovered only last year, hanging in Alnwick Castle, home of the dukes of
Northumberland.
The 'Madonna with the Pinks' was bought in Rome by Algernon the 4th Duke in
1853. The duke savoured the pleasure of owning a superb work by Raphael, who
enjoyed the status of a minor deity in the eyes of 19th-century art lovers.
But within a few years scholars had started to question whether it really
was by Raphael. Then in 1897, the painting's fate appeared sealed when
Bernard Berenson pronounced it a copy by Giulio Romano.
It was too much to bear; the painting was banished to a corridor. Here it
was spotted last spring by the sharp eye of Nicholas Penny, the Clore
curator of Renaissance painting at the National Gallery. After technical
examination in London, the 'Madonna and Child with Pinks' was found to be
the celebrated lost original. Now cleaned and restored, this lovely picture
can be compared with the Gallery's own two paintings of the Madonna and
Child by the young Raphael.
Perhaps it has been a year or two, or longer still since you last visited
the National Gallery. Perhaps you have done the Sainsbury Wing and not
realised that the 'old' Gallery is undergoing profound changes. The latest
stage is a new display of the early 19th-century collection recently opened
in three handsomely restored rooms in the east wing. (The galleries were
paid for by Hazlett, Gooden &amp; Fox, with matching funds from the Wolfson
Foundation.)
Roughly speaking, the first two rooms exhibit what used to be called the
'French School', artists such as Delacroix, Ingres, Corot, Courbet,
Fantin-Latour and Moreau. The walls are clad in a deep red-pink fabric,
almost the shade of the executioner's tights in Delaroche's 'Execution of
Lady Jane Grey'. For good or ill, this huge history painting dominates the
room. Rather comically, on the adjacent wall there is Puvis de Chavanne's
'Beheading of St John the Baptist'.
The third room is the first devoted to Impressionism. The others, which
reopened last year, have incorporated the riches of the Berggruen
Collection. False ceilings and hessian wall-covering have gone, the carpets
have been taken off the wooden floors. There is now air-conditioning in
these rooms - although by no means everywhere else. Impressionists and
Post-Impressionists hang against a grey fabric which my eye tends to
register as denim blue.
A chronological walk now takes you from young Ingres in Rome in 1811,
painting the portrait of Napoleon's Chief of Police to the spectacular
Picasso portraits from the Berggruen collection. The Sainsbury Wing has
taken pressure off space so that many paintings will be coming up from the
reserve collection where they have been visible, although relatively few
visitors penetrate so far.
There is one striking oddity about the new hang. Why are the Goyas
interspersed with Ingres? It is hardly an illuminating point that the two
artists are so different. Compare and contrast, as they say, Goya's 'Dona
Isabel de Porcelor', a romantic portrait of an animated and sensual young
woman, with 'Madame Moitessier', close by. Ingres presented his wealthy
sitter less as a flesh and blood woman than as a kind of salon Sphinx or a
piece of gorgeously upholstered Second Empire furniture.
The Spanish interloper's presence in this otherwise resolutely French room
is because the National Gallery is now taking a bolder, freer line with its
hanging. Neil McGregor, the National Gallery's Director, feels transplanting
Goya is understandable because of the intense interest artists in early
19th-century France showed in many foreign artists - Italian, of course, but
also English and Spanish. Delacroix, for example, visited Spain and noted
the Goyas he saw in his diary.
'There is a huge disjunction between art history as taught and as it is
hung', McGregor points out. He speaks of the 'enfeebling notion' of national
schools which dominated museum display from the 19th century; the Gallery's
new plan will 'undo the nationalist thrust'. In this respect, as in so many
others, London and Paris grow ever further apart. McGregor rejoices in the
fact when 'le grand Louvre' is rehung, it will be along rigidly
nationalistic lines.
At Trafalgar Square, the very word 'Schools' has been banished from the
labelling. The curators believe that to the unsophisticated public it
conveys nothing at all - except occasional puzzlement as to precisely where
these mysterious schools could have been located. The grand plan is that
when the entire Gallery is completed - and that relies on sponsors coming
forward - it will have a firm chronological backbone.
However, conservative readers need not feel unduly alarmed. A 'no frontiers'
policy has so far been only timidly applied. One example is a small room
where Tintoretto, Elsheimer and El Greco hang together. Another is an
international room grouping 17th-century full-length portraits including
famous paintings by Velasquez, Van Dyck and Rembrandt. The 'new' National
Gallery which is slowly emerging may well have its oddities. Yet we can be
confident that it will also be better labelled, better for the pictures, and
a setting which visually will be vastly more in keeping with a great
national collection.
