FT  25 AUG 92 / TV changes anger Attenborough: British Association for the
Advancement of Science
THE GOVERNMENT is forcing changes on British television that threaten to
destroy the BBC and ITV as sources of high quality programmes, Sir David
Attenborough, the naturalist and broadcaster, said last night.
In his presidential address to the annual meeting of the British Association
for the Advancement of Science in Southampton, Sir David expressed most
concern about cuts at the BBC.
He said the BBC was 'an institution that has produced programmes as
efficiently as any in the world and to the highest of all standards'.
It had provided this country with two television and four radio stations,
but was now being 'gravely eroded, the morale of its staff seriously damaged
and the very things that gave it its unique structure and strength
destroyed'.
Sir David, the first professional populariser of science to be chosen as the
association's president, attacked the changes because television was 'so
overwhelmingly important in the dissemination of scientific knowledge'.
He predicted that science would be squeezed out of ITV schedules because it
could not deliver the 8m audience required for a programme to be shown at
peak evening viewing times. 'From next year onwards, no serious science
programme will be shown on independent television at times that most people
are able to see them,' he said.
Sir David made clear, however, that his concerns for the BBC extended far
beyond science programmes. The corporation's policy of replacing a quarter
of its output with programmes by small independent units was an 'extremely
questionable' way of cutting costs. 'There is no evidence whatever that
competition in broadcasting has ever reduced costs  - and a great deal to
show that it significantly increases them,' he said.
'Nor can it be claimed that the system will encourage innovation. What a
small company needs is programmes that are sure-fire winners. The last thing
it can afford to do is to take major risks.'
Meanwhile the BBC was getting rid of staff. 'The accountants have moved into
production offices and in an attempt to make everyone cost-conscious they
are insisting that even the tiniest action, such as taking a book from a
library, should be costed and logged  - a system that in itself has required
the setting up of a huge new bureaucracy.'
Sir David urged the scientific community to 'contribute with all the
strength at its disposal' to the debate on the government's green paper on
the BBC, due out next month, 'and protect what is left of public-service
broadcasting'.
Sir David made clear his dismay at the prospect of the BBC being compelled
'to concentrate entirely on serious and less popular programmes'. This would
not only prevent it from building its audiences by attracting viewers with
popular programmes and encouraging them to sample other kinds, 'but it also
robs it of the widespread popular support that is essential if the payment
of a licence is to be acceptable to the public at large'.
