FT  04 JUN 92 / Technology: A licence to print money - Clive Cookson finds
out why selling research can be as profitable as exploiting the inventions
in-house
Researchers working for Thorn EMI, the UK entertainment and electronics
group, have made a breakthrough in one of the most competitive areas of R&amp;D:
liquid crystal displays (LCDs) for flat-screen televisions and portable
computers.
That is a notable technical achievement in a field dominated by Japanese
companies (which between them spend an estimated Pounds 1bn a year on LCD
development).
But it is more remarkable still that a company which makes neither TVs nor
computer displays - and has no intention of doing so in future - should have
invested several million pounds over the last few years in LCD research.
Thorn has just signed the first licensing agreement with a Japanese
electronics manufacturer to commercialise its new type of ferroelectric LCD,
and the UK company hopes that royalties from that and other licensing deals
will repay its research investment.
The LCD programme is one example of the way Thorn has managed to maintain
the scientific and technical strength of its Central Research Laboratories
(CRL) in Hayes, west of London, while the company has transformed itself
from being primarily a high-technology electronics manufacturer 10 years ago
to primarily an entertainment and leisure company today.
Ken Gray, technical director, joined Thorn in 1984 from the government's
Royal Signals and Radar Establishment. The period since then has been 'one
of the most remarkable periods of radical change imaginable for any
company,' he says.
Colin Southgate, chief executive, has disposed of many of the
technology-based manufacturing businesses, including Ferguson televisions in
1987, and he says any of the remaining businesses apart from music and
rental - now the two core areas - might be sold too if Thorn received a
suitable offer.
Such a transformation could have destroyed CRL which, as a vivid historical
exhibition reminds visitors to the laboratories, was responsible for many
pioneering developments in electronics: the first stereo sound recording,
first 405-line television, first airborne radar, first solid-state colour
TV, and the NMR brain scanner which won a Nobel prize for Thorn researcher
Godfrey Hounsfield.
The laboratory has certainly had to make many adjustments and give up some
lines of research. But the overall policy has been to maintain CRL at an
approximately constant size - with 230 staff including 165 scientists and
engineers - and to continue promising research programmes even if Thorn
sells the business that was originally intended to exploit their results.
The active licensing out policy started because the parent group kept
selling businesses. But the company has recently extended it, so CRL now
sets out to develop some technology for licensing from the start.
Thorn began to run CRL as a separate company with its own profit and loss
accounts this year. 'It's demonstrating that R&amp;D can be looked upon as an
activity like any other in a commercial organisation,' Gray says.
CRL is budgeting for an income of Pounds 11.5m in 1992-93. Only 48 per cent
of this comes directly from Thorn businesses; 21 per cent comes from
external grants or contracts and 31 per cent from royalties paid by other
companies exploiting CRL research under licence. The broad areas of
technology covered are electronics, computing, optics and new materials.
'We do a lot of radical research, which means taking a big step into a new
area,' Gray says. This commitment to radical - and therefore inevitably
speculative - research distinguishes CRL from other contract research
organisations.
Another feature of CRL's work is its avoidance of specific product
development. Instead, it concentrates on 'ideas, technologies and
applications, based on wide-ranging scientific knowledge coupled to market
awareness'. Examples of current CRL projects include:
Neural networks. Thorn is working on several applications in this
fashionable area of research, using computers to find patterns or classify
data in a way that resembles a simple model of the brain (see story on
right).
One is in the financial area: CRL has developed a network that a bank could
use to spot likely bad debts among loan applications. Another, which might
be used by Thorn's own rental business, identifies customers who are most
likely to terminate their contracts - and might be worthwhile targets for a
direct mail shot to persuade them to stay on. The music business is
interested in using a neural network to model styles of composition and
generate background 'musak'.
Visualisation. CRL has developed a system which gives an accurate impression
on a computer screen of complex lighting schemes. An architect or lighting
engineer can use it to demonstrate the effects of different light fittings.
Fingerprint classification. An entirely new system of encoding fingerprints
 -based on the interference patterns created when two copies of the same
print are superimposed and moved relative to each other - will be evaluated
this summer in a mass trial among Thorn workers. The intensity of the
interference patterns generates a 48-number code identifying that
individual. Applications include access control and identification.
However, despite the success of CRL's strategy so far, it remains to be seen
whether it can continue in the long run, particularly if Thorn sheds its
remaining businesses in electronics, security and lighting and becomes
exclusively a music and rental company. And there is always the question of
what happens if CRL comes up with a truly radical development - a
world-beating invention that Thorn would want to exploit itself, if only it
had kept its high-technology manufacturing operations.
