FT  14 NOV 92 / West's guilty role in arming Saddam: Revelations this week
in London and Washington imply high-level cover ups of illegal weapon deals.
Alan Friedman has been following the trail for six years
BRITISH ministers squirming under the torrent of accusations this week that
they helped to arm Saddam Hussein before the invasion of Kuwait may take
bleak comfort from the fact that they are not alone.
Fellow politicians, officials, bankers, businessmen, arms dealers and spies
stand accused of doing the same in countries as far apart as the US, Italy,
South Africa and Chile.
In spite of the publicly avowed policy of withholding the sale of arms and
weapons technology to Iraq, its war machine proved an irresistible lure.
This continued even when the president used the weapons to oppress his own
people, gas the Kurds and threaten the Middle East with a growing arsenal of
missiles and nuclear technology.
The Matrix Churchill affair, tantalisingly revealed in hitherto secret
Whitehall documents, is to be the subject of a judicial enquiry. But it is
only the latest twist in a bizarre tale which began in the early 1980s
At that time the west had decided that backing Saddam was the lesser of two
evils in its effort to protect strategic oil supplies in the Gulf where the
mullahs in Ayatollah Khomeini's Iran seemed increasingly hostile.
That Washington and London backed Saddam during the eight years' war between
Iran and Iraq is well documented. But the tilt to Baghdad continued well
after the end of that war in the autumn of 1988, and documentary evidence
has been uncovered which shows that it carried on until a few days before
Iraq's August 1990 invasion of Kuwait. Why? For some governments it was a
scramble for profits from Iraq's huge re-equipment programme. For others it
was the flawed judgment that Saddam was the man to provide stability in a
chronically unstable region.
Saddam turned to the west for weapons and technology after the Soviet Union,
long Iraq's patron, began to weaken. However, in most western countries
there were laws or strict policy guidelines, backed by United Nations
resolutions, banning the sale of weapons and military technology.
However, there is a large, shadowy sector of technology which can be used
for either military or civilian purposes. In this grey area officials had
wide discretion to interpret the rules strictly or - more often, it seems -
with flexibility. It is in this area that the scandal, already dubbed
Iraqgate, is unfolding.
A recently declassified US National Security directive, signed in October
1989 by President George Bush, shows that giving money and technology to
Iraq was considered a top political priority, a way of trying to make sure
Saddam served as the west's policeman in the region.
This week in the UK, documents released by the court where the case against
three directors of Matrix Churchill, an Iraqi-owned machine tools maker in
Coventry, collapsed, have shown that ministers in Margaret Thatcher's
government were briefed while the company acted as a lynchpin of Baghdad's
arms procurement network.
Paul Henderson, Matrix Churchill's former managing director, says he worked
with MI6, the espionage service, for nearly 15 years, passing information to
London on Saddam's nuclear weapons programme. The implication is that he,
and his company, were too valuable to lose.
In Washington it emerged yesterday that the Bush administration was moving
closer towards the appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate the
Iraqgate affair after a Justice Department investigator concluded that there
are credible and serious allegations of criminal wrongdoing by senior US
officials. It has not been proven that US officials knowingly broke their
own laws prohibiting military transfers to Iraq, but there is circumstantial
evidence to suggest they did.
The picture which is slowly emerging suggests that officials of three
nations may have been involved - using banks, companies, taxpayers' money
and government agencies to help in the covert arming of a dictator.
It is clear now that Matrix, in addition to being at the centre of Baghdad's
procurement network, was also at the heart of a related scandal. This was
the case of some Dollars 5bn of illegal loans to Iraq made from 1985 to 1989
by an obscure Atlanta, Georgia branch of Italy's state-owned Banca Nazionale
del Lavoro.
BNL Atlanta financed Matrix and many other companies that supplied
militarily useful technology to Iraq. An immunity from prosecution in the US
granted to Henderson in relation to the BNL scandal raises the question of
how much he knew of the administration's involvement in arming Iraq and why
he was granted immunity.
I started to follow this story in Milan and Rome nearly six years ago. Then
I learned about ties between European companies and a Swiss-based
procurement network of 16 companies. The system was known as the Consen
network and it helped to procure equipment for an Iraqi-funded
nuclear-capable ballistic missile project code named the 'Condor 2'. That
was between 1986 and 1988. When I claimed then that Iraq was working
secretly on a nuclear weapon, people were apt to smile, as though I was a
slightly eccentric uncle.
In August 1989, while reporting for the Financial Times from Milan, I was
struck one day by a terse four-line press release from BNL in Rome saying
that 'irregularities' had been uncovered at the bank's Atlanta branch. A few
days later a colleague in London sent me a tip concerning a company called
Matrix Churchill. When I telephoned a well-placed contact in Rome and
mentioned the words 'BNL' and 'Matrix Churchill' in the same sentence there
was a sudden pause on the line, then a strangely nervous invitation to hop
on an aeroplane and have dinner in Rome that night.
What followed in Rome was an all night session of dining, drinking whisky
and chain-smoking Marlboros in a hotel bar, discussing our suspicion that
BNL Atlanta might have been secretly financing Iraq's Condor missile. By 5am
my contact had travelled across Rome and returned with evidence that
appeared to prove the case.
What we now know from interviews and documents is that on the morning of
Friday August 4 1989, the FBI raided and sealed the Atlanta offices of BNL,
discovering hidden records of the huge Iraqi loans to Matrix Churchill and
others. The night before, Gerald Corrigan, president of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, telephoned a senior official at the Bank of Italy warning
of the impending raid. Fed officials met Bank of Italy officials in Rome at
10am August 4 to discuss ways of avoiding a disruption in world financial
markets that might follow a major banking scandal. That evening, Nerio Nesi,
the chairman, and Giacomo Pedde, managing director of BNL, were called into
a meeting with Lamberto Dini, director-general of the Bank of Italy. When
the BNL executives were told of the Atlanta affair they looked shocked.
Although they said they knew nothing of the Iraqi loans, the Italian
government removed both from BNL within weeks.
What none of us knew in 1989 was that press reports of the military side of
the affair were having an impact on the ability of Washington and London to
continue to assist Iraq. At a time when Iraq's creditworthiness was very
poor, its main financial pipeline in Atlanta was being stopped. Only now do
the available declassified US and British documents tell this story, some of
them citing FT reports.
James Baker, then Secretary of State, was even harangued about western press
coverage by Tariq Aziz, then Iraq's foreign minister, at a meeting on
October 1989.
Then something extraordinary happened. On November 6 1989 the CIA sent a
report on BNL and the Matrix Churchill network to the State Department and
National Security Council at the White House. Some 48 hours later, on
November 8 1989, senior US officials in the White House, citing the personal
wishes of President Bush, approved Dollars 1bn of US government loan
guarantees for US farm exports to Iraq, no doubt partly in response to the
demands Aziz had made of Baker.
Numerous memos show that some officials feared that Iraq was deeply
implicated in the BNL affair and that since some of the BNL loans were
backed by government guarantees they should not blithely hand over another
Dollars 1bn of US guarantees. As one senior Bush official admitted to a
joint investigation last year by the FT and ABC Television's Nightline: 'We
knew the BNL thing was stinking. There had been enough yellow flags to make
us worry about BNL. But an aide to Baker told the meeting that terminating
the Dollars 1bn of guarantees would be contrary to the president's
intentions.'
By early 1990, we now know, the Italian government sent its Washington
ambassador to see US officials, including Dick Thornburgh, then the
Attorney-General, in an effort to lobby the Bush administration not to
indict BNL. Thornburgh said recently that he could not recall the meeting,
although it is detailed in internal BNL reports.
In February 1990, according to Federal Reserve memoranda, Thornburgh stopped
US investigators from travelling to Istanbul and Rome to pursue the BNL
case. By April 1990 the Fed's Corrigan was told in a memo that prosecution
of the BNL case in Atlanta was being made difficult 'by what is perceived as
interference from the Justice Department in Washington.'
From the autumn of 1990 a lone Democratic congressman, Henry Gonzalez,
chairman of the House Banking Committee, joined the chase. He ignored
Thornburgh's written demand in September 1990 to drop BNL hearings on
'national security' grounds. Over the past 18 months he has stood many times
before an empty House of Representatives, late at night, placing into the
Congressional record a series of secret Iraq-related documents.
Among the revelations documented by Gonzalez was the story of how BNL helped
to finance and how Matrix affiliates co-operated with Iraq's 'Super Gun'
project, the 1,000mm cannon designed by the late Dr Gerry Bull, the Canadian
rocket scientist who was murdered in Brussels in 1990. Gonzalez's staff
discovered that the Bush administration, contrary to stated policies,
approved export licences for Dr Bull's Space Research Corporation to send
equipment to places already identified by US intelligence as Iraqi military
sites. This week the Italian Senate voted to re-open its BNL / Iraqgate
investigation which by 1991 had been running out of steam.
On February 28 1991, hours after the end of Operation Desert Storm and some
19 months after the FBI raid in Atlanta, the Bush Administration finally
brought indictments in the BNL affair. It argued that the BNL/Matrix affair
had been single-handedly orchestrated by Christopher Drogoul, the Atlanta
branch manager who had been dealing with officials in Baghdad and with
Henderson in Coventry.
It took until June 1992 for Drogoul's trial to be scheduled and then, at the
last minute, the US authorities agreed to drop many of the charges in
exchange for a guilty plea on others and the pledge of his co-operation.
By July 1992, Gonzalez had been joined by five other Congressional
investigations and Democrats on the House Judiciary Committee demanded that
a special prosecutor be named to investigate Iraqgate. The committee even
cited possible criminal wrongdoing by senior Bush officials alleged to have
joined the cover-up of the arming and financing of Iraq. These possible
crimes included obstruction of justice, perjury, financial conflict of
interest and falsification of documents.
William Barr, who replaced Thornburgh as Attorney-General and is himself a
former colleague of Bush from his days as CIA director in 1976, has so far
refused to appoint a special prosecutor. Instead he has named Frederick
Lacey, a retired Republican judge from New Jersey, to investigate further
and report to him; Barr however, will tell Congress on Monday that there are
sufficient allegations that members of the Bush administration have
committed crimes, to warrant moving toward the next stage: a further enquiry
that could lead to the appointment of a special prosecutor.
Two months ago the global dimensions of the Iraqgate saga became even
clearer in Atlanta when Judge Marvin Shoob, a fiercely independent federal
judge, presided over what were to have been brief hearings aimed at
establishing a prison sentence for Drogoul.
By then Drogoul had got himself a new lawyer - a clever Southerner named
Bobby Lee Cook. Cook promptly turned the Bush administration's case on its
head by introducing evidence and testimony that suggested BNL's Rome head
office was implicated in the Iraqi affair and that former US intelligence
agents might have been involved as well.
Midway through the Atlanta proceedings two former top BNL executives in
Italy detailed how they and six other Rome executives had been involved in
the Atlanta loans to Iraq. So much for the argument that Drogoul acted
alone. Then Judge Shoob said in court that he had read CIA documents that
'definitely proved' Rome was involved. Soon afterwards the Bush
Administration asked for the Atlanta hearings to be halted and said Drogoul
would be allowed to change his plea to innocent and face a full trial.
Last month an even stranger twist occurred when CIA and Justice Department
officials told a Senate committee that they had deliberately misled the
Atlanta prosecutors by concealing US intelligence reports on Rome's
involvement. CIA and Justice then engaged in an unusual public argument over
which agency pressed the other to lie. As opprobrium was heaped on the Bush
Administration by Congressional Democrats each agency then agreed to
investigate itself. Finally, the FBI was called in to investigate both.
Judge Shoob then summed up the affair in a judicial order stating: 'it is
apparent that decisions were made at the top levels of the United States
Justice Department, State Department, Agriculture Department and within the
intelligence community to shape this case and that information may have been
withheld from local prosecutors seeking to investigate the case.'
Strong words, and the collapsed Matrix trial in London mirrors the Atlanta
case in many ways.
Where is Iraqgate heading? If the Bush administration does not name a
special prosecutor, it will soon be up to President Bill Clinton to fulfil
his campaign pledge to name one.
I, among others, am convinced that there is a strong chance that if and when
the matter is investigated by a special prosecutor, Bush administration
officials will be indicted for taking part in a a cover-up. Like Watergate
it may ultimately be the cover-up rather than the underlying offences that
proves decisive.
The trail has been long - many miles and documents and years long. But it
shows no sign of petering out, not in London, not in Rome and certainly not
in Washington. These scandals take a long time to unfold.
