FT  28 JUL 92 / Nasa battling to save space station plans
THE US National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Nasa) faces a critical
battle this week to save plans for a manned space station, when the House of
Representatives decides whether to continue financing the ambitious project.
Nasa wants to start launching components of the space station into orbit in
1995, and for it to have a permanent four-person crew from the end of 1999.
Opponents, however, want to end space station funding before so much has
been spent on its development that it cannot be halted.
As national concern spreads over the yawning federal budget deficit, the
space station is one in a number of prestigious but costly programmes to
become a target for congressman seeking to rein in government spending.
Like the superconducting supercollider - an Dollars 8bn (Pounds 4.1bn)
scientific research project killed by the House in June but revived this
month by the Senate - and the Strategic Defence Initiative, known as Star
Wars, the space station's critics question both its cost and scientific
justification.
Nasa has already spent Dollars 7.8bn on the station's development, and is
estimated to need another Dollars 30bn-Dollars 40bn over the next six years.
Broader estimates of the cost of building, launching and operating the
station run as high as Dollars 180bn.
The agency wants to use the station to study effects of prolonged space
flight on humans and to conduct biomedical research in weightless
conditions.
Critics counter that Nasa could learn more about the effects of long space
flights by co-operating with Russia, which has accumulated considerable
experience with its space station. They argue that Nasa has grossly inflated
its claims for the space station's research value, and that its huge cost
will suck funding away from other more valuable research projects.
Two distinguished biochemists writing in the Washington Post newspaper
yesterday argued: 'We are many times more likely to achieve significant
knowledge here on the planet than in space, and to do so a lot more
cheaply.'
Congressman Bob Traxler, whose appropriations subcommittee controls Nasa's
purse strings, tried last year to kill the space station programme but was
overruled by the full House.
This year his committee has left the space station untouched. But Mr Traxler
plans, when the measure is debated by the full House this week, to propose
an amendment to strike out the Dollars 1.73bn pencilled in for the project
in 1993.
While Congress is showing a greater appetite for spending cuts this year,
the vote is still expected to go in favour of the space station, which is
fiercely backed by members whose states benefit from the 75,000
private-sector jobs the project will create.
According to Space News, a weekly journal on the industry, 24 states have
space station contracts worth at least Dollars 1m, with spending mostly
concentrated in California, Texas and Alabama.
