FT  01 FEB 92 / How To Spend It: Living up to the Aspen image
MAX Wilkinson, editor of the Weekend FT, has been an accomplished skier for
more than 20 years. But while his skiing technique rarely lets him down, his
ski clothing - also of some years' standing - has left rather a lot to be
desired.
With his old-fashioned, shapeless, quilted grey jacket, skimpy little woolly
hat, army-surplus cotton shirt (Pounds 11:99) and trousers tucked into his
ski boots, he was (dare one say it) one of those Brits you can spot a mile
off on the slopes.
This might be all very well in resorts such as Soll, Sauze d'Oulx or Sol y
Nieve, but when Max and I headed for Aspen, haunt of Colorado's skiing
glitterati, some sartorial adjustments became essential.
So, I took my life into his hands - not by leading him over a cliff but by
dragging him into one of Aspen's leading outfitters. The conversation went
something like this . . .
'Max, you're a snappy dresser in the office so why let yourself down on the
slopes? You really CAN'T wear that dreadful jacket and that frightful hat in
Aspen. I feel I really must protect your image. What on earth would Melanie
and Don or Chrissie and Andy say if they saw you like this? That jacket's
got to go, for a start]'
'Must it? I'm rather fond of it. I picked it up for Dollars 10 at a stall in
Beijing six years ago. It's real duck down - made specially for China's
export market.'
'I'm sorry, Max, but you just can't ski in that in Aspen. It's completely
out of fashion (never in, I suspect) and far too long. You'll be a laughing
stock.
'As for those gloves, you might as well chuck them straight in the bin.
You'd get more warmth out of a couple of old socks.'
'But they're my cycling gloves from Tesco. What's wrong with them? They are
supposed to be skiing-type gloves.'
'Your fingers will fall off if you ski with those on Aspen Mountain. It's
about 11,000 feet] Keep them for cycling - or just dump them. And those
awful trousers. Do you use those for cycling, too ?'
'No, I don't. They're perfectly good skiing trousers. I've had them for only
11 years. They're still perfectly serviceable.'
'Get rid of them, Max. And that silly hat. It doesn't even cover your ears.'
'What's wrong with it? If you think this is bad, you should see one I left
behind in London. It's also woolly but it's shrunk into a funny shape. But,
honestly, I don't know why you're being so critical. When I took up skiing
in the '60s, nobody thought of it in terms of fashion.'
'So I see, Max.'
'My family have never been great ones for fashion. My great-uncle Ernest
used to ski in the Austrian Tirol in an old tweed jacket. Why would you want
to wear anything fashionable or smart outside, where no-one is looking at
you?
'Besides, all my ski gear is still perfectly serviceable and, what's more,
extremely comfortable.'
Fortunately, fate took a hand. The hat fell off during a testing run through
the trees and, happily, a search for it was unsuccessful. If ever it was
located, we shall never know. Certainly, it was never handed in to
lost-and-found where fur coats and jewellery, rather than old woolly hats,
tend to find their way.
Then there was another bit of luck. His trousers were ripped - more
power-skiing to blame. Warmth and modesty gave me an excuse to drag him,
although not without considerable protest, to Bill McDonough's emporium, the
Crystal City of the Rockies, where a new man could be made of him.
What did McDonough think should be changed? 'Everything]' he said candidly,
with a wry smile. Out went the jacket. And the trousers, gloves and hat. And
out went the blue shirt.
On went the Meister turtleneck (Dollars 24), the magnificent Bognor
one-piece (Dollars 688) - 'not a cheap suit,' Wilkinson remarked, grimly -
the beautifully-soft kid gloves (Dollars 75) and the slightly-touristy Aspen
hat. There was even a pretty Aspenite draped admiringly around his shoulder
to help along the new image.
And, hey presto: a Wilkinson to admire and be proud-of was ready to hit Spar
Gulch, Copper Bowl, Ruthie's and all the other glamorous trails on Aspen
Mountain. Even he admitted (grudgingly) that there had been a slight
improvement.
But after a day skiing in the footsteps of Jack Nicholson, Donald Trump,
Robert Wagner et al, he couldn't help sneaking a final glimpse at that
Chinese jacket he was persuaded to chuck in the dumpster in the Aspen Mall
just to see if it was still there. It was.
Nobody in Aspen, it seemed, was prepared to give it house room. And, even
then, he was tempted to retrieve it. It was, after all, still perfectly
serviceable.
No, Max. Leave it where it is. Once you have been re-made, there is no going
back.
