FT  19 SEP 92 / UK Company News: TVS to be sold to US cable group for Pounds
38m
TVS ENTERTAINMENT, the ITV company which has lost its licence, is to be
taken over by International Family Entertainment, one of the largest US
cable television companies.
The company runs The Family Channel, which is devoted to wholesome
entertainment with more than 56m subscribers in the US. Its origins lie in
the Christian Broadcasting Channel, founded by Mr Pat Robertson, the first
of the television evangelists who ran for president in 1988.
The deal is worth Pounds 38.2m and is likely to be seen as something of a
coup for TVS shareholders. The shares of the company, which failed the
quality threshold in last year's competitive tenders for new franchise
because its Pounds 59.76m was seen as too high, has been down as low as 3
1/2 p.
The deal is worth 25p per ordinary and 45p per preference share. It already
has the support of 30 per cent of shareholders.
The shares were suspended yesterday at 18 3/4 p pending the announcement. It
was delayed awaiting Takeover Panel approval, which came later last night.
IFE is buying TVS mainly for MTM, its US production company responsible for
programmes such as Lou Grant and Hill Street Blues. It also wants to expand
into international production and will use the acquisition to expand into
the UK market.
The company is now quoted on the New York Stock Exchange. CBC still has a
stake in IFE but they operate separately. The Family Channel carries
programmes that are not overtly Christian.
IFE will not formally take over until January 1 when Meridian takes over the
south of England ITV licence from TVS.
For some time TVS has been investigating two different future strategies.
One was to try to rise again from the ashes as a media company by acquiring
strategic stakes in other companies. TVS looked at the possibility of buying
Carlton Communication's 51 per cent stake in Zenith, the independent
producer. But in the end TVS decided it did not have enough money to make
significant acquisitions.
The other was to sell the assets for the best price that could be obtained.
The appearance of a serious purchaser in IFE tipped the balance strongly in
favour of selling out.
Mr James Gatward, the founder of TVS who was ousted as chief executive of
the company, said last night he did not think the deal was a good one for
shareholders, particularly those who held ordinary rather than preference
shares.
'TVS is worth far more than that,' said Mr Gatward, who is one of the
largest individual shareholders.
