FT  01 OCT 92 / The Labour Party at Blackpool: Blunkett signals health
switch
rather than simply reverse - many of the government's reforms was signalled
yesterday by Mr David Blunkett, the party's new health spokesman.
Speaking to the conference, he hinted that much of the party's policy during
the general election, including its promise to scrap the newly created
self-governing hospital trusts, will be replaced.
Rejection of the GP fund-holding programme is likely to continue.
Mr Blunkett said he wanted to 'begin discussions' within the party on how to
rebuild the National Health Service, speaking of recreating the NHS 'in a
new world, with a new agenda for change'.
Speaking to journalists afterwards, Mr Blunkett said he did not want to rule
out any proposals for adapting trust hospitals to meet Labour's objectives.
That might include giving local authorities a role in hospital management or
changing the responsibilities of district health authorities.
He was keen to keep the principle of decentralisation but wanted a greater
emphasis on accountability to local communities and on preventive health
care - including links between health and housing and unemployment.
After the party's election defeat, there would have to be a reappraisal of
what a future incoming Labour government would inherit, Mr Blunkett said.
'We can't go backwards, we certainly can't accept what the Conservatives
have left us.'
Replying to a debate dominated by attacks on the government's health policy,
Mr Blunkett blamed government policy on homes, jobs, the economy and the
environment for 'worsening our health and quality of life'.
He said that in no other area of politics was the difference between
democratic socialism and the Tories' 'market dogma' as clear.
'Where there should be care, we have competition. Where there should be
service, we have the salesman's pitch, the internal market, the GP
fund-holder, a two-tier health service,' he said. 'Tens of thousands of
people forced into the private sector by Tory policy.'
Far from waiting lists being cut, Mr Blunkett said that under the
Conservative government they had increased by 130 a day since the general
election.
It was time for a new agenda to reveal the 'real inequality that exists in
our country' by comparing Britain's health spending with that of other
countries in the world.
He complained that the government was refusing to join with other European
countries in insisting on stronger health warnings on cigarette packets and
a wider ban on advertising because of the donations by tobacco companies to
the Conservative party. 'No wonder they call Mrs Bottomley 'Golden
Virginia',' he said.
