FT  28 SEP 92 / Economics: US figures take centre stage
ATTENTION shifts to the US this week where a string of indicators on the
real economy is unlikely to provide much comfort for President George Bush,
as he steps up his campaign for re-election.
One of the most politically sensitive indicators - the non-farm payrolls -
is forecast to show a small fall, although the data will be distorted by
several factors, including the termination of around 150,000 jobs created
following the Los Angeles riots. Furthermore, September's data did not
benefit from the federal summer jobs programme.
This week's national association of purchasing managers index is likely to
add to the picture of a sluggish economy by confirming that manufacturing
industry in the US is experiencing a very weak expansion.
In the UK, official reserve figures for September, out on Friday, will give
some indication of the cost of supporting sterling ahead of Britain's
departure from the European exchange rate mechanism on September 16. At the
end of August the Bank of England's reserves stood at Dollars 44.4bn. The
reserves were drawn on heavily in September as the Bank intervened on the
foreign exchanges in an attempt to hold sterling at its then ERM floor of
DM2.7780.
The depletion will have been partly offset, however, by the proceeds of the
Ecu10bn borrowing announced at the beginning of the month. About half of
this was drawn in September, while overseas inflows associated with the
third instalment of the regional electricity companies' privatisation should
have brought in about Pounds 250m, according to some economists' estimates.
A number of inflation measures are due out in Germany this week including
import prices and provisional cost of living figures. These, as always, will
be closely watched for signs that inflationary pressures in the German
economy - which lie behind the Bundesbank's tight monetary policies - are
easing.
In August, the cost of living rose by 0.2 per cent on the previous month in
spite of a sharp fall in seasonal food prices. Rents and services inflation
continued to rise at a well above average rate with increases of around 0.6
per cent on the month. The annual rate of inflation in August was 3.5 per
cent, compared with 3.3 per cent in the year to July. Most economists are
forecasting a low month on month rise in September.
'The beneficial effects of the very strong D-Mark on import prices and
producer prices, along with continuing weak commodity prices should continue
to help contain inflationary pressures,' said Ms Ruth Lea, economist at
Mitsubishi Bank in London.
Other economic events this week follow. The figures in brackets are the
median of economists' forecasts, from MMS International, a financial
information company.
Today: Brussels, EC finance ministers meeting; UK, Blackpool, Labour party
conference begins. Continues until October 2. Japan, August retail sales
(down 1.8 per cent on year).
Tomorrow: UK, Q2 savings ratio (11 per cent), Q2 real personal disposable
income; France, consumer prices index (up 2.7 per cent on year); US, August
leading indicators (down 0.2 per cent), September consumer confidence
(57.0), September agriculture prices.
Wednesday: France, government releases 1993 budget, August unemployment rate
(10.3 per cent); Denmark, August unemployment rate (11.3 per cent); US,
September Chicago NAPM, August new home sales (580,000); Canada, July real
GDP (unchanged on month), July building permits (down 3.5 per cent); Japan,
August construction orders, August housing starts (up 7.9 per cent), August
construction starts.
Thursday: US, initial claims for week ended September 19 (412,000), state
benefits week ended September 12, September NAPM (53.8 per cent), August
construction spending (up 0.3 per cent), money supply data for the week
ended September 21; Japan, September foreign exchange reserves.
Friday: Germany, Bundesbank council meeting in Schwerin, east Germany; UK,
September official reserves (down Dollars 15bn); US, September non-farm
payrolls (down 50,000), September manufacturing payrolls, September hourly
earnings (up 0.1 per cent), September average work week, September
unemployment rate (7.7 per cent), University of Michigan September survey of
US consumer sentiment, August factory orders (up 0.1 per cent), August
factory shipments; Canada, July leading indicator (unchanged on month);
Denmark, trade balance excluding ships.
During the week: Germany, August import prices (down 0.5 per cent on month,
down 4.1 per cent on year), October industrial production (down 0.2 per
cent), German manufacturing output (down 0.1 per cent), provisional
September cost of living (up 0.3 per cent on month, up 3.6 per cent on
year); Netherlands, consumer prices index (up 0.5 per cent on month, up 3.5
per cent on year), Italy, August foreign reserves.
