FT  21 APR 92 / Justinian: Judicial rebuke in the Strand
Lord Lane, the Lord Chief Justice, last week bowed out of office after 12
gruelling years. He had presided over the English criminal justice system at
a time of deepening worries about its efficacy and social value.
The valedictory speeches at the Royal Courts of Justice in the Strand
resounded to the accompaniment of praise from Lord Lane's colleagues and
plaudits from the legal profession, against a background of sustained media
criticism of the controversial Lord Chancellor following a series of
miscarriages of criminal justice.
Two notes of dissonance disturbed the ceremony. First, Lord Donaldson, the
Master of the Rolls, spoke out against the press for having exceeded the
bounds of responsible criticism and for making the Lord Chief Justice the
scapegoat for recent miscarriages of justice; second, Mr Gareth Williams QC,
chairman of the Bar Council, hinted darkly that all is not well in
relationships between the Strand and Whitehall. The two criticisms are
intertwined.
No judge - none more so than Lord Donaldson - denies the vital role which
the press plays in criticising legal decisions. Only the media constantly
parades judicial conduct under the public searchlight. Parliament applies a
self-denying ordinance which bars MPs from criticising judges except upon a
substantive motion, a rare enough event which focuses on a single instance
of judicial conduct. It takes a piece of serious misconduct to induce MPs to
table a motion criticising a judge, let alone an address for his removal
from office.
Since the press is, in effect, the only mechanism of discipline which
operates constantly and in the open, it bears a portion of responsibility
for keeping a check on the courts and the judges. The press also has a
peculiar duty to supply the information upon which other mechanisms can
operate to discipline a misbehaving judge or to remedy defects in the
administration of justice. If it is a truism that a free press must
necessarily be an irresponsible press it is less true when the press reports
on the workings of the legal system. Here responsibility must be more
strictly adhered to.
Lord Donaldson's outspoken attack on press hounding of the Lord Chief
Justice was therefore by way of a judicial rebuke in lieu of a warning that
the press may actually have been committing a contempt of court. The law
states that public criticism constitutes a contempt only if there is an
unfair imputation of corruption or conscious bias in a court or judge acting
in an official capacity, or if a criticism is not made in good faith or
exceeds the bounds of reasonable courtesy and hence amounts to scurrilous
abuse. This class of contempt of court is distinguishable from contempt in
the face of the court and from prejudicial coverage of pending trials. It is
known as 'scandalising the court'.
The difficulty with proceedings against a newspaper for 'scandalising the
court' is that the court before whom the alleged contemner was brought would
be judge and jury in its own cause; at the same time, the attorney-general
would almost certainly be prompted to prosecute the newspaper. These days a
move to commit a newspaper editor for contempt would be howled down as an
oppressive instrument of the judiciary and in violation of a right to
freedom of expression.
What then can, or should, be done to curb the excesses of press criticism?
The Press Council, until its demise 18 months ago, never adjudicated upon a
complaint of contempt by a newspaper. If it had received a complaint it
would have referred the matter to the attorney-general.
The Press Complaints Commission, successor to the Press Council, does not
canvass complaints other than those received from the aggrieved citizen; in
any event its code of practice makes no provision to protect judges in
respect of newspaper contempt.
Lord Donaldson's outburst, and the predictable riposte from the newspapers,
discloses the seemingly sole avenue of redress left for unwarranted press
attacks on the judiciary.
It has been the contention over many years that the Lord Chancellor will
come to the defence of the judiciary when it is unreasonably criticised. In
1972 Lord Hailsham in his first term as Lord Chancellor warned that 'there
was some danger that popular pressures might endanger the administration of
justice'. At the time Lord Bridge of Harwich (then Mr Justice Bridge who had
tried the case of the Birmingham Six) and Judge Christmas Humphreys were
criticised in the media. Lord Elwyn Jones and his predecessor Lord Hailsham
spoke up publicly in the judges' defence.
There's the rub. Lord Donaldson's exceptional disavowal of the traditional
Trappist approach of judicial silence in the face of public criticism was
prompted entirely by the apparent lack of support from Whitehall. The judges
are sensitive to, indeed incensed by, the lack of support from Lord Mackay,
the Lord Chancellor. One senses that had Lord Mackay not been engaged in
Cabinet business last week, and had appeared in the Strand, Lord Lane would
have declined to receive his warm wishes for a long and happy retirement.
