FT  06 JUN 92 / Arts: Sombre drama in Berlin - Psycho-surrealism dominated
this year's festival
RUTH BERGHAUS and Luc Bondy are in, Peter Stein and Robert Wilson are out.
In competitive Germany, the big annual theatre festival, Berlin's
Theatertreffen, is a dog-eats-dog affair in which directors across Germany,
Austria and Switzerland juggle for the dozen invitation-only places each
May. It makes for two weeks of outstanding theatre, and for something more.
If art mirrors life, anyone interested in Germany's self-image should glance
at this Festival, which as a cultural statement goes beyond a choice of
plays.
Last year, the Festival mixed upbeat, offbeat, funny, classical works, and
only four of them by Germans. This year, Germany is in sombre and
introspective mood. Nine of the 12 offerings are by German authors, and the
remaining three - Babel, Beckett and Strindberg - are stubbornly
mid-European in spirit. And, with exceptions, the dominant style for 1992 is
psycho-surreal, emphasising the inward, the subjective, drama as a
self-contained work of art. Berlin this last festival fortnight is like a
theatre museum which 'makes one little room an everywhere', exhibiting
finely chiselled, intense pieces in perfect yet other-worldly stagings.
Most controversial guest is Ruth Berghaus, who since her days at the
Berliner Ensemble in the 1970s has stamped her definitive style on opera and
theatre productions across Europe. Does the clever choreography and
mechanised showmanship of a production like Brecht's Jungle of Cities draw
out or destroy the heart of a piece?
Jungle of Cities, about the inexplicable struggle between two men, is
unusual Brecht: full of dark undercurrents and understated emotions, not
overtly political, it is a quintessential German Expressionist piece which
seems to cry out for the surreal Berghaus touch. Here lumber dealer Schlink
(Sven-Eric Bechtoff) and poor young Garga (Martin Wuttke) stiffen into
robots, splurting out the play in a rapid cold monotone.
In Erich Wonder's set, Brecht's Chicago is a mechanised urban jigsaw,
criss-crossed with railway lines to form diagonal rooms, backed by
silhouettes of skyscrapers, flooded with light through a veil of gauze.
People enter through windows, fall into holes in the ground; leaflets tip
down like rain. In this climate, homo-erotic impulses turn to hate:
threatened by closeness, Garga and Schlink - the fantasist versus the wan
messenger of death - lock into a deadly, lonely fight. An orange builder's
tent moves slowly, menacingly across the stage towards Garga: man against
society, the city devouring its own.
Skimping on plot, character, the rhythm of Brecht's language, Berghaus draws
a cityscape as vivid yet distorted as an Expressionist painting. At times
her minimalism suffocates, but she gets to the essence of the play -
isolation in the modern city, its unreality, its removal from earthly values
 -through symbols at once meaningful now and evocative of the 1920s city of
the Untouchables.
At the tiny Ballhaus Rixdorf, the tale of Bluebeard, the monster who
murdered his young wives if they glanced into forbidden rooms in his castle,
is played in Georg Trakl's 1911 dramatisation as a showpiece of Viennese
expressionism. With painted gold-black panels suggesting Klimt, music by
Mahler and Zemlinsky, the staging oozes sexual symbolism at every pore.
Dance, mime, music underline a fragmentary setting; parts of bodies flit
across vertical and horizontal slices of the stage, boxes of light jut out
at odd angles leaving the rest of the theatre black, a leg slides through a
slit in a curtain, a head peers above a trapdoor and is yanked back.
All are images from the nightmare/dream world of young Herbert (Thomas
Clemens), for whom Bluebeard's three doomed wives are icons of passive
sexuality. In white frills, bobbed curls, a red rose at their breasts, Inga
Hartl, Mia Hasper and Felicitas Kielingerer play them as life-size puppets.
Mechanically, they dance faster and faster until they break; keeling over,
one hangs dead by the ankles from a bare tree in winter. Only when Herbert,
confronted by his father's Catholic morality, stops dreaming, does the stage
open up to reveal deeper perspectives as panel after panel of drug-induced
fantasy - Trakl died of a cocaine overdose at 27 - is removed.
Saint/sinners, virgin/harlots, the torture chamber and an Eden glimpsed
through a window: director Cesare Lievi plays the forbidden rooms of
Herbert's unconscious against the forbidden rooms of the cloistered wives in
Perrault's story. This Vienna Burgtheater production distils classic
ingredients of pre-war Viennese art - the erotic dream, the passing of old
order into new, father versus son - into a 60-minute miniature as magically
condensed as the original fairy tale.
At the other extreme of self-reflective theatre, Luc Bondy directs Botho
Strauss's Final Chorus (Schlusschor) as a symbolical play about German
reunification. The German love-affair with this piece continues to baffle
this foreigner, but the production is slick and superbly acted.
Bondy, with a post-modern set of long mirrors encased in steel lift shafts,
works through the dilemmas of Ossis and Wessies in satire at the expense of
15 agonisedly self-conscious heeled liberals who rush in and out to trim up
their intellectual and social images before the looking glass. As the mirror
reflects the audience too, we are implicated; we are also entertained by a
mix of slapstick, philosophy, melodrama and a large flapping eagle
symbolising united Germany. It is vintage politics-and-pastiche Strauss; not
for those in search of the old well-made play, but a compelling new exhibit
for cultural tourists.
Jungle of Cities continues in at Hamburg's Thalia Theatre; Bluebeard at the
Vienna Burgtheater; and Final Chorus at the Schaubuhne, Berlin.
