FT  06 OCT 92 / FDA told SmithKline Beecham's depression drug is safe
AN ADVISORY committee of the US Food and Drug Administration yesterday voted
unanimously that SmithKline Beecham's anti-depressant, Seroxat, was safe and
effective. The decision paves the way for the drug to be launched next year
in the US, the world's largest market.
The drug, to be known in the US as Paxil, is seen as SmithKline Beecham's
most important new compound, capable of generating worldwide sales of Pounds
350m within three to four years.
Approval of Seroxat has been delayed by concern about the safety of Prozac,
marketed by Eli Lilly of the US. That drug is a selective serotonin
re-uptake inhibitor (SSRI) in the same drug class as Seroxat.
The US anti-depressant market - the largest in the world - has grown from
Pounds 700m in 1989 to about Pounds 1.2bn last year, thanks to greater use
of SSRIs. An estimated 14m Americans - 7 per cent of the US adult population
 -are depressed.
Prozac has captured 50 per cent of the American anti-depressant sector by
value since it came to market in 1989, making it one of the most successful
drug launches ever. Last year Prozac generated revenues of Dollars 910m
(Pounds 511m). Other SSRIs include Solvay's Fluvoxamine, co-marketed by
Upjohn, and Pfizer's Lustral, known in the US as Zoloft.
However, Prozac's sales have been affected by attacks from the Church of
Scientology which claimed Prozac created suicidal thoughts. Last year, an
FDA committee advised there was no causative link between the drug and
suicidal behaviour.
SmithKline Beecham believes Seroxat has fewer side-effects than other
treatments. Studies suggest patients on placebo have more suicidal thoughts
than those on Seroxat.
Seroxat is non-toxic and cannot be successfully used by suicidal people to
kill themselves. By contrast, there are annually in the UK about 500 suicide
fatalities associated with tricyclic anti-depressants, the older and most
common class of drugs used before SSRIs.
Tricyclics still represent 50 per cent of anti-depressant prescriptions.
The psychopharmacological drugs advisory committee's recommendation need not
be followed by the FDA, but that would be unusual.
Market report, Page 46
