FT  10 MAR 92 / Parliament and Politics: Tory MP quits after 'incident' -
News in Brief
MR ALAN AMOS, Conserv-ative MP for Hexham in Northumberland and chairman of
the northern group of Tory MPs, announced last night he would not stand in
the general election.
He said it would be 'in the best interests of my constituents, the
Conservative party and the re-election of John Major that I do not accept
the re-nomination of my constituency association.'
His decision follows what he described as an 'incident' in London on
Saturday when he was cautioned by police.
Mr Amos had a majority of 8,066 over the Liberal Alliance candidate at the
1987 election.
*****
TRANSPORT: The allocation of Pounds 1.24bn government spending on road
building and maintenance next year, including 24 new road schemes, was
announced yesterday by Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the transport secretary, as he
claimed that a Labour government would mean a 'road block'.
Announcing the division of the funds - Pounds 760m on new roads and Pounds
480m on maintenance - Mr Rifkind put particular emphasis on the programme of
bypasses which, he said, would be put at risk by a Labour government's plans
for a six-month moratorium on new projects.
Mr John Prescott, shadow transport secretary, said yesterday's announcement
included roads on which work had originally been scheduled to begin in the
current year.
*****
BANKING: A possible Monopolies and Mergers Commission inquiry into Britain's
banks was raised by the Liberal Democrats yesterday, as the party unveiled a
package of proposals designed to help small businesses.
Mr Nicol Stephen, spokesman on small businesses, said an MMC inquiry would
be the 'obvious next step' if banks failed to improve service to
small-business customers.
He also pledged to introduce an ombudsman for the commercial banking sector.
*****
FRIENDLY SOCIETIES: A bill establishing a new regulatory framework for
friendly societies received an unopposed second reading in the Commons
yesterday.
Mr Paul Boateng, a Labour Treasury spokesman, said with the election
pending, it was 'a second reading into oblivion.'
