FT  02 DEC 92 / Patten defiant on HK reforms as shares plunge
MR CHRIS PATTEN, Hong Kong's governor, yesterday announced a timetable for
his controversial plans to introduce more democracy in Hong Kong in defiance
of stiff opposition from China.
As Mr Patten spoke, share prices registered a steep decline on the Hong Kong
stock exchange in active trading that bordered, at times, on panic selling,
brokers said. Investors dumped Hong Kong equities as concern mounted about
the growing gulf between Britain and China on the constitutional development
of the colony.
Mr Patten plans to bring his plans before the local legislature in February,
he told the colony's Legislative Council yesterday.
By setting a date, he underlined the government's determination to press
ahead with reforms in defiance of opposition from China, which on Monday
issued a challenge to Britain's governance of Hong Kong.
Beijing is threatening not to honour any Hong Kong government agreement that
it does not approve of - a move seen as an attempt to undermine confidence
in the economy of the colony.
The Hang Seng index, the barometer of the local market, ended the day 308.92
points, or more than 5 per cent, lower at 5,501.71. It had fallen by up to 7
per cent when the governor was speaking but recovered as bargain hunters
stepped in, traders said. The index fell another 100 points in early trading
today.
Yesterday's drop in share prices was the biggest one-day decline since the
market fell by more than 8 per cent in August last year, on news of a coup
to topple former Soviet Union president Mikhail Gorbachev. The governor's
comments, before a packed legislature, did nothing to calm investors and
business people that Mr Patten had engaged China in a fruitless battle of
wills over his plans.
His, and the British government's, refusal to withdraw the proposals - which
would broaden the franchise for 40 of the 60 seats to be contested in
elections due in 1995 - have angered China and led to a virtual cessation in
official dialogue.
Mr Patten said in the Legislative Council that he would not withdraw his
plans which he said had twice been given general council approval since he
unveiled them on October 7.
The governor said he was prepared to discuss them with China at a time and
venue of its choosing. He would consider any alternatives that were fair,
open and acceptable to the people of Hong Kong.
The view among political analysts in the colony yesterday was that Mr Patten
can still secure a majority in the Legislative Council in support of his
proposals.
Robert Mauthner, Diplomatic Editor, writes: Britain yesterday made it clear
that it had no intention of being 'derailed' by the Chinese campaign aimed
at undermining Mr Patten's policies. The UK backed the reforms, but the
final decision on their implementation would be taken by the Legislative
Council, Foreign Office officials said. In the meantime, British policy
would be 'to batten down and carry on' under the now daily onslaught from
Beijing.
Hong Kong business, Page 6
Editorial Comment, Page 20
World stocks, Page 39
