FT  19 SEP 92 / London Stock Exchange: Another strong session for equities
ANY CONCERNS regarding this weekend's Maastricht referendum in France were
pushed aside yesterday in a London stock market now focusing on the chances
of a reduction in UK base rates to at least 8 per cent by Christmas time.
The FT-SE Index gained a further 83.1 points to 2,567, rounding off a two
week equity trading account which has brought a gain of around 8.7 per cent
in the Index.
Trading volume was again very heavy and stock index futures indicated that
optimism remained strong;some London marketmakers plan to open for telephone
trading at 6.30 on Monday morning, two hours ahead of the official start of
trading on the electronic trading screens.
Seaq volume reached 1,298.1m shares, just below the 1.4bn of the previous
session. The all-important value total of retail, or genuine customer
business, in equities surged to Pounds 2.5bn on Thursday, following Pounds
1.2bn on Wednesday; these totals compare with recent daily levels of around
Pounds 700m, and confirm the presence of the big institutions.
The pace was set by an early morning radio interview with Mr Norman Lamont,
the UK chancellor of the exchequer, which was interpreted as encouraging
interest rate optimism. Hopes for an early cut in UK rates were also
strengthened by quotations of 8 1/4 per cent on short sterling futures and
reflected in a squeeze in the government bond market when a US house came in
as a heavy buyer. Short-dated gilts, beneficiaries from a rate cut, jumped
by nearly one point, but even long dates, at risk from inflation prospects,
closed with only minor losses; index-linked gilts moved higher.
Equities opened slowly but were quickly driven ahead as London dealers
completed buying orders from the US which had been left open overnight.
Excitement also mounted ahead of the expiry, just after 10.00, of the
September contract on the FT-SE Index.
At least four trading programmes moved across the trading screens during the
session and Sun Alliance took the opportunity of a strong market to carry
off the sale of most of its stake in Commercial Union, attempted earlier
this week.
The gain in the Footsie was trimmed briefly from 63.3 to 37.4 points, until
the squeeze in gilts triggered fresh demand. At its best, the Footsie was
93.8 ahead for a two day gain of 188.7 points, outperforming the response to
re-election of the Conservative government.
Retail business in equities has begun to recover from dismally low levels as
the stock market has sensed that base rates could soon be reduced.
