FT  18 DEC 92 / Technology: Drugs that lighten depression - Paul Abrahams on
why the market for anti-depressants is growing so fast
Christmas is not the season of goodwill for all men and women. A recent
study in Birmingham suggests that on Christmas day attempted suicides
increase by 25 per cent.
Depression is a fatal illness - nearly three quarters of suicides are linked
to it. Clinical depression, the persistent and sustained feeling that the
self is worthless, the world meaningless and the future hopeless, is the
most common emotional disorder.
There is, however, no agreement about the disease's incidence because only
about 25 per cent of those depressed visit a doctor. Roger Bickerstaffe,
research director at the Belgian group Solvay Pharmaceuticals, reckons a
third of the population will need treatment at some time in their lives and
that at any one time 5 per cent will be receiving treatment.
The costs of depression are immense. The American Psychiatric Association
estimates depressive illness costs the US Dollars 27bn (Pounds 17bn) a year,
including Dollars 12.7bn through hospitalisation, out-patient treatment and
drugs. The Office of Health Economics, a UK think-tank, says the direct
costs to the National Health Service are about Pounds 333m a year.
The anti-depressant drug market is changing and growing rapidly. Although 9m
prescriptions are issued in the UK every year, most are for old and cheap
generic products.
But these older drugs, called tricyclics, are giving way to a new, more
expensive generation of medicines called selective serotonin re-uptake
inhibitors, or SSRIs. Smith New Court, the UK broker, estimates the
worldwide market has grown 20 per cent a year over the last three years from
Pounds 700m a year to Pounds 1.2bn. Geoffrey Dunbar, director of SmithKline
Beecham's central nervous system therapeutic unit, reckons the market could
quadruple by the year 2000.
Growth is partly being driven by the increased incidence of the illness,
according to a study published in this month's issue of the Journal of the
American Medical Association. General practitioners may also be more adept
at diagnosing and treating the illness which is under-recognised,
under-treated and stigmatised, according to the OHE.
There are two main categories of depression. Exogenous or reactive
depression is related to outside events such as a close death or losing a
job. However, clinicians remain unsure of the causes of endogenous
depression not linked to outside events.
'The plain fact is that nobody really knows the causes of depression,'
admits Bickerstaffe. However, he says the biological infrastructure of the
central nervous system appears to affect mood.
The hypothesis is that a shortage of naturally occuring neurotransmitting
chemicals - known as monoamines - may lead to depression, says Dunbar.
Between each nerve in the central nervous system is a gap, known as a
synapse, he explains. So that a nerve impulse can pass across the synapse
between a presynaptic nerve to a postsynaptic nerve, neurotransmitting
chemicals are released by the presynaptic nerve into the synapse. The
chemicals in the synapse then trigger a signal in the receiving postsynaptic
nerve.
A lack of these chemicals such as serotonin, noradrenalin and dopamine,
appears to suppress neurotransmitter stimulation and be linked to
depression, says Gary Tollefson, executive director of psycho- pharmacology
at Lilly Research Laboratories.
Tricyclics, the most common anti-depressants, are believed to work by
correcting the shortage of monoamines in the synapse.
Normally, once the monoamines have done their job, a proportion is
reabsorbed into the presynaptic nerve. The rest is broken down by enzymes.
Tricyclics work by hindering the reabsorption. This increases the
concentration of monoamines in the synapse and therefore stimulates the
post-synaptic nerve for longer. The drugs are effective for about 70 per
cent of patients.
The problem with tricyclics is two-fold, explains Tollefson. First they
affect the postsynaptic nerve as well as the presynaptic nerve. They
influence other neurotransmission systems, including those for dopamine,
histamine and noradrenaline. The result is a series of significant
side-effects, such as dry mouth, blurred vision, drowsiness and
constipation. Many patients fail to complete the course.
But more important is the toxicity of tricyclics. By taking five to six
times the normal dose, patients can kill themselves.
A second class of anti-depressants was developed in the 1960s called
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). The MAOIs work by binding with the
enzymes in the synapse that break down the monoamines. This raises the level
of monoamines and increases activity in the central nervous system.
However, these drugs also have unwanted side-effects. MAOIs are
irreversible, which means the enzyme has to be replaced, which can take four
weeks. One problem is that the enzyme which is bound to the MAOI has other
jobs including the breaking down of tyramines, chemicals found in some
cheeses and wine. Without the enzyme, levels of tyramine can build up. This
can lead to increased blood pressure, heart failure, even death.
Recent market growth has been driven by the new generation of drugs, SSRIs,
of which four are currently marketed. They are Fluvoxamine developed by
Solvay; Prozac sold by Eli Lilly, the American group; Lustral, also known as
Zoloft in north America, which is marketed by Pfizer of the US; and Seroxat,
discovered by Novo Nordisk in Denmark and marketed in most of the world by
SmithKline Beecham, the Anglo-American company.
SSRIs also work by inhibiting the amount of serotonin taken back into the
nerve terminals and so increasing its availability in the synapse. They are
no faster and no more effective than the tricyclics and considerably more
expensive. According to the OHE the cheapest tricyclic costs about 82p for
30 days treatment, compared with Pounds 33.90 for the most expensive SSRI.
They are, however, far more selective than the tricyclics and do not affect
other neurotransmission systems. Dunbar at SmithKline Beecham says clinical
trials suggest the drop out rate for SSRIs is 10 per cent less than
tricyclics. In addition, they are far less toxic than tricyclics, meaning it
is almost impossible to overdose on them.
The leading SSRI is Prozac. Its sales were hit badly in 1990 after the
Church of Scientology claimed it induced violence and suicidal tendencies.
The allegations were dismissed by the US Food and Drug Administration but
the drug's market share fell from 25 per cent in July 1990 to 21 per cent in
April the following year. Nevertheless, Prozac's sales reached Dollars 910m
last year and may reach Dollars 1bn this year.
Prozac's rivals are building up sales fast. Zoloft was launched in February
but already has sales of about Dollars 185m. Seroxat is not yet marketed in
the US where it will be known as Paxil, but had 20 per cent of the UK market
by value during the first six months of this year.
Meanwhile, drugs groups are investing heavily in the area. Bickerstaffe at
Solvay reckons 11 anti-depressants are ready to be or have been submitted to
licensing authorities. A further 30 are in development. Two SSRIs, from
American Home Products and Bristol Myers Squibb, will shortly be launched in
the US.
A number of companies, including Roche and Ciba-Geigy of Switzerland, are
working on a new class of MAOIs, called reversible inhibitors of monoamine
oxidase type A (RIMA). Unlike earlier generations of MAOIs, they do not bind
irreversibly to the enzymes necessary to break down tyramine and can be used
without dietary restrictions.
Researchers are also looking to synthesise drugs that affect only targeted
receptor cells. In addition, they are searching for compounds that replicate
or block the neuro-peptides capable of modulating the neurotransmitters.
The attractions of the anti-depression market are not limited to its size
and rapid growth, says Tollefson. Research on the central nervous system for
depression will have spin-offs in other illnesses, such as Parkinson's,
Alzheimer's and schizophrenia.
This series on new drugs looks next month at combating skin problems.
