FT  21 DEC 92 / International Company News: City welcomes electricity sale -
Welsh Water can now change its direction
LAST week's sale by Welsh Water of its 14.9 per cent stake in South Wales
Electricity is a mark of how serious the company has become about putting
its house in order ahead of the 1994-95 review by Ofwat, the regulatory
authority, which will decide pricing levels until the end of the decade.
The move should blunt criticism of Welsh's ambitious diversification policy.
It follows a decision in June to voluntarily give up some price increases,
ahead of other water companies, and silence critics of its profit levels.
The electricity stake was always controversial, even though Welsh made more
than Pounds 17m profit on the investment. Mr John Elfed Jones, chairman,
claimed the two utilities could make savings by combining functions like
billing and information technology. Unfortunately, in the narrow world of
Welsh business, the aggressive style in which the stake was taken led South
Wales to treat it as hostile and reject all advances on co-operation.
Welsh's decision to sell was welcomed in the City, which feared the
company's expansion plans could lead to conflict with Ofwat. 'It shows it is
possible to admit you've got something wrong and get out with credit,'
according to Mr Robert Miller-Bakewell, analyst at County NatWest.
The sale clears the way for Welsh to change direction on its unregulated
business. Mr Jones steps down as chairman in April and strategy will be led
by his successor, Mr Iain Evans, and group managing director Mr Graham
Hawker.
Welsh's unregulated business, which includes engineering consultant Wallace
Evans, hotel and leisure group Hamdden and an 'enterprise' company with
pipeline and waste contracting, will probably become lower key. Plans to
develop Hamdden are likely to remain on hold. Some analysts believe Welsh
would sell the division if hotel prices had not fallen so much.
This will leave Welsh to concentrate on its core, regulated business ahead
of Ofwat's review and gradually develop its enterprise businesses, most of
which were spun out of the core following privatisation and are lower risk.
According to Mr Hawker: 'We intend to give our non-regulated businesses more
focus, and only in areas where our core skills are relevant'.
Most analysts agree that because Welsh's capital investment targets were
less onerous than others, its price rises agreed at privatisation were
generous. Its post-1995 price increases, initially set at 5 per cent above
inflation, look vulnerable to regulatory review.
The electricity sale, and the voluntary abatement of some price increases
earlier this year, will go some way towards improving Welsh's regulatory
image. 'This reduces the chances of them being harshly treated at the
review, although they are not totally out of the woods,' one analyst said.
The sale may also mark a watershed for the water sector generally. Because
the regulated environment is expected to become tougher following Ofwat's
review, companies argue that unregulated businesses will become more
important as a source of profits to maintain dividend growth.
Welsh's expansion outside water-related fields was the most high profile,
but few other water companies have been successful developing non-core
businesses.
Some, such as Southern Water, are making profits from businesses like
pipe-laying which have been transferred out of the core. But others, Severn
Trent among them, which expanded more aggressively have yet to make money.
Severn Trent last year paid Pounds 212m for Biffa, involved in waste
management, and which is expected to make operating profits of about Pounds
12m this year, compared to interest costs of Pounds 25m.
Main problem with Biffa, and engineering ventures made by other companies,
is the recession. Welsh regularly complained that some of its enterprise
businesses were at the start up stage and during recession should not be
expected to make money.
Because of the pressure to maintain dividend growth, water companies will
continue to try and develop unregulated businesses, even moving into
unrelated fields. However, following Welsh's tactical withdrawal, companies
are unlikely to make high-profile acquisitions to diversify ahead of the
1994 review.
