FT  08 OCT 92 / Blueprint for Hong Kong: Britain expresses determination to
pursue proposals
THE governor of Hong Kong, Mr Chris Patten, said yesterday that he would
discuss his proposals for greater democracy in the colony with the Chinese
government, but that Beijing would not be allowed to veto his plan.
Mr Patten will have the first opportunity to sound out Chinese officials
when he visits Beijing on October 21.
But the signs are that he will be given a rough ride.
China's official news agency Xinhua yesterday accused Mr Patten of being
'irresponsible and imprudent' because he had not discussed his proposals
with the Chinese authorities before announcing them.
That accusation was denied by the Foreign Office in London.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, had given his Chinese opposite
number, Mr Qian Qichen, an outline of the proposals at their meeting in New
York on September 20.
The Chinese interpretation of 'consultations' is that only decisions with
which they agree should be announced, a British official said.
In an interview with British television, Mr Patten said that his proposals
reflected the legitimate aspirations of the people of Hong Kong for more
democracy.
But he made clear that he had also taken into account the need for his plan
to be consistent with China's Basic Law for the territory, the constitution
which will come into effect after the hand-over of the colony to Beijing in
1997.
If Beijing objected to his proposals, he would 'use such rhetorical gifts as
I can manage to convince China that this is in Hong Kong's long-term
interests and this is what the people of Hong Kong want.'
British officials stressed that the UK government would back Mr Patten's
pledge to try to persuade Beijing to accept a quickening of the pace of Hong
Kong's democratic development, with the specific aim of increasing the
number of directly-elected seats to the colony's Legislative Council
(Legco).
According to present plans, these seats are due to rise from 18 to 20 in
1995 out of a total of 60 Legco seats.
The officials recognised that any increase in the number of directly-elected
seats would require a change in the Basic Law and that there was little or
no chance that Beijing would agree to such a modification.
Mr Hurd's proposal to increase the number of directly-elected seats was
rejected by Qian Qichen at their New York meeting.
But the Foreign Office emphasises that greater democracy could also be
achieved by other means, notably through Mr Patten's ingenious proposal to
increase the number of functional constituencies for indirectly elected
seats and to extend them to include the entire working population.
