FT  11 SEP 92 / UK Company News: Sema near to France Telecom link
SEMA GROUP, the Anglo-French computing services company, yesterday announced
an agreement under which France Telecom, the state-owned telecommunications
company, would acquire a minority equity stake as part of an industrial
partnership arrangement.
Mr Pierre Bonelli, Sema's chief executive officer, was in London to announce
the interim results. He stressed that the agreement was subject to approval
by the French government, and details could not be announced until this had
been granted
Sema is anxious to develop its telecommunications business, which accounts
for just 7 per cent of turnover. It confirmed in July that it had been
discussing a partnership with France Telecom. At the same time, Sema
disclosed that Telecom was holding discussions with Paribas, the French bank
which holds a 39 per cent stake in Sema.
If the agreement is approved, Paribas's shareholding is expected to be
transferred to a holding company, which would be owned jointly by the bank
and Telecom, but with Paribas as the majority shareholder.
Sema's interim results showed an 18 per cent increase in pre-tax profits to
Pounds 7.73m (Pounds 6.57m) in the six months to June 30.
Mr Bonelli said the gain reflected improved profitability in several
markets, where, despite difficult trading conditions, the strategy of
focusing on systems integration had enabled Sema to increase its share.
Turnover from continuing operations in the core businesses of systems
integration, facilities management and software products, rose to Pounds
195.4m (Pounds 177.4m), excluding Pounds 23.5m in the 1991 period
attributable to the Sofres market research business, since sold.
The contribution from the systems integration business grew by 11 per cent
to Pounds 149m (Pounds 134m) while facilities management turnover rose to
Pounds 27m (25.6m) and products put in Pounds 19.4m (Pounds 18m).
Following the sale of Sofres, the UK is Sema's largest market. It accounted
for 44 per cent of turnover in the first half.
Retained profits were boosted by the Pounds 15.4m after tax profit on the
Sofres sale.
'Significant cashflow improvements,' together with the Sofres disposal,
enabled Sema to remove all debt from its balance sheet and show net cash of
Pounds 8m at the end of June, compared to Pounds 18m of net debt at the end
of 1991.
Earnings per share increased to 5.3p (4.7p) from which Sema is paying a
dividend of 1.1p (1p).
Mr Bonelli said Sema had managed to improve profitability in France, Spain
and in its joint venture with BAe which was breaking even. Efforts to
improve profitability in other areas, including the UK systems business,
were continuing.
In addition he reaffirmed that Sema was hoping to finalise a partnership
agreement shortly for its costly I-Line industrial software package.
The project, which is being developed by its German subsidiary, been
consuming large amounts of research and development expenditure.
