FT  06 OCT 92 / The Week in Luxembourg: Wood-pulp decision torn apart -
European Law
The European Commission's 1984 decision fining 36 wood-pulp producers for
alleged involvement in an illegal price fixing cartel has been heavily
criticised in a preliminary opinion of the European Court of Justice.
The opinion, delivered recently by Advocate-General Darmon, recommends that
the ECJ should annul the bulk of the Commission's December 1984 decision
imposing fines on the companies of between Ecu50,000 and Ecu500,000.
The 'wood-pulp case', which involves a series of 10 appeals brought in 1985
by 26 of the producers involved, is the last outstanding competition case to
be heard by the ECJ. Jurisdiction over competition cases was transferred to
the Court of First Instance in September 1989.
Six of the companies affected were based in Canada, 11 in the US, 12 in
Finland, 11 in Sweden, one in Norway, one in Portugal and one in Spain. The
Norwegian, Portuguese, Spanish, four Swedish, two Finnish producers and a US
producer were not fined. No Swedish producers appealed.
All but three appellants (Bowater, St Anne and International Pulp Sales)
gave undertakings to the Commission in order to qualify for a 90 per cent
reduction in the fines imposed.
The Commission decision
The Commission's 1984 decision found that the producers had infringed EEC
competition rules in four main ways:
First, almost all the producers had acted in concert on prices for bleached
sulphate wood pulp announced for deliveries to the Community during the
whole or part of 1975 to 1981. The Commission made a similar finding of a
concerted practice on actual transaction prices for the same pulp on five EC
member country markets in the whole or part of 1975, 1976, and 1979 to 1981.
Second, the companies that were members of KEA (the US Webb Pomerene Act
export organisation in whose respect the decision was annulled by the ECJ in
1988) were found to have acted in concert in exchanging individualised data
on prices.
Third, the Commission also found concerted action and individualised data
exchanges, within the framework of the European industry's association
Fides, on prices for deliveries of bleached sulphate hardwood pulp in the EC
from 1973 to 1977.
Fourth, some producers had infringed competition rules by including clauses
prohibiiting export or resale in contracts for the sale of wood pulp to
customers in the EC.
Advocate General's opinion
In his opinion, the Advocate General recommended that the ECJ should allow
the appellants' claims and annul the Commission's decision in respect of the
general concerted practices on announced and transaction prices.
In respect of the Fides concerted practice (involving Swedish producers,
Fincell - the Finnish association, other European producers and St Anne, a
Canadian producer), only St Anne should escape, on procedural grounds, he
said. The fine of Ecu100,000 on Fincell should remain.
He also advised the Court to dismiss appeals in respect of the Commission's
finding on the clauses prohibiting import and export. As a result, the fines
on Canadian Forest Products, MacMillan and Westar should be fixed at
Ecu20,000.
Advocate General Darmon was equally robust in rejecting as inadmissible
claims to annul the undertakings given by all but three producers. His view
was that only unilateral acts of the Commission could be challenged in the
context of competition cases. An undertaking was not a unilateral act.
However, the undertakings remain relevant as a factor affecting the level of
the fines.
But, the most important aspects of the Advocate General's opinion were his
dispassionate condemnation of the Commission's procedural irregularities and
his approach to the economic analysis of a concerted practice.
Procedural irregularities
Procedural irregularities form the main ground for setting aside the
decision in relation to transaction prices. The most blatant irregularity
concerns the failure of the Statement of Objections, setting out the case
against the pulp producers, to refer clearly and precisely to an alleged
concerted practice on transaction, as well as announced prices.
Other infringements of the rights of defence found by the Advocate General
include the Commission's failure to permit comment on new evidence requested
by it after the end of the administrative procedure but used in the
decision.
A refusal to disclose competitors' evidence protected by business secrecy
should either have led to an appropriate non-confidential means of
disclosure or the exclusion of the evidence from the decision.
'The Commission's position in this case irresistibly calls to mind those
plans of prisons on which the warder alone is able to see all the inmates
but they cannot see each other,' he said.
The Commission should also pay the costs of the two groups of accountancy
experts appointed by the ECJ to clarify economic evidential questions and
general pulp market trends. According to the Advocate General, these reports
do not support the Commission's decision on its procedural indiscretions.
Concerted practices
The Advocate General proposed the following definition of concerted
practice: 'reciprocation of communications between competitors with the aim
of giving each other assurances as to their conduct on the market'.
Each company is entitled to align itself independently on the conduct of its
competitors, if knowledge of such conduct is obtained solely by monitoring
the market. Parallel conduct cannot be equated with a concerted practice but
such conduct may serve as evidence of acting in concert.
The standard of proof required is a degree of certainty that goes beyond any
reasonable doubt. The burden of proof on the Commission cannot be shifted
simply by a finding of parallel conduct.
'In any event, if there is a plausible explanation for the conduct found to
exist which is consistent with an independent choice by the undertakings
concerned, concertation remains unproven,' he suggests.
According to the Advocate General, the main substantive problem with the
Commission's decision was its reliance on the producers' parallel behaviour
as the primary evidence of concerted action on announced prices, without
reliable corroboration.
The judgment of the ECJ is expected before the end of the year.
Cases 89/85, 104/85, 114/85, 116/85, 117/85, 125 to 129/85, Wood Pulp, ECJ
5CH, Opinion of AG Darmon, July 7 1992.
Unemployment benefit calculations
Unemployment benefit for EC citizens working in one member state but
resident in another must be calculated according to the ceilings of the
country in which they are resident, although based on the last salary in the
country of employment, the ECJ ruled last week.
Case C-201/91, Grisvard and Kreitz v Assedic, ECJ 1CH, October 1 1992.
BRICK COURT CHAMBERS, BRUSSELS
