FT  28 FEB 92 / UK Company News: British Gas expansion on target
BRITISH GAS said yesterday that it was on target to expand its business
overseas so that its exploration and production division contributed 40 per
cent to its profits by the end of the decade.
'Just our developments in the North Sea alone will propel us to that
target,' said Mr Robert Evans, chairman. 'We are now producing oil and gas
in eight countries overseas and could see more than 40 per cent of our
profits coming from international exploration and production by 2000.'
Mr Howard Dalton, managing director of the exploration division, said he
would have a 29 per cent share of the capital expenditure budget this year
amounting to Pounds 754m. British Gas would spend this on its exploration
efforts in Tunisia, Russia and Argentina, among other countries.
In 1991, exploration and production contributed Pounds 221m to British Gas'
overall after-tax profit of Pounds 1.16bn. Mr Evans said that the group was
ready to take advantage of acquisition opportunities in the oil and gas
sector where share prices were severely depressed by low oil prices.
COMMENT
The City showed little reaction to British Gas's profits for last year and
the shares slipped 1p to 258p. That could be due to the difficulty of making
comparisons between last year and the previous one since the group has
changed its financial accounting year. But the shares are currently more
vulnerable to political or regulatory announcements about the future of
competition in the UK gas business than to small changes in British Gas's
profit levels. The company raised its dividend by 7 per cent to 10.25p for
the nine months from April - giving a notional level of 13.4p for the year
as a whole. British Gas is committed to raising its dividend and, for the
past few years, has increased the pay-out at a rate of 8 to 10 per cent a
year - well above the rate of inflation and the rest of the market. While
there is a great deal of regulatory risk to be taken on when investing in
the shares, the company is set for substantial growth in its international
exploration and production business which is outside the jurisdiction of UK
regulators. It is expected to triple its oil and gas production by 1995
compared with slight increases of about 1 per cent for the leading oil
companies. In addition, although the new domestic pricing formula will bite
into UK profits, Mr Evans is commited to a programme of cost reduction that
aims at minimising its effect. If the government and regulators go ahead
with an oft-threatened break-up of the company, that could also release
significant value for shareholders.
