FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (9): London's
anaesthetic wears off
IT WAS only in the final weeks of the third quarter that the UK stock market
managed to edge ahead and join the handful of world equity markets that were
able to report capital gains, in local currency terms, over the three-month
period.
July and August were extremely disappointing months for the UK market, as it
struggled against an economic recession that was proving more enduring than
expected, as well as the growing storm in the sterling foreign exchange
markets.
Recovery came in the third week of September, when sterling's exit from the
exchange rate mechanism (ERM) - temporary, according to Mr John Major, the
prime minister - sent UK shares strongly higher.
The London stock market, brushing aside the prime minister's views for the
time being, interpreted the escape from ERM discipline as a signal that
domestic interest rates could now be cut. The FT All-Share Index jumped by
4.4 per cent on the day following the news, and, sure enough, base rates
were cut by one point within the week.
This concentration of activity into the final three weeks of the quarter can
distort the picture of what was happening in the previous two months. UK
government bonds and cash both outperformed equities over the quarter.
By the end of September, there were significant recoveries in some equity
sectors which had been looking distinctly unhappy only a few weeks earlier.
Banks and insurance stocks, for example, rallied quickly as interest-rate
optimism boosted the standing of their corporate customers, and thus
improved the chances that these customers might pay back some of their loans
and overdrafts - and perhaps even avoid going bankrupt and taking their
lenders and mortgage indemnifiers with them.
But most of the sectors which outperformed were favoured for defensive
qualities, in a market running for cover for much of the time: health and
household; utilities, including telephone and electricity stocks; and a
handful of large index stocks, including Hanson Group and General Electric.
Also performing strongly was Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, a
welcome newcomer to London following its acquisition of Midland Bank, one of
the market's chief problem stocks at the time.
It is not hard to see what the market was afraid of. Pressures within the
ERM network presented themselves early. The stock market focused on the
progress of the French government's campaign to secure a Yes vote in the
Maastricht referendum. At the begining of August, Mr Major was already
stressing his government's commitment to a strong pound, while calls for a
realignment of the ERM currencies were heard from the boardrooms of several
leading UK companies.
Meanwhile, the prolongation of the domestic recession hurt the corporate
sector badly. British Petroleum halved its quarterly dividend, and British
Aerospace shocked the market with a severe drop in profits. Stockbrokers
downgraded profit forecasts yet again; at the end of September, forecasts
for ICI's profits were cut by about one fifth, without provoking indignation
in the boardroom.
Britain's hasty exit from the ERM saved the UK equity market from a dismal
quarterly performance. Unfortunately, the anaesthetic seemed to be wearing
off by the end of September. The City of London had realised that further
cuts in base rates would be difficult to achieve if sterling continued to
plunge now that it was outside the ERM.
Although City analysts remain mildly positive for the final quarter of the
year, predicting a year-end Footsie level in the 2,575-2,625 range, few
expect an easy ride through a trading quarter which opened with the stock
market suffering its biggest one-day fall since the October crash of 1987.
Many fund managers will be tempted to keep the money in cash, a policy which
proved correct in the third quarter.
