FT  13 MAR 92 / Letter: Redressing the refugee and revenue balance
Sir, Edward Mortimer's review ('Refugees and wasted revenues', March 11)
strongly misrepresented the thrust of the paper presented to the UK-Japan
2000 Group.
Its message was to donor governments: by earmarking funds for relief,
western governments since the Second World War have been addressing the
refugee issue in terms of their political interests rather than those of
either refugees or their hosts. This is demonstrated by the amounts western
governments spend to keep a minority of asylum seekers out of their
countries, while reducing in real terms their support for the maintenance of
the majority of refugees hosted by the poorest countries of the world.
Now that the Cold War is over, it was argued, international politics need no
longer be the decisive factor in determining 'solutions' for refugees. It
should be possible for donors to reformulate policies so as to use
development funds both as a method of avoiding forced migration and of
ensuring that refugees are permitted to make a positive contribution to the
economies of their hosts. This philosophy has been part of the thinking of
humanitarian agencies since 1984, but donors persist in dividing overseas
aid, on the one hand for 'development' and on the other for 'relief'. Host
governments and humanitarian agencies, both UN agencies such as the office
of the High Commissioner for Refugees and non-governmental agencies, are
thus the victims of western donors who earmark money for particular relief
programmes. Any positive change will require leadership from the major
donors. Britain and Japan, having committed their overseas development aid
to human rights conditionality, were challenged to provide such leadership.
These points were clearly made in my paper. I was criticising donor
('western', in Mortimer's inappropriate phrase) governments.
Dr B E Harrell-Bond,
Refugee Studies Programme,
University of Oxford,
International Development
Centre,
Queen Elizabeth House,
21 St Giles
Oxford, OX1 3LA.
