FT  13 MAY 92 / (CORRECTED) UK Company News: Reject opportunistic bid says
Cronite director
Correction (Published 14th May 1992) appended to this article.
MR DAVID Pinsent, the lone voice on the Cronite board against the
recommended Pounds 7.3m offer from AFE, the quoted French engineering
company, has strongly advised shareholders to reject the 'opportunistic'
bid.
Mr Pinsent, who controls 0.9 per cent of the Birmingham-based engineer, said
that all Cronite's subsidiaries were now trading profitably.
However, Mr James Lindsay-German, chief executive, described Mr Pinsent's
letter to shareholders as 'a damp squib', saying it did not worry him as it
contained nothing new. 'Most of it has been trailed for some time.'
Mr Pinsent said Cronite's positive cash flow from current trading was
reducing gearing, now down to about 50 per cent and falling. By contrast,
AFE's was about 100 per cent and would rise with the acquisition. 'It would
seem that AFE needs Cronite more than Cronite needs AFE.'
Mr Pinsent said since the offer in April, the UK stock market had risen
about 12 per cent, interest rates had been reduced, and there were growing
signs of recovery in the UK economy. He asked: 'Could there be a less
appropriate time to accept a cash offer for a recovering company ?'
Mr Lindsay-German countered by saying that AFE now controlled 26 per cent
and had irrevocable undertakings for a further 14.8 per cent.
Cronite returned to the black in the six months to March 31, helped by lower
interest charges. Profits were Pounds 311,000 (losses Pounds 2.21m).
Cronite shares were unchanged yesterday at 45p.
Correction (Published 14th May 1992)
AFE, the French engineering company, yesterday said it owned or had agreed
to acquire 26.1 per cent of Cronite, the Birmingham engineering company for
which it has mounted a Pounds 7.3m recommended bid, and had undertakings in
respect of a further 3.6 per cent. In yesterday's Financial Times, Mr James
Lindsay-German, Cronite's chief executive, mistakenly stated that AFE spoke
for 40.8 per cent.
