FT  16 NOV 92 / Two schools for scandal: Europe
With the eruption of the Matrix Churchill scandal over the illicit supply of
machine tools to Iraq in the late 1980s, the British government is
effortlessly breaking all records for a run of self-inflicted political
disasters. Needless to say, the opposition has seized on the opportunity to
give vent to a gale of histrionic indignation; and the government has felt
obliged to set up a judicial inquiry under Lord Justice Scott.
Such portentousness is overdone. Political hypocrisy requires an
investigation, perhaps; but the investigation is unlikely to reveal much we
do not already know. Moreover, the investigation will not be able to pin
responsibility on one or more 'guilty men'; and it will not prevent similar
incidents from recurring. Like the opposition, the government is just
playing to the gallery; but the script of the melodrama is all too
predictable.
Political scandals in France tend to be more entertaining. This may be
because they have more experience in the making of scandals; or because
their scandals are more intriguing; or because they sometimes break with
tantalising slowness; but whatever the reason, the French usually manage to
put on a better, or at least a more varied, show.
Of the numerous French political affairs in recent years, one stands out as
a rather close parallel to the Matrix Churchill story. During the Gulf war
of the 1980s, the French government had declared a ban on military sales to
Iran. But in 1987 it emerged that Luchaire, a French manufacturer of
artillery shells, had sold about 500,000 of them to Iran over a four-year
period, from 1982 to 1986; moreover, it had got around the export ban with
the connivance of key officials in the administration.
The government duly set up a judicial inquiry; but two years later the
investigating judge closed it down, without a finding or a conclusion, 'for
lack of evidence'. Since the essential evidence could only have been
withheld by the administration itself, this showed brazen chutzpah on the
part of the government.
The more spectacular Greenpeace affair was handled rather differently. In
1986 French secret agents sank the ship Rainbow Warrior in harbour in New
Zealand, to prevent it from intruding on the French nuclear test site in the
Pacific; the explosion inadvertently killed a Portuguese photographer on
board.
Two agents were offered as scapegoats to New Zealand, but no one in the
government took political responsibility. Only after a long and unseemly
struggle behind the scenes was Mr Charles Hernu, the defence minister,
compelled to resign. Mr Bernard Tricot, a grand panjandrum of the French
establishment, was wheeled out of retirement to investigate; but his report
found that no one was to blame. As Liberation said at the time: 'Tricot
washes whiter.'
The idea of ministerial irresponsibility was implicit in the government's
handling of the Luchaire scandal; but in the case of the Habash affair, it
was raised to the level of an absolute principle. In January of this year,
the radical Palestinian leader, Mr Georges Habash, was admitted to hospital
in Paris for treatment. President Francois Mitterrand ill-advisedly blew
this up into a scandalous error of policy, on account of Habash's one-time
links with terrorism. But no minister could be found to carry the can; so
five top-ranking civil servants were summarily fired, including Mr Francois
Scheer, the head of the foreign ministry.
It turned out, however, that this tactic of scapegoatism was no more than a
piece of theatre. Even as he was firing Mr Scheer, President Mitterrand
publicly praised him as a most valuable public servant; and within six
months he had been found another top job, as ambassador to the European
Community. That is the kind of denouement which calls for a spectacular
spirit of insolence towards the voters.
One reason for the French practice of ministerial irresponsibility is the
power of the presidency. If the president is the ultimate source of power
and political legitimacy, it follows that his ministers are little more than
his executants. He may fire them; they do not resign on principle.
So it is all the more striking that President Mitterrand has just restored
the principle of ministerial responsibility, in the most sensational way
possible. In 1985, the official French blood transfusion service supplied up
to 1,500 haemophiliacs with blood which it knew to be infected with Aids or
hepatitis. Ten days ago, the head of the service was sent to prison for four
years. But last week Mr Mitterrand electrified France by calling, in effect,
for parliamentary impeachment of the ministers responsible. It seems likely
the list will include Mr Laurent Fabius, who was prime minister at the time;
but since he has long been regarded as Mr Mitterrand's chosen heir, such a
reversal of policy is dramatic indeed.
The explanation for the apparent reversal is not far to seek. The Greenpeace
affair happened far away to other people; selling arms to the enemy as part
of the export drive can be kissed off as part of the world of realpolitik;
and the Habash scandal was not really a scandal at all. But the contaminated
blood has caused, or will cause, hundreds of deaths in France; that is a
real scandal, not just one of the games governments play.
