FT  08 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Palladium surge linked to cold
fusion interest
PALLADIUM'S PRICE rose to its highest level for 27 months in London
yesterday and some analysts linked the surge with recently renewed interest
in cold fusion, which some scientists suggest might become a source of
limitless energy.
But some traders were more prosaic. 'Someone is squeezing the hell out of
the market,' one suggested. 'If this was one of the London Metal Exchange
metals, someone would be having their knuckles rapped for doing some naughty
manipulation.'
Whatever the reason, palladium was fixed in London yesterday at Dollars
105.75 a troy ounce, up Dollars 2.75 from Friday.
The market brushed off news that Russia, the world's biggest producer, had
denied rumours that it had been forced to buy metal on the market. Reuter
quoted Mr Nikolai Menshikov, director of Almaxjuvelierexport in Moscow, as
saying talk that Russia had been buying palladium from South Africa was '100
per cent not true'.
Palladium, used by the electrical and dental industries and by car catalyst
producers, reached Dollars 178.50 an ounce in April 1989, as industrial
users panicked after speculators had moved in following news that US
scientists claimed to have produced nuclear fusion at room temperatures
using electrodes of palladium in heavy water.
However, the excitement died away until October this year when scientists at
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone, which has one of the world's leading
industrial laboratories, said it had been able to repeat their cold fusion
procedure five times with identical results. Although different to the US
process, the Japanese also employed a plate made from palladium with one
side coated with palladium oxide.
Analysts pointed out that recent speculative buying of palladium originated
in Tokyo and was fueled by various rumours about shortages and interruptions
to supply. Also, in a recent study of the market, Johnson Matthey, the
world's biggest platinum marketing group, suggested there would be a
shortfall in supply of 110,000 ounces this year.
Mr Andy Smith, analyst at Union Bank of Switzerland, pointed out that other
platinum group metals had not benefitted from palladium's rise and neither
had silver, another 'white' metal. 'Demand is certainly not going up,' he
said.
