FT  21 JUL 92 / Havel departs in blaze of failure
PRESIDENT Vaclav Havel yesterday ended the last of his 935 days at the head
of Czechoslovakia admitting that the 74-year-old federation was condemned to
imminent demise.
Speaking at Lany Castle, the one-time residence of Tomas Masaryk, first
president of the Czechoslovak federation, Mr Havel said he was leaving
office having failed to prevent the break-up of his country.
'The fact that we did not succeed in building a democratic federation based
on the equal rights of its two members and rooted in our democratic
tradition has been a major failure for all of us.'
Perhaps surprisingly, he said: 'I don't feel either sad, or disappointed or
pushed aside'.
Mr Havel, who spoke to the nation 99 times from Lany in his regular Sunday
radio broadcasts, did not even hold out the hope of a referendum offering a
choice between a united state and two independent republics.
'It is too late for this sort of a referendum. Only the ratification of the
current political developments would now be possible,' he said.
The federation has been heading toward break-up since nationalist parties
won the upper hand in the smaller Slovak republic last month. According to a
post-electoral agreement between Czech and Slovak leaders, the parliaments
of each republic have until September 30 to decide on the modalities of a
constitutional divorce.
Mr Havel announced his resignation last Friday as Slovak parliamentarians
overwhelmingly approved a declaration of sovereignty for the Slovak
republic. Slovak deputies in the federal parliament had earlier this month
blocked Mr Havel's re-election as federal president but he could have stayed
in office until October 5 as long as no other candidate was elected.
Mr Havel's political career may be far from over, as he is the most likely
candidate for the post of Czech president. Both the Czech and Slovak
parliaments are currently drafting republican constitutions endowed with
their own presidents.
In London, Prime Minister John Major paid warm tribute to Mr Havel, praising
the 'wisdom and integrity' of the man who presided over his country's
transition from communism.
