FT  31 MAR 92 / International Capital Markets: Finland faces up to a
difficult funding task - Tracy Corrigan on the country's plans to raise
between Dollars 10bn and Dollars 12bn this year
THE FINNISH government aims to raise between Dollars 10bn and Dollars 12bn
in the international and domestic bond markets this year to bolster its
weakening revenue base.
The task has not been made easy by the devaluation of the Finnish markka
last November and Finland's worsening credit rating. However, plans to
reform the domestic market and to target international offerings should help
smooth the way.
The ratio of the government's debt to gross national product, which ran at
10 to 15 per cent in the 1980s, has now reached over 20 per cent and is set
to exceed 30 per cent in 1993. Finland's debt ratio still lags that of most
other European countries, including the UK's.
The devaluation of the markka, which was pegged to the Ecu just a few months
earlier, proved a severe blow to foreign investors, but sentiment has
improved since the start of the year. Although the proportion of foreign
investors in the FM50bn government bond market slipped in the wake of the
devaluation, it has now returned to around 20 per cent.
Despite recent positive news, such as Finland's application for membership
of the European Community, the risk premium in interest rates caused by the
devaluation is likely to persist. 'It will be very difficult for Finland to
reduce rates ahead of other European countries,' said Mr Peter Lawrence,
Scandinavian analyst at James Capel, even though real interest rates in
Finland are now among the highest in Europe.
The government plans to divide its funding equally between the domestic and
international markets.
'As a trend, we would like to see the proportion of domestic currency debt
increase,' said Mr Veikko Kantola, director of finance at the Finnish
Ministry of Finance. The Finnish markka bond market is to be reformed in an
effort to attract more overseas investors.
The government plans to establish benchmark issues and extend the range of
maturities on offer. Earlier this year, the government started issuing
seven-year bonds in addition to three and five-year bonds. There are plans
to increase the size of the 11 per cent seven-year issue to between FM4bn
and FM5bn. The government also intends to issue 10-year bonds, but may wait
for some easing of interest rate levels.
There are also plans to introduce a market-making system. Finnish banks are
in discussions with the government, and some foreign banks which already
quote Finnish government bonds may be invited to participate.
The strategy for issuance in the international markets is to launch a series
of large benchmark deals totalling around Dollars 1bn equivalent in each of
the leading currency sectors.
Finland has already raised half of its Dollars 6bn international borrowing
programme for 1992 and so can afford to ride the storm of adverse market
conditions. Of its four sizeable deals in sterling, French francs and Ecus
so far this year, one of the two Ecu deals met a rocky reception, but the
French franc and sterling deals were priced attractively enough to appeal to
investors.
According to dealers, Finland's funding costs have risen since its debt was
downgraded. Finnish debt is currently rated AA+ by Standard &amp; Poor's and AA2
by Moody's.
Finland is typically a fixed-rate borrower, holding more than 95 per cent of
its debt on a fixed-rate basis. 'We are interested in absolute interest
levels,' said Mr Kantola, but spreads relative to government bond markets
are also tracked. Currency swap agreements are used to modify the structure
of the debt, which Finland tries to keep close to the composition of the
Ecu.
