FT  07 MAR 92 / The FT Schools 500 (5): Bridging a great divide - A monk
engaged in worldly-wise debate
THE IDEA of a Benedictine monk presiding over the country's principal
independent schools forum may leave you a trifle apprehensive. But a few
minutes in the company of Father Dominic Milroy, headmaster of Ampleforth
College, North Yorks, and chairman of the Headmasters' Conference, puts paid
to any such secular prejudice.
Father Dominic, 59, was educated at Ampleforth, England's premier Catholic
boarding school, and has spent almost all his life since teaching there.
Narrow-minded is, however, the last adjective to describe him: he is more
engaged in - and engaged by  - the contemporary education debate than many
of his wordly-wise public school colleagues.
'I do not think it would be right for schools to exempt themselves from
public quality control,' he begins, complimenting the FT on the scope and
approach of its survey of independent schools. He dismisses any idea that
institutions will distort their admissions because of league tables. 'No
self-respecting head would do that.'
His concern is not about what such tables reveal, but about what they - and
attempts to quantify 'value added' - are incapable of revealing. 'We are not
just about A levels, however weighted, but about forming adults - people
able to concentrate, able to live balanced lives, resolving clashes between
work and family, and able to discern what is good and what is less good.
'Schools should be environments for growth first and foremost: a pupil's
true achievement should not only be at school, but in the future', he says,
adding: 'Many of Ampleforth's great heroes are boys who would not have
passed the 11-plus.
To Father Dominic, future relationships with the state sector are top of the
private school agenda. 'The independent sector has increasingly been
thinking with the maintained sector', he says. 'The trend in education, as
elsewhere, is towards a mixture of the old kind of welfare state economy
with the freedom of individuals to control their own budgets and
expenditure.'
He sees the assisted places scheme - under threat from Labour  - as 'one way
of preserving the complementarity of the two sectors'. But he identifies
others - such as Kenneth Clarke's plan for teachers to be trained in schools
across the two sectors - and sees such policies as 'natural and to be
encouraged.'
Doing his own bit to bridge the divide, he is active in the Secondary Heads
Association - 'the mutual respect is increasing all the time'  - and is
chairman-elect of the Conference of Catholic Secondary Schools and Colleges,
which spans the two sectors. 'We are all heads basically concerned with the
same things: and we all rightly see our own schools as special.'
In any case, he adds, an improved dialogue is important not just across the
public/private divide, but between independent schools themselves.
He recognises, though, that the British boarding tradition is 'a very
peculiar phenomenon', with an uncertain role beyond the 1990s. 'There is
much less of an automatic option for boarding than there was', he says, but
sets this against the fact that those who do opt for boarding 'are generally
far more committed than before - and take the decision with their son or
daughter. The large boarding schools are pretty sophisticated and enriched
establishments - quite able to adapt as they need to.'
The net effect? Possibly decline, he concedes, although it is difficult to
tell how much of the current pressure is recession-driven. In the longer
term, 'it depends in part on how the advantages of boarding are perceived in
a society that is increasingly mobile and unstable in family terms.'
Father Dominic is similarly ambivalent about the future of co-education,
greeting the FT's findings on the academic strength of single-sex schools
with a wry smile.
'In many schools, co-education is still in an embryonic stage, but we won't
be racing to join them,' he says, pointing to the traditions behind schools
like his.
Which brought us back to the FT 500. Father Dominic recalls that his
predecessor at Ampleforth was once asked what happened to the boys that did
not do well at school. 'Oh yes, they usually end up employing our scholars',
came the reply.
