FT  25 MAR 92 / The louder the row, the closer the deal: Talks S
Africa-style
SOUTH AFRICAN politics operate according to an inverse principle: when
opposing parties broadcast their disagreement most vocally and vehemently,
you can bet there is a deal in the making.
Negotiations are like that - no less so in South Africa where, over the next
few months, black, white, Indian and coloured will try to thrash out a
post-apartheid constitution. When the African National Congress (ANC) hits
new heights of bluster and the white government wields a heavy rhetorical
bludgeon, it is the sub-text that is important, not the superficial message.
The mock-clash on Monday between them - which involved Pretoria tabling
proposals for a multi-racial interim government and the ANC rejecting them
out of hand - was a classic example.
In public, ministers were keen to stress that they were not handing over
power to the ANC (the charge levelled against them by the right wing in the
referendum last week), despite their plans for multi-racial 'transitional
councils' to oversee key areas of government policy.
In private, they made clear that these councils (which would be dominated by
the ANC and the ruling National Party, though they would include lesser
parties) would be able to give orders to the white cabinet, and that the
cabinet would carry them out.
In public, the ANC condemned the councils as mere 'toy telephones' to power,
and dismissed the concept as 'outrageous'.
In private, ANC officials let it be known that they thought a deal could be
reached on the issue, along with the much more contentious question of
dismantling the ANC military wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe (Spear of the Nation),
and abandoning armed struggle.
It is not surprising that neither side wants to broadcast the large number
of compromises already made - and still to be made - before a new
constitution is agreed.
If they did, the government would not have won the white referendum by such
a large margin, and the ANC would risk a backlash in the townships. When
they have met privately - in the bilateral talks where the real tough
talking is done - neither side has proved reluctant to compromise.
That is not to say that agreement will be reached exactly along the lines
set out by Pretoria. There are arguments to settle over the exact powers of
the councils, who will appoint them, who will sit on them, and how many of
them there will be. What is certain is that there will be a deal, and soon -
perhaps as early as next month, as Pretoria predicted yesterday.
The battle to watch for is not that between the ANC and the government
(which work so closely together that they are often accused of collusion),
but rather between the two of them and Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi and his
mainly Zulu Inkatha Freedom Party.
Bilateral agreement between Pretoria and the ANC will not be enough on its
own; the 19 parties of the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (Codesa)
must agree before an interim government can be formed. The government and
the ANC will want broad support for something as important as an interim
government, and they will not risk the ire of Chief Buthelezi by forcing it
down his throat.
He is the real wild card in South African politics, to be ignored at great
peril. Progress towards interim government could depend, in the end, on
whether his injured pride can be assuaged - he alleges an insult to the Zulu
people because their King, Goodwill Zwelethini, has no seat at Codesa - and
whether the new government structure can accommodate his ambitions for
power.
Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, leader of the Zulu Inkatha Freedom party,
yesterday attacked government proposals for interim rule with blacks, and
accused Pretoria of aiming to destroy the political power of South Africa's
biggest tribe, the Zulus, Patti Waldmeir reports. Chief Buthelezi, chief
minister of the KwaZulu tribal homeland and a member of the Zulu royal
family, said he was not consulted in the drafting of the proposals which
failed to take into account KwaZulu's existence.
