FT  13 OCT 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Russia plans to streamline oil
sector
RUSSIA'S OIL industry, second in size only to that of Saudi Arabia, is on
the verge of a major reorganisation that could admit more private
investment. Last week Russian oil industry and government officials approved
the draft of a plan to restructure the oil sector into a handful of
vertically integrated joint-stock companies under the aegis of a single
super-trust, tentatively named Rosneft.
According to the programme, which still has to be approved by Boris Yeltsin,
the Russian president, Russia's 40-odd self-financing oil producing groups
would be marshalled into a limited number of integrated 'well-to-pump'
trusts by December 1. A controlling packet of 49 per cent of the shares in
each trust would be placed in the hands of Rosneft, allowing the government
to retain effective control.
'It is impossible not to worry that the momentum for change will be lost
during the transitional period the programme outlines,' said Mr Peter
Cameron, a European energy expert who was in Moscow to hold a workshop for
Russian oil and gas specialists.
The draft programme, which stipulates that foreign and domestic private
investors may purchase shares in the new trusts, is being billed in Russia
as a three-year transitional step which would prepare the oil industry for
more far-reaching privatisation.
However, the immediate effect of the plan would be to beef up centralised
control and curb the autonomy Russian oil producers, most of them in distant
Siberia, have enjoyed in the chaotic months since the collapse of the Soviet
Union. According to the draft plan, the government would guide overall
policy, control exports, and have the right to block take-overs. Rosneft,
the super-trust, would not have the right to dispose of its shares.
'The repercussions of radical change are frankly frightening them,' said Mr
Cameron, citing the Russian government's fear of unemployment, higher prices
and a dilution of central authority. 'This may be the best that they can do
for the moment.'
For Mr Viktor Chernomyrdin, deputy prime minister responsible for the
petroleum sector, the programme represents a delicate balancing act between
Siberia's powerful oil barons and Moscow's Fuel and Energy Ministry.
'By no means should we impose it (the program),' he told journalists. 'The
principle is that it must profit the producers and the whole country.'
The Russian oil industry, potentially an engine for economic recovery, is
collapsing almost as quickly as the rest of the economy.
Figures published over the weekend in Delovoy Mir, a Russian business
newspaper, indicate that oil output fell by 14 per cent in the first eight
months of the year and the government predicts that in 1992 Russia will
average 8m barrels a day, down 1m b/d from 1991.
Moreover, western investors have been wary of Russia, preferring the warm
welcome and clear lines of command in other former Soviet republics such as
Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan.
'It is remarkable that a country with as much oil and gas as Russia cannot
conclude a single major contract with a big Western company,' said Mr
Cameron. He said that western oil men were reluctant to finalise deals in
Russia because of uncertainty about who actually controlled the oil wells.
The reorganisation of the oil industry into trusts might open a window of
opportunity for western investors, but Mr Cameron predicted that they could
be reluctant to commit substantial funds into companies in which the
government retained a dominant voice.
Mr Cameron said that the promotion of 54-year-old Mr. Chernomyrdin, who won
a reputation as a tough manager in his days as the head of Russia's gas
monopoly, to the top job in the Fuel and Energy Ministry, had strengthened
the hand of the conservatives.
'There are indications of a growing conservatism (in the oil industry),
based on social and political concerns rather than economic ones,' he said.
