FT  31 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Thorp in trouble
BRITISH NUCLEAR Fuels must fear that its Thorp plant at Sellafield is a
Christmas present it will never unwrap. The Thermal Oxide Reprocessing Plant
for reprocessing nuclear fuel has taken nearly 10 years and about Pounds
2.8bn to build, but the government is now seriously considering whether it
should be allowed to start up.
The Inspectorate of Pollution is near the end of the formal process of
authorisation, but the government has rightly judged that there are large
economic, industrial and foreign policy issues at stake and commenced wider
consultations.
The arguments for reprocessing have changed since Thorp was given the
go-ahead by the 1977 Windscale enquiry. Re-processing splits out reusable
uranium and plutonium from 'spent' fuel, leaving a residue of
highly-radioactive waste. However uranium is still plentiful and cheap,
contrary to fears a decade ago, and the suspension of research into
fast-breeder nuclear reactors by the UK and France has removed much of the
civil demand for plutonium. Meanwhile international concern that countries
will acquire it for military uses has increased. Given the high costs of
reprocessing, storage looks an increasingly attractive alternative.
Those changes cast doubt on the economic case for Thorp. BNFL argues that
all of Thorp's capacity is booked for the next decade and 40 per cent for
the decade after. On the basis of a report by consultants Touche Ross, it
claims that the contracts are worth at least Pounds 900m in future cashflow
at today's prices, after accounting for operating and decommissioning costs.
However it is unclear how much weight should be placed on those projections.
Decommissioning costs for Thorp arise the moment the first load of fuel
enters the plant, making much of the quarter-mile-long structure
radioactive. BNFL suggests these costs could run to Pounds 1.2bn, but has
declined to say how long a life it assumes Thorp will have, and so over what
period these costs should be spread.
Moreover, two thirds of BNFL's contracts are with overseas customers, whose
commitment may have begun to weaken. Thorp's German orders arose from a law
which may be changed next year and Japan intended to feed the plutonium from
its reprocessed waste into now delayed fast-breeder reactors. If customers
pulled out, BNFL would receive compensation, but Thorp's prospects would be
badly damaged. But the option of abandoning Thorp is in turn complicated by
the fact that its construction has been financed almost entirely by
prepayments from customers.
It is premature to judge Thorp's future, but it is clear a new set of
environmental and economic objections must be addressed by an open and lucid
analysis of the facts. Early publication of the Touche Ross report would be
a start.
