FT  19 SEP 92 / The ERM and Maastricht: Maastricht lifts lid on French fears
 -Yes and No votes in tomorrow's referendum are only a guillotine blade's
breadth apart
THIS evening, 3 1/2 months of campaigning grinds to a halt as 38m Frenchmen
and women ponder whether and how to vote in tomorrow's referendum on the
Maastricht treaty, and Europe's politicians and the world's money dealers
hold their breath for the first results shortly after 8pm French time.
The stakes remain virtually as high as on June 3, when President Francois
Mitterrand called the referendum in France, in reaction to the treaty's
defeat in Denmark the day before.
French rejection will seal the doom of the treaty, though some claim that
this week's explosion in the European Monetary System may have mortally
wounded Maastricht's single currency project anyway.
Likewise, a No verdict will create political upheaval in France, though the
president's newly-discovered prostate cancer has heightened the feeling that
the Mitterrand era is already drawing to a close.
The eve-of-poll strengths of the Yes and No camps seem to be a guillotine
blade's breadth apart. The French have responded to the first great debate
their country has had in 40 years on European integration with all their
famous political volatility.
The No voters clawed their way up from 30 per cent in the June opinion
surveys to a narrow majority in late August, only to fall back slightly by
the time public polling ended a week ago. Since then, the rumour mills have
been whirring with whispered results of secret surveys.
So, the sure bet Mr Mitterrand seemed to be making in June on the pro-EC
sentiments of his fellow citizens has come to be the riskiest of gambles.
His not-so-hidden motive was, of course, to deflect from his own
unpopularity by discomfiting the main opposition parties on an issue that
splits them.
But his public rationale  - the need for popular endorsement of France's
participation in further EC integration  - has acquired a life and
legitimacy of its own. Judged by its import for present and future
generations in France, Maastricht warrants a referendum far more than, say,
the last issue to be put to such a vote in 1988, a new constitution for
remote New Caledonia.
Yet the range and complexity of the treaty's provisions make a verdict very
hard to reduce to Yes or No, as the large number of undecided  - as many as
30 per cent in the last public polls  - attests. Indeed, Maastricht has
lifted the lid on a Pandora's Box of French gripes and fears about the
Community, and about France's place in it.
Back in June when the French parliament was going through the first stage of
the ratification process by amending the constitution, the only contention
was whether foreigners (citizens from other EC states) should be allowed to
vote in France's local and Euro-elections. The issue was of little moment,
except to Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen's far-right National Front.
But the open debate of the referendum campaign brought out four big guns
against the treaty  - the 'three musketeers', Mr Charles Pasqua, Mr Philippe
Seguin, Mr Philippe De Villiers from the main opposition parties; and Mr
Jean-Pierre Chevenement from the ruling Socialists  - and four big issues.
The broadest has been the debate over French sovereignty: whether Maastricht
would compromise or protect it and how the EC should be made more
democratic. The French desire to maintain influence in Europe has shown
itself in the campaign to be largely defensive. That is to say,
pro-Maastricht arguments that Europe should project itself as a superpower
through common foreign and military policies have struck far less resonance
than assurances that Maastricht would help protect France from unwanted
immigrants and imports. The prospect of technocrats in an independent
central bank, alien to French tradition, running a Euro-currency has been
extensively and ably exploited by the No campaigners. But this week's
monetary turmoil will have reminded many French voters of the instability of
the current system, and may make them heed the warnings of the Yes camp that
worse would follow rejection of Maastricht.
Swirling around these issues has been the future of France's key
relationship with Germany, the one country which it constantly measures
itself against and which it feels outstripped by.
Even if domestic political considerations do not chiefly determine how many
French vote tomorrow, they will be uppermost in French minds, once the
result is in.
Mr Mitterrand rightly calculated that a Euro-referendum would fracture the
opposition more than his own Socialists. The RPR and UDF have committed
themselves to presenting a single candidate at the next presidential
elections, which they failed to do in 1981 and 1988. But Mr Jacques Chirac
and Mr Giscard d'Estaing remain rivals for that candidacy, having failed to
share a platform during the campaign. And Mr Mitterrand's health problems
almost certainly do not give them much time to make common cause.
But no assumptions are safe about how the wily president will react to
tomorrow's verdict. Obviously, he will take a Yes verdict as a personal
endorsement, but one which perhaps allows him to resign fairly soon, with
honour amid relative political calm.
A No decision will undoubtedly shift the French political landscape.
Foremost, it will be a slap in Mr Mitterrand's face. But it might also see
the 'three musketeers' and Mr Chevenement bursting the bounds of their
respective parties and splitting in opposite directions towards the solidly
anti-Maastricht National Front and the Communists. Mr Mitterrand might well
then feel, as captain of a storm-tossed France, he must stay on at the helm.
In doing so, he would be able to see whether there are political
realignments to his own party's benefit.
THE QUESTION        OUI ..   NON ..
Approuvez-vous le projet de loi soumis au peuple francais par le President
de le Republique autorisant la ratification du Traite sur l'Union
Europeenne?
'Do you approve the draft law put to the French people by the President of
the Republic authorising the ratification of the Treaty on European Union?')
