FT  28 JUL 92 / Technology: Ideas from Indiana recast face of steel - A
low-cost, energy-efficient way of making sheet steel is taking the industry
by surprise
The flat farmland of Indiana, in the heart of the American midwest, may seem
an unlikely starting point for a fundamental technological innovation in the
way steel is made.
Yet it is in precisely these bucolic surroundings that Nucor, the largest of
the American 'mini-mill' steel manufacturers, has been pioneering a new
process for making sheet steel which promises to shake up the world industry
during the coming decade.
So fascinated is the industry by Nucor's success that fact-finding missions
from dozens of countries have visited the company's plant at Crawfordsville,
some 50 miles west of Indianapolis, in the past two years. This summer the
numbers have grown so great that the plant has starting restricting tours,
lest they interfere with production.
Flat rolled or sheet steel is one of the industry's most important and
valuable products, with applications as varied as making pipes for the oil
industry, water tanks, washing machines and the interior and exterior body
work of cars.
Traditionally, it has been made by manufacturing methods which require
immense capital investment. That is why the sheet market was in the past the
exclusive preserve of Big Steel - America's large, integrated steel
manufacturers - rather than the smaller 'mini-mills' which have sprung up
over three decades to exploit market niches.
In a traditional plant, sheet is made by pouring liquid steel into a mould,
shaping it into red hot slabs between 8 and 12 inches thick and 30 to 40
feet long. Those slabs are then allowed to cool and are transported to
another shop where they are heated up again to about 2,350 degrees F.
They are then flattened into thin bands by passing them through a series of
rollers. The end product is known as hot-rolled sheet, and it has to be
rolled again (this time cold) before it is ready for many applications.
Industry technicians had long dreamed of finding a more efficient way of
producing sheet steel. In the mid-1980s, a West German company, SMS
Schloemann-Siemag, thought it had finally found the answer. Nucor decided to
take a huge gamble and become the first steel company in the world to use
the SMS technology.
Critics in Big Steel immediately decried the project, saying that Nucor
would never build its proposed greenfield plant at Crawfordsville within the
company's modest Dollars 270m budget and that the output of the plant would
not pose any competitive threat. They were wrong on both counts
The SMS Schloemann-Siemag process involves making sheet steel in a single
production run. The steel emerges from the caster only two inches thick and
some 150 feet long, thanks to the innovation at the heart of the SMS
technique - a new design of funnel mould which is shaped like a convex lens.
The resulting thin slab is then passed on rollers through a furnace which
makes the temperature across its width consistent. It then goes straight
through rolling mills, finally emerging as finished coils of hot-rolled
sheet.
That, at any rate, was the theory. Until Nucor built its plant, no one knew
how the technique would operate in practice and whether it would deliver
acceptable steel.
The plant suffered some serious initial problems when it started up in late
1989, but that is hardly surprising, given the novel nature of the
technology. 'There were bound to be some weaknesses in the thinking, and
fortunately they were all very easily correctable,' says Keith Busse, who
heads the Crawfordsville plant.
Whereas the SMS process is mechanically simpler than traditional technology,
it also has much tighter process control parameters. For example, it
requires the hot steel to be kept within a 20 degree temperature window,
compared with 70 degrees traditionally. 'Learning how to live within these
super-sensitive parameters took time.'
It also brought quality problems, two of which were particularly serious in
the early days. One was longitudinal cracks on the surface of the slab, due
to non-uniform cooling of the steel, which was caused by a combination of
seven or eight factors.
One factor was unevenness in the thin layer of film formed on top of a slab
by powder used as a lubricating agent inside the casting mould. The plant is
still experimenting with powders.
The second problem was blemishes, caused partly by premature use of the
lubricating powder.
Busse says both problems have now been largely solved, with each now
affecting about 1 per cent of output. A somewhat larger issue remains that
of a 'tight, thin gummy scale' that forms on 2-4 per cent of production.
The plant will be experimenting this autumn with a new kind of descaling
process. 'We believe it will give us a surface cleanliness vastly superior
to that of the industry,' says Busse.
When production started, some 35 to 40 per cent of Nucor's output was
flawed. Busse says that today the hot-rolled mill has a rejection rate of
4-6 per cent. That is approaching, but still above, the industry norm.
He points out that Nucor steel does not suffer from the internal and
transverse cracks found in traditional steel plants, and adds: 'I think
we're going to find that this technology ultimately yields a superior
product (compared with traditional methods) in terms of ductility and
mechanical performance.'
For the moment, Nucor's steel is not sufficiently good to go into the most
demanding applications, such as the exterior of motor cars. Busse says that
the company is not aiming at this market yet in any case. The Crawfordsville
plant is only now constructing a galvanising line.
'I'm not telling you we're ready to be the fender on a Cadillac,' he says,
'but we're not that far off.'
Whatever quibbles remain about the quality of the product, Crawfordsville
has been very successful in meeting its output targets.
The plant was built with a theoretical design capacity of 800,000 tons a
year. In 1990, it produced slightly less than 600,000 tons. Last year, the
figure was 803,000 tons, and this year, if the mill continues at its current
rate, Crawfordsville will ship nearly 1m tons.
A principal reason is that the designers assumed that the entry nozzle,
which carries steel into the SMS casting mould, would take such a beating
that it would have to be replaced after casting four ladles of steel. In
practice, one nozzle lasts routinely for 10 to 12 'heats' of steel.
Nucor reckons that the SMS process gives it a Dollars 50 to Dollars 70 a ton
production cost advantage over Big Steel; a huge gap when sheet steel is
selling at about Dollars 300 a ton. Busse reckons the cost advantage will
increase. 'The gap is going to get substantially wider.'
So pleased is the company with the SMS process that it is about to start
production from a second plant (at Hickman, Arkansas) and is thinking about
two further mills, one on the American west coast and one on the east coast.
It is also likely to put a second casting machine into the Crawfordsville
plant, which would add 700,000 tons to capacity at a cost of only Dollars
35m.
Others in the steel industry are starting to follow its lead. SMS says it
has three other orders for the technology - one from Taiwan, one from the
US, and one from Italy - while many other big steel companies, including the
American integrateds, have shown curiosity in thin-slab casting.
Nucor knows its rivals will eventually catch up. For now, however, Busse
says: 'Our competitors are well behind us, and financially impaired. We may
have a unique, vacuum type opportunity - and we want to take maximum
advantage of it.'
