FT  03 MAR 92 / Mexico's growing intimacy with World Bank: The relationship
between the world development institution and its biggest customer
WHEN President Carlos Salinas decided to overhaul Mexico's antiquated
agrarian laws, officials from the agriculture ministry called their friends
in the World Bank to ask them for advice.
The World Bank wrote issue papers; the Mexicans responded in kind. Draft
laws were written and re-written. Eventually a constitutional amendment was
drawn up, and passed late last year. The laws governing the new
constitutional article were passed last week.
Such intimate collaboration hardly raises an eyebrow in Mexico these days.
The World Bank has closely advised Mexico on most of its economic reforms in
the past decade - on trade opening in 1985, on the debt deal in 1989, and
now on education, agriculture and the environment.
In the last fiscal year, which ended June 30, the World Bank approved more
non-poverty loans for Mexico than any other country. Approvals totalled
Dollars 1.882bn, an impressive Dollars 927m more than Brazil, for instance.
World Bank involvement in Mexico came into its own in the mid-1980s, when
Mexico came to depend on World Bank money - its largest source of foreign
capital. From money followed advice. In 1985 Mr Fred Berger, then the bank's
chief Mexico economist, wrote a five-page memorandum that, according to one
bank official, 'had a substantial impact in helping them change their trade
policy'. Mexico soon afterwards announced it was going to join the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and received three tranches of Dollars 500m
trade adjustment loans to ease the pain.
But what happened afterwards explains why the Mexican state has become the
darling of the bank's economists (and its major shareholder, the US). Mexico
went much further in reducing its trade barriers than the bank required.
As in other policy areas, including agriculture, the World Bank influence
only came to bear because the Mexican government was itself convinced of the
need to press ahead with the reforms. Mr Rainer Steckhan, director of the
Mexico and Central America department at the bank, stresses 'It was a
home-grown programme; that was the secret'.
Working together, the World Bank-Mexico team has proved to be extremely
effective in achieving its goals. The 1989 debt deal - which, with hindsight
has clearly been crucial to Mexico's successful economic stabilisation - was
very much part of the Salinas plan. But the accord was facilitated by the
bank.
In June 1989, the bank - strongly supported by the US Treasury - approved
three loans for Dollars 500m each in record time. This (plus similar
International Monetary Fund loans) was designed to be a big show of support
for Mexico, says a bank official, and a warning to the commercial banks that
Mexico would be lent money even if it was in arrears in interest payments to
them. With a deal struck, the bank then put up Dollars 2bn in enhancements
to support the debt reduction. All along there was a lot of
behind-the-scenes advice between the bank staff and the Mexicans.
Since then the bank role in Mexico has changed, although it is no less
important. In June last year, it approved what should be its last adjustment
loan to Mexico, an agricultural sector loan of Dollars 400m. Such adjustment
loans are meant to encourage structural reform of the economy, or the reform
of specific economic sectors.
In future, World Bank money will be geared to broad-based project lending,
such as on primary education, drainage, irrigation, sanitation and so on.
'We have shifted emphasis,' says Mr Steckhan, 'in line with shifting Mexican
needs.'
The bank is now working with the government on how to support the
agricultural sector if, as is likely, barriers to maize imports are
eliminated as part of the the North American Free Trade Agreement. The bank
will target money - and advice - on improving the quality of land through
irrigation, while simultaneously offering income supports to the hardest-hit
farmers.
The World Bank's role in the reflecting both changes in priorities in both
Mexico and the bank, and has not been without friction. Mexico City's
environmental planning office complains about the mountains of paperwork the
bank requires before going ahead with a loan. The bank in turn would like
the government to use more market-based mechanisms - such as taxes on
pollution - in its effort to clean the city's air.
Nevertheless, the bank is at the point of approving a loan of up to Dollars
200m to help Mexico City clean up its air, money which will partly fund
lead-free gas, new buses and taxies, and more technical studies.
The Mexican government is understandably sensitive to accusations that it is
marching to World Bank running orders. Mr Angel Gurria, Mexico's
under-secretary of finance, readily concedes the bank economists can be
influential, but only because they are able technicians, often 'the best
people in the world'. As he says: 'If you are convinced you are doing the
right thing, often they will tell you how to do it better'.
But he says: 'It is not credible that the World Bank forces the Mexican
government to do anything'. As Mr Gurria points out, the bank only has the
capacity to make between seven and 10 Mexican loans a year, while Mr Gurria
can think of scores of projects the bank would like to finance. So if the
bank turns down one project because it does not like government policy in
that area, Mr Gurria will just offer another project, and so on, until the
target Dollars 2bn of loans is used up.
A more significant reason is that the bank does not need to force Mexico to
do anything; the two sides agree on almost everything. Mr Gurria says that
World Bank economists and Mexican officials often spend weekends together
brainstorming on policy issues. Many are the graduates of the same US
universities, and friends.
