FT  07 MAR 92 / The FT Schools 500 (3): The search for an education for life
 -How to assess a school's 'added value'
HOW DO you measure a school's added value? Is it possible to do it in any
systematic way? With league tables now a way of life, those questions are
likely to dominate educational discourse for years.
The key issue is the extent to which raw test and examination results
reflect a 'true' measure of pupil achievement. Numerous ideas are on the
table for improving them. The Audit Commission favours comparisons between A
level and GCSE results; a recent paper published by the National Commission
on Education suggests 'correcting' raw scores by allowing for quantifiable
measures of social deprivation and academic potential; some independent
schools are already doing their own value added tests, comparing GCSE and A
level results with common entrance and/or IQ scores.
This survey gives insufficient information for tests of that type. But it is
not just exam-score value that schools add: all but the most austere
cramming institution claims a broader educative role for itself than that.
That said, what else do schools claim to add?
Our survey asked two questions to elicit views. We asked head teachers,
first, which activities they thought distinguished their schools from others
in the independent sector; and second, on which three aspects of secondary
education they placed most emphasis. One head snorted that he was 'not going
in for such airy and cliched platitudes', but most responded - and the
collective picture is striking.
The consensus on the 'three aspects' is summed up in one three-line
response: 'maximising academic potential; extra-curricular activities;
caring and civilised community.' Low staff:pupil ratios appeared frequently;
so did the number of scholarships. Virtually none mentioned the need for a
broad social mix.
Some elaborated on the 'civilised community'. For Yarm School, Cleveland,
'Discipline Without Regimentation' was the key; the head of Bury Grammar
School for Girls wants to create a supportive environment 'where education
is fun'; while Marlborough stressed the need to cultivate a sense of 'duty
to plough back into society the benefits of a privileged education.'
Cultivation of a Christian ethos is emphasised by a fair proportion of
schools. Normally it is in the context of pastoral care and 'values'. But
many Catholic schools lay it on more heavily (Downside School, Bath, prides
itself on its standing 'as part of a worldwide Benedictine family'), and for
Ackworth School, West Yorks, one of the few Quaker institutions,
'recognising the value of silence in widely differing situations' is a
priority.
As to extra-curricular activities, answers to the first question were most
revealing. Music, drama and 'the great outdoors' featured generally, with
several schools boasting recently-opened theatres. Combined Cadet Forces
still regiment a large proportion of boys, and the Duke of Edinburgh's award
is followed far and wide.
But sport generally heads the list - in all types of schools. It is not so
much the prominence of sport that is stressed, but the the range of sports
on offer (Millfield claims the most - 30), and the modernity of the
facilities for their pursuit.
Surprisingly few schools claim overseas links - as opposed to trips - as
particular points in their favour. But the concept of Shrewsbury's 'European
Liaison Officer' will doubtless spread widely, as will variants on Latymer
Upper School's annual exchange with a Hamburg school. Involvement in the
European Youth Parliament figures frequently.
For many schools, comparative advantage is sought in the unusual - or even
positively idiosyncratic. Caterham School boasts a Kenyan Wilderness
Expedition; Clifton a 'resident scientist'; Bradfield a classical Greek play
 -performed in Greek  - once every three years; Charterhouse a four-day
poetry festival and international poetry competition. However, Badminton
School, Bristol, must take the biscuit, with: 'constructing a real
aeroplane.'
Links with local business hardly feature at all, though some mention young
enterprise schemes and a few highlight work-shadowing projects. Highgate
School, London, takes the pressures of modern life most seriously: it lays
on an 'urban survival course' for all fourth and fifth formers.
How do the heads themselves think parents should go about weighing up the
merits of rival schools?
Go and look, talk to everyone, and do not be over-impressed by the marketing
hype, is the general response. But Philip Johnston, headmaster of Queen
Elizabeth's Grammar School, Blackburn, offers a basic yardstick: 'Check the
boys' toilets, the way the staff dress, the cleanliness of the school, and
the head master's availability to meet 'normal' parents.' Who, one wonders,
are the 'abnormal' parents?
STRENGTHS: THE SCHOOLS' VIEW
'Sixth form council of pupils and staff decide punishments for serious
discipline offences: 'Bionics', a sports club for the disabled, held
every fortnight.' (Malvern Girls)
'Sixth form 'flat experience' on a budget. They must cater for themselves
for a week. This is a trial run for student life.' (Lawnside)
'We select our prefects by job description, application and interview, and
all have a chance to apply.' (Laurel Bank)
'Wide range of mother tongue and foreign language offerings.' (International
School)
