FT  19 SEP 92 / UK trade deficit widens to Pounds 6bn: Industry urges
Treasury to cut interest rates while pound floats
BRITAIN'S current account deficit widened to almost Pounds 6bn in the first
half of this year as exports of invisible goods, such as financial services
and dividends, failed to match expectations.
The figures led the Central Statistical Office to revise upwards the current
account deficit in the second quarter from Pounds 2.6bn to Pounds 2.9bn,
bringing the cumulative total for the first half to just under Pounds 6bn.
This is only half a billion less than the forecast for the whole year by the
Treasury in the March Budget.
Throughout the recession, Britain has continued to import more than it sells
abroad, a trend which recently showed signs of worsening. Industrialists are
hoping that this week's devaluation of the pound along with the prospect of
lower interest rates will boost exports.
Yesterday senior industry representatives urged the Treasury to seek a quick
cut in interest rates to take advantage of the pound's new free-floating
state outside the European exchange rate mechanism.
The message from industry was pressed at a meeting between Mr Alan Budd, the
Treasury's chief economic adviser, and economists from some of Britain's top
companies including Imperial Chemical Industries, GKN, RTZ and Ford of
Britain.
According to the CSO figures, the surplus on invisible items in the second
quarter of the year was Pounds 336m, compared with an initial projection of
Pounds 600m. This was, however, an improvement on the first quarter figure
when the surplus dropped to Pounds 168m, the smallest surplus for seven
quarters. The deficit on visible, or merchandise, goods, was Pounds 3.2bn in
the second quarter compared with Pounds 3.1bn in the first quarter.
The news came as the Confederation of British Industry released a survey
showing that manufacturers' order books remain below normal with price rises
at their most subdued since the late 1950s.
The survey, carried out in the three weeks before the pound left the
exchange rate mechanism, revealed that manufacturers remained gloomy about
the economy, with most expecting output to fall over the next four months.
Mr Andrew Sentance, an economist at the CBI, said the October survey could
be more optimistic if interest rates were to fall.
Although some industry representatives at the Treasury meeting said they
hoped the recession had bottomed out, they gave a generally gloomy opinion
of the economic outlook.
One participant said: 'While the lower exchange rate is likely to boost
export sales, in the current climate of high interest rates and sluggish
world economy you have to be an optimist to talk about recovery.'
