FT  25 MAR 92 / Supermarket chains ponder running goods trains on BR tracks
SUPERMARKET giants such as J. Sainsbury and Safeway are among 12 companies
considering running their own rail services under plans to open up British
Rail lines to the private sector.
Speaking in West Bromwich yesterday, Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the transport
secretary, predicted a strong response from the private sector if the
government's planned deregulation of BR went ahead. He warned that Labour's
insistence on maintaining BR's monopoly would jeopardise such innovations.
With the opening of the Channel tunnel, Safeway, the UK's third-largest
supermarket chain, is looking at ways of using the rail network to transport
goods from the Continent to its huge food depot at Bellshill, near Glasgow,
two miles from a proposed Channel tunnel terminal.
Safeway is also considering using the rail network to shift goods from UK
suppliers to their depots and from the depots to the shops. Sir Alistair
Grant, chairman of the Argyle Group, which owns Safeway, has said he wants
his company to be the first big food retailer to make a shift from road to
rail.
Sainsbury, Britain's biggest grocery retailer, is also researching
opportunities to shift parts of its distribution system to rail.
'These are more likely to be in the primary distribution from producers to
the centralised depots than in the secondary distribution from the depots to
our thousands of stores,' the company said.
Last week Stagecoach Holdings, Britain's biggest private bus company,
announced that it would charter BR rolling stock to run an overnight service
from Aberdeen, Dundee and Edinburgh to London.
National Power, the electricity generator, has said it wants to operate coal
trains that run from pits to its power stations.
Mr Richard Branson's Virgin group wants to operate trains between London and
Edinburgh, using its own staff and trains to offer a standard of service
that would compete with airline shuttles.
Virgin has already expressed an interest in attaching carriages to airport
expresses for its business-class airline passengers.
Other companies that have expressed an interest in operating services on the
BR network include Mr James Sherwood's Orient-Express Hotels, which operates
the luxury Venice-Simplon-Orient Express.
