FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of World Banking (6): Winners and losers in a
European game - Banking sans frontieres? Technology may help
a single currency across the member states of the European Community - would
have profound effects on the banking sector. But the winners and losers are
far from clear at the moment, and the changes may well be gradual rather
than dramatic.
One impact would be on the foreign exchange markets. A unified European
currency would mean that there would no longer be any trading between the
various countries' monetary units - and thus on the foreign exchange profits
of banks.
Mr Christopher Ellerton, banking analyst at Warburg Securities, says this
point should not be over-emphasised. The bulk of foreign exchange trading is
currently on the dollar/yen, dollar/Deutsche Mark and sterling/dollar
cross-rates. Such trading would not be affected by a unified currency, save
that the D-Mark might be replaced (in name, at least) by the Ecu.
Nevertheless, some of the smaller currencies will have provided lucrative
niche markets for forex traders. And, of course, Europe's tourists will not
need to change their money every time they cross a border - and pay banks
commission income on each occasion.
One researcher set off from Brussels to visit all 12 Community nations with
BFr1,200. Rather than spend any money, he simply exchanged his cash for the
local currency in each place. By the time he returned, he was left with only
BFr596, less than half his starting capital.
A unified European currency would, of course, mean that the same level of
interest rates would prevail across the Community. Given that UK interest
rates have tended to be higher than the European average, this might affect
some UK banks, according to Mr John Aitken, banking analyst at County
NatWest. UK banks have been used to a high level of interest rates, which
creates an 'endowment effect' on their profits, by charging high rates for
loans and offering low returns on current accounts. (Although, as a
counterbalance, high interest rates normally lead to increased bad debt
losses.)
But what about the dream of a genuinely open European banking market, with
banks of all nations offering services to customers across national markets?
It may take a long time to appear, according to some experts.
It is difficult to imagine retail banking products being readily sold across
European boundaries within the next 10 years, according to Mr Aitken.
Products are difficult to compare, because of the different ways that banks
can charge - some via straight fees, some via higher rates for overdrafts,
and the subtly different services on offer. 'Most people will vote with
their national prejudices,' says Mr Aitken. 'Banking products are not
readily exportable,' according Mr Ellerton, at Warburg.
Technology may break down some of the barriers. Services such as Directline
insurance (a subsidiary of the Royal Bank of Scotland) may set a trend for
telephone-based financial services. The FirstDirect telephone banking
services is the kind of product which might be relaunched (via a different
name) in other EC countries.
But the sheer strength of the branch networks built up by banks on the
continent and in the UK means that acquisition and merger are much more
likely routes to cross-border banking links, than direct competition.
Even before monetary union, the prospect of the single European market, due
to come into force at the end of this year, had prompted a number of
cross-border banking deals.
Some deals have been unambitious, such as a five-bank deal signed in 1991
which allowed customers of Credit Agricole of France, Rabobank of the
Netherlands, Banco Ambrosiano of Italy, Lloyds Bank of the UK and Bayerische
Vereinsbank of Germany access to each other's branches.
The best known link is the Deutsche Bank takeover of Morgan Grenfell, but
there have been a number of deals in the field of fund management. Here, the
trend has been for continental banks to take over UK investment groups, in
search of the generally acknowledged equity management expertise that
London-based companies are perceived to have.
A single currency ought to put a premium on such skills. Investment
institutions have traditionally held the bulk of their assets in their own
markets, in part because of currency risk. With a unified currency, domestic
and other EC assets ought to be interchangeable; as a consequence,
institutions should shift a far greater proportion of their portfolios into
other European markets. They will need international managers to look after
those assets.
On the retail front, fund managers hope eventually to sell mutual funds
Europe-wide via the Ucits (undertakings for collective investments in
transferable securities) system. The 'international rich', who often live in
more than one country, are the ideal target market.
Banks have traditionally dominated the investment market on the continent,
and thus should benefit from any cross-border Ucits growth. But to date, the
bulk of Ucits money has merely moved to Luxembourg from other offshore
centres as investment companies have moved to centralise their cross-border
funds.
Again, a single currency ought to help the growth in Ucits investment. But
cultural differences, such as continental preference for bond over equity
investment (and the reverse bias in the UK), could mean that progress, as in
other financial services fields, will be slow.
