FT  15 JUL 92 / British Rail White Paper: Tories anxious over quality -
Political Impact
CONSERVATIVE MPs yesterday hailed the opportunity to shake-up British Rail's
management, but many were anxious for assurances about the future quality of
service.
Serving notice that many Tory MPs will judge the success of the proposals
more in terms of service improvements than revenue raised, Mr Tim Renton,
former arts minister and MP for mid-Sussex, warned that without capital
investment by BR, commuter lines near his constituency would prove
unappealing to private operators.
'The infrastructure will not be good enough for franchisees to commit
themselves to run an efficient and punctual service,' Mr Renton said.
The most critical Conservative was Mr Robert Adley, MP for Christchurch, who
said that 'a few more Sock Shops on platforms and a few gaudy carriages'
would be no substitute for the services on which most of BR's passengers
depended.
Sir Geoffrey Johnston-Smith, Tory MP for Wealden, said he 'warmly welcomed'
the white paper but asked for assurances the private operators would not be
'fleeced' by BR. Other Conservatives were anxious about central ticketing,
timetabling, the future of smaller stations and about safety.
Mr Paul Channon, a former transport secretary, wanted to ensure fares in
Network SouthEast would continue to be controlled. Mr John MacGregor,
transport secretary, said franchises would include price ceilings.
Mr John Prescott, shadow transport secretary, said the proposals were
'irrelevant' for building a modern transport system and described the
long-delayed white paper as 'a cherry picker's charter - ripe for
exploitation'.
The Central Transport Consultative Committee, the passengers' watchdog, said
it accepted that the proposals to inject an element of competition into the
network could lead to an improvement in services. But it insisted the
government must continue to support unprofitable services.
The Confederation of British Industry welcomed the move towards
privatisation.
Mr Derrick Fullick, general secretary of Aslef, the train drivers' union,
said the proposals would be a catastrophe for Britain's transport system.
'The privatisation fanatics have drawn up a timetable for disaster. Their
plans are a fast-track to serious rail accidents,' he said. Routes would be
axed and vast areas of the country isolated from a direct rail service;
fares would rocket with concession schemes scrapped.
Mr Jimmy Knapp, general secretary of the RMT transport union, said: 'The
acid test of the government's plans for railways remains whether they will
improve services for all passengers. The proposals set out in the white
paper do not meet this test.'
