FT  11 FEB 92 / French got Dollars 24m from Soviet Communist party
INVESTIGATIONS into the finances of the now-banned Soviet Communist party
have revealed details of its financing of foreign communist organisations
and its holdings in Russia.
Mr Yevgeny Lisov, Russian deputy prosecutor general, told the Russian
Parliament yesterday at least Dollars 200m (Pounds 109m) had been paid to
foreign communist and other organisations - including 'freedom fighters' -
since the 1950s. At the same time, inventories made since the failed putsch
last August showed party property worth at least Rbs2.5bn (Pounds 12.57m at
the current rate of Rbs110 to the Dollars ), with investments in 'commercial
structures' of a further Rbs7.5bn.
Top of the Communist party's beneficiaries were the French, who got Dollars
24m, followed by the (tiny) US party, receiving Dollars 21.25m, the Finnish
with Dollars 16.6m, the Portuguese Dollars 9.5m, Israeli Dollars 6.5m and
Chilean Dollars 6m. These destinations and figures were listed yesterday by
the evening newspaper Izvestia which quoted Mr Sergei Aristov, a senior
prosecutor investigating party finances.
He said that a number of mainly west European Communist parties had received
substantial sums over the past decade. The Izvestia report says the party
possessed 4,228 administrative buildings, 112 party archives, 145 motor
pools, 23 sanatoria and rest homes and 206 'other installations,' which
included special stores and departments with goods for party officials.
The report coincided with attempts by the parliament to question leaders of
the former Soviet Communist party - including Mr Mikhail Gorbachev, former
general secretary.
No moves have yet been made against party leaders not directly involved in
the failed putsch of last August. However, this hiatus could now be ending,
as anti-communism becomes attractive to the current authorities as a way of
redirecting social tension.
Mr Lisov told parliament that Mr Gorbachev had authorised the party to
invest in small business ventures, quoting from a document to that effect
signed by the former general secretary. 'We would like to know whether these
investments were made to save the CPSU in case it was forced to work
underground,' Mr Lisov asked.
Senior communists, including Mr Gorbachev, Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, the
former foreign minister, and Mr Alexander Yakovlev, a close aide, are
expected to be questioned.
