FT  11 SEP 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Malaysia feels after-effects of
cocoa fever - Growers' initial enthusiasm has evaporated as prices have
plummeted
IN THE late 1970s and early 1980s cocoa fever swept through the small town
of Tawau, in the state of Sabah, East Malaysia. 'We all had pockets full of
cash then' says Mr Nicholas Mok, a local cocoa smallholder. 'The bars were
full, you even had to book restaurant tables for breakfast - we all bought
Mercedes.'
But that was in the good old days when the export price of a tonne of cocoa
was more than MDollars 13,000 (Pounds 2,615 at the present exchange rate).
Now growers like Mr Mok are lucky if they get MDollars 2,500 per tonne and
earlier this year prices went as low as MDollars 1,700 a tonne.
Last year Malaysia produced 230,000 tonnes of cocoa - about 10 per cent of
world output. Sabah accounts for about 57 per cent of Malaysia's total
production, with more than half of the state's output coming from the Tawau
area. 'There's no doubt that more people are moving out of cocoa production
and into palm oil, which is more profitable at the moment,' says Mr Hashim
Wahab, head of the Malaysian Cocoa Board.
'Something has to be done about pricing - the consumers blame producing
countries for overproduction but if there was disease or some other mishap
then the consumers would suffer. . . It's as if the consumers - mostly the
big chocolate companies - want to kill the goose that laid the golden egg.'
Latest cocoa board forecasts are for a drop in Malaysia's production this
year to 184,000 tonnes, the lowest since 1986.
It is only recently that Malaysia joined the Ivory Coast, Ghana and Brazil
as a major cocoa producer. Commercial growing began in the mid-1950s. In
1960 less than 2,000 hectares (4,950 acres) of land was given up to cocoa.
By 1980 there was more than 100,000 ha under cocoa: spurred on by high
prices Malaysia's cocoa production climbed by about 30 per cent each year in
the mid-1980s.
BAL Plantations, wholly-owned by the London-based Commonwealth Development
Corporation, is one of Tawau's biggest cocoa producers, with 6,000 workers
and about 40 per cent of its 16,000 ha estate planted with cocoa trees.
Malaysian cocoa production is claimed to be the most efficient in the world:
at BAL the aim is to produce about 2,000 kg a hectare. According to Mr Lim
Fook Hin, finance controller at BAL, African countries produce only about
500 kg a hectare.
'We are now experimenting with close planting of trees to achieve even
higher yields,' says Mr Lim. 'But we have been losing money for the past
three years on cocoa. We are lucky because we have oil palm and rubber
production and no debts. It's the mono-crop, highly geared producers who are
really suffering'. BAL has so far not taken any land out of cocoa production
but has made efforts to cut costs, mainly by reducing fertiliser use. 'We
might lose a small portion of our crop but with the price so bad it's a
calculated risk,' says Mr Lim.
About 40 per cent of Malaysia's cocoa production is estate-based, the rest
from smallholdings. It is estimated that present production costs are about
MDollars 3,000 a tonne for the estates and MDollars 2,400 for smallholders.
At the height of the cocoa boom in the late 1970s many speculators with
little knowledge of cocoa - several of them formerly involved in Malaysia's
tin mining industry - rushed to Sabah to buy land. While cocoa offers a
quick return on capital compared to palm oil and rubber, it is a highly
sensitive crop and needs careful husbandry. Many of the new planters
invested little in fertiliser use and often planted on marginal land.
Mr Lim feels a shake-out is now going on in the cocoa sector. 'In the short
term only the most efficient producers will survive,' he says. 'But if the
price does not rise within the next two or three years then there could be
no cocoa industry left in Sabah.'
Malaysian producers concede that there has been global overproduction but
argue that consumers often exaggerate world cocoa stock holdings. Malaysia
says it is penalised both by European Community tariffs and the quality that
discount Malaysian cocoa is subject to on the London market. Meanwhile
production costs are rising: labour is in short supply in Sabah and most
workers on the plantations are immigrants or 'guest-workers' from Indonesia.
Costly insecticide has to be used frequently to control disease,
particularly the cocoa pod borer, an insect which burrows into the pod,
oxidising the beans.
The big European consumers still tend to favour the West African or Ghana
cocoa bean. Malaysia and other producing countries have been hit by the
dramatic fall in cocoa consumption in what was the Soviet Union. In 1988 the
Soviet Union imported 200,000 tonnes of cocoa beans plus an additional
75,000 tonnes of cocoa liquor (one of the extracts of the cocoa processing
industry). The forecast for total cocoa imports by the CIS this year is only
25,000 tonnes.
Malaysia feels that while production seems to be falling in Brazil, the west
African countries, with few agricultural alternatives, will continue to
produce cocoa even at the present depressed price levels. There is also
concern about the rapid rise of cocoa output in Indonesia, where labour
costs are much lower.
Downstream development is perceived as the most promising solution. In 1990
about 72,000 tonnes or 30 per cent of Malaysia's total cocoa bean production
was processed locally. The processing, referred to as grinding, has several
stages, producing cocoa liquor, butter, paste, powder or chocolate.
But there are problems. The infrastructure is bad in Sabah and energy costs
in the state are double those on the mainland. Cocoa beans from Sabah have
to be transported to the Malaysian peninsula or Singapore for onward
processing. Singapore, with no cocoa production of its own, processes about
50,000 tonnes of cocoa beans each year. Many of the big chocolate companies
prefer to do their own grinding. Some Malaysian producers have made attempts
to go into chocolate production themselves but face marketing problems.
The other solution is to search out new markets. China has recently made
substantial purchases of Malaysian cocoa beans and there are hopes of a
growing market in the East Asia region. The Malaysian Cocoa Board is
considering launching a generic advertising campaign aimed at increasing
regional cocoa consumption.
Small producers like Tawau's Mr Mok are willing to try anything to survive.
'Cocoa trees need shade so above my cocoa I'm growing durian fruits, which
are very profitable' says Mr Mok. 'In between the cocoa trees I've planted
papaya and below I'm growing a special local vegetable. Then I'm also
producing kampung (village) chickens. We'll be wiped out if we just sit back
and wait for cocoa prices to rise.'
