FT  30 NOV 92 / Leading Article: Nuclear research
THE NUCLEAR industry is celebrating the 50th anniversary of its birth on
December 2 1942, when Enrico Fermi and colleagues carried out the first
controlled nuclear reaction. Past glories are a distraction from what looks
like a barren future for nuclear research, at least in the UK.
The government is cutting back drastically on the development of new nuclear
energy sources, and R&amp;D on fast reactors will be wound up over the next 18
months: the UK is to withdraw from the European Fast Reactor project and
close its Dounreay prototype reactor. That will leave fusion as the last
remaining field of nuclear research in which the UK is actively involved -
and even its most fervent advocates do not expect to see a commercial fusion
reactor within 40 years.
Nuclear scientists and engineers are lamenting what they see as the
short-sightedness of pulling out of fast reactor research, after spending
Pounds 2bn on it since the 1950s. They see the fast reactor - also known as
a 'breeder' because it can produce more fuel than it consumes - as a future
jewel in the crown of nuclear power.
That attitude is understandable but sadly out of date. Experience with
experimental fast reactors has shown that they are more difficult to build
and operate successfully than nuclear engineers had expected.
More important, the economic justification for fast reactors - that nuclear
fuel shortages early in the next century would make plutonium breeding
worthwhile - has disappeared. Most experts now expect the world to remain
awash in plutonium and uranium for several decades.
To have proceeded to the next stage of the European Fast Reactor project
would have meant designing a Pounds 2bn demonstration reactor for a specific
site. Yet there was no real prospect for the foreseeable future of the three
countries involved - France, Germany and the UK - agreeing either to put up
the funds required or to host the station.
The US has not been seriously interested in commercial fast reactor
development since the 1970s. Even Japan's enthusiasm for fast breeders is
cooling in the face of worldwide protests against its plutonium shipments.
In the unlikely event of the UK wanting to build a fast reactor in, say,
2020, there is no reason why Nuclear Electric should not buy a Japanese
design, just as it is building an American-designed PWR now at Sizewell.
The government should put the money saved on fast reactor research - Pounds
13m a year on EFR and Pounds 40m on Dounreay - into other areas of energy
research which have been starved of funds, such as clean coal technology.
And it must keep up Britain's share of the international effort to develop
nuclear fusion.
