FT  22 SEP 92 / Survey of Belize (11): Beautiful, multi-faceted jewel - The
country's 450 cayes are a paradise for scuba divers
CONSERVATION and tourism have become almost synonymous in Belize. Mr Glenn
Godfrey, minister of tourism, calls the country a beautiful, multi-faceted
jewel.
It boasts the longest barrier reef in the western hemisphere, and has 450
beautiful cayes which are a paradise for snorkellers and scuba divers. It
also has some of the best preserved rain forests in the world in spite of
extensive logging, as well as the beautiful Mayan mountains and their
archaeological remains.
Government tourism policy does not aim at large-scale ritzy developments
such as Mexico's Cancun and Ixtapa but smaller-scale projects, where
possible under Belizean ownership and retaining maximum added value for the
country while respecting its traditional, eccentric social fabric.
The commitment to conservation has developed in a fairly haphazard,
incoherent way. Foreign institutions have played a significant role - most
notably the World Life Conservation International, an offshoot of the New
York Zoological Society. Nationally, the driving force has been the Belize
Audebon Society.
US conservationists are concerned about birds which emigrate north. Experts
believe Belize may have as many as 500 species, many of which are
endangered.
Individuals have also played a big part in conservation projects. Alan
Rabinovitch's fanatical and hair-raising research on jaguars and determined
lobbying led to the establishment of the Cockscomb basin wildlife reserve
where up to 100 are believed to survive.
Another notable contributor has been Dr Robert Horwich who helped establish
the somewhat inaptly named Community Baboon Sanctuary devoted to the
threatened Black Howler monkey.
He has also assisted in resettling the primates at Cockscomb where they were
wiped out by yellow fever and Hurricane Hattie.
The Programme for Belize, funded with foreign donations, now has 200,000
acres under management in the Rio Bravo area. Coca Cola Foods donated 92,000
acres having purchased the land from Mr Barry Bowen, a leading entrepreneur.
The company renounced plans to plant citrus there after German
conservationists objected.
In turn, Mr Bowen, has cleared only 2,200 acres of his magnificent jungle
territory, leaving another 130,000 virgin for the cause and adjoining the
Rio Bravo estate. At the last official count Belize had 33 reserves under
varying degrees of protection and management totalling 2.2m acres or about a
quarter of the country's territory.
'Everyone has been encouraged by the reaction of the public,' says Mrs Janet
Gibson, who is assisting the fisheries department in drawing up the coastal
zone management plan.
Developments on the coastal strip are threatening a vital eco-system
including the mangroves with their capacity to contribute to fisheries. They
cover an estimated 80 per cent of the shoreline. The fate of the manatee, or
sea cow, and other marine creatures, are also at stake. Ambergris is the
main tourist centre but it is overpriced and has serious water and sewage
problems. A plan to increase its potential is about to be submitted to the
cabinet.
Belize's small population is probably the main reason why it remains an
environmental paradise. However, this could be threatened by demographic
changes, which may result from the arrival of some 40,000 Guatemalan and
Salvadorean refugees.
They, like the indigenous Mayans (about 11 per cent of the population),
practise slash-and-burn agriculture while shooting and eating monkeys and
parrots.
Devising ways of tapping timber resources without wholesale destruction of
forests is also a problem. So, too, is finding the manpower resources to
police the reserves.
For the time being, therefore, it may be advantageous that the country's
tourist infrastructure remains relatively undeveloped.
