FT  06 AUG 92 / A paper trail of troubles: The Bush administration is coming
under fire as Congress investigates alleged transfers of arms and money to
Iraq
President George Bush might not have imagined it possible, but 18 months
after the end of the Gulf war he has found himself forced to box with the
shadow of Mr Saddam Hussein on two fronts.
Internationally, Saddam's defiance over United Nations nuclear inspection
efforts in Baghdad underscored the extent to which the Iraqi leader could
taunt Mr Bush during a presidential election year.
In the US, the Bush administration has been irritated by a series of
congressional investigations into both the arming of Iraq in the 1980s and
the improper lending of Dollars 5bn to Baghdad by the Atlanta branch of
Italy's Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL).
The investigations have produced serious allegations that go well beyond the
acknowledged policy failures of the US 'tilt' toward Iraq during the
Iran-Iraq war which ended in 1988. Instead, the claims are that officials of
the Bush administration may have been guilty of criminal wrongdoing.
Democratic members of Congress are alleging that for more than a year after
the war ended, top government officials pursued a policy of appeasing Saddam
with illegal transfers of money and arms in an attempt to maintain US
influence in Iraq.
Dozens of documents disclosed in Congress illustrate that nearly three years
ago the White House and the State Department were aware of Iraqi arms
procurement networks operating in Europe and the US. They also catalogue how
explicit government approval was given to the export of technology directly
to Iraqi factories known by Washington to be at work on nuclear and chemical
weapons.
The documents also show that the administration allowed Iraqi-owned
companies such as the Ohio affiliate of Britain's Matrix-Churchill, the
machine tools company, to operate in the US even after the August 1990
invasion of Kuwait. In addition, they confirm that US officials later
altered Commerce Department documents to hide from Congress the fact that
export licences had permitted military goods to be shipped to Iraq. This
willingness to allow militarily useful goods to be exported to Iraq had been
part of a broader policy of co-operation that was detailed in a presidential
directive of October 1989.
Week after week the declassified documents have been placed before Congress
by Mr Henry Gonzalez, a persistent and occasionally cantankerous Democrat
who chairs the House Banking Committee and who has spearheaded the BNL
probe. His accusations form the basis of no fewer than six congressional
committee investigations, but it is only in the past few weeks that leading
Democrats have begun to take a public interest. The US media has dubbed the
story 'Iraqgate'.
Mr Gonzalez and other Democrats have not hesitated to hurl the phrase
'cover-up' at the White House, just as Mr Bush and his aides have sought to
portray the entire investigation as politically biased hyperbole inspired by
the presidential election campaign.
However, congressional Democrats, led by Mr Jack Brooks, the conservative
Texan who chairs the House Judiciary Committee, have created what could be a
potentially more serious problem for Mr Bush and his colleagues. Earlier
this month, Mr Brooks and 19 other Democratic members of his committee wrote
to Mr William Barr, the US attorney-general, demanding the appointment of a
special prosecutor to investigate allegations that high-ranking officials of
the administration had committed crimes in arming Iraq before the Kuwait
invasion and then broke other laws in seeking to conceal information from
investigators. Mr Barr has not yet replied to the request.
At the heart of the Iraqgate allegations is the extent to which the Bush
administration can be shown to have knowingly assisted Iraq with loan
guarantees and militarily useful technology, including government-approved
exports that helped Saddam's nuclear, chemical and biological weapons
projects as late as 1990.
US investigators say an estimated Dollars 2bn of the Dollars 5bn of Iraqi
loans made by BNL Atlanta went to help Saddam's weapons programmes. They
allege that both the Reagan and Bush administrations were aware of the Iraqi
loans flowing from Atlanta to Baghdad and found it convenient to permit them
as part of their pro-Baghdad policy. This charge, however, has not been
documented.
Several hundred millions of the unauthorised Dollars 5bn BNL loans were
backed by a US government loan guarantee plan administered by the
Agriculture Department's Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC). The
investigators allege that Iraq abused the CCC programme by using money
ostensibly loaned for US farm exports for military projects with the
knowledge of the Bush administration.
US government documents show that money from the BNL Atlanta branch funded
Iraq's Condor 2 missile project as well as components for nuclear weapons
and the 'super-gun' of the late scientist Dr Gerald Bull. BNL also funded,
according to CIA reports in 1989, Matrix-Churchill and other US and UK-based
front companies owned by Iraq and used in its procurement scheme.
The paper trail now in the public domain tells the story of a curious
sequence of events beginning with the initial August 1989 disclosure of the
BNL loans scandal.
In a Federal Reserve memorandum dated September 22 1989, Ms Gail McKenzie,
the Atlanta prosecutor heading the BNL probe, is quoted on the issue of
press allegations that BNL money went to fund the Condor 2 missile project:
'Everything being written about the missile sales is true,' she said.
Other recently released documents include US Customs Service memos written
nearly three years ago that stated flatly that BNL was suspected of having
'provided loans to various US firms for the illegal export to Iraq of
missile related technology to be used in the Condor 2 project'. This is
striking given that Department of Justice officials have insisted in public,
as recently as June 1992, that they cannot discuss any of the military
aspects of the BNL affair, which remain under investigation.
The thesis of US prosecutors in Atlanta, who have indicted only a handful of
Iraqis and some former BNL employees including Mr Chris Drogoul, the former
Atlanta branch manager, is that the entire Dollars 5bn Iraqi loans fraud was
perpetrated between a group of low-level BNL employees in Atlanta and their
Iraqi paymasters.
For his part, Mr Drogoul - indicted on numerous charges of fraud and money
laundering - went public in April, claiming both the US and Italian
governments knew of the BNL loans to Baghdad. The charge has been denied by
the Bush administration. By June, however, Mr Drogoul struck a plea bargain
with the Justice Department. Many charges were dropped in exchange for his
co-operation with prosecutors.
An illustration of the high-level attention the BNL scandal received can be
found in a declassified cable describing a meeting in October 1989 between
Mr James Baker, the Secretary of State, and Mr Tariq Aziz, then Iraq's
foreign minister. It reports Mr Aziz as saying that Baghdad was unhappy
because Washington was dragging its feet on a request for Dollars 1bn more
loan guarantees.
At this time, there was already debate in the White House over the loan
guarantees in light of Iraq's suspected abuse of the CCC programme. Mr Baker
and his colleagues at State none the less lobbied hard and won approval for
the CCC guarantees.
More clues to what the Bush administration knew can be found in a November 6
1989 CIA secret report noting that many US and west European companies
supplying goods to Iraq were being paid through BNL. It sourced the
information to US diplomats.
This report, which was sent to the National Security Council and the State
Department, was dated just 48 hours before the White House meeting convened
to debate whether to approve Dollars 1bn of fresh US loan guarantees for
Iraq. The CIA confirmed how BNL loans had been used to fund Iraqi companies
in the US and Britain that were supplying Baghdad's nuclear weapons and
missile projects. The CIA also said Iraq would be unable to replace BNL
financing 'any time soon'.
Investigators in Congress point to five other items to bolster their claims
that the administration mishandled the BNL case. These are:
A November 7 1989 telephone call from a lawyer on the White House staff to
the BNL prosecutor in Atlanta expressing concern about the 'embarrassment
level' of the BNL affair. Government officials have confirmed the call was
made, but have denied it was improper.
An April 5 1990 Federal Reserve memorandum on BNL which states that the case
was being complicated 'by what is perceived as interference from the Justice
Department in Washington'.
Mr Joe Whitley, the US Attorney in Atlanta appointed by President Bush in
1990, had to withdraw from handling the BNL case because he had worked just
months before as a lawyer for Matrix-Churchill, the Iraqi-owned company. In
early 1991, as the Gulf War was starting, the State Department asked the
Justice Department not to bring any indictment of the central bank of Iraq
in the BNL case, although there was documentary evidence of direct
collusion. The reason given was that the central bank had diplomatic
immunity.
In April 1991 a top White House lawyer convened colleagues from the CIA,
State, Justice, Commerce and other agencies for a series of meetings to seek
ways to avoid providing BNL-related documents to Congress. During these
meetings government lawyers discussed the danger that a cabinet member might
be prosecuted for refusing to give Congress key documents.
The above events remain in the sphere of circumstantial evidence and as yet,
while media interest is growing, the congressional investigations have not
caught fire as a significant campaign issue. For his part Mr Bush has
angrily denied the allegations from Congress, although the White House has
refused to allow key officials to testify.
Informed opinion in Washington, however, is that the attorney-general will
eventually appoint a special prosecutor, if only because the Bush
administration cannot credibly investigate itself. Whether or not a special
prosecutor is named, more revelations and documents are certain to come from
Mr Gonzalez, and possibly from Mr Drogoul. Whatever is disclosed, it will
not be a plus for the president's already troubled re-election campaign.
