FT  19 JUN 92 / Nuclear dump site selected by Nirex is 'compromised'
GEOLOGICAL investigations by UK Nirex, the nuclear waste consortium, into
its chosen site for Britain's first underground repository for radioactive
waste suggest that it may have difficulty in arguing that it would be safe,
a report by independent consultants published yesterday says.
According to the report, by consultants Environmental Resources, information
from the first four test boreholes shows that water in the rock that would
surround the repository travels upwards into sandstone used as a source of
drinking water.
ERL says the borehole results show that the proposed repository site, near
the Sellafield nuclear reprocessing plant in West Cumbria, is in a mixing
zone where groundwater travelling in deep basement rock towards the sea
meets incoming saline water.
It says results suggest that the denser saline water forces the groundwater
upwards through the basement rock around the repository at a rate of about
4,000 cu metres a year, towards the aquifer sandstone above.
ERL says Nirex's preferred site near the Sellafield plant is, however, the
only possible local location, because it alone offers suitable basement rock
at the right depth.
Against that, it adds, the proximity of the Lake District hills, where the
basement rock outcrops and absorbs rainwater, compromises one of Nirex's
main site selection criteria: slow rates of water movement in regions of low
hydraulic gradients. That may affect the time it would take groundwater to
return to the human environment.
Nirex selected the Sellafield area for the Pounds 2.5bn, 800-metre deep
repository for low and intermediate-level waste after a 10-year search
throughout the UK.
ERL's report is one of a series about the repository commissioned by Cumbria
County Council, which has not yet determined its stance. The leaders of the
three political groups on the council said in a joint statement: 'Unless the
hydrogeology turns out to be better than demonstrated, so far we cannot see
how a depository, as currently proposed, could go ahead.'
Nirex, which this month announced a delay until next autumn in submitting
its repository planning application, said yesterday: 'We don't disagree with
the broad thrust of the report.'
It said, however, that ERL's assertion that groundwater was rising after
meeting the saline water was based on pressure measurements and had not been
confirmed.
A Review of the Geology and Hydrogeology of Sellafield. Cumbria County
Council PR Dept, The Courts, Carlisle, CA3 8NA. Free.
