FT  13 JUL 92 / Slovaks inch towards independence from Prague
THE Slovak nationalists who dominate the newly elected Slovak National
Council are expected to endorse a declaration of Slovak sovereignty when the
new session opens in Bratislava tomorrow. For many Slovaks, irked by a
1,000-year history of subservience to Hungarians or Czechs, the symbolic
declaration will underline Slovakia's right to run its own affairs.
Despite its long political subservience, Slovakia's wealth of fine Gothic
churches bears witness to a culture which many Slovaks feel has been
underrated. Bratislava's Catholic churches are packed for evening mass,
unlike the the more sceptical Czech lands cities, where church attendance is
low and protestant traditions live on. Differences are likely to widen if
the federal relationship with the Czech lands is broken as expected later
this year.
Under the communist regime Slovakia was industrialised with huge arms
factories, steel works and engineering plants which either exported to the
east or delivered components to finishing plants in the Czech lands. After
the 1968 Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia many Slovaks, such as the former
president Gustav Husak, were promoted to top positions.
Traces of that recent past remain. The taxi drivers with brand new Peugeot
cars who lurk outside Bratislava's high-tech Hotel Danubia have the
unmistakable air of former secret policemen. Frontier guards who check
passports on internal flights still treat passengers like potential
defectors.
That is certainly the fear of the losers from the recent elections - the
Christian Democrats led by Mr Jan Carnogursky; the Greens, whose vote was
negligible despite the environmental degradation left by the communists; and
the Civic Democratic Union, which, as Public against Violence, held the
first street demonstrations against the communist regime.
But the clearest sign of nervousness about the future of an independent
Slovakia can be seen in the way the Hungarian minority voted on ethnic
grounds for the three Hungarian parties who form a compact bloc, despite big
political differences.
For nearly 1,000 years Slovaks were dominated by Hungary. Mr Gyorgy Halasz
of the Hungarian Civic party fears that if Slovakia, under the leadership of
Mr Vladimir Meciar's Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), breaks its
federal ties with the Czech lands, it will be the turn of Hungarians and
other ethnic minorities such as Gypsies, Ukrainians, Poles and Germans to
become second-class citizens.
'Meciar is angry with us because we were part of the coalition which ousted
him from government last year. We fear that Slovak will become the only
official language and we will be discriminated against. We intend to form a
united opposition with the right-wing parties and the Christian Democrats,'
says Mr Halasz in Kosice, Slovakia's second biggest city, near the Hungarian
and Ukrainian borders.
The presence of nervous ethnic minorities and strong Catholic traditions
kept support for the HZDS to 28 per cent of the vote in Eastern Slovakia
compared with 51 per cent in central Slovakia and over 35 per cent
nationwide.
Eastern Slovakia has suffered less from unemployment than central Slovakia
with its heavy concentration of arms factories. Thanks to some adroit
managerial footwork and federal assistance several thousand new jobs have
been created over the past year by VSZ steelworks, the largest employer in
the Kosice region.
It is a different story in central Slovakia, where thousands of workers have
been laid off from plants which supplied the former Soviet market. It is in
towns such as Martin that resentment against Prague and support for the
former communists and the pro-independence parties is strongest. But the
sense that Slovaks should take their own future in their hands and break
away from what is seen as Prague's insensitivity to Slovak interests is
strongest in the Bratislava-based ministries.
Mrs Dagmar Repcekova of the Economy Ministry's foreign trade department
approves of the emerging alliance between Mr Meciar, a former communist
secret policeman, and the 'Democratic left' reformed communists led by Mr
Peter Weiss. 'The Democratic Left is full of people who have a lot of
experience in planning and decision-making. Both Meciar and Weiss accept the
market system. But we feel that in the common state things will only get
worse while they (the Czechs) will get better,' she says.
Czechoslovak President Vaclav Havel said yesterday he would be willing to
become president of an independent Czech republic if Czechoslovakia split
up, providing the conditions were right, Reuter reports.
Mr Havel failed to be re-elected as Czechoslovakia's federal president
recently after his candidacy was blocked by Slovak parliamentarians. He said
he would only accept nomination for a post of active president.
