FT  06 JAN 92 / UK Gilts: Investors keep close eye on sterling
YIELDS on gilt-edged securities edged down as market-makers late last week
bought the bonds, which were buoyed by a stronger pound and reassurances by
government ministers that devaluation was not an option.
However, any signs of weakness by sterling today as traders return in force
from the holiday break are likely to scare off potential gilt investors,
damping a further rise in the market.
Pension funds and other large institutions were not much in evidence as
buyers last week. Purchases were mainly left to market-makers, many of whom
were short of stock following the poor spell for the market over the past
month.
As sterling moved higher at the end of last week, the gilt market recovered.
Sterling drifted up on Friday to DM2.8550, about 10 pfennigs below its
central rate of DM2.95 in the exchange rate mechanism, and comfortably above
its lower effective limit of about DM2.84.
Aided by the stronger pound, prices for many types of gilt rose by about 1
percentage point on Thursday, with the momentum continuing on Friday. That
lifted the market for the week, with yields pushed down by roughly 10 basis
points (0.1 percentage points) at the long end of the market and slightly
more for shorter-dated gilts.
Those investors who were active in the market took advantage of generally
low prices due to the under-performance in December of gilts against other
leading European government bonds, much of this due to nervousness about
sterling and the UK government's election prospects.
Little has happened in the past two weeks to shake the general belief that
the UK recovery will be slow and weak. This should help the gilt market by
damping inflationary pressures and keeping up long-term downward pressure on
interest rates.
However, the negative point for the market is that the poor outlook for the
economy will probably diminish the popularity of the Conservative
government. That, in turn, may undermine sterling, making it harder for the
government to make the cut in UK interest rates which many believe is
necessary to revive the economy.
Disappointingly for many business people, consumers and politicians, base
rates have been stuck for four months at 10.5 per cent, after coming down at
half-point intervals between February and September by a total of 3.5
percentage points.
'The government is still looking for a way out of the vicious circle in the
effort to get interest rates down,' said Mr Robin Marshall, UK economist at
Chase Manhattan, the US investment bank.
As for the gilts market, much will depend on whether the pound suffers
serious selling pressure this week. If investors decide that the higher
interest rates in Germany and other European countries are sufficient to
tempt them to shift funds out of sterling, the government might be forced to
bite the bullet and increase rates, in precisely the wrong direction from
the one that would aid the economy. That, in turn, could send the Tories'
opinion poll ratings plummeting, increasing selling pressure on gilts.
Even without comments last week by the prime minister, the chancellor and
the Bank of England governor that the pound would stay within its ERM bands,
many onlookers believe a devaluation is highly unlikely. Such a move,
however, may be called for as an alternative to a rate rise, should the
pound fall too close to its effective ERM floor.
In the gilt market last week, the overall weak tone was illustrated by the
little interest being shown by investors in a tap stock issued by the Bank
in mid-December of Pounds 1bn worth of 8.5 per cent Treasury bonds maturing
in 2007. One estimate on Friday was that only about a third of this had been
taken up by market-makers and investing institutions, with nervousness about
the next few weeks for both sterling and gilts well to the fore.
