FT  09 MAY 92 / Albania and UK resolve war disputes
ONE of the last major diplomatic and legal disputes arising out of the
Second World War was resolved yesterday at the British embassy in Rome.
At a low-key ceremony, Albanian and British officials agreed to bury all
outstanding differences caused by the 'Corfu Channel incident', when, in
1946, two British destroyers struck Albanian-laid mines while exercising
their rights passing through the Corfu Channel.
One destroyer was sunk with the loss of 44 lives. The other was holed and
had to be scuttled. In retaliation Britain broke off diplomatic relations
and withheld gold claimed by Albania. The gold had been seized by the Nazis
in their occupation of Europe and was found by the allies at the end of the
war in caves in southern Germany. It was impounded and subsequently
administered by a tripartite commission of Britain, France and the US being
used to settle numerous state and private post-war claims.
Britain took the Corfu Channel incident to the International Court of
Justice at the Hague which ruled in 1948 that the Albanian government pay
Pounds 843,947 compensation. The communist government in Tirana never
recognised the decision and with the isolationism of the regime of Enver
Hoxha a dialogue was impossible. The first tentative contacts began only
seven years ago.
Yesterday's agreement involved Britain undertaking to hand over some 1,574kg
of gold to Albania as the latter's share held by Britain in the tripartite
commission. In return, Britain will receive Dollars 2m (Pounds 1.1m) from
Albania in settlement of all outstanding claims.
It is doubtful whether any money or gold will change hands. Britain accepted
the impossibility of Albania paying the accumulated value of the court
judgment, and the democratically-elected government of President Sali
Berisha refrained from pressing for payment of the current value of the
gold. Britain established diplomatic relations last year but the agreement
smoothes the way for increased bilateral assistance from the UK. The
agreement requires formal approval from France and the US.
