FT  03 JUN 92 / BHP ends doubt on Foster's future
BROKEN Hill Proprietary (BHP), Australia's largest company, yesterday ended
more than two years of uncertainty over the future of Foster's Brewing Group
by appointing receivers to Mr John Elliott's International Brewing
Investments (IBI).
BHP's unexpected action removes control of a 32 per cent shareholding in
Foster's from IBI, a wholly-owned subsidiary of International Brewing
Holdings (IBH), a privately-owned company controlled by Mr Elliott and other
Foster's executives.
Mr Elliott, the former chairman and chief executive of Foster's, was abroad,
but is believed to have been informed of BHP's move. There was no comment
from other directors of IBH.
Mr John Prescott, BHP chief executive, said the group installed receivers to
protect its ADollars 1bn (Pounds 400m) preference share investment in IBI,
which is secured against the company's shareholding in Foster's.
Foster's shares fell 12 cents to ADollars 1.87 on the Australian Stock
Exchange after the move was announced, but closed one cent higher at
ADollars 2 after BHP said it would take steps to stabilise the brewing
group.
Mr Prescott said there would be no 'fire sale' of IBI's Foster's shares.
'If necessary, BHP will acquire the shares from the receivers to ensure that
they are not dispersed at less than full value,' he said.
BHP also said it had offered to purchase IBI's debt of about ADollars 1.2bn
to a syndicate of banks.
Such a purchase would prevent the appointment of separate receivers by the
syndicate, which also has a claim on IBI's Foster's shareholding as security
against its loans. Mr Prescott said BHP would look sympathetically at a
recent proposal by SA Brewing, the South Australian food and industrial
group, to merge with Foster's.
BHP's decision to appoint receivers follows the end of a moratorium on
interest payments on about ADollars 2.6bn of debt acquired by IBH to finance
the purchase of its shareholding in Foster's. Mr Prescott said the financial
instability of IBH had depressed the value of Foster's and caused board
disharmony, management distraction, financial pressures and a perceived
overhang of Foster's shares in the market.
Miscalculation, Page 28
