FT  24 SEP 92 / Survey of Computers in Manufacturing (5): 'Server' may still
have role - Decline of the Mainframe
REPORTS of the death of the mainframe computer may be greatly exaggerated -
but even at IBM, where a Dollars 60bn global empire has been built primarily
by selling and supporting these centralised computer systems, the decline in
the stature of the beast is readily acknowledged.
'The mainframe business isn't growing as it used to,' Mr Andrew Wightman,
head of IBM industrial marketing in the UK, concedes. 'And that's even more
true in manufacturing than it is elsewhere.'
The diminishing role of the mainframe computer has been a continuous theme
of the industry since the minicomputer offered an alternative 25 years ago.
But the decline in its stock has accelerated sharply of late with the
arrival of powerful computer workstations running on the 'open' Unix
operating system, and the bold assertion, by Sun Microsystems and others,
that almost any size of computing requirement can now be met by a
distributed network of workstations and servers.
According to Mr Wightman, the slowdown in mainframe demand from UK
manufacturing industry has been hastened by special factors - most notably,
the tendency of larger companies to devolve decision-making to their
operating units. Information technology is normally decen- tralised, too -
and so the importance of the central, corporate computer declines.
Mr Wightman is aware that anything he says in support of the mainframe may
cast him in the role of King Canute, refusing to bow to the inevitable tide
of distributed and 'open' systems. 'We are not trying to defend mainframes,'
he says cautiously. 'But in our view, the pendulum has swung too far.' He
predicts a continued role for the mainframe as a powerful 'server',
supporting networks of smaller computers.
His argument is that, despite the technical performance and the cheapness of
fully distributed computer systems, most organisations will need to retain
central control over data, and, even more problematically, over the
development and maintenance of software. So when old hands in the computer
industry hear, as they have recently, that the Post Office or the Royal Air
Force is committing its vast computer requirements to run on distributed,
Unix-based systems at a future date, they say: 'We'll believe it when we see
it.'
Few manufacturing companies, in any case, are in a position to jettison
their mainframe computers, even if they wanted to. 'I think the mainframe
computer still has a life of perhaps 10 years,' says Mr Cliff Shuker,
managing director of the Rover division of software house AT&amp;T Istel.
'But its role will change. It will become a server, holding corporate data.
And since its architecture is wrong for that role, we'll see a move to
parallel processing machines,' he adds. These mainframe computers will,
observers believe, use new, so-called 'massively parallel' hardware
technology to process thousands of simple tasks simultaneously.
Mr Shuker thinks that even as the move to distributed computing gathers
pace, the mainframe will still be needed as a central server. 'As the
concept of the server and the distributed network evolves there will be new
issues, such as how you manage software updates and security,' he says. 'But
I don't believe you'll ever service data adequately across a large network
without a big central server.'
However this need for central support cannot, Mr Shuker believes, preserve
the traditional keeper of the mainframe - the central data processing
department. 'That will become extinct,' he predicts.
Mr Tony Hoare, industrial marketing manager of UK-based but Japanese-owned
computer supplier ICL, claims that a smooth evolution of the mainframe
computer into the new, distributed environment is feasible. 'The mainframe
is still the most appropriate corporate server,' he says, 'while Unix
machines will serve as departmental servers.'
ICL is also adapting its mainframe computers to try to meet the demand for
distributed computing: they will offer the facilities of the latest personal
computers on their terminals, for example, and run programmes written for
that linchpin of open systems, the Unix operating system.
But Mr Hoare says that these developments are intended to keep existing
customers happy: mainframes are not cost-competitive, he admits, for anyone
building a corporate computer system from scratch. 'The mainframe market in
manufacturing will become much narrower,' he concedes.
Other observers are reluctant, though, to concede that the market has any
future at all. 'Our view is that distributed computing is the way to go,'
says Mr Eric Woodcock of BAeCam, the factory control business which has
developed from expertise within British Aerospace.
'Manufacturing wants its computing power as close as possible to where value
is added,' he adds. 'So distributed computing is the answer. The mainframe
was never right - it was just that there was no alternative.
'There are reasons why manufacturing firms will hang on to their mainframe
even if it is not the optimum solution - they have old data, old
applications and security requirements to think about.'
But for Mr Woodcock, recent commitments by the US Department of Defense and
the UK Ministry of Defence to rely on workstations and servers for their
computer requirements in the future were the writing on the wall. 'The
military has now accepted that these client-server systems are secure.
That's just another piece of evidence that suggests the mainframe computer
has no future in manufacturing control.'
The writer is features editor of The Engineer
