FT  29 JUL 92 / Brewers keep their places at the bar / Review of changes in
shares of the beer market
Three years after the introduction of the government's beer orders, the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission's overall view is that competition is
still weak in large areas of the UK beer market.
The latest MMC inquiry also found widespread evidence that wholesale prices
of beer to independent retailers have been falling while retail beer prices
have risen since 1989. 'It seems surprising to us . . . that retail prices
should continue to rise strongly in real terms at a time of economic
recession when demand for beer is falling,' it said.
As a result of previous government directives to the industry, the size of
the national brewers' tied pub estates is being reduced but their share of
total beer production and sales has been maintained. Grand Metropolitan's
exit from the industry has left five brewers controlling 78 per cent of the
market.
Their grip on the sales of lager - which the MMC viewed as a distinct
product - - was even tighter. Together they accounted for 80 per cent of the
market, and the strength of nationally advertised brands was putting more
pressure on the ability of smaller brewers to compete.
Although 19 regional and local brewers still produce their own lager,
several have recently withdrawn their brands and are buying one from a
national.
It is difficult to predict, says the MMC, how the national brewers' share
may change in the near future. Three regional brewers - Devenish, Boddington
and Greenalls - have quit the industry; and guest beers from the remaining
regionals have penetrated only a third of the nationals' tenanted estates.
The regionals, however, have been expanding their own pub chains, giving
them greater retailing strength. Independent pub operators have also entered
the field but many are tied to the nationals by loans and long-term supply
agreements.
Loan-tied customers represent 27 per cent of national brewers' sales through
pubs against 24 per cent in 1989; and the MMC estimates that supply
agreements of more than 12 months with pub retailers account for about 15
per cent of total beer sales by national brewers to the pub trade.
Since then, the Office of Fair Trading has intervened - notably in Allied's
arrangements with the Brent Walker Pubmaster estate - to limit supply
agreements. Agreements for five to seven years 'foreclose areas of the
market to competition from other suppliers and add to entry barriers', says
the MMC.
But national brewers were much better placed than others to compete for even
limited supply agreements because of their wide portfolio of beer brands,
extensive distribution networks and ability to meet retailers' requirements
for drinks other than beer.
The MMC received evidence that real wholesale prices of beer supplied to the
free trade, net of discounts, have been falling. Retail prices, by contrast,
have continued to rise strongly since 1989. These increases have been
ascribed to the continuing investment by national brewers and tenants in
improving pub facilities; the need for heavily borrowed independents to
raise cash; and the shift in demand towards premium beers which has affected
average prices.
It was suggested to the inquiry that national brewers used their managed
houses - where sales are bigger than those of tenanted or free trade pubs -
to exercise price leadership. 'We were not able to reach any conclusion on
this contention,' the MMC says.
The MMC's view of a chequered competitive background was not shared by
Allied and Carlsberg. They argued that the market was now highly competitive
and that such pressures would continue to increase.
Allied estimates that the proportion of beer sold through tied estates has
fallen from 44 per cent in 1989 to 36 per cent last year and will drop to 29
per cent by the end of this year. There has been a largely corresponding
rise in the free pub trade from 37 per cent to a projected 49 per cent; but
the take-home trade through supermarkets and off-licences has also grown
from 19 per cent to 22 per cent.
The existence of spare capacity in brewing added to these competitive
pressures as brewers vied to increase their sales volumes. But only national
brewers had been able to develop and sustain efficient national networks for
wholesale distribution of beer.
Professor M E Beesley, a member of the MMC, agreed with that view. These
were significant developments that would continue to shape strategies over
the next few years, he said.
The only channel for rivalry, he says, is long-term supply agreements.
'These are not the restorations of a now-forbidden monopolistic practice.'
Similarly, brands of lager disappearing from the market would be the result
of increasing competition, not less competition.
Any concern for local and regional brewers should be tempered by the fact
that they now have more opportunities than ever to extend their tied pub
estates, he adds.
Lex, Page 18
