FT  03 OCT 92 / Cracking the Tory code: Dominic Lawson interprets a most
un-European language
ONE OF the more diverting aspects of the deepening political split in the
Conservative Party is, as always within that organisation, the code. He who
wins the battle of terminology will usually win the political war.
At an earlier stage in the debate the semantic initiative was entirely with
those within the party who favour European political and economic union.
They managed to get themselves described by the media as 'pro-European' so
that their opponents were, naturally enough, designated 'anti-European'.
This gave the federalists the initiative: to be called anti-European is to
suggest that one actually dislikes, en masse, the people who live in Europe;
in terms of political correctness it is only one step up from being called
racist.
I do not know which member of the Bruges group invented the phrase
'Eurosceptic', or when, but it saved the day for the Thatcherites. To be
sceptical is to be intelligent in a thoughtful, Tory sort of way. And the
adoption of the term by the press has meant that the opposing faction has
come more and more to be labelled 'Europhile'. This sounds dangerously
foreign, with a slight whiff of perversion.
It would not be the the first time that the right wing of the Conservative
party has won the war of terminology. In the 1980s the division was defined
as being between the wets and the drys. Certain dissenting cabinet ministers
were described as being 'so wet you could shoot snipe off them.' The
anti-Thatcherites never really recovered from the adoption of this
particular code: no politician can for long survive being described as
'wet', and indeed, few did.
In the European debate the rhetorical battle is by no means over. The
federalists still have their famous European 'train', the train which we
must not miss, the train we must be in the van of, the train which must not
be derailed, nor hit the buffers, nor pull into the sidings.
When the opponents of the Maastricht treaty manage to co-opt an image as
simple and appealing (and misleading) as the benevolent train they will
finally have gained the ascendancy in the great debate.
But none of this explains the great mystery of why so many otherwise able
politicians have become so emotionally attached to the idea of being, as
they put it 'at the heart of Europe.'
I have a sneaking suspicion that it all stems from holidays. Europe means
sun, good food and beautiful dark-haired women. It means not having to
commute to the office, it means being liberated from the petty day to day
problems of earning a living in a damp and rainy climate. This for the
middle classes - which describes most conservative MPs - is what Europe
means.
But how many of them, I wonder, choose to spend their holidays in Germany?
Perhaps the anti-federalists should begin to spread the idea that European
union will be like having to spend one holiday a year in Germany. For there
is no doubt that the recent fracas between Britain and Germany has been all
to the benefit of the opponents of the Maastricht treaty, not because there
has been a row - lovers always have those - but because the row has been
with the Germans.
While newspapers such as the Sun have attempted to stir up a popular
campaign against Jacques Delors, it has not really taken hold. The fact is
that the English cannot take the French seriously: this may be a hopelessly
arrogant attitude but it is undeniably a fact: perhaps Napoleon died too
many years ago. But one only has to imagine how British people would react
if Jacques Delors were a German to see how the debate could turn. No wonder
then that John Major was so furious at the publication, through the
Financial Times as it happens, of the Bundesbank President's strictures
about Britain's conduct during the recent debacle on the currency markets.
John Major, while devoted to the cause of European integration, understands
only too well that if the language of the European political debate begins
to be expressed in terms of Anglo - German conflict, then, in Britain at
least, the Maastricht treaty is dead.
Dominic Lawson is editor of The Spectator.
