FT  11 MAY 92 / Survey of Business Air Travel (6): Bigger means better - and
it saves money - Wide-bodied jets
LIKE HEAVYWEIGHT boxers, the biggest aircraft combine glamour and
popularity. They embody mass marketing of cheap air travel and yet are the
flagships for the world's airlines.
Even during the world economic slowdown of the last 18 months, manufacturers
have been pouring cash into the development of new wide-bodied aircraft. The
reason is that bigger aircraft mean cheaper travel. With cheaper travel,
there can be more passengers and in turn more aircraft sales.
How are wide-bodied aircraft different from other aircraft? 'Luxury,'
according to Mr Paul Griffiths, commercial director of Virgin Atlantic. On a
wide-bodied aircraft there is room for bars, lounges and the sheer space
that business passengers demand on long-haul journeys.
Mr Rod Muddle, head of planning at British Airways, has a different point to
make. 'Our overriding motive is to provide growth at competitive unit
costs,' he says. 'This is only achievable with wide-bodied jets.'
Big aircraft save airlines money in several ways. At many overcrowded
airports including London's Heathrow, Tokyo's Narita and New York's JFK,
landing rights are rationed. Each airline has a specific number of landing
and take-off slots available to it. Airlines jealously guard their landing
rights knowing they will probably not be given any more. It is possible
nevertheless for airlines to plan for growth by using bigger aircraft.
Large aircraft use less fuel per passenger than small aircraft. Fuel
accounts for more than 10 per cent of total costs at many airlines. So
airlines' order books stretch into the second half of the decade. With
manufacturers spending so much on development, big aircraft are made with
the latest materials, economical engines and computerised controls. It is a
combination that still further improves fuel economy.
This vast market is the battleground for just three manufacturers.
Boeing of the US is the biggest by far. The 747 has dominated sales for so
long that it is hard to imagine it being replaced. Boeing's next new product
is the 777. It will slip in below the 747 in the product range and is due to
enter service in 1995. The initial model will accommodate 328 passengers,
compared with the 419 on board the largest 747s, and has a shorter range
too. 'The interior is similar in dimensions with the 747, it's just a
smaller aircraft,' says BA's Mr Muddle. He says that the 777 will on some
routes replace the 767, a smaller wide-bodied aircraft.
Airbus, owned by a consortium of European companies, is in No 2 position. It
is due to deliver the first of its new A340 aircraft to Lufthansa early next
year. It is Airbus' first four-engined aircraft and represents a new market
for the company. The A340's selling point is its range, at 7,550 miles,
greater than any other commercial aircraft. It carries 262 passengers.
US-based McDonnell-Douglas is close behind Airbus. Many of its hopes are
pinned on its latest product, the MD-11, recognisable by the turned-up wing
tips. Sales began last year.
The MD-11 faces a tough battle against head-on competition from the Airbus
A-340 and the Boeing 777. 'We believe the MD-11 will be the loser,' says Mr
George Shapiro, aerospace analyst at Salomon Brothers in New York. He blames
the older technology which gives that aircraft a shorter range than the
Airbus A340 and a smaller passenger carrying capacity than the Boeing 777.
Mr Shapiro is also concerned that sales might be difficult given the
political controversy surrounding McDonnell-Douglas' plans to sell a 40 per
cent stake in its commercial aircraft operations to Taiwanese companies.
The aircraft maker nevertheless last month announced that it intended to
develop with the Taiwanese a radical new design to be called the MD-12. This
would be a megajumbo jet designed to challenge the successors to Boeing's
747. It would be a double-decked aircraft carrying more than 500 passengers
and flying more than 8,000 miles non-stop. Target launch date is 1997.
Such double-deckers have been the subject of much industry talk in recent
weeks. At the biannual Asian air show in Singapore in February, British
Airways revealed plans for a series of fuselage configurations that would
carry up to 800 passengers on a single aircraft. A string of potential
designs was floated including figure-of-eight shaped fuselages, both
horizontal and vertical.
The ideas are exciting, but the operators of airports are worried they will
not be able to cope. 'Wingspan is the biggest issue,' says Mr Richard
Everett, director, legal services, of BAA, which operates most of the UK's
large airports. The Boeing 747 has a wingspan of 65 metres but BAA is
drawing up contingency plans to accommodate 85 metre wingspan aircraft.
Mr Everett warns that much of the talk of ultra-high capacity aircraft might
come to nothing. 'There is a strong feeling in the industry that a bigger
747 is more likely to arise,' he says. He forecasts that the upper deck of
the Boeing 747 will be extended along the length of the fuselage. Already
the 747-300 and 400 have an upper deck more than seven metres longer than on
previous 747s.
Dealing with bigger wings is one of several problems. It is already a
tedious process to put 400 passengers on an aircraft. If numbers were
doubled, BAA says it would move to two-door boarding, entailing a redesign
of terminals. BAA has no plans to do this 'until the larger aircraft are
already on their way'.
Megajumbos will happen, insists BA. 'It is a total rethink,' says Mr Muddle.
The 747 was designed 30 years ago and there are new customers now with
different requirements. The strongest source of demand comes from the
Pacific rim, he says.
As if to echo this sentiment, McDonell-Douglas is already talking of the
non-stop flights that will be possible with the MD-12: Dallas to Seoul,
Zurich to Singapore and others.
Mr Muddle has detailed a 10-strong team at BA to list what parameters a
turn-of-the-century world champion megajumbo should follow. Their blueprints
could presage the next age of air travel in which passengers paid less for
seats and yet were able to fly non-stop between just about any two cities on
the globe.
