FT  06 APR 92 / International Company News: Norwich Union losses on general
insurance rise 81%
NORWICH UNION, the mutually-owned insurer, suffered an 81 per cent increase
in pre-tax losses on its general insurance business in 1991, from Pounds
147.7m to Pounds 267.7m.
Worldwide underwriting losses rose to Pounds 297.7m (Pounds 175.7m), with
most of the damage concentrated in the UK which was hit by rising theft and
other recession related claims. UK underwriting losses rose by 65 per cent
to Pounds 276.7m (Pounds 167.6m).
The life business fared better, however. Total premiums expanded 33 per cent
to Pounds 3.3bn (Pounds 2.49bn). Worldwide income from new single premiums
rose 43 per cent to Pounds 2bn (Pounds 1.4bn), fuelled by strong sales of
single premium with-profits contracts in the UK. But growth in new annual
business was sluggish with premiums up only 1.5 per cent to Pounds 238.4m
(Pounds 234.8m).
Mr Allen Bridgewater, group chief executive, said: 'It is absolutely
essential to restore our general insurance to profitability as soon as
possible.'
Last year the group announced sharp increases in premiums - with rates
rising by up to 80 per cent for high performance cars, for example. The
group is the country's biggest insurer of motor cyclists but last year
announced that it would refuse to insure some categories of rider.
Despite the loss, the group still transferred Pounds 21m from its general
insurance account to its life fund. Although this was less than the Pounds
29m paid in 1990, transfers over the last three years have still equalled
the dividend income which would have been received if the capital backing
general insurance had been invested in a range of ordinary shares, the group
pointed out.
General insurance represents about one-third of premium income and an
investment of less than 5 per cent of life insurance assets.
With-profit bonus rates levels were set at lower levels
The group is investing greater amounts of its assets into fixed interest
investments. It expects 'equities to out-perform fixed interest assets by a
far smaller margin in future, particularly over the next two years.'
