FT  08 JAN 92 / Survey of Kenya (16): Strategies for all seasons - Tourism,
from potential disaster to mild success
THE worldwide downturn in tourism last year, fuelled by the Gulf crisis, the
international economic recession and the escalating costs of air travel, has
proved a watershed in Kenya.
Kenya's dynamic tourism industry, although faced by the prospect of a severe
loss of jobs and hard currency in what is its biggest foreign exchange
earning sector, has turned 1991 from being a potential disaster into a mild
success.
The private sector and the government, with cancellations running at up to
60 per cent for the peak season of January to March, rallied with a series
of measures.
The boldest move by government was the decision to open up Kenya to South
African tourists, several months before the October Commonwealth head of
government conference in Harare. Visas, previously denied to South Africans,
were granted at the airport and an agreement was reached to allow South
African Airways and Kenya Airways to operate one flight each a week between
Nairobi and Johannesburg.
The government also gave new incentives to the hotel training college,
established an autonomous airports authority and started the rehabilitation
of Nairobi's international airport and continued to strengthen the
newly-created Kenya Wildlife Service, a semi-autonomous parastatal in charge
of security and management in Kenya's national parks.
The private sector moved quickly, reducing rates and increasing charter
flights, particularly from Spain and Britain. In August and September there
were 42 such flights a week arriving in Kenya, each with about 200 seats, in
addition to scheduled flights.
These measures appear to have averted a slump in tourist arrivals which in
1990 nearly reached 900,000 people, while foreign exchange earnings last
year should approach the 1990 level of Dollars 467m.
Sustaining the remarkable growth which Kenya's tourist sector has enjoyed
since independence will not be easy.
Since 1963 the numbers of visitors a year have increased from 110,000 to
889,000 in 1990 and foreign exchange earnings in the same period have
mushroomed from Dollars 25m to Dollars 467m. In 1987, tourism overtook
coffee as the country's number one foreign exchange earner.
The impact on the rest of the economy has been vast. Throughout the last
decade employment in the sector has grown by at least 5 per cent a year and
tourism has contributed to the expansion of the services sector - hotels,
restaurants, road and air transport - and to allied industries such as
construction and food. Much of the rapid growth in tourism in the past
quarter of a century has been due to declining costs of air travel and the
extensive infrastructure which was in place at independence.
The government has created a reasonably attractive enabling environment
through welcoming foreign investment in tourism, the development of
infrastructure and the maintenance of relative political stability.
Increasing importance has been given to conservation and better animal
management and while the national parks and reserves sector was marred by a
long period of poaching and inefficiency between 1976-88 it has become a top
priority.
However, with mounting regional competition and the demands of the growing
population a much greater effort is required. In order to continue
generating jobs and increasing critical foreign exchange earnings the
government has recognised the need to creat a better environment.
Mr Philemon Mwaisaka, permanent secretary in the Ministry of Tourism, says
the government is targeting two key areas for growth over the next three
years: diversifying the type of tourism available and drawing in visitors
from new markets.
Diversification away from game parks and beaches will depend on giving
greater importance to attractions such as cultural, conference and
speciality tourism, scuba diving, fishing or mountaineering, and opening up
new areas of Kenya to tourist development such as the volcanic desert around
Lake Turkana.
Attracting visitors from outside the traditional markets of the US and
Europe will require a big publicity drive in the Asia Pacific area,
particularly Japan and Singapore.
In order to realise both ambitions a overhaul of Kenya's hitherto weak
overseas marketing is necessary. So far the government has been content to
leave most of the marketing to the private sector. Unlike many other
countries Kenya does not have an autonomous tourist board. Between 1986 and
1990 the government spent a mere Dollars 25m on marketing.
Kenya's well organised private sector has been lobbying hard for a tourist
board to be set up under an autonomous director to launch a concerted
marketing campaign of research, information gathering and publicity to
enable the industry to better tailor and target their products in a
competitive market. The government has given its blessing to the appeal but
progress appears slow.
Good marketing and closer links with airlines will be vital to attract the
high income from the choosy Japanese market.
Plans for Kenya Airways to open up a route to Bangkok next year may prove
insufficient to penetrate Asia and South Africa is proving a formidable
competitor with Singapore Airlines operating a flight to Johannesburg.
A number of issues need the government's urgent attention. Problem areas
include privatisation of government share holdings in hotels, developing a
strategy for high income VIP tourism, planning how to cope with the growing
demand for combination tourism with tourists visiting at least two African
countries, better harmonisation of visa and health requirements and more
incentives, such as import duty exemption on vehicles for the tourist
sector.
 -----------------------------------------------------
TOURISM PROFILE
 -----------------------------------------------------
         Total              Total     Aver. length
    receipts (Dollars m)   visitors   of stay (days)
1965      30.2              147,400       9.3
1970      51.8              326,500       8.8
1980     222.4              362,700      15.7
1985     239.8              541,200      15.9
1987     354.9              662,100      16.0
1988     393.3              676,900      16.0
1989     417.0              729,700      14.2
1990     467.0 (est)        889,000 (est)  na
 -----------------------------------------------------
Source: Ministry of Tourism
 -----------------------------------------------------
