FT  22 MAY 92 / PowerGen and Trafalgar plan rail terminal
POWERGEN, the electricity generator, and the Business Parks subsidiary of
Trafalgar House, the shipping, construction and property group, emerged
yesterday as potential sponsors of an independent railfreight terminal after
British Rail has been privatised.
The two companies plan to develop a business and distribution centre based
on a railfreight terminal at Hams Hall near Coleshill, north-east of
Birmingham.
Hams Hall is one of two sites in the west Midlands considered suitable by
Railfreight Distribution, BR's international freight arm, as Channel tunnel
terminals. The other, promoted by the Black Country Development Corporation,
is at Bescot in Walsall.
PowerGen said it was assuming Railfreight Distribution would choose Hams
Hall, 'but if it does not we will seek an independent operator for the
terminal'. Development of the terminal would take place regardless.
Railfreight Distribution expects to choose a site at the end of next month.
But the future of Railfreight Distribution is unclear. Under plans to
privatise BR, Railfreight Distribution would be sold off. Whether it would
be sold as a single entity or in blocks has yet to be decided.
The transport department says the government wants to see a number of
freight operators on the rail network.
The Hams Hall terminal would be capable of handling 1m tonnes of freight a
year by 1995, according to PowerGen and Trafalgar House. It would occupy 50
acres of a 890-acre redundant site owned by PowerGen. The two companies plan
to develop 350 acres of the site.
Hams Hall would be the largest commercial property project in the Midlands
and would create what the companies called a 'Pounds 380m facility'
providing 7,000 jobs.
The rail terminal would have private sidings and 5.5m sq ft of warehousing
and manufacturing space. The site is beside the Birmingham-Nuneaton railway
line and the Birmingham-Derby line runs across part of it. Hams Hall is next
to the M42 motorway and close to the M42-M6 junction.
