FT  05 MAY 92 / The Lex Column: The shadow of the Mark
For those of an apocalyptic turn of mind, events in Germany have raised the
spectre of disarray in the ERM or even its collapse. Twenty years ago, after
all, it was the misbehaviour of the dollar which caused the demise of the
Bretton Woods system. But there is an important difference. Then it was US
inflation - generally ascribed to the deficit financing of the Vietnam war -
which alienated the system's other members. Now, although unification has
certainly landed Germany with an inflationary problem, the difficulty is
rather the severity of the measures it is taking to deal with it. At the
start of the 1970s, cutting loose from the dollar was a sign of monetary
rectitude. Abandoning the D-Mark now would be the reverse.
The more subtle question is whether the D-Mark might relinquish its central
role to another member currency. Germany's economic dominance in the system
should not be exaggerated. United Germany accounts for perhaps 27 per cent
of the combined GDP of the ERM members, compared with 20 per cent for France
and 17 per cent for the UK. The question is which currency would be a
plausible substitute. The French franc would be little help, since France
seems independently bent on matching Germany's monetary stringency. And
however attractive sterling now seems under a re-elected Tory government,
its chief appeal lies in that government's commitment to hanging on to the
Bundesbank's coat-tails.
This is not to deny that the ERM has a genuine problem. Germany does not
even know how fast its money supply is really growing, let alone whether its
target rate of growth is appropriate. The result is that the united Europe
of 1992 has to grapple with an inflationary demon which for many of its
members no longer exists, while the US and Japan are able to use monetary
stimulus to improve their competitive positions in the world. But there
seems little alternative to Germany's partners hanging on, while taking such
comfort as they can from the fact that German dominance of the system allows
them to copy its loose fiscal policy as well.
