FT  04 JUN 92 / London Stock Exchange: Early confidence upset as futures
fall
THE CLOUD cast over prospects for the Maastricht Treaty by developments in
Denmark and France unsettled the London stock market yesterday. Stock index
futures plunged heavily, closing at a discount to the underlying stock
market for the first time in this account as traders took alarm at a setback
in UK government bonds which raised worries regarding the British
government's funding schedule. The FT-SE Index, edging ahead at mid-session,
lost 30 points in the afternoon before steadying at the close of business.
The final reading put the FT-SE Index at 2,680.9 for a net loss of 25
points.
While yesterday's setback in equities was little more than a nervous
response to developments in Europe, market strategists warned of potentially
more serious implications. Yield ratios between UK equities and gilts could
be sharply changed if anti-Maastricht moves upset potential overseas buyers
of UK government bonds. 'The gilt market needs to be closely watched over
the next week,' warned the economics team at Kleinwort Benson Securities.
London rallied comfortably at first from an initial fall of 10.9 on the
Footsie which reflected the overnight news that the Danish referendum had
rejected Maastricht; nor was the UK market long restrained by Wall Street's
weak close overnight.
By midday, traders' thoughts were turning towards the Epsom racecourse and
bets were being placed for the Derby, always the stock market's favourite
horse race. The mood changed dramatically, however, when the Paris bond
market plunged on news that France will hold a referendum on the European
unity treaty, and UK gilts followed suit. A sharp setback in the sterling
rate against the D-mark completed the London stock market's unhappiness.
As so often happens, it was the stock index futures market which took the
brunt of the selling pressure, attracting significant unloading of positions
by marketmakers and institutions struggling to shift their investment
stances. The June index future quickly fell to a discount and prices for the
underlying equity stocks were struck down in haste as marketmakers sought to
minimise losses.
Turnover in equities was relatively unexciting with a Seaq total of 473.6m
shares comparing with 493.8m in the previous session. There were a number of
good company news features and the banking sector turned firmer as traders
absorbed the implications for the sector of the growing struggle for control
of Midland.
However, the general nervousness unsettled the broad range of the market.
Pharmaceutical stocks remained depressed by the bearish trend established on
Wall Street, but steadied at the close when the New York market rallied from
initial loss to make a firm start to the new session.
There was no move by market firms yesterday to alter their forecasts for the
London market. The consensus view remained that recovery stocks should be
bought, although it was agreed that unambiguous confirmation of an economic
recovery is still lacking.
