FT  14 NOV 92 / Records: Pianists and a bit more - Young musicians, some
more virtuoso than others
for their own interesting sakes, not to choose Best Buys among the works
they have recorded. 'Middle years' here covers a wide spread: at least 20
years, and more if Piers Lane is even younger than Marc-Andre Hamelin. (The
sleeve-note for Lane's Hyperion CD tells us absolutely nothing about him.)
But they are all past the teenage-prodigy stage, while still short of Senior
Authority status.
The eldest of these, Stephen Kovacevich (sometime 'Bishop') might by now
have succeeded to that. From the start he was a wise head on young
shoulders, and the senior musical establishment seized him to its bosom; yet
something nervy, even anxious, often sets his playing apart from those
devout performances that aim at a definitive or monumental condition. That
is what enlivens his new EMI recording of three late Beethoven sonatas (CDC
7 54599 2).
Even the much-trodden Allegro of op. 111 refuses to be sculpted here,
instead hurtling away upon an urgent personal impulse. Nor is the Arietta
movement treated as a sacred frieze; Kovacevich finds a variety of
subjective moods in it - and still allows the celestial heights of the music
to float timelessly free. The gentle, two-part op. 90 is natural territory
for him; the A major op. 101 too, though in the quick movements he snaps at
upbeats so tetchily that we have to listen hard to hear them. It is pleasure
and a relief to hear an artist who is not concerned to file a Document.
Nevertheless, his performance of young Brahms's D minor Concerto with
Wolfgang Sawallisch and the London Philharmonic (EMI again: CDC 7 54578 2)
is the quintessence of a 'young man's reading' - exactly what is required:
clean-lined, forward-pressing, directly felt. Sawallisch matches that
perfectly, even if they don't always coincide on the beat. Their strong,
up-tempo Maestoso is hugely satisying. No concert-hall performance I have
heard in years has sounded as alive as this recording of the concerto; and
there is a lovely bonus in the fill-up - not solo piano pieces, but the
mezzo Ann Murray delivering the two op. 91 lullabies with Kovacevich and
Nobuko Imai's viola (molto vibrato).
More Brahms: Rian de Waal, first noticed in the daredevil piano repertoire,
joins the Allegri Quartet to make up the F Minor Quintet (Cala CACD 1009).
Surprisingly, he is the member who occasionally sounds a touch deliberate,
while the Allegri are excitingly febrile; but they collaborate in rewarding
many a passage that has come to seem routine with fresh attention. Better
still is the Clarinet Quintet on that same CD, where the soloist James
Campbell's opening phrase - a whole Romantic dream in one breath - promises
poignant delights, and the entire performance fulfills the promise. In its
exquisite twilit vein, it has no competitors.
Campbell is also the soloist in Berio's orchestrated version of the great F
minor Sonata, op. 120 no. 1 (together with Schoenberg's version of the G
minor Piano Quartet on CACD 1006), but the recording is far less happy. It
sets Campbell in a dry foreground, sans ambiance, whilst Geoffrey Simon and
the LSO make dignified noises from afar. The intimate duetting of the
original clarinet-and-piano is much missed - and anyhow I think Berio is
wrong to transfer some of the piano part to sustained winds. Like any
pianist-composer, Brahms took full account of the inexorable 'decay' of
every note played on his instrument, and the Andante here is meant to trade
hauntingly upon that deliquescent effect.
The pianist Andrei Gavrilov is admired as an athlete and considerably more,
but on the strength of his new DG Schubert (D. 899 and 935, four Impromptus
each: 435 788-2) we have no further evidence about the 'more'. His address
is prickly, often aggressive. More discouraging still is the fact that
Schubert's most delectably original passages of pure pianism (conceived,
remember, for a mere wooden-frame piano) sound so lumpen and clangy on his
modern machine. As an antidote I warmly recommend Katharina Wolpe's recent
recording of D. 899 on an 1840 fortepiano (cassette, Symposium 1082), a
model of informed, lyrical sympathy.
The young French-Canadian pianist Hamelin has made a great impression upon a
few London audiences, especially the St. John's, Smith Square audience who
heard him traverse the unparalleled hazards of Alkan's solo 'Concerto' with
almost superhuman confidence. That blazing performance is reproduced on
Music &amp; Arts CD-724: perhaps without the extra inspiration of a live
audience, but if cooler no less staggering. There is also a rich Hamelin
trawl through more-than-showoff Liszt - the Don Juan and Norma fantasies,
two of the most winning Etudes, the 'Benediction de Dieu dans la solitude' -
on CD-723.
Hamelin has the ping and the pantherish pounce of the true virtuoso, as well
as a thoughtful musician's modesty: a rare combination. Piers Lane evinces
as much sympathetic dedication in the complete roster of Skryabin's Etudes,
very early to very late, on Hyperion CDA66607. Musically, it offers a fine
conspectus. Lane is never perverse (unlike many pianists who imagine
themselves licensed by the Master's cranky example), and he illustrates
Skryabin's extraordinary development with illuminating care.
As a technician, however, he earns only a beta-plus. Hands too weakly
synchronised (which means loss of clarity in intricate passages), the left -
which has to deal with Skryabin's skittery basses - not very fluent; his
theatrically abrupt changes, like subito piano and tight dynamic 'hairpins',
either shrunken or too heavily signalled in advance. You might find Lane's
trek through Skryabin a repeatable pleasure, but later be amazed every once
in a while by so-and-so's properly brilliant account of this or that Etude.
In fact I think that an enviable position to be in: get to know the music,
and then relish the live-action potential of Skryabin's piano-writing when a
real virtuoso fastens upon it.
