FT  26 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Doubled sales in Poland help Rothmans
advance by 4.2%
ROTHMANS International, the cigarette and luxury goods company, yesterday
reported a 4.2 per cent increase in profits despite a price cutting war in
Australia, one of its most important markets.
The main boost to growth came from a doubling of sales in Poland coupled
with higher prices in Canada and cost cutting in Germany.
Pre-tax profits rose from Pounds 542.5m to Pounds 565.2m on sales of Pounds
2.4bn (Pounds 2.3bn). Earnings per share rose 9.2 per cent to 85.7p and the
company is to pay a final dividend of 13p, up 11.1 per cent, giving a total
of 20.5p, up 10.8 per cent on the year.
The company is also splitting its ordinary 'B' shares, which are traded in
London, into two in an attempt to widen their appeal to investors.
The Australian operation was badly bit by the price war and the operating
result was struck after a higher-than-expected Pounds 28.7m rationalisation
cost in Europe and Australia.
Cash balances increased by Pounds 55m to Pounds 770m but investment income
fell from Pounds 65.4m to Pounds 58.5m as a result of lower average interest
rates.
The luxury goods interests, which are mainly a controlling interest in
Dunhill holdings, were hit by recession. But sales increased by 11 per cent
to Pounds 230m largely due to the purchase of substantial interests in
Alfred Dunhill's Japanese distributor. Operating profits rose from Pounds
55.1m to Pounds 55.7m.
During the year the tax rate fell from 36.8 per cent to 35.2 per cent.
COMMENT
A good week for cigarette makers. Fast in the tracks of Wednesday's US
Supreme Court judgment on smokers' lawsuits, that appears to limit their
avenues of attack, Rothmans yesterday demonstrated the industry's old cash
generating magic. Allowing for a price war in Australia and reorganisation
costs, which were higher than expected, cigarettes showed a 10 per cent
increase. Luxury goods through Cartier and Dunhill particularly, were also
ahead of expectations. Rothmans is, however, sitting on a Pounds 770m cash
mountain that it still does not appear to know how to use, even though some
of this pile is controlled by associates. Perhaps there is a case for a
higher dividend, but this argument has cut little ice with the South African
Rupert family since it took control by buying Philip Morris's stake in 1989.
With the legal threats in abeyance, if not entirely despatched, the shares
are looking on the cheap side based on a forecast of Pounds 605m of profits
this year, or earnings of 94p, which gives a prospective multiple below 11.
