FT  31 MAR 92 / Spanish alert after Eta chiefs captured
THE SPANISH government was yesterday bracing itself for a possible upsurge
in separatist violence after the arrest in France late on Sunday of the
military high command of the Basque separatist organisation, Eta.
Senior Spanish officials, struggling to disguise their delight at the
capture of Eta's three most wanted operational leaders by French police,
were warning that retaliatory strikes were still possible.
'The operation is still going on . . . but there must not be any euphoria,'
said Mr Jose Luis Corcuera, the Spanish interior minister. 'Eta is still
capable of striking and there will not be any relaxation in our security. If
anything, it will be increased.' He said Spain would try to have the three
extradited.
The capture of the three men is probably the most devastating blow struck by
the authorities against Eta, which has killed more than 700 people in its
20-year struggle for Basque independence. Those held were Francisco Mugica
Garmendia, Eta's military commander and Spain's public enemy number one.
With him were two key lieutenants, Jose Luis Alvarez Santacristina, Eta's
leading ideologue, and Joseba Arregui Erostarbe, alleged by police to be the
group's top bomb-maker.
The organisation has stepped up its campaign this year in the hope of
frightening the government to a negotiating table by threatening to attack
this summer's Olympic Games in Barcelona or the World Fair in Seville. More
than 12 people have been killed this year.
Although the detention of the men was greeted by violent protests in parts
of the Basque country, Madrid is hoping that the removal of the military
leadership might make it easier for more moderate elements in Eta or its
political wing, Herri Batasuna, to make their voices heard.
Nevertheless, Eta leaders have been arrested before and replaced, though the
arrest on Sunday of Mugica means that the last of the organisation's
traditional Marxist-Leninist leaders is now dead or behind bars. But it is
assumed that at least two Eta units will continue to operate in Spain.
Mugica was one of the ideological clique thought to have murdered Eta's
leader, Mr Moreno Bergaretxe, and assumed control in 1974 when he began to
have second thoughts about armed struggle.
That entire clique is now under arrest or dead but one of its members lives
under a form of house arrest in the Dominican Republic. He is Eugenio
Exteveste, whom Madrid sees as the only person moderate enough to negotiate
an end to the fighting and who would still carry some credibility with Eta's
die-hard supporters.
