FT  09 DEC 92 / Arts: Catering for closing time on the commercial channels -
Television
The most extraordinary hour in the week's television now occurs on the
commercial channels at pub closing time on Fridays, especially in London and
the remote Scottish islands. Channel 4 provides The Word, which can be seen
anywhere in Britain, and London Weekend offers Dial Midnight which is shown
in the metropolis and in the Grampian region of northern Scotland. The Word
is a yoof show, its title presumably ironic since its young cockney male
presenters have remarkably limited vocabularies. The young female presenters
tend, like Madonna, to make underwear the focal point of their outfits:
black lace bra under transparent blouse, stockings which end below the hem
of the miniskirt, and so on. It is like a meeting between The Bash Street
Kids and the girls of St Trinian's. Rap, pop and fame are the subjects.
The presenters on Dial Midnight, two anorexic looking girls and the
ebullient James Whale (who converted his Midlands radio show into a late
night Midlands television show before making this move to London) sit on
what appears to be a red rubber hedgehog and discuss the sort of subjects
which you find at the extreme edge of the tabloid market: penis enhancement
operations, faith healing, and so on. Last Friday they boasted television's
first drag-queen tele-dating session. Danny, dressed in black lingerie and
high heeled black patent boots, took phone calls from viewers, asking 'How
big is your dick?' and so on, and made a date with one of them. It all looks
astoundingly cheap and the sensationalism may pull in a hefty post-pub,
post-club audience. But is this really the way that British commercial
television intends to make the bigger profits which the new government rules
apparently intend?
Last month this column characterised much of television's drama output as
Marks and Spencer material (middle of the market, good value for money, but
desperately safe and derivitive), so it should now be acknowledged that we
have recently been treated to two superior and original drama productions,
both on BBC1. The 13-part series about a police investigation unit, Between
The Lines, fulfilled its early promise, developed three unusually
interesting characters at its centre, and vividly illustrated the
difficulties of fighting the unprincipled with principles. It fully merits
another series and is getting one. Look At It This Way, a three-part
adaptation by Justin Cartwright from his own novel, was a nicely
idiosyncratic mix of crime, romance, and satire, using cities in general and
London in particular as a sub text, and a visually powerful one.
On the other hand ITV's new Sunday evening series A Touch Of Frost, with
David Jason playing yet another police detective, looks like a classic Marks
and Sparks production. It is well made - though the opening story was not
too clever - and will doubtless please many and offend few. But do we really
need yet another one?
On Monday Panorama finally presented an honest programme about 'Satanic
abuse', showing that, whatever those ludicrous ooky-spooky documentaries on
Channel 4 may have pretended, there is no evidence whatsoever to prove the
existence of this phenomenon which stems from an obsession among American
Christian fundamentalists. Producer Nawinder Minhas and reporter Martin
Bashir deserve the thanks of everyone, especially those whose children have
been taken away by social services departments and put through the
astonishing sort of third degree demonstrated on this programme.
Which current affairs series will have the courage to make a similarly
honest programme about AIDS to be shown in Britain in peak time on a major
network? It will, of course, cause the most almighty row. In the ten years
since the first public acknowledgement of the disease, enormous efforts have
been made to frighten ordinary heterosexuals into altering their habits,
rather than focussing on promiscuous male homosexuals, bisexuals, drug
abusers or those from parts of Africa as 'high risk' groups. In the age of
political correctness it seems that television journalists would rather risk
misleading the public than being called homophobes or racists.
Last week being AIDS Awareness Week, this serious lack of balance was much
in evidence. We were repeatedly told that in Britain the fastest increase in
AIDS cases in the past year was among women, but none of the speakers
mentioned the fact that for women the numbers are counted in tens but for
men in thousands. In all the years of AIDS programmes, I know of only three
which were completely honest and open. The first, made by Fisher Dilke for
Horizon in 1986, tried to establish exactly what it was about homosexual
behaviour which produced a high incidence of the disease. The BBC suppressed
it. The other two, made by Joan Shenton, were bravely non-conformist and
questioned some of the widespread assumptions about AIDS and HIV. But having
been shown on Channel 4, they will not have reached a big audience.
Last week's programmes were typified by the sight of comedienne Ruby Wax
wagging her finger at us and telling us that heterosexuals must wear
condoms. You might think that the duty of a self respecting current affairs
department was to try to explain to us the difference between AIDS in
Britain and in sub-Saharan Africa. Does the high rate of heterosexual AIDS
in Africa result from needle-sharing in under-funded clinics? From
transmission linked to other venereal infections? From the widespread use of
anal intercourse as a contraceptive measure? Medical journals discuss these
factors, but television programmes prefer to suggest uncritically that since
AIDS is a heterosexual disease in Africa, the same must be true in Britain,
despite the differences. This is another example of a subject on which the
public has been better served by the press. If television continues to
suppress facts and to follow its own tunnel vision down the politically
correct line while newspapers continue to report a broader spectrum of fact
and opinion, television's credibility in current affairs will suffer.
The increasing specialisation in the television awards business is getting
out of hand. On Monday of last week Sky One brought us two and a half hours
of the BAFTA Advertising Awards, compered by David Frost, then on Saturday
ITV gave us two hours of The British Comedy Awards compered by Jonathan
Ross. These are both new occasions to be added to the Emmys, Oscars and
BAFTA Awards, the BFI Awards (with their leaning towards film), and the RTS
Awards (journalism), not to mention the craft awards, awards for rock
videos, and so on. Soon there will be enough to make it a regular monthly
occasion, and at that point the logical step will surely be an Award of
Awards, offering a single prize for the year's best actor, actress, comedy,
documentary . . . and of course best awards evening.
