FT  24 JUN 92 / Management: Measured approach to radical reform - Britain's
big hospitals are becoming out-dated. A look at pressure to break them up
Delegates to today's National Association of Health Authorities and Trusts
conference in Harrogate have all received an unusual gift - a pedometer.
The intention is to highlight the fact that people working in hospitals
spend a remarkable amount of time walking around. A study of junior doctors
published by Andersen Consulting this week showed that each walks an average
of six or seven miles during a shift - consuming up to three hours of what
is supposed to be productive time.
Porters in one large teaching hospital were found to be walking up to 20
miles a day. Less remarkable perhaps, because walking is one of a porter's
main duties but - since the hospital spends Pounds 1.25m a year on portering
services - powerful evidence that a reduction in their movements could save
money.
Could it be achieved? Yes, conference delegates will be told. It will
require a complete restructuring of the way hospitals are organised, but
that is not as impossible as it seems.
Many British hospitals have developed in a haphazard way. Often housed in
Victorian buildings extended during the present century, new departments and
large items of equipment tend to be located on the basis of available space
rather than efficiency.
Health planners in Britain, the US and elsewhere are now trying to bring
more order into this haphazard structure. Schemes known as patient-focused
or patient-centred hospitals aim to provide teams of care staff to meet most
of a patient's needs in a single unit, so that patients do not have to go on
long journeys around the hospital for treatment. A few commonly repeated
blood tests, for example, account for 80 per cent of all hospital blood
testing - suggesting that nurses could be trained to carry out such
procedures on the ward.
Andersen Consulting, which is involved in helping hospital managements
develop patient-focused schemes - alongside Booz Allen &amp; Hamilton and other
management consultants - sent the pedometers to conference delegates to
emphasise the point. But the time wasted walking around was only one of the
inefficiencies found by Andersen in a survey of 10 NHS hospitals during the
past three months.
Other findings showed that:
A common pathology test took, on average, 10 people and 18 hours.
A typical patient came into contact with 47 different care providers during
a five-day stay in hospital.
Hospitals in the survey typically had 201 job classifications.
The patient-focused approach involves moving away from the concept of the
hospital as a single institution and dividing its buildings into a series of
centres.
At Lee Memorial Hospital in Florida, where Andersen is helping local
management introduce 'focused-care', a mini-orthopedic hospital has been
established within the building with its own beds, pharmacy, laboratory,
radiology centre and offices.
Patients receive all except the most specialised and complex treatment
within units like these from teams of multi-skilled staff.
Kurt Miller, an Andersen consultant, believes the patient-focused approach
raises the quality of care and improves industrial relations and staff
retention rates. He predicts it could eventually reduce overall operating
costs by about 10 per cent.
London's Central Middlesex Hospital, which became one of the first
self-governing trusts last year, is managing its own move to a
patient-focused structure with an in-house team. Starting next year, the
hospital will be divided into 14 ambulatory care centres reflecting the main
medical needs of patients and catering for both day and in-patients. There
are plans to replace old buildings with purpose-built blocks to house the
centres.
According to Andy Black, the hospital's chief executive: 'An increasing
number of other managers are asking about what we are doing. This may become
one of the next big issues for change in the service.' A move to
patient-focused care would undoubtedly cause a reduction in those 201 job
classifications. Supporters of the system say multi-skilled teams are good
for both the quality of patient care and staff morale.
Miller says his US experience suggests that once initial staff fears about
de-skilling have been addressed, job-satisfaction rises. 'When a
multi-skilled team is given complete responsibility for a group of patients,
they feel they are playing more of a part in the task of curing people.'
Nick Edwards, Andersen's UK consultant who supervised the survey of NHS
hospitals, says current hospital organisation encourages staff to give
primary loyalty to their profession. 'The solution is to design the system
around the needs of the patient, rather than giving priority to the
requirements of the institution and the professional and other groups
working in it.'
Some NHS managers believe hospitals are likely to reduce their workforces by
up to 20 per cent during the 1990s. This is likely to affect both skilled
and unskilled staff. A move to a patient-focused organisation would provide
personnel managers with a rational basis for launching a drive for
productivity improvements in the NHS.
By the next century, even more dramatic things may be happening to
hospitals. According to a report published by the King's Fund health
research organisation yesterday, they will be playing a much smaller part in
the overall delivery of health services by the year 2010. The King's Fund
report casts doubt over the future of famous London teaching hospitals like
University College and the Middlesex hospitals, with their joint medical
school and elderly buildings on valuable sites in central London.
The district general hospital of the 1960s and 1970s is becoming outdated,
suggests the report. It predicts that a large proportion of hospital work -
perhaps including areas like psychiatry, dermatology and the clinical care
of elderly people - is likely to shift to GPs surgeries, health centres and
the community. The bulk of planned, non-urgent surgery will be performed on
a day-case basis. Hospitals will become smaller and more specialised,
concentrating on people who are undergoing complex treatments.
Compared with achieving this level of change, the introduction of
patient-focused care looks a relatively straightforward management task.
But the view that hospitals are about to undergo some of the biggest
structural changes in their long history is widely shared by health planners
and, as the King's Fund report points out, the year 2010 is not very far
away.
