FT  09 JUN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Labour seeks a unified position on
Maastricht
THE Labour leadership yesterday attempted to broker a unified party response
to Denmark's refusal to ratify the Maastricht treaty.
It is threatening to vote against any 'improper' attempt by the government
to resubmit legislation until a clear way forward has been proposed.
In an amendment to a motion for consideration by the parliamentary Labour
party from Mr Tony Benn, the veteran leftwinger, calling on Labour MPs to
support a referendum on the treaty, the leadership has instead argued that
the UK should reconsider its stance by approving the social chapter and
greater democratic accountability.
But in an alternative move, members of Labour's so-called 'soft left'
grouping have tabled a second amendment demanding outright opposition to the
government and 'a fundamentally different treaty', promoting democratic
accountability in European Community institutions.
The three strategies, due to be debated by Labour MPs tomorrow, have
underlined growing differences within the parliamentary party on the correct
strategic approach to the new circumstances.
While Mr Gerald Kaufman, the shadow foreign secretary, yesterday kept open
the option of voting against the government, Labour's leaders privately
believe that any opening up of the treaty to renegotiation might frustrate
moves towards closer union, which it supports.
However, Mr Bryan Gould, a challenger for the leadership, sided with the
soft left by arguing that the current treaty was now 'dead'. In a speech to
Labour MEPs in Strasbourg, he called for democratic accountability for the
proposed European Central Bank; a strengthened social chapter signed by
Britain; and an enhanced 'regional dimension'.
Mr Gould called for the opening up of a 'new and more constructive agenda'
including a reassessment of defence, employment and energy policies.
'We should be clear that further ratifications and referenda on a
non-existent Treaty can only be charades', he said.
Tory opponents of Maastricht are increasingly looking to Labour as the best
chance of defeating the government. The official line states that Maastricht
'contains much official Labour policy . . . whose enactment would be
beneficial'. It adds: 'The best way forward would be a reconsideration of
the treaty during the UK presidency, with the purpose of including an
enhanced social chapter.'
At the weekend, Mr Kaufman said Labour would vote against the Maastricht
Bill if it was reintroduced before the confusion created by the Danish
referendum had been cleared. He also hinted that there might be
circumstances in which Labour would back a referendum.
