FT  09 NOV 92 / Clinton summons business leaders to Little Rock
US PRESIDENT-elect Bill Clinton is to convene a summit of business leaders
and economists in Little Rock, Arkansas, in the next few weeks to advise him
on ways to tackle the country's economic crisis.
The summit is one of several steps which Mr Clinton's transition team
announced yesterday it would make before the new administration takes power
in late January.
The summit is 'in the planning stages', according to Mr Warren Christopher,
director of the transition team, but it will include an audit of 'where we
stand now'.
The transition team is also looking at the establishment of an Economic
Security Council to raise the priority of government economic
decision-making.
Mr Vernon Jordan, chairman of the transition team, said Mr Clinton would
appoint an assistant for economic security to co-ordinate the operations of
the proposed Economic Security Council, but the president will head it.
The new position is modelled on that of the national security adviser. It is
not clear how the proposed council would work in practice with the existing
Council of Economic Advisers.
Mr Jordan also said the first cabinet appointees are likely to be to
economic posts. They will be announced on December 1 or perhaps earlier,
according to Mr Jordan. It is expected that the top 25-30 appointees will be
announced next month.
Mr Clinton will travel to Washington to meet Congressional leaders before he
takes office. Mr George Mitchell, the Democratic leader in the Senate, has
offered to hold confirmation hearings after the new Congress convenes on
January 5 so Mr Clinton's cabinet can be ready to start work by his
inauguration on January 20.
The cabinet could include Republicans, and Mr Jordan did not rule out the
possibility that a Clinton administration would seek the services of Mr
James Baker, President George Bush's former secretary of state, as a special
envoy.
'We will be an equal opportunity employer,' Mr Jordan said. 'Diversity will
be the operative policy in the arrangement of the government.'
Both parties have expressed support for the incoming administration. But Mr
Mitchell said he would oppose Mr Clinton's request for a line item veto to
reduce the budget deficit, enabling Mr Clinton to delete specific programmes
but not reject the whole budget package.
Senator Robert Dole, the Senate minority leader, has promised to 'chaperon'
the administration's expected honeymoon with Congress. But he said he would
support the line item veto, which had been demanded by Mr Bush, and health
care reform.
Fresh focus, Page 28
