FT  23 JUN 92 / Time to become lean and mean / Examining the challenges
confronting the German car industry
Mr Ferdinand Piech grinned as he drove off in a big black Audi limousine. He
told his driver to get in the back, and slipped behind the wheel himself.
It was a small incident on a sunny day in Munich, but enough to show that Mr
Piech, 55, is different from the usual run of executives who are happy to
let their chauffeurs take the wheel. His appointment to take over next year
as head of the Volkswagen group, which owns Audi where Mr Piech is the chief
executive, was controversial. Not only is he a somewhat prickly personality,
he has uncompromising views on how the industry should improve productivity
and cut costs. Both shareholder and union representatives on VW's
non-executive supervisory board agreed that Mr Piech - who impressed at Audi
with his record of rising profits and attractive new models - was the man to
give the company a thorough overhaul.
On a broader level, the arrival of Mr Piech at VW marks the growing
awareness of German car makers that their once-dominant position is under
threat. German companies account for about 40 per cent of total west
European sales - producing nearly 5m cars a year and exporting roughly half
of them. There are nearly 2m production jobs at German motor manufacturers
and suppliers, and twice as many if sales, repairs and other activities are
included - one in every six jobs in west Germany. The industry accounts for
about a fifth of gross national product and as such has underpinned
Germany's postwar 'economic miracle'.
In spite of the industry's obvious successes, German executives have become
edgy. The global recession outside their home markets is forcing car
companies to squeeze more profits from existing domestic plants rather than
relying on steady growth in worldwide sales. The slowdown is compounding
German companies' increasing vulnerability to Japanese competition
increasingly in the luxury car area, both from Japanese-built imports and
from plants set up in Europe. By the mid-1990s, the latter should be
producing more than 1m cars a year. The situation mirrors that of the US in
the late 1980s. 'The US did not react (to the Japanese invasion) and now
it's very late for them,' Mr Piech says. 'It's no good asking your opponent
not to attack any more. It's better to hit back.'
Closer to home, European competitors, notably in France, have made great
strides. Car makers such as Renault and Peugeot have slashed their
workforces and improved efficiency. In the European Community (except
Germany), car producers have, over the past decade, shed 410,000 jobs; in
Germany, automotive jobs have risen by 79,000 over the same period, spurred
by strong demand from eastern Germany following unification in 1990. This
artificial boost temporarily masked some of the underlying problems.
The productivity gap between the rest of the EC and Germany has also
narrowed. In the 1980s, productivity at French and UK motor companies rose
by an average rate of about 6 per cent a year compared with 5 per cent for
Spain and only 2 per cent for Germany.
In spite of this development, by 1990, Germany still topped the European
league - France's productivity was 91 per cent of Germany's, with Italy at
74 per cent and the UK (before the full impact of recent Japanese
investment) still some way behind at 61 per cent - but it lagged Japanese
home-based production by some 50 per cent. Mr Achim Diekmann, managing
director of the German motor industry association, says: 'We still have some
catching up to do.'
Catching up will be difficult as long as German wage costs continue to march
ahead of productivity. Including social security payments, they are among
the highest in the world (see chart). One solution to the problem is to cut
jobs - a course now being taken:
VW has said some 12,500 jobs will disappear over the next five years from
its domestic workforce of 130,000. Mercedes-Benz has announced it will shed
up to 10,000 jobs this year after its workers, along with others in the car
industry, won a 5.8 per cent pay award for 1992. BMW is shedding 3,000 from
its domestic workforce of about 62,000 this year and will today announce the
site of a new US plant in South Carolina to help it produce more cheaply for
the local market.
Opel, the profitable subsidiary of General Motors of the US, wants to reduce
the 31,000-strong workforce at its main plant at Russelsheim by about 6,000
over the next five years. Like VW, Opel is building a plant in east Germany.
Despite the urgency with which these measures are being implemented, 'things
look quite gloomy', on the costs front, says Mr Holger Karsten, of
management consultants Arthur D Little. So gloomy that Germany's
still-superior productivity cannot offset lower costs elsewhere in Europe.
Opel says it takes DM 750 (Pounds 260) more to make its Vectra mid-range car
at its main Russelsheim plant near Frankfurt than Vauxhall (also part of GM)
needs for the same vehicle (the Cavalier in the UK) at Luton in England.
Even though productivity is lower in the UK, favourable unit costs more than
offset this disadvantage.
In addition, German car makers are hampered by shorter working hours than
their main overseas competitors. Mr Werner Schmidt, VW's marketing and
overseas director, says a VW worker in Germany spends less than 1,200 hours
a year on the production line compared with up to 2,000 hours in Japan.
Employees at VW's Spanish plants work 25 per cent more hours than their
counterparts in Germany; staff at VW's plant in Mexico work 33 per cent more
hours. Next year, the introduction of a 36-hour working week will make the
German motor industry keener than ever to extract more productive value from
the hours worked.
Here they are looking east for guidance: for Japan's car makers are
Germany's biggest rivals partly because of management and production line
restructuring which is being continuously improved.
What most frightens German executives is the prospect of a rising volume of
cars built more cheaply by Japanese companies in the UK, many of which will
be exported to continental Europe. 'The Japanese plan to build between
700,000 and 800,000 cars a year in the UK, roughly the same as Opel's German
capacity, including Eisenach (the new east German plant),' says Mr Peter
Enderle, Opel's production director.
Already, German makers regard the Nissan plant in Sunderland in north-east
England as a prime threat. Opel says the Primera mid-range car made there by
Nissan is priced markedly lower than its German-made Vectra. 'Nissan
Sunderland has set a new standard for us all,' says Mr Piech who has visited
the plant. 'We have to challenge the Japanese.'
How? Cutting jobs will not be enough. So, prodded by the notions of 'lean
manufacturing', 'lean management', and 'simultaneous engineering', German
companies have set about redesigning their production methods.
This involves shifting even more of the car production process, and thus the
cost burden, to outside suppliers. In Germany, the usual level of 'vertical
integration' - the share of the car built inside the car plant - is about 40
per cent; the target for new east German sites is about 25 per cent.
Audi has reduced its level of vertical integration to 20 per cent, keeping
only complex operations in-house, such as engines, gears, bodywork and final
assembly. It has made big savings by having wiring systems made in Hungary
and Poland. German car makers in general are putting increased emphasis on
buying not just single parts but whole systems such as wheel assemblies from
outside suppliers. 'The innovative ability in the German automobile industry
comes in part from the highly specialised supply companies,' says Arthur D
Little's Mr Karsten.
On the production line, more team work is being introduced to give employees
extra motivation and responsibility. But, adds Mr Karsten, management
structures must also be made more flexible, so that rigid German production,
development and marketing divisions are dissolved. Traditionally, Germany's
corporate pyramid has been fairly rigid and hierarchical, and breaking down
entrenched ways of working at companies such as Mercedes-Benz and VW will
not be easy, says Mr Karsten.
Many of the leaner, streamlined working and management practices are being
introduced at greenfield sites in Germany. Mercedes' new Rastatt car plant
in west Germany incorporates more widespread use of team work than in its
other plants; VW set up a special team comprising experts from all divisions
for the design and production of its latest Golf model.
We are bringing in efficiencies we never had,' says VW's Mr Schmidt. The
trick is applying the Japanese-inspired lessons at home. Mr Schmidt reckons
productivity in VW's west German plants can be raised by an annual 6 per
cent through a variety of modest improvements, including group working.
Will all this radical change work? Already the powerful IG Metall union has
expressed doubts about Opel's plan to contract to (lower-paid) outside
suppliers some of its body-stamping work.
In the past, consensus has been reached through the German system of
co-determination at board and plant level. But, as Mr Diekmann of the motor
industry association, says: 'We are approaching a new structure in the
industry. It can only be done if unions and management co-operate.'
Though this year's engineering sector wage deal of 5.8 per cent will not
help the German industry in its effort to dampen rising costs, next year's
agreed 3.4 per cent rise indicates that the car unions have started to
realise the gravity of the industry's problems. They are reluctantly aware
that jobs must be lost and productivity gains must be made if they are to
compete.
The choice of Mr Piech to run VW shows unions and management are trying to
work closer together. This is a positive sign. Like their US rivals, German
companies have been slow to react to Japan's penetration of their markets
but the determination of German industrialists to cling on to sales means
competitors in Europe and Japan are in for a tough fight. The Germans are
unlikely to be the losers in the long run, but success will have its price:
the shape of the German car industry will change inexorably as manufacturers
invest more abroad and cut jobs at home. Within 10 years the industry will
have developed a new streamlined shape - not so much a Mercedes family
sedan, more a sleek and sporty Audi.
