FT  28 NOV 92 / FT schools 1,000 - the examiners' notes
EIGHT months is an eternity in school league tables. When the FT published
its first survey of private school A-level performance in March, complaints
at the very idea of publishing 'raw' results flooded in. Now, after two FT
surveys, a host of rival exercises from other papers, and finally last
week's marathon effort by the Department for Education, almost everyone
outside the teachers' unions realises they are here to stay.
Our latest survey, the FT-1,000 published on November 1, provoked hardly any
letters objecting to the principle of publishing comparative exam data.
Jonathan Riley, headmaster of Emscote Lawn prep school in Warwickshire, was
a lone voice, 'looking forward to reading about chairmen of governors
clandestinely approaching head teachers in plush hotels with fat signing-on
fees and even larger salaries. Second division soon becomes second best'.
However, the issue of what the tables reveal remains controversial. The
critics, in full voice since John Patten's efforts, suggest they are little
more than snap shots of the deprivation with which a school has to contend,
and / or the degree of selection it employs. The two are essentially
different points, though often conflated. Selective schools draw many of
their pupils from deprived backgrounds, while many a comprehensive has a
thoroughly middle-class clientele. Judging by our responses, parents are not
blind to the social and selective characters of schools. They focus mainly -
and rightly - on the differential performance and fees (in the private
sector) of institutions of similar type.
The question of selection featured prominently in responses to the FT-1,000.
Vivian Anthony, secretary of the Headmasters' Conference, wrote: 'I hope the
message that comes through will be that a whole variety of factors affect
the performance of schools, and none more important than the quality of the
entry into a school.'
However, the idea that even top schools have the pick of the bunch is
strongly denied by many of their heads. Tony Evans, headmaster of Portsmouth
Grammar, which came 144th in the survey, said any notion of his school being
free to choose its pupils was a 'serious oversimplification'.
'There are no fewer than seven sixth-form colleges within easy distance,
with five other schools mentioned in your table equally accessible. There
are very few schools which now have a monopoly.'
Much pleasure, and some surprise, was expressed at the strong A-level
performance of some state schools and colleges. 'It is gratifying that you
note what good value can be found in the state sector,' wrote Alan Hiscock,
chairman of the governors of Brooklands College, Surrey.
'It is worth restating that the private sector as a whole does not earn
higher examination results in strict proportion to the fees charged.' His
only concern was that we had not been able to rank further education and
tertiary colleges in the survey.
John Howson, deputy director of Oxford Polytechnic's school of education,
thought performance tables were 'fraught with danger,' but necessary, 'not
least for the benefit of parents whose work requires them to move around the
country'.
His concern was that 'the variables that go towards producing any set of
results are too complicated to allow easy comparison between schools'. The
five-year score was a help, 'but not if it forces any school to say to any
child that they cannot be entered for an examination because their entry
might adversely affect the score the school could achieve.'
Howson was also concerned that with the growth of vocationally-oriented
qualifications at the post-16 level 'there is a danger that your survey, by
using just A levels, has selected too simplistic a measure which does not
reflect the direction post-16 education should be taking at this juncture'.
The question of how good schools expand, explored in the survey through
articles on Bristol and Forest School, London, was taken up by Will
Bartlett, a research fellow at the School for Advanced Urban Studies at
Bristol University. 'If a popular school faces an excess demand for places,
there is no mechanism whereby extra funds can be channelled to that school
to allow for an expansion of capacity,' he wrote, highlighting a serious
weakness in the government's plans to promote market principles in
education.
Bartlett also pursued the question of funding. Minimum fees charged by
private schools in Avon are around Pounds 3,000, whereas Avon county council
provides only Pounds 2,153 per sixth form pupil in the county - 'and
considerably less than that for other secondary school pupils'.
The 1988 Education Act, by linking recurrent funds to pupil numbers, was
intended to create a quasi-market, directing funds to successful schools.
But, says Bartlett, its main effect 'has been to bring about a reduction in
funding for inner city schools, and a further deterioration in the service
offered to the least advantaged pupils'.
The FT score, which gave equal weight to performance per entry and per
candidate, caused some anxiety. Mrs B Hamnett, head of the sixth form at
Jews Free School in north London, told us that of JFS's 115 candidates, 37
took only 2 A-levels, and 8 one only, mainly for health reasons. 'The
objectivity of any particular indicator does give us cause for concern.'
Valerie Bidwell, headmistress of Norwich High School for Girls, took issue
with the decision to exclude general studies.
'General studies is, in fact, a good discriminator: students who will
achieve A and B grades in other A-levels will tend to achieve a similar
grade in general studies. . . Should A-level results in modern languages be
discounted if the candidate is a native speaker? What about the candidates
who may take A-level art without attending classes if sufficiently gifted?'
Answers on the back of a post-card, please.
Alas, like the education department's, our survey was not free from slips.
Some were caused by incomplete information, some were our fault.
Alsager Comprehensive should be in Cheshire, not Staffordshire.
Clifton High School for Girls should have got a mention as one of Bristol's
leading independent girls schools.
Honley High School, Huddersfield, has 36 per cent of its pupils studying
maths and science and six per cent modern languages, against the 20 and 11
per cent given.
Longridge Towers School, Berwick-upon-Tweed, Northumberland, should have
been ranked third equal in the value for money table for boarding schools,
with its annual boarding fees of only Pounds 7,110. It is also the
top-performing school in the county.
St Helen's School, Northwood, Middlesex, was ranked twice in error. The
entry giving it 572 pupils, and placing it 120th, is the correct one.
St Peter's School, Bournemouth, is a church (Roman Catholic) School, with
1,462 pupils (not 137). It achieved 2.4 passes per pupil, and its FT score
was 0.87 (not 0.68), giving it a ranking of 738th.
Southampton Technical College gained 1.9 passes per pupil, not the 0.3
stated.
Wirral Grammar School: the proportion taking science/maths courses was 38,
not five per cent.
