FT  10 SEP 92 / Gota to receive Swedish support
SWEDEN'S centre-right government yesterday promised to support Gota Bank,
the country's fourth largest commercial bank, after it forecast a sharp
deterioration in its financial position and warned that credit losses would
amount to SKr8bn (Pounds 784m) in 1992 - or double its previous forecast.
The government said that Gota's obligations would be met and it promised to
take the necessary measures to maintain the stability of the financial
system.
The announcement coincided with a tumultuous day in Sweden's financial
markets after the Riksbank, the central bank, raised its marginal rate from
24 per cent to 75 per cent to defend the Krona.
Gota Bank said credit losses for 1992 would be SKr7 to SKr8bn, against its
earlier forecast of SKr4bn, and predicted that operating losses for 1992
would be SKr3 to SKr4bn. The bank blamed the combination of high interest
rates and Sweden's recession which have resulted in severe credit losses for
the Swedish banking sector.
The government, which has already been forced to help rescue Nordbanken,
another commercial bank, said it would discuss the future of Gota with its
management and owner, the Swedish insurance group Trygg-Hansa SPP.
It expects to reach a solution within the next few weeks, and is understood
to be considering several options including: stripping out Gota Bank's
non-performing loans and placing these in a separate company; combining
Gota's non-performing loans with those from Nordbanken; and selling Gota
Bank.
Gota's position came to a climax after Trygg-Hansa, which owns 96 per cent
of the bank's shares, said it would not provide further funds for the
troubled bank.
On Tuesday, Trygg-Hansa had to pull a SKr3.1bn share offer - which was
intended to strengthen Trygg-Hansa's capital base - because of turbulence in
the Nordic financial markets.
In June, Gota announced a stop-loss insurance plan which was intended to
protect Gota's shareholder's equity and provide protection against credit
losses and defaults on interest payments.
Swedish money rate, Page 1; Details, Page 2; Lex, Page 18; Union Bank of
Finland, Page 24
