FT  16 SEP 92 / Unease in Mexico rises as economy takes a dip: The
government, has been stung by problems that are less easy to explain away
when the economy is underperforming
THE SHINE on the Mexican economic miracle, once the toast of Wall Street and
the envy of Latin America, is beginning to wear off.
Despite a sharp rebound on Monday, the stock market is 30 per cent down
since June. The economy is expected to grow by only 2-3 per cent this year,
compared with the government's original forecast of 4 per cent.
The current account deficit is likely to exceed Dollars 20bn (Pounds
10.1bn), or more than 6 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP). The
long-awaited rise in Mexican living standards appears as distant as ever.
The slowdown has generated creeping unrest. The Manufacturing Industry
Chamber has complained about tight government policy and the squeeze on
consumer spending. In July and August, workers at the Volkswagen car plant,
the largest in Mexico, and 22,000 textile workers were on strike.
Another 15,000 former petrol workers were protesting at their dismissal and
lack of severance payments.
At the same time the government has been stung by political problems that
are less easy to explain away when the economy is underperforming. Yesterday
the ruling party's governor of Michoacan state took office amid mounting
protests from the leftist opposition at alleged fraud by the government
party.
While economists differ on the severity of the problems, most agree on the
cause: Mexico's troublingly high current account deficit and inflation rate,
coupled with the sluggish US economy and nervous foreign investors. The
combination has forced the government to raise short-term interest rates to
17 per cent and to run an even larger budget surplus than forecast in an
effort to cool down the economy.
The government has warned the private sector not to expect any loosening of
economic policy in the near future. 'We cannot pay attention to the few
voices that propose relaxing financial discipline to adjust the nation to
their own inefficiencies,' President Carlos Salinas de Gortari said in
August at the annual bankers' convention. The prize he is seeking is
single-digit inflation - not attained in two decades - and productivity
increases as companies restructure in order to compete.
The trouble is inflation, with imports remarkably unwilling to respond to
the economic slowdown, argues Mr Jonathan Heath, head of the consultancy
Macro Asesoria Economica.
Mexico's inflation rate is falling but will still be around 11-12 per cent
this year. The peso devalues against the dollar by a pre-set 2.5 per cent a
year in nominal terms, implying about 6 per cent annual real appreciation
against the dollar. On top of that, imports in the first half of this year
reached Dollars 23.1bn, 30 per cent up on the period last year, while
exports were Dollars 13.7bn, up 1.5 per cent.
The implication, says Mr Heath, is that 'the government is going to have to
continue with its restrictive policy all this year and maybe next year as
well'.
Mr Roberto Barreira, head of research at the brokerage Inver Mexico, concurs
and has cut his forecast for growth next year to only 2 per cent.
Such low growth will reduce company earnings next year and partly explains
the poor performance of the stock market. Low growth should also reduce
private investment, already suffering from the falling stock prices and
higher interest rates. Private investment, financed in large part by eager
foreign investors, has fuelled economic growth over the past two years.
The government's economic strategy may have become over-dependent on the
ability to attract cheap foreign capital, lulled as it was into security by
the boom years of 1990 and 1991. 'The 1990s are not the 1980s,' argues Mr
Jesus Reyes Heroles, head of the consultancy GEA, 'and unlike Spain then,
Mexico faces a real scarcity of world resources.'
Thus, while Mr Jose Cordoba, the president's closest adviser, says in one
breath that Mexico needs Dollars 150bn of foreign capital in 10 years, he
admits in another the difficulties, by publicly warning Mexican companies
not to raise too much equity capital in international markets.
The proposed North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta) grouping Mexico,
the US and Canada was meant to square the circle by locking in President
Salinas' economic reforms, and encouraging foreigners to foot the bill for
the country's industrial restructuring.
But the Mexicans first over-estimated the speed at which the Nafta
negotiations could be concluded and then under-estimated the opposition to
the agreement in the US Congress. A ferocious attack on Nafta last Tuesday
by Mr Richard Gephardt, the Democratic leader of the US House of
Representatives, helped the market fall by 7 per cent in the week.
Most people expect the congressional vote on the agreement to be delayed
until summer next year, and the final result to be close.
The shortage of cheap foreign capital may mean that the Mexican government
will have to put up with sluggish growth for the next couple of years, just
when the ruling party prepares for the 1994 presidential elections.
It will be a measure of President Salinas' political skills if he can
persuade Mexico that this was the best result obtainable.
