FT  06 JUN 92 / Gardening: Heavenly hostas on the march - A genus that took
the US by storm but is harder to find in Britain
HOSTAS have had a lot of publicity in the UK in recent years, although
nowhere near as much as in the United States, where most of the new
varieties have been bred. Hostas have become a cult there, and some gardens
are devoted to them almost exclusively.
One such is the garden of Wolfram George Schmid in Georgia. He even calls
his house Hosta Hill. H grows little else. Even calls his house Hosta Hill;
he grows little else. His His latest book, The Genus Hosta, is a weighty
tome of 428 pages (Batsford, Pounds 45).
You would scarcely think that a genus of only about 40 species, more or less
confined in the wild to Japan, China and Korea, would generate enough
material to fill a book of this size. But Schmid is nothing if not thorough;
he has a great deal to say about hostas in the garden as well as devoting a
whole section of the book to the species.
These he has considered critically, with the object, in some cases, of
re-classifying them. Classification is, however, a matter of opinion - of
putting together the facts of evolution as they appear to the observer. And
these opinions are unlikely to tally exactly with those of other observers
who have studied the subject equally exhaustively.
What is notable in Britain is that the number of varieties of hosta
available in the large nurseries dealing with herbacious perennials -
particularly those supplied in garden centres - has increased only a little
over the past 10 years. Anyone who wants to look at the several hundred
hostas available in the UK will have to search for them mostly in small,
specialist nurseries (of which, luckily, the UK has many).
This is where The Plant Finder becomes indispensable, for it devotes nearly
five pages to the genus hosta: close on 500 names (although some of these
are synonyms). It is quite remarkable that only 13 are described as being
'widely available.' These 13 are August Moon, fortunei albopicta, fortunei
aureomarginata, Francis Williams, Ginko Craig, Halcyon, Honey Bells, Krossa
Regal, lancifolia, sieboldiana and its variety elegans, undulata
albomarginata, and uldulata undulatum.
One of them turned Wolfram Schmid into a hosta fan. He explains that his
ideal garden is a place of refuge from an increasingly synthetic world;
tapestries of colour do not fit in with this tranquil goal. Yet, he found
his perfect perennial in one of its borders.
It was a stately mound of large, heart-shaped leaves, dusted with a
comforting, deep, blue-grey frosting, almost 3 ft high. The leaves were
over-topped by sturdy stems bearing white flowers. When he found the label,
it read Siebold's Funkia - the old name for what is now hosta sieboldiana.
That was more than 40 years ago. Since then, Schmid has come a long way in
his appreciation of hostas.
Hostas are very easy to grow but not, perhaps, quite so easy to grow really
well. For best leaf production they need shade, but for flower production
they are better in sun (although this can scorch their leaves). They enjoy
plenty of humus in the soil - leaf mould, peat, spent mushroom compost or
just well-rotted manure - and they also like moisture; but all these also
attract slugs and snails, which are the hosta's worst enemies.
Schmid says the Japanese accept this as an inevitable part of hosta
cultivation, and illustrate hostas complete with slug or snail holes. But I
do not think their tolerance would stretch to the tattered remnants which,
in some favourite varieties - usually the heavily variegated ones - are all
that remain in my snail-infested garden. Slug baits or traps are the obvious
answer, and I can only plead that I do not have time to apply these
efficiently.
Hostas are not very good plants for nurserymen because they grow rather
slowly. In the garden, they certainly should not be lifted and divided
frequently. Micro-propagation is possible but highly specialised; it is most
practical when large numbers of plants are required. I do not know to what
extent it has been used by nurserymen. Schmid does not have much to say
about it.
A peculiarity of some species is their readiness to produce variegated
leaves: splashed or striped or banded with white, yellow or chartreuse
green. Sometimes this colouring can envelope the whole leaf, and I have
noticed at flower shows that there is a tendency to exhibit a predominant
number of these varieties so that the impression from a short distance is of
a golden display.
This is very beautiful, but in the garden there is a lot to be said for the
all-green leaves, especially those with the blue-grey frosting that so
enraptured Schmid when he found his first sieboldiana. Last week I was
looking at some large clumps of this variety, toning down the hot colours of
Ghent and Mollis azaleas - just the kind of thing I imagine Schmid would not
like. But I found it a delightful piece of planting which would last in that
brilliantly contrasted form for only a few weeks, afterwards relapsing into
tranquillity.
