FT  22 JUN 92 / More pension delays likely
THOUSANDS of Maxwell pensioners are likely to suffer further delays in
payments of their pensions as a result of the criminal charges brought by
the Serious Fraud Office against Mr Kevin Maxwell, Mr Ian Maxwell and Mr
Larry Trachtenberg last Thursday.
Civil proceedings by liquidators trying to recover disputed pension-fund
assets are likely to be suspended until after the criminal cases have been
settled, which may take years.
None of the accountants acting as administrators or liquidators to companies
in the Maxwell empire was warned by the SFO of its intention to act so soon.
Two have privately expressed concern in spite of comments from the
liquidators to the Maxwell pension funds last week that the arrests would
not affect the conduct of their proceedings.
The civil action includes writs issued by Robson Rhodes, liquidator to
Bishopsgate Investment Management, manager and trustee of the Maxwell
pension funds, for the recovery of up to Pounds 450m from the two Maxwell
brothers and up to seven more writs, also from Robson Rhodes, against
institutions that hold shares whose ownership is in dispute.
Arthur Andersen, administrator to the private Maxwell business empire, has
also launched a number of writs over shares and assets whose ownership is in
dispute.
Mr Neil Cooper, the liquidator at Robson Rhodes, said: 'Nothing at the
moment has stayed proceedings. We still hope to go ahead. I am not
necessarily confident that the hearing will be effective. It would be a
great pity if the effect (of criminal charges) was to delay recovery.'
Robson Rhodes was due to bring its case against Mr Kevin Maxwell in the High
Court late next month. Courts do have the power to permit civil proceedings
to go ahead but often administrators can press for criminal bankruptcy to
claim assets from anyone convicted at the end of a criminal trial.
Meanwhile Mr John Talbot, the Arthur Andersen partner who is administrator
to the private Maxwell companies, is believed to have been served a notice
by the SFO under Section 2 of the 1987 Criminal Justice Act, which requires
him to answer its questions with no right to silence.
That may conflict with powers invoked by both Andersen and Robson Rhodes
under Section 236 of the 1986 Insolvency Act to gather information from the
Maxwell brothers.
Those powers are available to the administrators but not to the SFO. It
still has to be determined whether the SFO will be able to gain access to
the Section 236 interviews under its Section 2 notice.
Observer, Page 15
Anthony Harris, Page 21
