FT  22 OCT 92 / Letter: Thorny VAT zero rate problem persists
Sir, The article in the Financial Times on the new EC VAT system ('Exporters
pick up the pieces as barricades fall', Management, October 13) states that
the introduction of the 'origin' principle 'would have probably meant that
the UK would have had to drop its zero-rating of children's clothing and
many foods'. The point is repeated in the leading article ('VAT headache')
of the same issue.
From an economic point of view, that would be completely unnecessary.
A VAT-registered purchaser of zero-rated goods from the UK would gain no
more competitive advantage under an origin system than would already exist
through the zero-rating of deliveries to another member state under the
transitional system.
Indeed, most detailed studies (such as that carried out for the French
senate in 1990) have concluded that differences in VAT rates, in general,
can have little effect on competition in the case of the 95 per cent of
cross-frontier transactions which take place between VAT-registered traders.
The problem of cross-frontier shopping by final consumers is another matter,
but that problem would also exist already under the system applying from the
end of this year.
The problem is a purely legal one, arising from Article 28 of the 6th VAT
Directive.
That directive effectively allows the UK to retain the zero rate, but only
until 'the charging of tax on imports and the remission of tax on exports in
trade between the member states are abolished'. That is to say: until the
coming of the origin system.
The solution to this conundrum is a simple one, and has actually been
adopted by the European Parliament. Zero should be recognised as a proper
VAT rate, and it should become the 'floor' of the reduced-rate band.
That would have enabled the UK to retain the zero rate permanently, if it so
wished. Unfortunately it was derogation, thus ensuring that the whole issue
will come up again in 1996.
Ben Patterson,
vice chairman,
European Parliament
Economic Monetary and
Industrial Committee,
Strasbourg
