FT  07 AUG 92 / UN mission flies into Somalia
A SPECIAL United Nations assessment mission yesterday flew into
war-shattered Mogadishu to consider means of improving security to
distribute food to hundreds of thousands of starving Somalis.
The mission arrived as a huge effort was under way to move hundreds of
tonnes of food blocked in the port into the city. 'We are trying our best to
put food into the mouths of people who need it, but it is becoming
increasingly difficult to do so because of looting and insecurity,' said one
aid worker.
A World Food Programme (WFP) official, Mr Trevor Page, yesterday dismissed
British press reports that the UN was going to suspend food deliveries for a
month, due to the insecurity, as 'absolute nonsense'. Two UN-chartered
ships, carrying 10,000 tons of sorghum for Mogadishu and 3,000 tons of food
for Kismayo, are due to dock on Sunday.
However, senior UN officials appear deeply divided about the role of the
technical mission. One official in Mogadishu said it had been sent to
'rubber stamp' the view of Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN secretary-general,
that a contingent of armed UN guards was imperative to protect humanitarian
operations and food distribution - with or without the consent of the
feuding factions. Canada's announcement yesterday that it was prepared to
send 500 troops to Somalia on the request of the UN, appeared to confirm
reports that the secretary-general is shopping around for member countries
willing to provide military forces.
But Mr Mohammed Sahnoun, the UN special envoy to Somalia, has consistently
said it would be extremely dangerous and counter-productive to send in armed
troops in the face of violent opposition by General Mohammed Faffar Aideed,
the strongest of Somalia's feuding war lords.
Gen Aideed has said he will shell any UN troops trying to enter Somalia and
Mr Sahnoun has cautioned against the UN embarking on intervention that would
turn it into an occupying force risking casualties.
Meanwhile, the thousands of gunmen in Mogadishu continue to threaten the
fragile relief operation, exacerbating the mounting death toll from
starvation. On Wednesday, 20 trucks carrying 200 tons of food from the port
to Wardigley, a suburb of Mogadishu, were hijacked by gunmen and disappeared
en route.
So far this year only 107,000 tons of food has been delivered to Somalia,
the bulk by the Red Cross. The estimate of food needs for 1992 is at least
400,000 tons. Getting food out of the ports to the starving civilians,
however, continues to be the single biggest obstacle.
Mr Holbrooke Arthur, the WFP representative in Somalia, said distribution of
food was deteriorating with successful food distribution to the most needy
having decreased from 90 per cent for their first shipment to 30 per cent.
'We can't distribute food successfully without military intervention,' said
one aid worker. 'It can be done with military troops but only if we're
prepared for the situation to become bloody. No one wants to support that.'
The UN technical mission, which yesterday met both feuding factions in
Mogadishu and aid agencies, is also going to consider how to monitor the
shaky ceasefire; a 'food-for-arms' exchange programme; the feasibility of an
airlift to the interior of Somalia; and how to help re-establish a police
force.
Mr Bernard Kouchner, the French health and humanitarian action minister,
yesterday said he had witnessed in Somalia the worst suffering since the
Biafran war.
He urged Britain to use its presidency of the European Community to double
aid to the east African state.
