FT  01 DEC 92 / Japan's bank lending growth slows
THE weakened state of the Japanese economy was underlined yesterday by
figures showing that commercial bank lending rose by just 2.4 per cent in
the three months to September from a year earlier.
The economy, which faces a combination of financial contraction and
industrial retrenchment, is still mired in a downturn partly because the
reduction by manufacturing industry of inventories of unsold products has
slowed recently, the Bank of Japan's monthly bulletin warns
Recent sharp cuts in industrial investment and production were reflected in
a 0.1 per cent increase in bank lending to manufacturers in the third
quarter. The growth in lending to the non-manufacturing sector slowed to 2
per cent in the quarter. The rise in business with non-manufacturers was
mainly accounted for by strong lending to service sector companies and the
construction sector, which is being boosted by government public works
programmes.
Bank deposits contracted in September by 4.6 per cent, with corporate
deposits down 9.1 per cent. This was the 15th month in succession that bank
deposits have fallen.
The banks are trying to raise their profitability partly by offering fewer
savings accounts on which they have to pay high rates of interest to savers.
As a result individual savers are shifting their funds into the postal
savings system which offers better returns, while companies have been
running down their cash reserves to fund their working capital requirements
rather than borrow more.
Construction orders for the top 50 Japanese contractors in October fell by
7.3 per cent from a year before to Y1,587bn (Pounds 8.4bn). An 18.3 per cent
increase in civil engineering orders, fuelled by the public works programmes
failed to offset an 18.7 per cent fall in private sector construction orders
mainly from companies.
Housing starts rose by 10.3 per cent last month from a year before, the
fifth successive monthly increase. The pick-up reflects a sharp decline in
urban land prices and cheaper housing loans which have made home-ownership
more affordable.
The three opposition parties, the Social Democratic party, Komeito and the
Democratic Socialist party, yesterday called for a Y2,000bn tax cut in next
year's budget to revive the economy by boosting consumption.
The ruling Liberal Democratic party's key taxation committees started
discussion of the budget yesterday as the Ministry of Finance reported tax
revenues so far this year were 4.3 per cent down on the same period last
year.
