FT  23 DEC 92 / People: Radcliffe steps down from CBI
Mark Radcliffe is stepping down as deputy director general of the CBI,
though he is continuing his involvement as an adviser on industrial affairs.
At the same time he is taking up two new non-executive positions, the first
of which is the chairmanship of construction company McLaughlin &amp; Harvey.
The other is to be announced shortly.
In November 1991, Radcliffe, 54, was seconded from TI, where he has been a
main board director since 1988, to set up the National Manufacturing Council
which aims to promote the cause of British manufacturing to government,
business and the City. Presentation of the NMC's blueprint 'Making it in
Britain' formed the centrepiece of the CBI national conference in Harrogate.
A year ago there was some speculation that Radcliffe might have been a
candidate to succeed Sir John Banham as director general, and some CBI
watchers have recently expressed surprise that he is stepping back so soon
after the birth of the NMC. But Radcliffe now maintains that the deal with
TI was, from the outset, that the secondment should last just 12 months.
'But it was left open as to how we would go on from there. And now we have
decided on the role of adviser,' he says.
Radcliffe adds that TI had paid his salary, and he had done some advisory
work for the company, but he had relinquished his board seat because of
potential conflicts of interest; there were never any plans for him to
return to TI. He acknowledges that a year is not long in terms of a task as
vast as reviving Britain's manufacturing industry base - 'it is a project
that won't be completed in my life-time'  - but claims to be 'rather
encouraged' by the interest shown by both government and the City.
He is accepting the post at small construction group McLaughlin &amp; Harvey,
where the chairman and chief executive, Charles Denny, retires at 60 at the
end of the year, because he believes it is important to 'spread your
industries'. He is also a non-executive director at Lancer Boss and at
Partnership Sourcing, a CBI/DTI joint venture.
