FT  16 DEC 92 / Foreign Affairs: Grievous national harm - Recognition of
minority rights can be a prelude, or an alternative, to frontier changes
By coincidence, this week has seen two big steps forward in the struggle to
establish the rights of minorities in a world of nation states. In New York,
the UN General Assembly adopted a declaration 'on the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities'; and in
Stockholm, the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe appointed
Mr Max van der Stoel, a former Dutch foreign minister, as its first high
commissioner on national minorities.
The processes leading to both steps have been infuriatingly slow. The UN
declaration was originally drafted as long ago as 1978. The CSCE first
alluded to national minorities in the Helsinki Final Act of 1975, but at
that time only to say that those European states on whose territory such
minorities existed would respect the right of their members to equality
before the law, would afford them the 'opportunity for the full enjoyment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms' and would 'protect their legitimate
interests in this sphere'.
Not until June 1990, after the fall of communist regimes in central and
eastern Europe, did CSCE recognise the right of people belonging to
minorities 'freely to express, preserve and develop their ethnic, cultural,
linguistic or religious identity and to maintain and develop their culture
in all its aspects, free of any attempts against assimilation at their
will'. A year later, a CSCE meeting reached the daring conclusion that
'issues concerning national minorities, as well as compliance with
international obligations and commitments concerning the rights of persons
belonging to them, are matters of legitimate international concern and
consequently do not constitute exclusively an internal affair of the
respective state'.
The experts at the meeting went on to list a number of measures by which
some of the participating states had obtained positive results 'in an
appropriate democratic manner'. They said cross-frontier contacts between
people sharing a common ethnic or national origin, cultural heritage or
religious belief should be encouraged, and promised to exchange information
and statements of policy on the subject, 'on a voluntary basis'. But that
was about as far as it went, until this March when the Netherlands put
forward the idea of a high commissioner, which was finally adopted at the
Helsinki summit in early July.
Everyone knew that Mr van der Stoel, a veteran human rights campaigner who
recently served as UN special rapporteur on Iraq, was waiting in the wings.
And by this summer almost everyone could see that the problem was an urgent
one, with ethnic conflicts coming rapidly to the boil all over the Balkans,
central Europe and the former Soviet Union. I fondly imagined Mr van der
Stoel would leap straight into action, taking up (for instance) the
situation of the Hungarian minority in Slovakia, and that of the Russian
speakers left behind in the Baltic states. But the wheels of multinational
diplomacy grind exceedingly slow. He could not even be appointed until the
52 participating states got together again at foreign minister level.
Meanwhile five precious months had been lost.
One of the saddest ironies in the whole affair is that the state that had
been most actively pushing the minorities issue, both at the UN and in CSCE,
was Yugoslavia. It was Yugoslavia that produced the first draft of the UN
declaration back in 1978, and Yugoslavia that pressed tirelessly for CSCE to
take up the subject, against strong French, American and Soviet
reservations. As recently as August 1991, Yugoslavia submitted one of the
most comprehensive national responses to the questionnaire sent out by the
UN sub-commission on the prevention of discrimination and protection of
minorities.
In his progress report submitted last July the sub-commission's special
rapporteur, Mr Asbjorn Eide, remarked that 'leaving aside the issue of
Kosovo, it might appear that the solutions found in Yugoslavia were very
sophisticated, comprehensive and aimed at a degree of national and ethnic
pluralism unparalleled anywhere in the world'. And he drew the obvious moral
that 'it would be excessively legalistic and naive simply to compare
national legislation with regard to minorities on the assumption that
perfect models could be found which could prevent the eruption of violent
conflict'.
Indeed, the Yugoslav tragedy provides excellent arguments for anyone seeking
to bury the whole issue of minority rights. The late Marshal Tito may have
been a communist dictator, but in national terms his policies were admirably
pluralist. Instead of imposing a unitary state or a single national identity
on his fellow citizens, he organised them into six separate republics and
recognised an even larger number of nationalities.
The trouble was, of course, that republics and nationalities did not
perfectly correspond. Many Serbs live outside the Serbian republic, Moslems
had no republic of their own, and Albanians were divided between Serbia and
Macedonia.
That was hardly Tito's fault. His arrangements broadly corresponded to
historical and demographic realities, which provided (one might think) good
reason for keeping the country together.
But once the iron frame of communism began to loosen, populist leaders
exploited national passions, and the structure fell apart. Serbian leaders
suppressed the rights Tito had accorded to Albanians in Kosovo. Slovenian
and Croatian leaders did what they could to weaken the federal
in-stitutions, fearing they would be used as instruments of Serb domination;
when Serbia res-isted, they proclaimed independence. Serbs in Croatia and
Bosnia-Hercegovina took up arms rather than be separated from Serbia, only
to be told by the international community that they had no right to alter
'existing' frontiers, although they had never thought of these frontiers as
international.
After that experience, any state might reasonably argue that it would be
signing its own death warrant by recognising different nationalities among
its citizens, and more especially by recognising any autonomous territorial
entities. Yet the tide of history seems to be running the other way. States
are actually more willing than in the past to admit the existence of
national minorities and to codify their rights. In Europe, they have even
appointed Mr van der Stoel as an official international busy-body to
interfere in these highly sensitive matters.
Why? Because the fall of communism has called in question all forms of
purely authoritarian rule. It has become apparent that simple suppression of
dissent does not work; that strongly held political grievances will in the
end make themselves felt, and, for good or ill (usually in practice for a
mixture of both), the feeling of national identity is one of the strongest
human emotions. Once people believe that they belong to a different nation
from their rulers, it is all too easy for nationalist leaders to persuade
them to see all their grievances through that prism. The more their national
identity is denied or suppressed, the more convinced they are that
independence is the only solution.
But since in so many places national groups live intermingled, independence
is seldom possible without bloodshed. Each national group that escapes from
minority status takes with it a small minority that has to be either coerced
or displaced. Thus even large nations which cared little for minorities in
the past find themselves taking an interest in new minorities of their own
kith and kin, on the other side of new frontiers. And everyone starts to
think how much better it would be if frontiers did not have to change,
because minorities were properly treated within existing states.
