FT  13 OCT 92 / World Trade News: US and EC fail to break Gatt deadlock -
Intensive lobbying from French and American farm organisations
US and EC negotiations to break a 20-month deadlock in the Uruguay Round of
trade reform talks stalled last night in Brussels amid intensive lobbying by
French and US farm organisations.
Both sides claimed in a joint statement that 'it was good progress' and 'we
narrowed the gap', particularly on the most contentious issue of subsidised
farm trade.
Meetings on technical details continued last night but the main negotiators
on both sides have suspended talks for the time being. Mrs Carla Hills, US
trade representative, and Mr Frans Andriessen, EC external affairs
commissioner, are to meet at the weekend in Toronto in the margins of the
'Quad' summit of ministers from the US, EC, Canada and Japan.
Mr Ray MacSharry, the EC farm commissioner, and Mr Ed Madigan, the US
agriculture secretary, also plan to meet as soon as the technical work by
officials on various scenarios for cutting back the value and volume of
subsidised farm exports is completed.
The failure to achieve a breakthrough at Brussels comes as a disappointment
after expectations had been raised over the past week. Because of the
impending US presidential election the talks had been seen as the last
chance this year to reach a settlement in the Gatt Round.
French farmers stand to lose most in the EC if the Community accepts US
demands for substantial cuts in subsidised exports volumes. Mr Jacques
Delors, European Commission president, has warned of the danger of a
political backlash in France; last week he said Paris might boycott meetings
of the Council of Ministers.
Mr Daniel Bernard, spokesman for the Quai d'Orsay, said yesterday there was
no connection between the Gatt talks and the Birmingham summit called to
discuss ratification of the Maastricht treaty. Suggestions that French
opposition to a Gatt deal would provoke a Birmingham boycott by President
Francois Mitterrand were 'speculation'.
But EC officials insisted Mr Jean-Pierre Soisson, French farm minister, had
suggested Mr Mitterrand would refuse to attend this week's Birmingham summit
if pressed to endorse concessions in the Round unacceptable to France.
Failure to narrow further the gap on the farm dispute can only be seen as a
short-term victory for French lobbying and intense pressure from the main US
farm organisations in the last two days.
A spokesman for Mr Madigan confirmed that there had been lobbying. 'We
always stay in touch with farm groups and these talks have been no
exception,' he said.
However, delay in reaching a settlement is not thought to have been
principally due to the prospect of a crisis at Birmingham this Friday.
Instead it is understood American negotiators had called for more time
mainly to analyse details of EC proposals.
The delay is nevertheless helpful in that it removes a potentially dangerous
area of dispute for the Birmingham summit.
US officials also commented that EC negotiators appeared to have
over-estimated their scope for compromise. They insist that more votes could
be lost by President George Bush in the presidential election as a result of
concessions that hurt farming interests than might be gained by a trade
liberalising agreement.
