FT  07 MAR 92 / The FT Schools 500 (7): A tale of two schools - Spot the
differences between similar institutions
ON THE face of it, St Edward's School, Oxford and Sedbergh School, Cumbria
are distinguishable by little but location - the first abutting a city
centre, the second on the edge of the Lake District in northern England,
nothing but dales in sight and 40 miles from the town of Lancaster.
Both are middle-ranking public boarding schools; both were built by the
mid-Victorians (though Sedbergh was founded in 1525). They each have about
500 pupils, are organised into seven or eight houses, and have virtually
inter-changeable staffs.
Both charge boarding fees of around Pounds 3,400 a term, and their living,
sports and cultural facilities are comparably modern or modernised. They
operate a similar public school regime of prefects, chapel, house matches,
compulsory games, and compulsory Combined Cadet Force training for younger
boys. Their headmasters were even recruited from the same stable -
Winchester.
Yet the differences between the schools are marked, and reverberate across
boys' public schools as a whole.
St Edward's decision to admit girls to its sixth form in 1983 is the most
obvious divergence: they now make up a third of its sixth-form, with their
own boarding house but otherwise fully integrated. Sedbergh has set its face
firmly against going co-ed. Roger Baxter, its headmaster, is convinced 'it
was the right decision for us - by doing nothing we have found a niche.'
Girls do not seem to have wrought too dramatic a change in the ethos at St
Edward's. They comprise less than one-eighth of the school and, being mostly
recruits from private girls' schools, they were breathing much the same air
long before arrival.
It is arguable that Sedbergh compensates by having a far broader social mix
than its southern counterpart. A richer foundation, it pays up to a third of
the fees of 35 per cent of its pupils, and takes five assisted places pupils
a year. About a third of Sedbergh's intake comes from the state sector
(compared with 2 per cent at St Edward's), and the school has a boarding
house for 50 11- to 13-year-olds to facilitate the transition.
Undoubtedly, however, girls have strengthened the sixth form at St Edward's
 -in size (250), appeal and academic results (an average A-level score
mid-way between B and C).
David Christie, the school's ebullient Warden (headmaster), insists: 'We are
less elitest than the likes of Winchester, and proud of it'. But he is
ambivalent about the concept of 'value added'. 'The words imply a stuffing
process, rather like pate de foie gras', he says: what matters is not the
value schools add to exam results, but rather the contribution they make to
broader pupil development - 'enrichment', in the jargon. 'Education needs to
be seen as a whole process: league tables reduce it to exam passes.'
Sedbergh gains less glamorous, but respectable, A-level results: its average
pass is just below grade C, and 83 per cent proceed to higher education (90
per cent at St Edward's).
'You need to weigh that against the breadth of our intake', says Dr Baxter,
a former university lecturer. His sixth form is small - 150-strong - with
only a tiny post-16 entry. A sixth-form centre is under construction to make
A-level pupils less house-bound, but the isolation still needles some. 'If
we didn't have two girls' schools nearby, life would be pretty unbearable',
says one sixth-former.
Nonetheless, Sedberghians are proud of being 'up north' - 'none of those
southern, pale namby-pambies up here' - and with no competing independent
schools nearby, isolation offers other attractions besides the Lakes.
About 80 per cent of St Edward's pupils come from within an
hour-and-a-quarter's drive of the school; a majority of Sedbergh's hail from
Cumbria and North Yorks, but a large minority live farther afield. Dr Baxter
regularly visits prep schools three and four hours' drive away: 'it's a
competitive market, and you have to keep cultivating old ties these days.'
Tradition - and traditional values  - are more powerful forces 'up north'.
St Edward's has an almost cosmopolitan feel. It is not just girls, the city
and a more fluid entry: chapel is largely voluntary, and Christie talks of
the school's 'basically Christian outlook' in the same breath as provision
for Moslems and Buddhists.
Only a tiny proportion of pupils had fathers at the school. By contrast, at
Sedbergh about a seventh of the intake are sons of past pupils, and most of
the sixth formers asked seemed intent on sustaining the link with their
offspring. Two of the seven housemasters are Old Boys: 'the first place many
Old Sedberghians show their fiancees is Sedbergh', remarked the wife of one.
The house system is stronger than 'down south'. All meals are taken in the
houses; housemasters recruit many of their pupils directly; they also run
their own budgets - with staffs of 20 or 30 each.
Independent education is big business. Both schools have annual budgets in
excess of Pounds 6m a year, and both are engaged on large-scale capital
projects. Sedbergh is building its new centre; St Edward's is about to
embark on a Pounds 6m development plan, complete with appeal director.
With five reputable private schools nearby, St Edward's has the competition
on its doorstep. But Dr Baxter feels no more secure from the pressure up
north. 'If as many in the south looked north, as in the north looked south,
we would be flooded, of course', he is quick to add.
