FT  24 NOV 92 / Technology: Something to shout about - Computers that
recognise human speech are the talk of the town
For at least two decades, the computers of science fiction novels and films
have obeyed spoken commands. Now, with the development of advanced automatic
speech recognition technology, reality is beginning to catch up with
imagination.
In the US and Italy, hospital radiologists are experimenting with a computer
that can directly transcribe their comments as they examine x-ray images.
Some New York stockbrokers are trying out computers that can respond to
their verbal buy and sell orders.
At one of the leading US newspapers, writers who have become disabled by
repetitive strain injuries that limit their use of a computer keyboard are
dictating their reports to computers that can transform speech directly into
text.
All are pilot customers for a new range of products unveiled last week by
International Business Machines which demonstrates significant strides in
the ability of computers to decipher the frequently ambiguous mutterings of
human speech.
Until now, speech recognition has been more of a curiosity than a practical
means of communicating with a computer. Pioneers of computer speech input
have focused upon the needs of disabled computer users with systems that are
trained to 'understand' an individual's speech, or upon narrowly defined
applications that require a limited vocabulary.
Yet the vast potential of speech recognition to provide a more 'natural'
link between man and machine is spurring development efforts throughout the
computer industry.
For people whose jobs keep their hands full - dentists, bank clerks,
emergency room doctors, pilots or police car drivers, for example - speech
recognition could provide a way to make use of computers as they work.
'Speech is the most natural and efficient means of communications,' says
James Cannavino, IBM vice president and general manager of personal systems.
'Enabling computers to accept and compute the spoken word can mean
tremendous gains in productivity for existing customers and can open up the
world of computing to a whole new population of users.'
Advances in the complex mathematical algorithms needed to analyse speech and
guess at the true meaning of the spoken word have contributed to the latest
generation of speech recognition products.
The availability of powerful microprocessors and signal processor chips at
relatively low cost has brought speech processing to the desktop computer.
Noise-cancelling microphones that screen out background noise are also
critical to making speech processing systems practical in the workplace.
Still, key challenges remain. These are: the variations between the way
different people pronounce the same words; a wide vocabulary; and the
tendency of speakers to blend one word into the next in continuous speech.
IBM's new offerings reflect compromises between these challenges.
IBM's 'Speech Server' is a voice dictation system that must be trained to
recognise the voices of individual users. It also requires users to talk in
a clipped fashion, pausing between each word.
However, the system provides the most accurate speech recognition available,
IBM claims. Its vocabulary of 20,000 words is larger than any existing
system and it can be customised to accept new words by individual users. The
program accepts dictation at up to 70 words per minute - faster than most
computer users can type.
Speech Server is aimed at businesses that generate large volumes of
documents that must be transcribed with great accuracy. As text is dictated
into a headset or lapel microphone, the program is trained to accept the
speaker's accent. It analyses the speaker's voice and displays the speech in
text.
A statistical language model sorts out homonyms such as two, to, or too, and
recognises frequently used word patterns such as President George Bush.
If the program does not recognise a new word - a name, for example - it will
display a few guesses, enabling the user to 'point and click' with a mouse,
or type in a new word on the keyboard.
Speech Server is designed to run on an IBM RS/6000 workstation with up to
eight users on a local area network. The program costs Dollars 6,950 (Pounds
4,600), plus Dollars 695 per user for networked systems. It requires a
special processor circuit board costing Dollars 1,900.
For continuous speech applications, IBM is taking a different tack. Its
Continuous Speech program, developed in conjunction with Carnegie-Mellon
University, is designed to enable software developers to incorporate speech
recognition in existing or new applications products. Continuous Speech
accepts any voice and is expected to find use in a broad range of
applications with a relatively limited vocabulary of up to 1,000 words.
Systems that allow anyone to say anything to a computer at a normal rate of
speech are still on the drawing board. IBM's new offerings do not quite live
up to the capabilities of Hal, the infamous computer in the science-fiction
classic 2001: A Space Odyssey, but they do suggest that by the turn of the
century we may indeed be regularly talking - and listening - to computers.
