FT  27 OCT 92 / Survey of Sri Lanka (9): Confrontation may be looming -
Labour and Trade Unions
ORGANISED labour in Sri Lanka is once again restive, and confrontation
between the traditionally powerful unions and the Premadasa administration
cannot be ruled out.
The government has sought to trim the fat from its bloated civil service and
wage freezes have begun to affect living standards of lower middle-class
public servants.
Last month, a 28-day work-to-rule paralysed Colombo port and many ships were
diverted to Singapore. As the costs mounted, the government agreed to
negotiate.
The strike was supported by opposition political parties and by the
pro-opposition press. Unions rejected offers from shipping agencies of
'incentive allowances' for unloading urgent cargo. In the end, the ports
authority agreed to talks.
Interestingly the chief negotiator was not the ports authority chairman, but
Mr R. Paskaralingam, President Ranasinghe Premadasa's top economic adviser
and chief negotiator with international donor agencies.
The government was keen not to have the prospects of economic growth wrecked
by union activity.
Colombo port, considered the best in south Asia, has a long history of
labour unrest. The port was nationalised in the 1950s, a move that increased
the power of unions which soon began to organise wild-cat strikes.
Mr Lee Kuan Yew, former prime minister of Singapore, once said that the
economic success of his island state was 'largely because of Ceylon's
failure'. He said that, before that period, Colombo had been known as the
'Clapham Junction of the east' (after a busy London railway station), but
had wrecked its future through the mishandling of labour and ethnic
relations.
The jibe is one with particular potency for the Premadasa administration
which is attempting to engineer precisely the type of economic miracle
achieved in Singapore.
Recent union unrest has not been an entirely economic affair. Opposition
political parties, increasingly desperate after 15 years in the political
wilderness, may be tempted to use trade unions as a stick with which to beat
the Premadasa administration.
The opposition, led by the Sri Lanka Freedom Party, has a long-standing
alliance with the traditional 'Marxist' left, which in turn controls many
trade unions.
Mr Premadasa, however, has shown himself prepared to negotiate with unions
as in the case of state bank employees. The government, seeking to
reconstitute the two state banks, chose not to seek outright confrontation,
but instead offered a 'golden hand-shake' in order to cut staff. Moreover,
the administration stopped short of privatisation, instead choosing to
'commercialise' the banks.
And the unions are not wholly bent on confrontation. Replying to private
sector critics, Mr Tennekoon Rusiripala, president of the bank employees
union, explained: 'We appreciate how the political, economic and social
environment is changing, and we do not wish to be left behind in the race.
Our concept is that trade unions should be essential partners in any
dialogue on social progress.'
Government handling of organised labour has not always been so deft. In
September it was rash enough to introduce an 'emergency maintenance of
exports' regulation, banning any form of trade union activity in the free
trade zones.
The legislation had been introduced in response to foreign investors, now a
fast-expanding community, which had requested 'protection' from labour
unrest. The government miscalculated that it could get away with what were
universally described as 'draconian' measures.
In the face of strong protest - including outbursts from opposition benches,
threats from the unions, and strongly-worded resolutions by human rights
groups - the government was forced to back down and withdrew the regulation.
Despite such periodic confrontations between government and unions, last
year the amount of labour unrest actually fell. There were about 100 strikes
involving 57,000 workers in the private sector, a big improvement in terms
of working days lost over 1990.
Such improved labour relations may be hard to maintain. Both the
implementation of the IMF programme, as well as the government's aggressive
policy of attracting foreign investment, are likely to provoke periodic
confrontations between organised labour and the government.
