FT  29 OCT 92 / UK Company News: Scotia will be an unusual flotation / A
look into the history of the drug company
SCOTIA, a name that few in the City have yet heard of, will be one of the
more unusual drug companies planning to float on the London stock market
next year.
Until last month Scotia was the pharmaceutical subsidiary of Efamol
Holdings, a private company which has succeeded over the past 15 years in
convincing millions of people that evening primrose oil is a healthy dietary
supplement. Now Scotia Holdings is the master company and Efamol its
subsidiary selling nutritional products.
Dr David Horrobin, the founder and chief executive, has consistently
ploughed the income from selling Efamol evening primrose oil into
pharmaceutical research and development, with the long term aim of building
up an international drug company.
In its year to June 30 1992 sales of licensed pharmaceuticals at Pounds 8.3m
overtook nutritional supplements of Pounds 8m, and the group made a pre-tax
profit of Pounds 1.1m. Dr Horrobin predicts 'substantial growth' for Scotia
over the coming years.
Changing the name to Scotia is one sign of the plan to go public next year.
It has chosen Hoare Govett and Kleinwort Benson as broker and merchant bank
respectively.
The group already has about 200 shareholders, including 23 financial
institutions, and the shares are traded under Stock Exchange Rule 535. The
flotation is expected to value the group at between Pounds 120m and Pounds
200m, depending on market conditions.
Scotia is remarkable both for the type of drugs it is developing and for the
way it operates. It is neither a biotechnology business like Celltech and
Xenova, two other UK pharmaceutical companies likely to go public next year,
nor a fast-growing conventional drug company such as Medeva.
So far Scotia has concentrated above all on essential fatty acid molecules
(hence the name Efamol). These include the active ingredients in evening
primrose and fish oils. Dr Horrobin believes that the pharmaceutical
industry and medical science - focusing largely on proteins and genes - have
underestimated the significance of fatty molecules for human health.
Three of Scotia's first four licensed pharmaceuticals are based on fatty
acids: Epogam and Epogam Paediatric for atopic eczema, and Efamast for
breast pain. The fourth, Efalith, is a lithium compound for seborrhoeic
dermatitis, a common skin complaint.
Conventional drug companies are taking an increasing interest in Scotia's
products. The most important licensing deal is with Searle, pharmaceutical
subsidiary of Monsanto, which markets Epogam and Efamast in the UK.
The group has an amazing array of other drugs in development, based on fatty
acids and their chemical derivatives. The conditions they are designed to
treat include cancer, viral infections, diabetes, osteoporosis (brittle
bones) and Alzheimer's disease.
Critics often scoff at the idea that one group of compounds should be
involved in such a wide range of conditions. But Dr Horrobin says his
approach is fundamentally different to conventional pharmaceutical research.
Most drugs today are designed to stop the body producing too much of a
particular chemical, for example by blocking an enzyme or receptor. Scotia
takes the opposite tack: making up for the deficiency of a natural chemical.
Dr Horrobin takes the view that many disorders are related to a metabolic
failure by the body to produce enough of certain fatty acids. To illustrate
the point, he looks back to the time when Vitamin C deficiency was common
and caused a huge variety of different symptoms.
Another unusual feature of Scotia is the geographical spread of its
activities. For example, R&amp;D takes place at six separate facilities: in Nova
Scotia, Canada; Carlisle, Cumbria; Writtle, Essex; Guildford, Surrey;
Dundee, Scotland; and Callenish on the Isle of Lewis.
Scotia plans to move its corporate headquarters soon from Guildford to
central Scotland. It will then assume a consciously Scottish identity. This
will be one more distinctive feature for the company, since Scotland now has
virtually no pharmaceutical industry.
But Scotia is not totally unorthodox. It is preparing for flotation by
recruiting distinguished non-executive directors to its board, which is
headed by the veteran Scottish businessman Sir Ian Morrow. Sir James
McKinnon, director-general of Ofgas, joined in August, followed this week by
Mr William Glynn-Williams, deputy managing director of Glaxo Pharmaceuticals
UK.
