FT  25 JAN 92 / Hawks &amp; Handsaws: Amis for Tolstoy
halibut oil capsules at school, tennis lessons, exotic travel and the joy of
good books - then they would not be in the mess they are now. Which is why I
responded, this week, to Book Aid's invitation to donate books for Russia
and the republics. The MI Rudomino State Library for Foreign Literature is
hoping to receive and distribute 1m English-language books. They especially
asked for works of philosophy, technical manuals, ecological books,
religious books and detective stories. So I skipped to my shelves and
fossicked along them. I am fond of carnal pleasures; but when my youthful
morn hath travell'd on to age's steepy night, and all those beauties whereof
now I'm king are vanishing, or vanish'd out of sight, I will still have my
beautiful books. Minus, that is, those books that I parted with this week,
that I popped into a carrier bag and handed in at Waterstone's bookshop in
Notting Hill Gate so that they could be forwarded to the Russians. I made my
selections carefully. After all, these books are likely to be read by 50,
100, perhaps 500 people. And a book can change a life - or history. I did
not want to fill the carrier bag with any old books. I wanted to pass on to
the Russians only books I would be sad to part with. My first choice was the
handbook from the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, together with Robert
Lenzner's The Great Getty: The Life and Loves of the Richest Man in the
World. My intention was to show those incipient capitalists in Russia that
they, too, could amass unbelievable riches if they got their fingers out.
But I also wanted to warn them. Not for nothing did John Kenneth Galbraith
describe the Lenzner book as 'an eloquent and terrible warning to all who
are struggling to get rich.' Choice No 2 was Blanche d'Alpuget's Robert J.
Hawke, a biography of the man who was until recently prime minister of
Australia. I have a soft spot for Bob Hawke. In earlier times, he drank and
womanised heroically. But so what? Ms d'Alpuget's book will spread
enlightenment and cheer throughout the Russian wastes, and show what fun can
be had in a democracy as pixilated as Australia's.
To balance things up, I also chose John Bryson's Evil Angels, a study of the
Lindy Chamberlain 'dingo baby' case - an appalling stain on Australia's
conscience which showed how, even in a democracy, prejudice, ignorance and a
psycopathic Press can wreak hideous damage.
Choice No 4 was Nicholas Tomalin Reporting, a collection of pieces by the
great British journalist killed on the Golan front line in 1973. Tomalin's
The General Goes Zapping Charlie Kong, from the Sunday Times of June 5 1966,
is one of the most famous examples of British journalism this century. I
want them to read it in Russia. (Just to be honest, I also popped into the
carrier bag a copy of Wednesday's Sun. God, how pitiful).
I have a lot of American books, so choice No 5 was Ian Frazier's Great
Plains for its affectionate portrait of the immense, short-grass
prairie-lands of America. I want them to understand in Russia that there is
more to the US than drugs and guns and ghetto poverty; there is also space
and sky and sparrow-hawks - and (still) a little hope.
I did not want to over-do the sentimentality, so choice No 6 was Frances
FitzGerald's Cities on a Hill: A Journey Through Contemporary American
Culture, wherein the Pulitzer-rewarded Ms FitzGerald shines the searchlight
of her powerful reporter-historian's talent into corners dark and lurid, not
least the New Age community in Oregon founded by one of my favourite
air-heads, Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh.
Choice No 7 was My Gastronomy by Nico Ladenis, if for no better reason than
to convey the recipe for escalopina de saumon a la creme de ciboulette into
all the little towns of the new republics.
And choice No 8 was Arthur C. Clarke's July 20 2019: Life in the 21st
Century, to show the Russians how we in Notting Hill are heading, pell-mell,
for a life of IQ enhancers, bionic implants, household robots, levitating
cars, holographic movies and zero-gravity sex.
I could have gone on; but I wanted to include some fiction, so I stuffed the
carrier bag full with EL Doctorow, John Updike, Peter Carey, Nicholas
Mosley, Nadine Gordimer, Andre Brink, Patrick White, EM Forster, Kingsley
and Martin Amis, JG Ballard, Robertson Davies, William Burroughs, William
Faulkner, Carolyn Chute, Kazuo Ishiguro, David Lodge, William Golding, John
le Carre, Natalie Zemon Davis, Marguerite Yourcenar and Henry Miller.
I could have wept to see those books go. But they will set some socks on
fire in Mother Russia.
