FT  02 NOV 92 / Angola slides back into civil war as troops clash in capital
ANGOLA appeared to be slipping inexorably into renewed civil war yesterday
as heavy fighting continued across the country between government forces and
troops of the rebel Unita movement.
Fears are rising that the latest round of pitched battles, the most bloody
since Unita disputed the results of September's elections, will scotch
remaining attempts to broker a negotiated settlement.
The fighting threatens UN-led efforts to bring Angola through a 17-month
transition to peace and democracy after a ceasefire was signed in May 1991,
ending a civil war that began at independence in 1975.
According to the Portuguese news agency Lusa at least 300 people, including
two United Nations peacekeeping staff, have been killed in clashes in the
capital Luanda since Thursday night, and corpses and abandoned weapons
littered the city's deserted streets yesterday.
Although the fighting subsided yesterday, mortars and grenades continued to
fall on parts of the city, particularly in the Unita stronghold of Miramar,
a suburb of Luanda. Bursts of heavy machine-gun fire erupted in the downtown
area.
Russian Mi-8 helicopter gunships circled the city and the government put
into force an all-day curfew and threw up road blocks around the city.
Foreign residents bunkered down in hotels and private residences.
Fighting was also raging yesterday for control of the key cities of
Benguela, Lobito, Huambo and Cuito in the Unita tribal strongholds of the
central provinces. Unita also seized several diamond-producing areas in the
north and south of the country.
South African President Mr FW de Klerk, whose country sent support and
troops to aid Unita throughout most of the civil war, added his voice
yesterday to international appeals calling for a ceasefire in the fighting
and fresh peace talks between President Jose Eduardo dos Santos and Mr Jonas
Savimbi, the leader of Unita.
Mr Savimbi, however, appeared increasingly isolated and immune from
international pressure, most recently expressed by a United Nations Security
Council Resolution passed late Friday night which demanded an immediate end
to the violence and threatened action against any party endangering peace.
Luanda airport was closed yesterday and commercial flights into the capital
have been cancelled. Britain, the US, Portugal, South Africa and Brazil were
attempting to evacuate their nationals as international efforts to pull the
vast country away from further conflict appeared increasingly futile.
Several hundred people were evacuated by air and sea over the weekend but
evacuation plans are being constrained by lack of movement in the city and
continued fighting near the airport.
Portugal is trying to evacuate 40,000 nationals by air and sea.
