FT  05 NOV 92 / Electricity regulator angers MPs: Littlechild spurns role in
promoting coal - Controversy over opencast proposals - Clarke preferred
'gradual closure'
PROFESSOR Stephen Littlechild, the electricity industry regulator, yesterday
declined to take a direct role in promoting greater use of coal in power
generation in order to save pits from closure.
He told a House of Commons inquiry: 'My job is to protect the electricity
consumer. Responsibility for the coal closures lies with the secretary of
state for trade and industry and British Coal.'
In the face of repeated questioning by backbench MPs on the trade and
industry select committee, Prof Littlechild said that neither the
Electricity Act nor his understanding of the role of a regulator permitted
him to prescribe what the UK's energy mix should be, or to dictate what
power stations should be built.
Contrary to the perception that he could intervene in electricity industry
decisions, his job was to remove obstacles in the market so that competition
could determine which types of fuel were best.
His stand infuriated MPs. Mr Cranley Onslow, Tory MP for Woking, described
it as 'a cop-out'. Others referred to his 'blind faith in the market'. They
also professed amazement when Prof Littlechild said he had not yet met Mr
Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, although he had had
frequent discussions with Mr Tim Eggar, energy minister.
Prof Littlechild would not be drawn on whether gas was unfairly taking
market share from coal. He said that, although many people claimed gas was
more expensive than coal, there was also evidence to the contrary and the
situation was not clear-cut. There was no such thing as 'a single price' for
electricity.
The regulator is currently conducting an inquiry on whether electricity
distributors are living up to their licence requirement to purchase
electricity economically. He will report his initial findings next month.
MPs accused Prof Littlechild of dragging his feet and preparing of producing
a report that would be 'too late'.
He replied that he wanted to take as broad a view as possible of the
electricity companies' purchasing practices, and not just respond to
particular concerns.
He said: 'I want to make clear that my review is of the economic purchasing
obligation, not a general review of the case for gas against coal.'
