FT  17 MAR 92 / Letter: Aid to Russia would be small price to pay
Sir, Your editorial comment, 'Fiddling while Russia burns' (March 10 ),
badly needed to be made. As you were right to emphasise, the case for
financial aid to the Russian government must now move beyond demonstrating
the need for it into the less easily predictable territory of calculating
the rapidly shrinking timescale within which it could be effective.
Your report, 'St Petersburg sounds the alert on wages' (March 11),
graphically illustrated the speed with which inflationary pressures on the
Yeltsin government are mounting. These will be supplemented in April by the
impact of planned energy price increases, which are likely to result in
closure for many industrial enterprises and a leap in unemployment.
The provision by the G7 nations of a Dollars 5bn to Dollars 6bn
stabilisation fund to assist the Russian government to strengthen the rouble
would not in itself guarantee a deceleration of the inflationary spiral or
the defusing of the acute social tensions to which it, together with rising
unemployment, will give rise. But it is the only resource, apart from
humanitarian aid, at the west's disposal. It would stiffen the morale and
the will of Mr Gaidar, Russian first deputy prime minister, and his
colleagues, in pressing on with their programme of reform; and it would have
an important psychological impact on a population facing the humiliation of
a worthless currency.
The coincidence of looming crisis in Russia with a US presidential election
campaign in which the incumbent is under threat from the isolationist right
is unfortunate: but it should not be allowed to prevent western governments,
including the US, from acting now rather than hiding behind the
International Monetary Fund's inevitably protracted procedures. If inflation
in Russia cannot, with western help, be slowed within the next few weeks,
the Russian government could be obliged, despite its current denials, to
resort to a monetary reform which would wipe out savings and risk a social
explosion. The sum of Dollars 5bn to Pounds 6bn is a small price to pay to
help to reduce that possibility and the long-term dangers for the west which
it would create.
Bryan Cartledge,
British Ambassador to the Soviet Union 1985-88,
Linacre College,
Oxford, OX1 3JA
