FT  05 AUG 92 / International Company News: Looking to the future as present
put on hold - Andrew Baxter returns to the FT Six and finds earlier optimism
about the recession has been dampened
'We're getting plenty of inquiries, but that's because a lot of our
customers have plenty of time. They've b - - - - - all else to do.'
'The General Election is well and truly forgotten, and there doesn't seem to
be any residual euphoria.'
'The UK market is as dead as dead can be.'
THESE GLOOMY statements come from three of the six engineering companies
taking part in an occasional Financial Times survey tracking the sector out
of the recession.
They confirm the recent evidence from manufacturing industry on the outlook
for the domestic market. It may not be worsening, but there is a long haul
to recovery.
Encouragingly, though, this second instalment in the series, which began on
April 14, finds the six companies have maintained their new pro-duct
development programmes, clearly mindful of the old adage that new products
sell better in a recession than more established lines.
The first article, published a few days after the election, had ended on a
hopeful note. JCB had taken on about 100 new workers at its main Rocester,
Staffordshire, plant in preparation for an expected increase in orders.
There were seasonal factors behind JCB's move, but along with the other five
companies it was also hoped that the Tories' election win would spark their
markets into life. Sadly, said Mr Gilbert Johnston, deputy chairman, 'the
hope has not come to fruition'.
Indeed last month's forecast from the Engineering Employers Federation,
postponing any marked upturn in engineering output by as much as six months
to late this year, is echoed by the FT Six. Similarly, their forecasts of
reduced job cuts fit in with the EEF prediction.
'I still think there will be some small improvement in the second half of
this year,' said Mr Colin Gaskell, managing director of 600 Group, 'but six
months ago I would have predicted much stronger growth.'
The past three months have brought a number of important developments:
Rationalisation - Fenner (which halved its interim dividend) is closing some
of its transmission manufacturing operations in Hull with the loss of 200
jobs. Smaller job cuts have been made at 600 Group and Senior, and a
reorganisation in Bloxwich's automotive business has cost 20 jobs.
Investment - Senior announced a projected Pounds 8m investment in a new
company, Flexonics Automotive, within its engineering products business
area.
Supported by the Welsh Development Agency, the company will produce a range
of stainless steel fittings for vehicle exhausts from a site at Crumlin,
Gwent, employing up to 260 people.
New products - 600 Group unveiled a string of new machine tools and
accessories at the Mach '92 show in May. Fenner unveiled an innovative range
of water-powered motors for fire-fighting and other applications. Posiva has
won its first UK orders for sophisticated gearboxes and couplings for
windmills.
The details, naturally, vary, but for six very different companies there is
broad agreement on the outlook and similar emphasis on the crucial
importance of product development to maintain competitiveness.
BEL
Mr Peter Burton, chief executive of Bloxwich, is feeling mildly optimistic,
although he admits he is 'not terribly thrilled' by current market
conditions.
The optimism stems from the encouraging reception for new products including
door checks and hinges. The company is also seeing benefits from its
investment 12 months ago in new dies in its forge.
Irrespective of the election result, Mr Burton said there had, by necessity,
been some restocking by customers. He would be watching closely in case this
petered out in the autumn.
Over the next six months, he foresaw 'some gentle progress', fuelled
particularly by the introduction of car models, for which Bloxwich is
supplying parts.
SENIOR
Conditions in Senior's engineering products division were 'still very much
the same in general terms,' said Mr John Bell, group chief executive,
although there were some sectors where volume was beginning to improve.
Immediate prospects were improving in the automotive industry, an important
market for Senior, and the company had also picked up contracts in the
construction sector because of the specialist nature of its products.
Broadly, however, Mr Bell did not expect a marked improvement in the UK
market for some considerable time. Dozens of jobs had been cut in the past
three months, and the employment trend could still be downwards, but further
wholesale reductions were not expected.
New product development had increased emphasis on extending the range. 'It's
relatively easier to get 5 per cent of a new market than to get another 5
per cent of a business where you've got a 40 per cent share already,' he
said.
POSIVA
Mr Reg Bricknell, chief executive of this German-owned company, said
first-half turnover had fallen by 18 per cent - 'not bad' - but the company
was having to fight harder in a contracting market.
Mr Bricknell said the company was benefiting from recent refocusing, and
from moves to push the refurbishing side of the business which had improved
considerably in recent months. Although he did not expect a marked
improvement in conditions until next year, he hoped the appointment of two
experienced new salesmen would start to bring a pay-back in the remainder of
this year.
Sales of gears to the textile equipment industry have been flat but Posiva
has scored some successes - last month it said its gears had been chosen by
Smith Engineering for two new textile machines because of novel
characteristics giving precise control of speed, tension and pressure.
JCB
Mr Johnston sees no sign of improvement in the UK market, but remarks that
the government does not, in any case, have much room for manoeuvre on
economic policy. JCB continues to be buoyed by European business, and in
particular the strength of the German market, along with new products that
have helped the company gain market share. 'Everything we've offered we've
got right,' said Mr Johnston.
JCB's new hydraulic crawler-excavators, supplied by Sumitomo of Japan, have
already taken market leadership in the UK and the Staffordshire company's
own new products, such as its updated backhoe-loaders and its Fastrac
high-mobility vehicle, had been well received.
'We'd have been bemoaning our fate had it not been for new product
launches,' he said. Product development times had been trimmed by as much as
18 months with some slick 'simultaneous engineering'. JCB hoped for further
reductions of six to 12 months, bringing the cycle down to two years.
The company took on a total of 140 new employees in the spring, and may have
to trim its temporary workforce if there is no upturn in UK market
conditions.
FENNER
Mr Peter Barker, chairman, saw very little change in the UK market, but
noted that the recession was going on longer than anticipated. As at
Bloxwich, the automotive components business was getting stronger, but the
immediate general outlook was for steady improvement rather than recovery.
The job cuts at Hull, he said, were part of the long-term restructuring of
the UK workforce that had already reduced the headcount by 20 per cent since
the start of the recession.
The benefits from restructuring the cost base would come through when the
upturn arrived.
Meanwhile, the company stands at what Mr Barker calls 'a very exciting
threshold' with its new water hydraulics range.
Its water-powered fire rescue equipment, marketed by Godiva, is attracting
the attention of fire brigades and aviation authorities, and, via
co-operation with other industrial partners and Hull University, Fenner has
emerged as a world leader in using water to work mechanical equipment.
THE 600 GROUP
Amid gloom in the UK machine tool industry, Mr Gaskell saw some signs of
upturn in the US and Australia but no change overall at home. 'In April we
saw a bit of an upturn, but in May it all disappeared again.'
He did not forsee any marked improvement in the UK until real interest rates
came down from their present level of about 6 per cent, because, he said,
'nobody can afford to borrow'.
The company had shed a further 50 or 60 jobs during the past three or four
months, reducing the workforce by nearly 1,000 to 1,600 in the 18 months
since Mr Gaskell joined the company.
Cost savings of between Pounds 12m and Pounds 13m were made last year and
more were still coming through.
The new product development programme had been maintained, although research
and development staff had been reduced, and the company was trying to
broaden its external sources of new product ideas.
'It's been a struggle,' said Mr Gaskell, 'but at least we've survived. And
we're not in hock to our banks like some of our competitors.'
