FT  22 DEC 92 / Letter: Offshore oil and gas industry confidence endangered
Sir, In the debate on energy policy, the welter of detail on generating
costs and similar matters has been the principal topic so far in the select
committee and the media. Some larger issues are in danger of being obscured.
These have a big bearing on Britain's offshore oil and gas producing
industry, the enormous investments it represents and the employment it
provides both offshore and onshore.
This industry is a large contributor to the UK economy, not only in balance
of payments and tax revenue generation, but at the pragmatic level of
industrial activity, development of new technology and jobs. All available
figures, including the Department of Trade and Industry's, estimate that
more than 3,000 companies throughout the UK benefit from offshore work.
About 300,000 jobs onshore depend on this work, quite apart from the 30,000
people who are regularly employed offshore. The capital spending programmes
of oil and gas companies have for some years amounted to about one quarter
of total UK industrial investment.
But it is an industry that depends heavily on confidence in the future.
Offshore projects are planned with up to 25-year lives and undertaking
exploration and subsequent production is a high risk business in which large
sums are invested on the basis of sparse information. The industry's
confidence in future political, fiscal and market policies is critical to
planning its activities, particularly when - as at present - high operating
costs in UK waters provide unfavourable economic comparisons with other
international opportunities for investment.
Continuing development of Britain's gas reserves, and the investment and
jobs that go with it, requires a consistent approach on the part of
government and stable policies towards its momentum and growth. We believe
there are sufficient reserves of UK gas to satisfy the nation's needs well
into the next century.
These future opportunities will be put at risk if gas is regarded casually
and mistakenly as a distant resource, always on tap, to be turned on or off
by the short-term arguments of expediency. Continuity of offshore
exploration and development will only occur in a climate of industry
confidence in rational economic and political decision-making. It is this
climate of confidence that may now be endangered.
J V Parziale,
president,
UK Offshore Operators
Association,
3 Hans Crescent, London SW1
