FT  01 APR 92 / Hachette cuts its losses over La Cinq: The ending of a
French flirtation
WHEN Mr Jean-Luc Lagardere posed, sun-tanned and smiling, for the French
press outside La Cinq's headquarters in October 1990, he was celebrating the
end of a lengthy struggle to take Hachette, his publishing and printing
group, into television.
The memory of those celebrations must seem, at best, bitter-sweet to
Hachette's chairman.
La Cinq, which earlier this year filed for bankruptcy, will on Friday be
told by a Paris court if it is to close. Hachette's flirtation with the
television industry has lasted less than 18 months and could cost up to
FFr3.55bn (Dollars 630m) (Pounds 360m).
It might also mean that Mr Lagardere and his family lose control of
Hachette, one of Europe's most prominent media empires.
The La Cinq crisis has come at the worst possible time for Hachette which is
burdened by heavy debts after its over-ambitious acquisitions in the US.
On Monday Hachette announced that, after totting up last year's losses on La
Cinq, it was asking its banks for a fresh injection of capital to
restructure its finances.
Hachette has to make provisions of up to FFr1.8bn for La Cinq in its 1991
accounts. This follows a provision of FFr1.7bn in 1990 bringing the total
bill for its brief investment in television to FFr3.55bn. But the 1991
provision takes Hachette's net debt to an estimated FFr8bn - against equity
of just FFr1.2bn.
It remains to be seen what form the financial restructuring will take: how
much money the banks, which include Credit Lyonnais and Banque Nationale de
Paris, will agree to give; and whether the Lagardere family interests can
hold on to their 51 per cent of Hachette.
Meanwhile Mr Lagardere is proceeding with the plan he announced to a
startled Paris stock market earlier this year, to merge Hachette with Matra,
the electronics company also controlled by the Lagardere family.
'The merger with Matra looks more and more like a rescue for Hachette,' said
one media analyst. 'The chickens are really coming home to roost at
Hachette. We will soon find out whether there are a few vultures among
them.'
Until the La Cinq debacle, Hachette was seen as an ambitious, but far from
reckless media group which was expanding beyond its original base in France
notably by launching Elle, its successful fashion magazine, into other
countries.
Mr Lagardere can hardly complain he was not warned about the pitfalls of
investing in television. No fewer than three government ministers told him
to steer clear of La Cinq which had been struggling to establish itself as
France's fifth channel since its launch in 1986.
But Mr Lagardere, still smarting at being beaten by the Bouygues
construction group in the 1987 privatisation bid for TF1, the biggest French
channel, was anxious to take Hachette into television. When the opportunity
arose to invest in La Cinq in autumn 1990, he leapt at it.
La Cinq had then already lost almost FFr2.5bn. Its losses have since
escalated. By late last year the situation was critical. On New Year's Eve
Hachette, having tried and failed to find new investors, announced the
station was filing for bankruptcy.
No one, not even Mr Lagardere, knows the final cost of La Cinq to Hachette.
It is still in negotiations over possible compensation for the investors,
notably Kleinwort Benson, the British bank, that it brought into the station
in 1990. But the putative provision of FFr1.8bn for 1991 is believed to be
the highest possible figure, enabling Hachette to begin 1992 with a clean
sheet.
La Cinq may be the immediate cause of Hachette's predicament, but it is not
the only problem. Hachette is also encumbered by the debts amassed in its
acquisitions of the late 1980s and by the difficulty of integrating its new
interests. It has been left with net debt of around FFr8bn mainly because of
the purchase of two US companies - Grolier encyclopedias and Diamandis
magazines - for a total of Dollars 1.16bn (Pounds 670m) in late 1988.
Unluckily for Hachette it did the deals on the eve of the US recession and
the consequent slump in the publishing sector.
The new acquisitions not only performed less well than Hachette had expected
(the US companies covered their financial costs for the first time in 1991),
but it was also hampered in its attempts to reduce its debts by making
disposals, not only in the US but in other countries.
Hachette did sell the Nouvelles Messageries building in central Paris for
FFr2.78bn in 1990 and sold some printing businesses last year. But its 8.1
per cent stake in Rizzoli, the Italian publisher, is still on the block as
is its landmark building on Paris' Boulevard Saint Germain.
'This is a very bad time to be making disposals,' said Mr Jean Jacques
Limage, media analyst at James Capel in Paris. 'The publishing and property
markets are both depressed. Hachette is finding it difficult to get good
prices.'
It is difficult to calculate the full impact of these problems on Hachette
given it has had little contact with analysts for the past year. However
Hachette posted a net loss of FFr30m in the first half of 1991 and is
expected to report another loss, possibly as high as FFr1bn, for the full
year in its results next month.
In the meantime Hachette, like the rest of the French media, is waiting
anxiously for Friday when a Paris court decides whether to pull the plug on
La Cinq. If it does, a blank screen will take the place of France's
ill-fated fifth channel.
