FT  08 FEB 92 / Heaven and Hell: The disgraced soldier who was jailed for
doing his duty - Edwina Currie, MP, recalls a sobering night in the French
countryside
WE SAT, my friends and I, around a white table in the soft, warm French
evening on a terrace overlooking a field and a forest. Crickets sang lustily
in the hedge and a lizard scuttled to rest under a stone.
The cheeseboard sat on the table, creamy Brie oozing, the milk-white round
of chevre reflecting the ghostly glow of the rising moon. We were full of
food and a little drunk, even as Mike brought a tarte aux poires and
Armagnac and port to the table. Laughing: 'Oh no, I really couldn't manage
any more' and 'lt's a good job we don't have far to go   . can you imagine
driving home in this state in England?'
Then, I said to them: 'Tell me your ideas on Heaven and Hell. Is this
Heaven? Sitting here, with friends, escaping from the realities of home and
work? If so, what would Hell be - going back?'
Mike lives six months in France, six months in Wiltshire. Very British, he
'retired' from business at the age of 45 more than 20 years ago. He is
tanned, moustachioed, fit, young-looking. He lives alone and fills his time
by pottering around and doing-up the ruined mill on his land, digging drains
and laying floors, and arguing with the local artisans. He loves cooking and
regarded our presence as an opportunity, not a chore, serving up a whole
salmon and trying out a new sauce with comments like 'piquant' and 'too
much?'
'This is as close to Heaven as I've ever been,' he said, leaning back, hands
behind head. 'All it lacks is someone sympa to share it.' He grinned
roguishly at Marjorie, the only unaccompanied woman in the group. Her
husband had been forced to return to his hot, sticky office in London. She
tried out a rakish smile, hiccuped slightly and dropped her eyes to the
fruit bowl, blushing.
An uncomfortable silence. Mike's two broken marriages and a life of
solitude, even in this lovely place, did not seem a recipe for Heaven to me.
And eyeing other men's wives was a hiding to nothing; when did adultery end
in happiness for all concerned?
I turned to Alain, the young local builder. The French abandon their
dilapidated old farmhouses, built of solid creamy limestone with oak beams
sprouting from every angle, in favour of modern little boxes near town with
piped water and television aerials. The English cannot believe their luck in
finding so much gorgeous stuff within easy driving of the ports, going for a
song. Nothing had made Alain happier than the day the Channel tunnel broke
through. So, he improves his English and his wife grows fat.
'I have my idea about Hell,' he mused. 'There, I would not be able to do any
sport. There would be no football, no cycles, no swimming, no-one to play
squash, no boules, no - nothing. And I would be in pain, tied down, not able
to move my arms and legs.' And he did so, energetically, knocking a glass of
wine off the table. The red stain spread on the bleached stone in an ugly
puddle. It seemed, in our alcoholic fug, incredibly funny.
He is young and fit - now. The way he goes, heaving planks and lugging
stone, will destroy his back eventually. His Hell is coming, built into his
life-style as he gets older.
For me, Heaven is a place where all the people I have ever loved are
gathered, all as young and handsome and beautiful as when first we knew each
other. My husband has rather more of his hair. My dark-haired, leggy older
daughter, now nearly 17 and happy to back-pack around the Continent, casual
about a Euro-passport and the single currency, is again four years old:
huge, brown eyes, fair hair curling around small ears, in the garden where
we used to live. Old enough to say funny, sweet things, small enough to be
carted off when naughty. Now, she is bigger than me and still growing: I'm
the shortest in the family.
My younger daughter is a baby, chubby and bald and impossible. It was not
until nine months old that she smiled, and then sunshine came into every
room. Now, she is in America with cousins and awaits her GCSE results. We
may never spend the summer all together again, just the four of us. The
babies are gone forever.
'I should have thought,' suggested Mike, looking at me sideways, 'that, with
your history, Hell would be to be disgraced.' Disgrace? Humiliation? No, you
can live through that, especially if you believe your detractors are wrong.
Put it behind you and carry on. 'What do you mean?' I asked. 'I was
disgraced once,' he said. 'I've never told anyone before; and that was Hell
on earth for me.' We settled down to listen.
'I had been a very young second lieutenant as the (Second World) war
finished and volunteered to continue in service. I found myself in the wake
of Mountbatten, in northern India, as he and (his wife) Edwina (your
namesake) and (British prime minister Clement) Attlee prepared to hand over
independence. There was trouble - a lot of it - but the British government
was not prepared to do more than offer to keep control. The Labourites
didn't care, see, they wanted out.
'I was sent with a sergeant and six or seven privates up to one area where
there had been massacres - Moslems slaughtering Hindus, trying to get them
to leave. Mostly, we got to the villages a day or two after the events and
could do no more than help with the disposal of bodies and make reports. It
was a sickening business.
'Then we had advance warning. I was ordered with my troop to one larger
stockaded village. Hundreds of Moslems, armed to the teeth, were sitting
encircling the village as night fell, just like vultures, only white: you
could see their clothes in the dark out there, hear their muttering all
night.
'The place was crowded with refugees: women, kids everywhere. God, was I
scared - I was only about 21. I posted a man to each corner of the stockade
and gave them five live rounds each. As dawn came, the whole ghastly host
started to charge, waving knives and screaming for blood. And they got it
from us, as we opened fire. It worked - the moment men fell, they turned
tail and were off. We were able to get out in one piece.'
We cheered. 'Well done] What was wrong with that?' But Mike was far away. 'I
was court-martialled - charged with manslaughter. Not orders, see; Jinnah (a
Moslem politician who became Pakistan's first governor-general) and the
others didn't like it. Found guilty, imprisoned two years. Drummed out.
Disgraced.' He reached for his brandy and drained it at a gulp. Tears were
running down his face. Hell was sitting right there among us.
It was time to leave; subdued, we said our farewells. Mike continued to sit,
alone on the terrace, refilling his glass.
