FT  17 FEB 92 / Day rules out BAe top level reshuffle
THE appointment of a new chairman at British Aerospace, the UK's biggest
engineering company, is not expected to lead to any significant top
management reshuffle.
Sir Graham Day, BAe's interim chairman, said at the weekend that the
company's search for a new chairman was 'on target' and that the position
would be filled by someone who would be expected to work as part of the
defence, aerospace, car and property group's existing executive management
team.
'We are not looking for someone to come into the company with a fresh look
but to join and work with the existing team', he emphasised.
Sir Graham made a strong defence of Mr Dick Evans, the company's chief
executive. Mr Evans is playing a central role in the selection and
interviews of potential candidates for the chairmanship.
Some of BAe's critics in the City believe that further top management
changes will be needed if the company is to restore its credibility with
investors following its mishandled rights issue last autumn.
Sir Graham has been irritated by recent speculation that the search for a
new chairman was proving difficult. 'We have made no offers and no one has
turned any offer down,' he said.
BAe, which is due to report its preliminary results for the year ended
December 1991 on Wednesday, is still hoping to announce the appointment of a
new chairman in May to coincide with the company's annual meeting. Sir
Graham said a short list of less than five candidates had now been drawn up.
The company had also started the first interviews of potential candidates.
While declining to disclose any names on the short list, he said BAe was
looking for a candidate who was British and came from a large company with
international experience. Not all the candidates were based in the UK but
all were British because of the difficulties of appointing a foreign
national at the top of a company with such wide-ranging defence activities
as BAe.
Candidates would be meeting BAe's top management team, including Mr Evans,
to get a feel for the management they would be working with, Sir Graham
explained.
He added that Mr Evans and Mr George Simpson, the new deputy chief
executive, had the BAe board's 'full support'.
Rocket deal, Page 10
