FT  06 JUN 92 / Books: Politician of passion rather than principle
CHARLES JAMES FOX by L G Mitchell Oxford Pounds 25, 338 pages
AS FAMOUS parliamentary double-acts go, Fox and Pitt have never caught the
imagination as much as Gladstone and Disraeli, although the pair dominated
the politics of their day as surely as G &amp; D did 100 years later.
The contrast between them was just as marked: Pitt the professional
politician, the buttoned-up bachelor and (in his enemies' opinion) the
puppet of the potentially despotic George III; Fox the self-styled 'man of
the people', who could extemporise four-hour-long speeches to a packed
House, often after gaming at Brooks's until the early hours. Fox belonged to
an older style of politics, one in which loyalty to friends mattered as much
as political beliefs, and in which the pleasures of the world, of literature
(he was a brilliant classicist and linguist) and the Parisian high-life were
necessary adjuncts to the parliamentary grind.
Now LG Mitchell, one of Oxford's brightest young historians, has written the
definitive and (because he likes his subject so much) certainly the most
penetrating biography someone so unfathomable has inspired. Fox's
principles, even to his friends, seemed obscure often to the point of
deliberate obfuscation, and he has proved equally puzzling to subsequent
historians. Hailed as one of the founding fathers of Radicalism, he has been
just as vehemently depicted as an irresponsible impediment to the
statemanship of Pitt. Throughout his life he was suspected of being more in
sympathy with Britain's enemies than her allies. This was especially true
during the wars with America and France, both of which he opposed because he
believed they disguised the despotic ambitions of George III.
But Fox's career is really a study in political alchemy. The true magic lay
in the man rather than the message. Burke, long after the termination of his
political association with Fox, admitted that he was a 'man made to be
loved.' Long after Fox's death a diarist recorded that elderly Foxites,
remembering the loss of their mentor, would 'burst into tears with a
vehemence of grief such as I hardly ever saw exhibited by a man.'
Fox was a man of strong passions but few principles. He upheld toleration,
supporting the abolition of the slave trade and the extension of liberties
to Catholics and Dissenters: 'as someone who from infancy had never accepted
any constraints on conduct, he never had any qualms about extending the
freedoms he enjoyed to others.'
Likewise, Fox's brand of Whiggery, which turned this descendant of Charles
II into the most strenuous opponent of executive power, was the expression
of a certain sort of personality rather than the result of deep reading in
political science. He never seriously believed in extending the franchise,
in natural rights or even the virtues of a mixed constitution. To his
opponents, the phalanx of grand Whiggery who bore his coffin - Devonshire,
Norfolk, Carlisle, Albemarle, Fitzwilliam - represented the 'Aristocratical
Republic' which Fox would have substituted for Britain's system of limited
Monarchy.
He was probably right about the needlessness of the war with America but
wrong about France - until, that is, he encountered the megalomania of
Napoleon face-to-face in Paris in 1802 ('Long talk with Bony he talked
almost all'). In later life (to the disappointment of his parliamentary
allies) he virtually retired from the political arena, returning to
literature ('in every point of view a preferable occupation to politics'),
to history (he began a history of the reign of James II), and to the haven
of a late but contented marriage, all of which prompted his niece to remark
that 'he affects to be as virulent as ever in politicks, but as he sometimes
laughs at his want of candour, I think it is more a love of argument &amp;
dispute than any fixed principle to him.' He died, to universal mourning, in
1806 aged 56.
Mitchell wisely refuses to smooth a career full of ambiguities and
hesitations into a tale of undeviating consistency. He traces its
fluctuations with great subtlety. The result, quite simply, is one of this
year's best books, a brilliantly readable achievement.
