FT  20 FEB 92 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (22): Smarter Cinderellas
 -The new image of vans
LIGHT commercial vehicles have traditionally been the Cinderellas of the
motor industry. However, they are quietly and slowly, shaking off the worst
of that image, as manufacturers, dealers and fleets start to take them more
seriously. The supplier side of the industry appears to be putting its house
in order, according to Derek Carpenter, of the Harris Research Centre.
Harris has been doing annual surveys of van operators' satisfaction since
the mid-1980s, and found in its latest survey that 'overall, operators said
the standard of servicing was high, and better than in 1990. However, there
are still examples of customers having to wait a very long time for spare
parts.' Other problem areas highlighted by a generally happy public were
quality of workmanship, and having to return to the workshop more than once
with a recurring fault.
Several manufacturers are doing detailed market studies and using the
results much more actively to identify poor dealer performance. Some are
using financial rewards and penalties to encourage improvements.
'Either manufacturers are coercing dealers, or the dealers are simply
improving their own performance. Although vans are low volume compared with
cars, they can be very profitable.' Many van customers are reliant on their
vehicles, much more so than car users, he notes.
According to Stuart Wright, light commercial vehicle manager at Citroen UK,
dealers are coming under increasing pressure from sections of the van market
to move away from car-based after-sales support and move more towards what
is available in the heavy truck sector, in terms of the style of maintenance
and contracts.
Lorry operators have long been used to a responsive, 'open-all-hours'
service from their dealers, which has enabled them to get their vehicles
serviced at times when they are not needed to carry freight, and repaired at
the roadside urgently. Many truck dealers' workshops are open 24 hours a
day, six days a week or more, contributing significantly to their customers'
efficiency.
The influence of the heavy truck market is coming through on a number of
fronts, according to Malcolm Jefferies, marketing director for Leyland Daf
vans and trucks. 'More fleets are buying on a professional basis, they are
looking at their costs in more detail. A lot of people are looking at vans
on a whole life cost basis, who two or three years ago wouldn't have given
it a thought.
'Out-of-hours servicing is one thing which grows out of that. If the
vehicles are working on eight-hour day delivery cycles, one way to reduce
the costs of non-productive time off the road is to have the vehicles
maintained outside normal hours.' Fleet managers running vans and trucks and
demanding out-of-hours servicing for the heavier vehicles often have exactly
the same operating requirements for their vans.
The difference in culture between car and lorry dealers shows up in the
Leyland DAF network. While 140 dealers are part of car (mostly Rover)
operations, a further 50 joined after the disposal of Rover's van and truck
companies to DAF in the late 1980s.
Bill Beadnell, chairman of North East Leyland Daf, has two workshops which
were more used to catering for hauliers working for chemicals and heavy
engineering companies, than for van operators. After getting the van
franchise, companies like his have been able to offer lcv users with 'a
level of service most had hardly dreamed about'.
Mr Jefferies agrees. 'Heavy truck dealers have been able to provide a
different type of service.' But there are, by necessity, relatively few
heavy truck outlets, and many van operators would prefer to deal with a car
dealership, than have to walk into a huge truck workshop. The ideal would be
a network which combined the best of both worlds, but that is impossible, he
says.
At a time when there is pressure to reduce workshop hours, the dilemma
facing car dealers is how to justify the increase in overheads involved in
putting on a second shift in the workshop to cater for van customers needing
out-of-hours servicing. The demand will rarely be great - more than half the
lcv market seems happy to buy after-sales service in the same way as car
owners.
There is no evidence that customers would pay more for the service in this
recession. On the contrary they have been seeking lower labour rates. It
seems certain that some fleets seeking out-of-hours servicing, will move
away from franchised garages to independent workshops.
Some manufacturers, who are seeking to expand their lcv activities, are
finding that dealers, hit by falling sales and profits, are reluctant to
invest in the parts, vehicle lifts and trained personnel needed for a
first-class van outlet.
Ford, the clear market leader, is putting pressure - it prefers the term
'friendly persuasion' - on its car dealers to set up separate sales, parts
and service operations for their van business. 'Car specialists can't deal
in a normal way with commercial vehicle requirements. It involves a
different product knowledge, everything. It is obviously difficult at
present, but we are putting a lot of weight behind commercials.'
Another manufacturer commented: 'By and large, customer requirements will be
met. However, dealers would undoubtedly invest more, if it weren't for the
recession.'
Manufacturers' warranties are improving, however. Toyota and Mazda offer
three-year, 60,000-miles cover, typically of interest to small traders,
while Leyland DAF now gives two years or 100,000 miles as standard, with a
third year option. Ford gives one year, unlimited, while Mercedes gives an
optional second year warranty on the driveline.
Meanwhile, Iveco Ford Truck, market leader in goods vehicles up to the
non-heavy goods vehicle limit of 7.5 tonnes, has introduced the concept of
menu pricing along with its new Cargo range of middleweight trucks. The
computer-based system is part of a package of measures designed to overcome
a long-standing criticism of truck dealers - that operators can never be
sure of what they will be charged for maintenance work, until they get the
bill.
The system seeks to impose the discipline of standard workshop hours, which
are common in the car side of the industry but much less so with trucks,
across a wide range of servicing and repairs.
