FT  29 MAY 92 / House passes energy bill with oil-saving aim
THE House of Representatives has passed an energy bill which, according to
its sponsors, could cut US oil imports by nearly one-third by the year 2010.
The bill, voted through easily on Wednesday, has been described as the most
comprehensive piece of energy legislation for more than a decade. It covers
most aspects of domestic energy use and regulation and includes many
compromises between environmental and industry lobbying groups.
The highlights include a prohibition on further offshore oil drilling,
excepting the Gulf of Mexico and Alaska, for the next decade. The
administration had objected to this restriction, but not to the point of
threatening a veto. On the other hand, the oil industry was relieved that it
is not being forced to underwrite a proposal later stripped out of the bill
for a 1bn barrels strategic petroleum reserve.
The bill is not designed to address the concerns likely to be raised at next
week's Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro.
The legislation contains no provision to force the car industry to improve
fuel efficiency standards, but it does encourage greater investment in
vehicles powered by other sources of energy. It also tries to stimulate use
of public transport by placing a limit of Dollars 160 a month on the value
of tax-free car parking privileges offered to employees.
It promotes incentives and tax credits for further development of solar,
wind and geothermal energy supplies and makes slightly easier current
regulations on building nuclear power plants and natural gas pipelines.
Independent non-utility companies would also be encouraged to enter the
power business by requiring existing utilities to make their transmission
facilities available to new entrants.
Congressman Philip Sharp, a Democratic from Indiana, estimated that oil
imports could be cut by 3m barrels a day by 2010, with the equivalent of a
further 2m b/d savings through increased use of other non-fossil sources of
energy. The US now consumes about 17m b/d, roughly half of which is
imported.
