FT  17 DEC 92 / Arts: Billy Liar - Theatre
Keith Waterhouse has achieved the unusual distinction of having a new play
running in the West End while one of his early works is being revived as a
period-piece at the Royal National Theatre. It is not that Waterhouse has
changed much as a playwright: he continues to chronicle the times as he sees
them, but in 30 years times have have changed almost beyond recognition.
Our Song, his new play at the Apollo, is about an abortive love affair in
the advertising world of the late 1980s. Billy Liar, which he wrote along
with Willis Hall, is a product of the late 1950s. Lindsay Anderson, the
original director, writes in a programme note that Billy was a protest play
about the class society, and remains so today.
That is not how it looks in Tim Supple's production at the Cottesloe.
Protest and anger are notably absent. This Billy Liar is a portrait of the
emergence of relative affluence and the continuation of deference. No-one
seems particularly short of the odd bob or two. Some, like the girl Liz
(Sally Rogers) are even fairly flush - ready to buy rail tickets from the
north of England to King's Cross on a Saturday night.
No-one is unemployed. When Billy's father threatens to throw him out if he
cannot earn his own living, Billy comes back within two hours having found a
job as a clerk, which he continues to hold down despite fiddling the petty
cash and not turning up on Saturday mornings. If he wanted to, Billy could
enter the family business - a removals firm. The family cocktail cabinet, by
no means despised by Billy, lights up and plays a tune when opened.
There is one area of contention. Billy has passed his 11 plus and entered a
grammar school where he feels out of place. He resents his parents' claim
that it is a willing financial sacrifice on their part to pay for the
uniform that goes with a grammar school education. This was before the late
Anthony Crosland pledged to abolish the whole effing lot of them, because of
their disruptive social influence.
Billy withdraws from school prematurely and retreats into fantasies. His
parents call them lies, which is literally true, but nostalgic fantasies is
the better description. He would like to be a concert-pianist, a
script-writer or even prime minister. When his father calls him into line,
on the whole he obeys. There is not the slightest sign of a social
conscience or serious break with conformity. Besides, he spends most of this
time chasing the girls: references to the campaign for nuclear disarmament
or South Africa are no more than an afterthought.
There are other dips into the past, like the grandmother who refuses medical
treatment because one of the doctors is a woman and the other is black. The
grandmother (Elizabeth Bradley) also talks about the trouble caused by the
blacks on the buses in Birmingham. It takes an effort of memory to realise
that she means Birmingham, Alabama.
Billy is played by Paul Wyett. He looks younger than his predecessors,
Albert Finney and Tom Courtenay, but that may be a sign of our growing
older. James Grant plays his father whose every third word is 'bloody',
which once seemed daring but now sounds quaint. June Watson as the mother
looks and acts exactly like a lower middle class woman of the time - bearing
up with some dignity. As a loving, careful reconstruction of a view of
Britain circa 1960, it is very well done. It should not be taken for
anything more.
In repertory at the Cottesloe Theatre (071 928 2252), then touring.
Sponsored by BP.
