FT  21 NOV 92 / The FT Goes Shopping (3):  For fashion or fling, a scarf's
just the thing / A look at the evolution of a top accessory
EVERY SCARF shop will tell you the story of the woman who meets a friend
wearing a particularly luscious silk square and asks: 'Is it real?'
'Real' generally means one of the classic equestrian or Baroque styles from
Hermes which have become the much-copied pinnacle of aspiration. Yet, this
is misleading. There are thousands of exquisite designs and fabrics from
other illustrious labels, and Hermes itself does a huge range of less
classic motifs.
So, wearing a scarf can be an act of public status-display or private
comfort. You can choose one with a designer label in a prominent position or
you can throw on the plainest slip of cashmere and silk that feels wonderful
or lifts a plain outfit. The true aficionado knows a stylish scarf
instantly. If you have to ask if it is real, then you are not up to wearing
it.
Hermes' pre-eminence came about almost by accident - it was first with a
brilliant idea. Having diversified from equestrian to motor age accessories,
it launched scarves in 1937. The first big success, Entente Cordiale, was
kept under wraps during the German occupation of France. After the
liberation, the windows of the Paris store were filled with the new design,
which was snapped up.
The scarves' quality - designs take 2 1/2 years from concept to shop and can
involve up to 36 colours, each of which needs its own print-screen -
attracted a top-line clientele, emphasised later by the patronage of such
celebrities as Grace Kelly.
When fashion went back to glamour and formality in the 1980s, Hermes went
into overdrive, boosted by the newly label-conscious Far East market.
Despite a big range of other products, scarves, made in France and costing
Pounds 129 each, now constitute the main part of its business.
Each company connected loosely with fashion feels it needs a signature scarf
as part of its corporate image. Through the 1980s, this was a great
marketing ploy which played on the customer's need for confidence through
labels. Some designs were less than subtle, though. Burberry used its rather
dominant house check on its first silk scarf in 1980. Now, in a more
sophisticated marketplace, there are 15 more gentle varieties of that check,
plus 30 other designs where the check-as-logo might be just the ribbon on a
bunch of flowers. Made in Italy, they cost from Pounds 85 to Pounds 105.
There are aspirational scarves at all levels of the market. For top fashion
houses, a scarf can be the point of entry that lures you on to more
expensive things. Chanel's Bernadette Rendalls says: 'Lipsticks are the
basic introduction to the world of Chanel but a scarf or a pair of earrings
often comes next, before the handbags or clothes.'
Designs vary from the classic, incorporating the famous double C logo, to
the specials that Karl Lagerfeld designs for each clothes collection. Next
spring's, in fashionably 1940s' style, feature his witty sketches of house
symbols - camellias, quilted bags and so on - on faded pastel backgrounds.
They cost from Pounds 115.
Celine is more classic: its main growth areas are the large wraps, stoles
and throws which high designer fashion now takes for granted. Its range is
from Pounds 90 to Pounds 200.
Even in the mass market, there is an element of exclusiveness. Tie Rack uses
much thinner silk and designs with only 10 colours (although often
overprinted to make more) and, by turning to high-tech methods in Japan, can
sell at a maximum of Pounds 25. Art school graduates design limited edition
ranges which change every month and disappear quickly to regular customers.
The designs may be heavily influenced by the likes of Versace and English
Eccentrics, but if you want a scarf for every outfit this is the reasonable
way to do it.
There is, however, another approach to scarves which is growing as the
market becomes less label-obsessed. Here, choice depends totally on design,
either its beauty or the exquisite quality of fabric or because it
complements an outfit from the same house.
Gucci, for instance, says its scarves are 'bought as the finishing touch
with an outfit. Sales are increasing as our clothes in general become more
high profile.' Made in Italy, the scarves are Pounds 120. At Yves St
Laurent, a plain silk scarf often adds an unexpected but totally appropriate
colour note to an outfit, and there is also a tradition of a different
animal-print scarf each season.
Loewe's beautiful scarves on Spanish themes - often historical - also are
collectors' pieces, the latest being inspired by Velasquez and the Madrid
botanic gardens. And Louis Vuitton's scarves, commissioned from well-known
contemporary designers such as Gae Aulenti and Philippe Starck, could almost
be used as wall hangings and go from Pounds 130 to Pounds 180.
Jewellery houses have discovered that their designs translate very well into
classic scarves of the pearl-swag and chain variety. Cartier's newest
designs, based on the Duchess of Windsor's famous flamingo brooch and on
Egyptian-inspired jewels, cost Pounds 110.
Lalique has taken the same route this year as part of its expanding product
range, with designs at Pounds 150 based on famous Art Nouveau pieces from
Rene Lalique's archives.
Classic scarves come mostly from Europe but British designers are in the
vanguard of a new direction. Georgina von Etzdorf started as a screen
printer, but scarves now make up 73 per cent of her turnover, which
increased by 15 per cent last year.
She is known best for Art Deco-inspired prints on silk or velvet but is now
trying matt linen, sheeny panne velvet and metallic organza, all in the
pale, muted shades of fashion's new light and fluid mood. Prices go from
Pounds 69.
English Eccentrics' forte is the rich baroque motif with which it has
experimented since 1987 in all colourways, from the most vivid to strict
monochrome. It is now working also with more delicate colours and fabrics
and with the newly fashionable long, rather than square, scarf (from Pounds
81).
Young designer Jackie Campbell, whose fragile watered chiffons, priced from
Pounds 52.50 are acquiring a cult following, sums up the new approach.
'I am not competing with the Hermes silk twill status symbol,' she says.
'Chiffon is much softer and subtler, an enhancement of clothes rather than a
designer afterthought.'
As women increasingly forsake the prop of the label, the great scarf houses
may have to take note.
