FT  31 OCT 92 / The Financial Times Guide To Post-16 Education 19: Bristol -
where opportunity takes many shapes
BRISTOL exemplifies the UK's education system at its most thriving. Few
cities have as much to offer post-16 year olds. An FT survey of Bristol's
schools and colleges found pupils and parents alive to the opportunities; it
also found institutions, whether in the independent or state sectors, keenly
aware of the pressures of the market.
Bristol's results in the FT-1,000 survey speak for themselves. Eight of the
city's ten independent schools outperform its entire state sector.
Nonetheless, the best of Bristol's state schools and colleges perform
creditably, given their mostly non-selective admissions.
Bristol has a particularly strong college sector. The top state institution
is a Further Education College - Filton College, in the north of the city
but drawing from across and beyond Bristol. Nearly a third of Filton's
A-level passes this year were at grades A and B. A quarter of this year's
16-year-old intake are students who were previously in the independent
sector.
St Brendan's, a Roman Catholic sixth form college, gives priority to
Catholic families, but has four feeder schools and draws widely beyond.
South Bristol FE College runs the sixth form for a consortium of south
Bristol schools. For the more vocationally-oriented, Brunel FE College -
housed in a bleak former orphanage - offers a wide range of BTEC and other
courses, and has superbly run and equipped engineering, technology and
science facilities. The colleges market themselves as half-way houses
between school and work or college.
Avon county council runs Bristol's state schools. Under the local management
of schools policy, all have budgets of their own and their heads are growing
used to running their own shows as never before. Only two grammar schools
have survived in a sea of comprehensives, but catchment areas,
euphemistically dubbed 'areas of prime responsibility' by the education
authority, appear to be more important than formal admissions policies in
forming the character of individual schools.
Comprehensives in the wealthier suburbs and surrounding villages - such as
Nailsea, Backwell and Chew Magna - have excellent and well-deserved
reputations. Their clientele is largely middle-class, and they are no more -
and may even be less - socially representative than Bristol's independent
day schools, all of which take a high proportion of pupils on bursaries or
the government's assisted places scheme. A sample of sixth formers in one
successful 'comprehensive' found that the parents of almost half had moved
into the school's catchment area to get them into the school.
Bristol's high-achieving state schools are all oversubscribed, but unable to
expand because of capacity ceilings imposed by Avon. Cotham grammar school,
on the edge of affluent Clifton near the city centre, has its eyes on a
vacant college down the road as a sixth form centre; Backwell, on the road
to Weston-super-Mare, would consider selling off a playing field if it could
use the proceeds to expand. But neither has got any joy from cash-starved
Avon, which is struggling with surplus places in other schools.
Even in the less leafy areas, schools are battling to get results. Marlwood
school, which embraces the working-class suburb of Severn Beach, gains third
place among Avon's state schools - evidence that catchment areas are not
everything. Hartcliffe school, in the middle of the council estate hit by
this summer's riots, has expanded its intake from six to 17 primary schools
in recent years. In the mid-1980s its post-16 stay-on rate was 10 per cent;
now it is more than 50 per cent - 'and that's not just the recession,' says
the head.
There are numerous school / college federations across the city and beyond.
Some, like that in south Bristol, involve pooling sixth forms; others, like
that between Brimsham Green, King Edmund and Chipping Sodbury schools, allow
sixth formers to move between institutions for different courses.
Others are 'magnet' arrangements: Cotham, for example, is part of a north
Bristol consortium for vocational education, embracing 16 schools and Brunel
FE College; it also has outstanding music facilities, and is a county centre
for A-level music.
Bristol's independent sector is large and flourishing - despite the
recession. Almost all the private schools are single-sex (unlike virtually
all the state sector), and most are long-established city institutions.
Clifton College is the best known school but its social cachet and superb
facilities come dear: at Pounds 7,700 a year for day pupils, its fees are
twice those of the city's leading independent day schools. and its results
are no better than theirs.
Three of the independent day schools - Bristol Grammar, Bristol Cathedral,
and Queen Elizabeth's Hospital (QEH) - do their admissions jointly. Parents
express a preference between them, but applicants sit the same exam and all
three schools' fees are all within a few hundred pounds of each other (at
around Pounds 3,500).
The three main girls independent schools - Redland High, Colstons' Girls and
Red Maid's - run a similar system. 'Our position owes a lot to tradition and
expectation - and our very good value for money, which is due to the
competition,' says Mrs Judith Franklin, headmistress of Colston's, whose
fees are Pounds 3,360 a year.
All six hail from the old direct-grant tradition. Says Dr Richard Gliddon,
head of QEH: 'This schools doesn't have any social pretention; we are not
aping the big public schools; we're an old city grammar school.'
The independent sector gains from the widespread view that Cotham's apart,
state schools in the city - unlike those in the suburbs and beyond - do not
churn out the results. Cotham's is massively oversubscribed, and every year
the independent sector picks up a number who fail to get places.
Bristol also has an independent A-level tutorial college. The foremost is
run by Mander Portman Woodward. It is not cheap - Pounds 1,925 a term for
two A-levels - but with a maximum class size of seven, it offers intensive
tuition for those who didn't take well to a school regime. Some even prefer
it to school first time round.
