FT  28 NOV 92 / Skiing: Scaling the heights of gastronomic pleasure -
Nicholas Lander on the unexpected joys of ski-resort dining
ASKED for my ideal job I would have not the slightest hesitation. 'To review
all the restaurants in the world's ski resorts.' Aside from satisfying my
desires to ski, see the world and eat well, the job would also contain
enough contradictions to make the finished report - and I would certainly
take my time about it - useless.
For the fact is that although you can eat wonderfully well and with
spectacular views during a day's skiing, some of the most satisfying meals,
while being exactly what you want, are not that special.
No matter, they are served at exactly the right time - usually after you
have fallen, probably more than once; failed to conduct yourself perfectly
on a ski lift; or were made to look slow and old by a posse of
eight-year-olds obviously born with their skis on.
Soup tastes as though your mother has made it. Pasta joins body and soul. A
region's local specialities - raclette, tarteflette, roesti - justify fully
your decision to have chosen that particular resort. And that is before you
move on to the cakes, hot chocolate or schnapps that may see you down the
last run faster than you had thought possible.
But how do these restaurants manage it? It is hard enough in normal
circumstances to hire staff and find supplies and suppliers. The only
apparent advantage these eating houses in the sky seem to have is a
relatively captive audience.
According to Annie Schwab, who now runs Winteringham Fields in Yorkshire but
who met her husband while running a restaurant above Zermatt when he was a
chef in the Swiss village, the answer is meticulous planning.
All the heavy items to the highest restaurants - wine, water, gas tanks -
must go up on the 'rat track' in the autumn before the snow has fallen,
although helicopters are being used increasingly. 'Skidoos' can take
supplies to the lower places.
The rubbish and dirty laundry comes down every night in black bin liners on
the 'blood wagon' used for injured skiers.
Staff is actually not a problem as all resorts are inundated with ski-mad
chefs and waiters, many from Down Under and keen to see Europe. The
restaurants in the villages get the pick of the crop, however. With their
main business in the evenings, the days are free for staff to ski.
Communication with the outside world - or lack of it during an electricity
cut - can be a special problem. If a restaurant does not know something
special is happening on the other side of the valley, it can be left with a
lot of food on its hands. And any restaurateur in the sky must realise that
after a fascht nicht - when bars and restaurants in the village can stay
open all night - he will not see many skiers the following morning.
Schwab says the food on offer in these restaurants has changed. Twenty years
ago, when those who went skiing were predominantly 'serious' sportsmen,
lunch was a prompt invasion that lasted no more than half an hour and
involved, at most, a glass of mulled red wine. Today, it can be champagne
and lobsters flown in live from the south of France.
But not for me, and not just on the grounds of expense, either. Last winter
in Morzine, perspiring gently and with my boots unclipped, the pleasure of
eating a local speciality cooked simply cannot be bettered by restaurants
which recreate the cuisine outside the region.
The place was Cousin Michel (tel: 50 79 15 06), a shop that sells local hams
and cheeses with a restaurant behind. After a morning's skiing we ordered
the local speciality, a vacherin roti, without really knowing what the
cooking technique involved.
They began by delivering platters of the local hams and potatoes baked in
silver foil over a wood-burning oven. Then, from the pizza oven, came a
whole vacherin - a soft, creamy cows' milk cheese - that had been roasted in
its wooden box. The crusty top was sliced off and the ham, potatoes and
bread dipped into the warm, runny cheese. This, with a salad and a bottle of
Mondeuse, the local red wine, was nectar.
On our last day I bought all the raw ingredients - vacherin, salamis and
hams - packed them in my suitcase and brought them home. I cooked them all
just as I had remembered; but without the sun, snow and sore feet, they
really were not that special.
