FT  17 FEB 92 / Survey of the Philippines (9): Recovery hopes - Regional
Development
TEN miles south of Manila airport, in rolling agricultural land, there is a
frenzy of factory building quite at odds with the widely-held view that the
Philippines economy is stagnating.
Cavite Province's rice fields are sprouting a crop of industrial parks,
export zones, new arterial roads and microwave communications links on the
back of a wave of enthusiasm from foreign and local investors.
Once called 'The Badlands' because of its reputation as a refuge for
bandits, Cavite is now the focus of efforts to develop an industrial belt to
the south of Manila.
Governor Juanito Remulla says his zone of 'industrial peace and
productivity' has attracted 20bn pesos of investments since 1986 and has
directly created 45,000 new jobs. About half the investment is from Japan,
Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and the US and the rest from large local groups
such as San Miguel.
With the Philippines economy shrinking in real per capita terms last year by
2.5 per cent, Cavite is one of several regional pockets of activity that are
keeping recovery hopes alive.
Cebu City, on the central island of Cebu, is perhaps the best known example.
In the past three years it has left the rest of the country behind in terms
of growth, investment and attractiveness to foreign investors.
A bustling port and trading centre, it is dominated by Filipino-Chinese
businessmen with little time for what politicians and government are doing
in Manila. It has marketed an image of a peaceful 'Island in the Pacific'
divorced from the problems of politically fog-bound Manila.
'The Manila businessman spends his time trying to influence government to
get grants and policy changes,' says one Manila-based Filipino banker. 'The
Cebuano knows he has no access so he just dives in and swims. He could not
care less about government policy.'
As a result, Cebu has developed a thriving native furniture export industry,
a large trade in seaweed to the US and an active coconut oil export
business.
About half the companies operating out of the Mactan export processing zone
are Japanese. Exports from this area have grown about 15 per cent annually
over the past three years, despite a wayward typhoon in 1990 which damaged
infrastructure and threatened to derail the regional boom.
For the domestic market, Cebu has also become the southern Philippines
centre for cement production, scrap iron consolidation, and a large flour
milling and beer brewing centre.
Common to Cebu and the newer but equally promising Cavite, are strong
provincial leaders and access to international airports. Cebu's was upgraded
by the Americans during the Vietnam war. Governor Emilio Osmena in Cebu is
pressing ahead with plans to upgrade the regional infrastructure. With one
of the largest local developers, Ayala Land, the local government has tapped
private capital, issuing the country's first municipal bonds or CEBU's (Cebu
Equity Bond Units).
He has also attracted pledges of more than 5bn pesos in development
assistance from Japan and has cut swathes through Manila's red tape,
encouraging a 'can-do' mentality.
In Cavite, the firm hand comes from Governor Remulla who has taken 10 years
to consolidate diversely-held land holdings so that more than 4,000ha are
now available for industrial uses. 'Local government should concentrate on
inviting in investors to get exports and more foreign exchange,' he says.
The most advanced development is the 277ha export processing zone at
Rosario, Cavite where more than 100 companies have invested or are about to
start building. Investors include a glass manufacturing joint venture
between Yamamura of Japan and San Miguel; the US computer components maker
Commodore Electronics; Yasaki, the Japanese car parts maker; Maxon, a Korean
portable telephone manufacturer; Clarion, the Japanese audio company; and
Cavite Apparel, a local exporter of suits and garments.
About half the investment in Cavite has so far gone to the export processing
zones where exporters are exempt from import levies and have their own
dedicated customs officials to reduce bureaucratic delay.
But Mr Remulla is also encouraging development of private business parks and
export zones. The biggest are the 160ha Gateway Business Park where the
developers, the local de los Reyes family, claim 'Asia's greatest rewards
await', and the 500ha First Cavite Industrial Estate, a joint venture
between Marubeni of Japan and the government's National Development Corp.
Throughout the country these export zones accounted for about Dollars 819m,
or 10 per cent of the country's exports in 1991. The industries they attract
are mainly assembly operations adding little local value other than labour -
as the Dollars 584m figure for imports into the zones suggests.
Nevertheless, with foreign exchange and import liberalisation likely to
improve local quality and competitiveness, economists expect domestic
sourcing for exports to increase.
Just as regions such as Cebu and Cavite are seen as small engines of
recovery, so regional development has received an additional boost.
Last October, the senate approved a new local government code which will
allow local authorities, particularly in the cities, to spend more of the
taxes they collect.
It is a bold experiment in local democracy, after years of centralisation,
that was driven by frustration with Manila's slow disbursement of funds.
Businessmen and economists agree the new code should allow more local
leaders to develop the infrastructure from which more Cebus could sprout.
