FT  14 OCT 92 / World Trade News: US airline protests at Japanese action
A NEW aviation trade dispute, between the US and Japan, loomed yesterday
when United Airlines, the Chicago-based carrier, said it might have to
postpone the start-up of a new service between New York, Tokyo and Sydney.
The service had been scheduled to start on October 25. However, United said
yesterday that, when it made its normal winter schedule filing, the Japanese
authorities refused to accept that portion of the schedule which covered the
new flight.
Instead they requested that a separate filing be made to cover the new
service - a demand which United refused, fearing that this would impede the
operation.
The US airline insisted yesterday that there was 'no legal basis for Japan
to refuse the schedule filing', and maintained that the new service was
authorised under the US-Japan Air Services Agreement, the bilateral aviation
accord between the two countries.
It said that the issue had been raised with the US Department of
Transportation and with the State Department and that United had asked them
'to ensure that Japan honour its international obligations'.
The potential trade dispute with Japan comes at a time when the US is
already battling to win greater access for its airlines to European markets.
That policy, in turn, generated tension earlier this year between the US and
both France and Germany.
Aviation relationships between the US and the UK are also at a delicate
stage.
British Airways is seeking to purchase a large minority stake in USAir, the
sixth biggest US carrier, and the big three US airlines insist that approval
for this deal should be conditioned on a much more liberal aviation
agreement between the two countries.
'Japan now seems to be joining the Europeans in limiting US carriers' access
to markets for which the US has negotiated and paid for in terms of
reciprocal access for carriers of those countries to US markets,' claimed Mr
Stephen Wolf, United's chairman yesterday
The US Department of Transportation said it was investigating the situation.
