FT  03 APR 92 / Election 1992: Kinnock disappoints Lib Dems over PR
LIBERAL DEMOCRATS made it clear yesterday that the gesture by Mr Neil
Kinnock, the Labour leader, on electoral reform fell short of their demands
for 'fair votes'.
Mr Kinnock announced yesterday that a Labour government would invite other
politicians to join its planned inquiry into electoral reform, as the party
unveiled further details of its programme for constitutional change.
He said that Labour wanted a broad consensus behind any proposals for change
and to allow the British people to express their view, almost certainly via
a general election under the present first-past-the-post system.
In contrast, Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, said he would not
join a coalition government unless there was a commitment to legislation for
proportional representation in the first Queen's Speech of the new
government.
He envisaged agreement on details in time for a bill to be introduced in the
first session of parliament. A referendum would then take place after the
legislation had been approved by MPs but before it came into effect.
Mr Kinnock saw no chance of the party's committee on electoral reform,
chaired by Professor Raymond Plant, reaching a conclusion in time for the
Queen's Speech.
The next interim report from the committee was not expected until the
party's annual conference in the autumn, he said.
Later, Mr Roy Hattersley, Labour's deputy leader, indicated there was little
prospect of any change that might be recommended in the voting system for
Westminster being made in time for the election following the one next week.
Mr Kinnock said the election of a Labour government would give 'extra
authority' to the committee, and other political parties, representatives of
the churches, trade unions and business would be invited to take part.
He declined to give his views on proportional representation, however. 'The
whole purpose of the exercise in the first place was to gain the most
thorough and comprehensive analysis and to make recommendations on the basis
of consensus,' he said.
Asked if he would hold a referendum on any changes, Mr Kinnock replied: 'In
the event of any propositions coming forward of significant change, it is
the British people who will have the power of decisions.'
He added: 'The way that we make decisions of that nature, conventionally in
the British system, is by process of general election. That remains my
preference. It always has been.'
Mr Hattersley set out how Labour would, immediately on coming into office,
require senior government appointments to be examined by all-party
committees in the Commons.
He said Labour would protect individual rights with a comprehensive 'Charter
of Rights' made up of specific acts of parliament. It would cover equal
treatment under, and access to, the law; rights of women; and the rights of
ethnic minorities.
Other Labour proposals for constitutional reform included a Freedom of
Information Act, the replacement of the House of Lords with an elected
second chamber, Scottish and Welsh parliaments, and a review of the criminal
justice system.
