FT  05 AUG 92 / International Company News: Monsanto offloads valve division
MONSANTO, the large US chemicals company that has been focusing on its core
businesses amid a difficult operating environment, yesterday announced the
sale of its Fisher Controls valve and systems subsidiary for Dollars 1.275bn
in cash.
The buyer is Emerson Electric, the electronic products company that, like
Monsanto, is based in St Louis, Missouri.
Mr Nicholas Filippello, Monsanto's chief economist, said the Fisher Controls
division, which had 1991 sales of Dollars 928m, was no longer viewed as a
strategic asset of the group.
The Monsanto executive said the sale of the division, which employs 7,000
people of Monsanto's workforce of 39,000, would 'help us reach our financial
goals and more finely focus our product portfolio'.
Fisher Controls is a leading supplier of control valves and control systems
for process industries including the chemical, oil and gas and pulp and
paper sectors.
In 1991, its operating income was Dollars 95m, representing 11 per cent of
sales but only 6 per cent of operating profits.
Mr Filippello said that Monsanto's concentration on its core businesses of
high-value chemicals, pharmaceuticals, agricultural chemicals and food
ingredients 'precluded the level of investment needed to allow Fisher to
grow'.
The group needs cash. The chemicals operations are suffering from the poor
US economy. In addition, some of its strongest revenue earners are slowing.
These include Roundup, Monsanto's herbicide and world's best-selling
agrochemical, whose patents expired in the US and Europe last year. But the
group faces price--cutting and generic competition. It has cut prices by 45
per cent, although Mr Richard Mahoney, chairman and chief executive, claimed
earnings were increasing.
Earnings from Nutrasweet, the artificial sweetener, are set to decline. Last
year, it generated sales growth of only 2 per cent and its patents expire in
December. Sales of Simplesse fat substitute have been disappointing and the
product is in loss, admitted Mr Mahoney.
The trend among leading US chemicals companies, as well as international
groups such as ICI of Britain, is to both restructure and seek a sharper
strategic focus for the 1990s.
Du Pont, for example, recently announced a reorganisation of its electronics
division and plans to sell off its electrical connectors business.
Monsanto declined to say how it planned to use the Dollars 1.275bn of cash
it will receive, although the company noted that in the past excess cash has
been used to make investments in existing operations, to make further
acquisitions or to repurchase the company's stock.
Wall Street reacted very favourably to the news of the Monsanto divestiture;
the company's share price was marked Dollars 3 1/8 higher to Dollars 56 1/2
.
Kidder Peabody, the New York investment house, meanwhile reacted to the
Fisher sale by calling the move a positive one and by raising its rating on
Monsanto shares from hold to buy.
For the first six months of 1992, operating earnings at Fisher declined to
Dollars 31m, from Dollars 51m in the first half of last year.
