FT  05 MAY 92 / Leading Article: . . . and a warning
THE RIOTING which has afflicted Los Angeles and some other American cities
is rooted in the circumstances of the US, whose ethnic mix, history of
racial strife and political institutions leave the urban poor effectively
outside the system. An epidemic of violent  - often drug-related  - crime
has created a law and order backlash which allows middle America to sanction
capital punishment as well as police behaviour which is as unacceptable as
it has now proved to be unproductive.
Yet urban deprivation and the existence of an alienated underclass are
familiar enough to Europeans. Throughout most advanced industrial economies,
unemployment rates of 10 per cent or more are persistent, with the
underlying rate ratcheting to a new floor after each recession. The position
is much worse in rustbelts and declining inner-cities, especially those with
substantial ethnic minority communities. Serious riots have afflicted
Britain and France in recent years.
That Europe's social disturbances have been less intense than those in the
US reflects in part that in Europe income distribution is less unequal.
Although there has been a widening of the gap between rich and poor in most
advanced economies, real wages have actually been falling among the lowest
income groups in the US  - not so in most of Europe. European governments
are also more redistributive in their spending, so that the middle classes
finance willy-nilly the education of underclass neighbourhoods. And most
European countries are prepared to pay more in social security benefits to
the losers in capitalism's race than the US (though all countries now seek
to target benefits better to avoid reinforcing a cycle of dependency).
Underneath these different circumstances, however, lies a common factor: the
decline in advanced industrial economies of the unskilled labourer.
Increasingly manufacturing and service industries require employees who are
motivated, educated and skilled. Employers can afford to pick and choose,
and they will not choose those who lack educational qualifications or
workplace skills.
Attracting more of the new highly-skilled jobs to the areas of deprivation
is thus only part of the answer. Many of the youths who set ablaze deprived
estates on North Tyneside last September desired jobs in Nissan's nearby
gleaming new car factory. Most would not have got beyond the initial
screening stage for applicants: they not only lacked education; they had
failed to acquire the basic skills of concentration and application which
are essential to efficient production in modern industries.
It cannot be too often stated that the key to offering opportunity to this
underclass lies in better education and training, which must be effective
long before young people reach the age of rioting. It is hard to see what
can be offered usefully to those who have already failed in the education
system apart from a minimum income sufficient to participate in civilised
society and labour market rules which do not destroy low-paying, low skill
jobs. But for the next generation, there must be hope not only that there
will be decent jobs to go to, but also that they will be able to compete for
those jobs. Societies which persist in denying opportunity to a significant
minority breed violence.
