FT  23 JUN 92 / Survey on A-Z of Computing (26): New bugs play havoc in the
office - Yankee Doodle
IF COMPUTER users had never heard of Michelangelo, by March 6 this year, the
name was firmly fixed in their minds. On this day, the anniversary of the
Renaissance painter's birth, the computing world held its breath as it
waited for the Michelangelo virus to activate and destroy data stored on
thousands of computers around the globe.
Computer viruses - so named because of their similarity to human viruses in
the way they enter and 'infect' the 'body' of the computer have become one
of the greatest problems facing users. With nick-names like 'Yankee Doodle',
they can be benign, doing little more than announcing their 'infection' of
the system with an on-screen message. At their worst, however, they can
cause incalculable damage to the information a corporate user holds.
As computers grow in power and sophistication, and as more business users
come to rely on systems for critical applications, the results of infection
by a virus have grown from being an annoying interruption to a major
catastrophe.
As a result of massive publicity of the virus, users were able to take
precautionary measures and the effects of Michelangelo were limited. But the
potential for disaster is still great.
A computer virus is usually a small program written in such a way that it
will be automatically transfered from one computer to another without the
users detecting it.
The two most popular methods of implanting a virus are by attaching it to
the boot sector of a floppy disk, or by making it work itself into another
application program.
Its effects can vary enormously. It may simply put a message on the screen
to announce its presence, or disrupt the information displayed - text can
break up on the screen or characters being keyed in may appear to fall into
a heap at the bottom of the screen. Such effects are annoying, but need not
be terminal to the computer system or the data it holds.
Others, however, carry with them what those in the virus-hunting business
refer to as a significant 'destructive payload'. One version of the 1701
virus is said to reformat a computer's hard disk on any day between October
1 and December 31 of any year except 1993. Reformatting removes all the data
stored on a disk.
Time bomb viruses are date-driven in this way, watching for the date and
time counters of the computer to come round to preset values before
activating their 'payload' - the Michelangelo virus waited for the birthday
of the artist to activate itself while 'Friday the 13th' wreaks havoc only
when the computer's date counter comes round to a 13th of the month that
falls on a Friday.
Like many human viruses, they infect by contact and their success is based
upon the willingness of individuals to share information and applications
programs with each other, usually by swapping disks. Once an application is
copied from a floppy disk to a hard disk, the system is infected and the
destructive payload is ready to be activated. As soon as another file is
copied to floppy disk, the virus goes with it to infect another computer.
This can even happen with what users would think are brand new, 'clean'
disks from established suppliers.
Novell is not alone in having had to withdraw disks from sale because it was
discovered they were contaminated. With the growth of public-access
electronic mail and Bulletin Board Systems (BBS), such as CompuServe and
CompuLink, a new method of infection has been found. The viruses which bury
themselves in applications programs, many of which are freely available on
these systems, can be readily distributed to a wide range of users if one
user uploads an infected file.
Many of those who write viruses view the task purely as an intellectual
exercise. Others, however, have malicious intent. Perhaps the most notorious
of these was the so-called AIDS virus, which was sent out embedded in disks
containing information on the disease. This was an alleged blackmail where
the virus, once run, would install itself in the computer and then demand
payment of Dollars 378 for the supply of an antidote.
There is much individual users can do to protect themselves from virus
infections, however. The most obvious step is to stop or cut down on disk
swapping and sharing, which may indirectly help reduce software theft and
illegal copying.
Several anti-virus packages are available, such as Norton's Anti-Virus from
Symantec and Dr Solomon's Toolkit from S&amp;S International, and their regular
use is recommended, especially after each new application is copied from
either a floppy disk or BBS.
