FT  13 JUN 92 / The Hess secrets remain locked away: David Marsh on
questions new disclosures do not answer
THE TWO men arrived at 1 pm on June 9 1941 to interview the prisoner in
Mytchett Place, a gloomy red-brick Victorian mansion near Aldershot. The
tall bushy-browed German, recently flown in from Augsburg, had been nervous
and depressed lately. Dressed carefully in his Luftwaffe uniform, he said he
was pleased to receive his visitors. 'I know that my arrival has not been
properly understood by anyone,' he said.
The prisoner was Rudolf Hess, the deputy Fuhrer of Nazi Germany. He had
parachuted out near the Duke of Hamilton's estate in Scotland a month
earlier from a Messerschmitt-110. He hoped to convince Britain to make
peace, leaving Hitler a free hand on the continent. After several years of
sliding from favour within the Nazi hierarchy, Hess wanted to show the
Fuhrer that he was still a man to be reckoned with. Hess was on the way to
making history, but not along the route he had in mind. The deputy Fuhrer's
road from Renfrewshire led not, as he had hoped, to Buckingham Palace and an
audience with the King, but to four decades of incarceration in Spandau
fortress in Berlin, where he died in 1987.
Hess's visitors in June 1941 were Sir John Simon, the Lord Chancellor, and
Ivone Kirkpatrick, a German expert attached to the political warfare
executive, who knew Hess from service in Britain's Berlin embassy before the
war. Simon, who had supported appeasement as foreign secretary in the
mid-1930s, had been chosen by Churchill to quiz Hess sympathetically. The
transcript of the rambling 2 1/2 hour session, released by the Foreign
Office on Wednesday as part of a belated Whitehall effort to reduce secrecy
over the Hess case, shows that Simon was - if nothing else - sympathetic. On
page 43 of the transcript, Simon tells Hess politely that he had been
waiting for two hours for Hess to tell him the reasons for his mission 'and
I haven't heard a word about it yet.'
Simon's lack of thrust as an interrogator was matched only by Hess's
inability to come to the point. Kirkpatrick, who had already had three
somewhat tiresome interviews with Hess, recorded that the event had been a
'Mad Hatter's tea party'. Eventually, Hess spelled out his peace offer -
'Germany's sphere of interest is Europe; England's sphere of interest is her
Empire'.
The next day, Simon wrote up for Churchill the result of his meeting on
House of Lords notepaper. Hess 'does not, apparently, know anything of
strategic plans,' Simon concluded, but his arrival might show that Germany
was more 'uneasy' about a long war than Hess himself had tried to pretend.
Five days after the interview, Hess attempted to commit suicide, or at
least, to draw attention to himself, by throwing himself down the Mytchett
Place stairs in the middle of the night.
The account of the Simon interview may have titillated news editors. But,
along with most of the other 900 pages of 'new' Hess papers, it added
nothing to previous analysis of the reasons for Hess's flight. The only
novelties were four pages of Hess farewell letters to his family and Hitler,
written on the eve of his apparent suicide attempt, and some hand-written
Hess annotations clearing up points in the Simon interview. Nearly
everything else had been published before.
The transcript of the Simon and Kirkpatrick interview was quoted in court by
Hess's defence at the Nuremberg tribunal in 1946, and was published with the
trial documents. The full Simon papers have all been available at the
Bodleian library in Oxford for more than a decade. The Foreign Office's
closed files on Hess have intrigued historians, sleuths and conspiracy
theorists for years. It is now apparent that a great deal could have been
laid bare far earlier without any conceivable harm to British interests.
The most interesting point about this week's publication was what was not
published. A number of questions remain: Was Hess lured to Britain through
an MI6 decoy mission, boosting his credulous belief that he would be
received by the King and allowed to make peace over Churchill's head? Did
British establishment figures compromise themselves by extending peace
feelers towards Germany in the months before his arrival? Did Hess give his
interrogators details of Operation Barbarossa, the forthcoming German attack
on the Soviet Union, of which Churchill already had forewarning through
decrypts of the German Enigma ciphers? Did Hess come with either the
blessing or the knowledge of Hitler? And was there anything in the conundrum
of May 1941 which might have led to British agents killing Hess in his cell
in Spandau in 1987, as his family and some German right-wingers claim?
Andrew Roberts, a historian who probed the Hess saga in The Holy Fox, his
recent biography of Chamberlain's foreign secretary, Lord Halifax, believes
that the answer to all the above questions is probably 'No.' But he says of
this week's publication: 'This is by no means the end of the affair'.
Some details may come to light in further Foreign Office files - a 1 ft high
stack of documents - due to be released during the next few weeks. Two files
on contemporary contacts between Germany and Spain are, for instance, still
being held back. These may include references to Britain's ambassador to
Madrid, Sir Samuel Hoare, thought to have played a part in encouraging
Berlin's hopes of peace with England. But the full story of any MI6
deception, along with the record of Hess's 1941 debriefings by intelligence
officers, are presumably still buried in separate, unpublished MI6 files. A
letter brought by Hess for the Duke of Hamilton, a blue-blooded RAF officer
and former Conservative MP, who was the first person formally to interview
him after his landing, has still not come to light. Neither have details of
previous correspondence to Hamilton from Albrecht Haushofer, a
well-connected Hess friend and Anglophile official from Berlin. Hamilton
refers, intriguingly, to an earlier letter from Haushofer in a report on his
interview with Hess released as part of this week's documents.
There are other missing links too. A full transcript of Kirkpatrick's
interviews with Hess is not available, although his summaries were released
this week. (Kirkpatrick had already written his account in a book published
in 1959.) There is no account of an apparent briefing with Hess by Desmond
Morton, Churchill's intelligence aide. In October 1941 Morton told a US
military intelligence chief that Hess gave warning of Hitler's June 22
attack on the Soviet Union. This may have been a piece of disinformation by
Morton, but, according to John Costello, the author who revealed the story
last year, 'Morton wasn't making this up.'
The notion that Hitler knew about Hess's mission seems unlikely. Hess's son,
Wolf-Rudiger, a businessman living near Munich, contends that Hess was
acting with Hitler's backing, and that both had agreed - in case the peace
initiative misfired - never to reveal the Fuhrer's approval. This is
far-fetched. Simon wrote in his report to Churchill that Hess was 'trying to
reproduce things Hitler has said to him about conditions of peace which
would satisfy Germany,' and that seems to have been the limit of the two
men's compliance.
Wolf-Rudiger's idee fixe - the subject of a best-selling book in Germany
since his father's death - is that Hess was murdered by the British to
prevent him spilling secrets once he was released from Spandau. But on the
evidence, this melancholy and confused man would not have had many secrets
to impart.
A postscript comes from Sir Frank Roberts, a former British ambassador to
Bonn, who visited Hess in Spandau and was a Foreign Office official during
the war. Sir Frank said this week that Hess came to Scotland because he was
'at a loose end . . . He had nothing to do with the running of the war.'
During his time in Spandau - and perhaps before - Hess 'cast himself in the
role of a martyr.' He lived to be a victim and, Sir Frank adds with Foreign
Office malice, 'If he had been released, he would probably have died the
next day.'
