FT  23 JUL 92 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals (7): Increasingly competitive - A
look at UK marketing
IT takes up to 12 years and an investment of Pounds 100m-Pounds 150m to
discover one new drug in the UK, but even this level of investment is no
guarantee of commercial success.
Cost pressures, generic substitution and the continual demand for new and
effective products are making for an increasingly competitive marketplace,
so how are Britain's top pharmaceutical companies shaping up to the
challenge?
According to Mr Ben Hayes, spokesman for the Association of the British
Pharmaceutical Industry (ABPI), the difficulty faced by the prescription
industry in marketing their products to the NHS is to show that they are
cost-effective.
'The challenge of all new products coming onto the market is to be new,
bigger and better, and to cost less in the long run,' said Mr Hayes.
Medicines prescribed by the NHS last year cost more than Pounds 3bn, about
10 per cent of total NHS expenditure. When the Pharmaceutical Price
Regulation Scheme (PPRS) is renegotiated this September, further pressure to
reduce the drugs budget is expected.
Companies foresee a greater movement towards economic evaluation in the
future, but how does 'cost-benefit' relate to the 'clinical benefit' of a
particular drug?
'The clinical benefit comes first,' says Mr Andrew Smith, managing director
UK for SmithKline Beecham. 'The economic argument is a very powerful weapon
if it backs clinical benefit.'
Nearly 80 per cent of existing drugs will come off-patent over the next five
years. How to stem the transfer of profits to generic manufacturers and get
a full return on their research and development investment is a problem for
drug companies.
Generic competition, which lowers the price of branded products by at least
50 per cent, now accounts for 43 per cent of prescriptions and is expected
to rise to 60 per cent by the end of the decade.
Among the short-term solutions tried is the promotion of different
variations of an old product. A good example is SB's Amoxil, the second most
widely prescribed antibiotic in the UK, which came off-patent four years
ago. The company now has a different series of formulations of the drug,
from drops to capsules, to a fizz tab.
'Although novel formulations do slow down the decline in sales of a product,
you're often converting the business into a product which doesn't make much
money,' said Mr Smith. Under the PPRS, a product which is more than five
years old has to be priced per milligram to the price of the original
product. 'You have to charge the same price as you did 20 years ago for
Amoxil,' he said. 'Long-term, it is not a strategy or a way forward.'
Greater investment in R&amp;D, leading UK drug companies claim, is a more
effective solution. As Mr Colin Wight, marketing director at Rhone-Poulenc
Rorer, says: 'Our track record points the way ahead. In a market where
generic use is increasing, our company should continue to develop innovative
new medicines as long-term protection.'
The industry now spends four times as much in R&amp;D as it did 10 years ago.
This year, SB will spend Pounds 400m and RPR Pounds 263m on R&amp;D.
Concentration on novel products along with new patent legislation - under
which a company can apply for a Supplementary Protection Certificate (SPC)
giving it up to five years longer on a patent in the country in which it was
first licensed - will balance out some of the loss in sales to generics.
Another consideration for companies is whether they should start marketing
medicines over-the-counter. Both SB and RPR have their own OTC arms with
established products and more prescription-only medicines (POMs) to OTC
switches to follow.
For example, take RPR's Ketoprofen, the number two non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory in the UK with sales of Pounds 20m. The company expects it
to take the product over-the-counter within five years.
An OTC licence in the UK, Mr Wight says, would 'open up a whole new field of
opportunity.' Switching a POM into the OTC field, companies admit, is not an
easy marketing decision. As well as safety and efficacy considerations,
going OTC demands a radically different marketing approach.
'They are totally different markets with different drivers and there is
absolutely no guarantee that a highly successful product in the
pharmaceutical sector is going to be highly successful in the OTC sector,'
said Mr Smith.
Tagamet, SB's blockbuster anti-ulcer drug, came off-patent in March. The
company expects Tagamet to switch to OTC in the UK within the next year, and
is realistic about its chances of success: 'We're not going to take Pounds
500m worth of Tagamet business and convert it into an equivalent amount of
OTC business.'
Given that only one in 5,000 compounds investigated by companies reaches the
marketplace, and new medicines account for 9 per cent of total sales, the UK
pharmaceutical business is becoming increasingly risky.
Switching products to OTC will lead to more consumer advertising, but
companies maintain that the marketing of pharmaceuticals will never become
as blatant as selling a car. As Mr Smith points out: 'You cannot encourage
people to buy medicines because of the image, because if they don't work,
they don't buy them again.'
The author is Editorial Assistant at Financial Times Pharmaceutical Business
News.
