FT  24 SEP 92 / The ERM and Maastricht: Industrialists fear fresh round of
devaluations
WITH the European currency turmoil showing no signs of abating, the spectre
of competitive devaluation is starting to worry EC industrialists.
Exporters in Britain, Finland, Italy and Spain are trying to use the
declining value of their domestic currencies to boost their competitive
advantage on foreign markets. But if other weaker currencies, led by the
French franc, fail to defend their fragile parities against the D-Mark,
these gains will be eroded. This could lead to pressure for a further round
of 'beggar-thy-neighbour' devaluations in which the whole of Europe would be
the collective loser.
In Britain, companies such as ICI, the chemicals group, believe last week's
decision to float sterling will have a strong and immediate impact on
boosting exports.
But the Institute of Directors, which represents executives throughout the
UK, warned yesterday that the benefits expected from sterling's decline
would be undermined by the downward movement of other currencies such as the
lira and the peseta.
The currency crisis comes at a highly sensitive time for French exporters
who were, until recently, able to take advantage of low inflation and
relatively stable exchange rates to win back market shares abroad.
LVMH, the luxury goods group, although concerned about the possible effect
of declining foreign currencies on sales in the US, the UK and Italy,
yesterday stressed that it prefers the stability of ERM membership to the
short-term gains - or losses - of a floating franc.
The country whose exports are likely to be most vulnerable to foreign
devaluations is Germany.
'The west German economy has been brought to the brink of recession by the
sharp appreciation of the D-Mark,' concludes the economics team of Salomon
Brothers International.
Since the start of this year, the D-Mark has appreciated by more than 4 per
cent against other European currencies. The D-Mark has risen 11 per cent
against the lira, 10 per cent against sterling, and 7 per cent against the
peseta.
More than a quarter of Germany's exports have been affected by the recent
parity changes - making foreign markets much tougher places in which to do
business.
For export-oriented companies such as those in the motor, engineering,
electrical, chemical, and steel sectors, this puts a sharp extra squeeze on
margins.
The decline in the lira, for instance, will have a clear effect on exports
of the Volkswagen car group. Its sales to Italy account for nearly as many
VW exports as the UK and France combined.
Mr Bruno Kesseler, an economist with Westdeutsche Landesbank, says the
problems caused by D-Mark revaluation for exporters come at a time when the
boom effect of unification has worn off. 'Now, as the world economy is in a
weak phase, companies are affected massively by the extensive revaluation.'
The mechanical engineering industry is already in a crisis and not expected
to emerge until next year, while the electrical industry is showing almost
no growth, he says. Overall, he expects German industrial production to fall
back slightly this year; earlier, he had expected it to be flat. 'What we
are seeing,' he says 'is a marked downturn.' If the currency instability
continues, it could get worse.
