FT  09 APR 92 / Election 1992: City Watch - A hard day's night for the
brokers
It seemed that it might be one of the last opportunities for a traditional
City lunch before a Labour victory. The Economics Editor was determinedly
contrarian. 'I have been bearish about the British economy for 10 years, but
now I am going to be optimistic,' he proclaimed before forecasting that the
Footsie would tumble further to the 2,200 level. 'With bulls like him, who
needs bears?' complained a fellow guest.
Impending damage to Square Mile lifestyles was viewed with curiosity rather
than anxiety by the Young Stockbroker. 'I was 13 when Labour was last in
power so I can't really recall what it was like,' he confessed. 'And
remember that the foreign-exchange dealers are even younger than I am.'
An entire generation of City practitioners has indeed grown up since the
Conservatives came to power in 1979. Yuppie dealers were unknown in the
1970s, and the Porsches and mobile telephones only ap-peared in the Thatcher
years.
The new aggressive trading style will be strongly in evidence tonight, when
many big broking firms are planning to stay open most of the night.
In gilt-edged, for instance, unofficial trading will start at about 10pm,
when the official polls close and the exit polls are published, and will
continue as the results are declared through the night.
Early dealing for UK and Continental clients could be replaced by US
trading, and eventually the Far East may come on-line, depending on how
unpredictable the election turns out to be. The official markets are only
making modest gestures to the big occasion, however. The Stock Exchange Seaq
equity trading system will open just half an hour early on Friday morning.
If Labour wins and introduces its threatened high-tax regime, will it be
possible to motivate people to work the kind of hours and accept the kind of
stresses which have become normal in the City of London's financial markets?
Already there are stories of many City firms rushing out bonuses by last
week so that their employees could benefit from the relatively benign tax
rules of the last financial year. In some cases, apparently, companies have
paid the whole of the coming tax year's salaries in advance as a precaution
against a threatened 19 per cent jump in the marginal tax rate.
Veterans remember the days when tax on earnings was anything up to 95 per
cent. But only a few partners in City firms were liable to such rates, and
then only in theory. They could hire the best tax experts to reduce tax
liabilities.
Today the partnerships have nearly all been bought by big banks which may
make it harder to remunerate people in a tax-efficient way. On the other
hand, in the absence of exchange controls a whole new category of avoidance
schemes has become possible. A recent colourful example was the device of
avoiding National Insurance contributions by paying people in gold bars
lodged temporarily in offshore havens.
At the lunch the genial atmosphere failed to overcome entirely the
underlying gloom. But it would take more than the approach of a
fierce-taxing socialist regime to knock the Technical Analyst off his
stride. He knew that sheer uncertainty was the greatest threat to the stock
market.
'I take it, gentlemen, that we will all be short-term buyers of the market
whatever the result on Thursday,' he said.
