FT  04 MAR 92 / UK News (Employment): EOC backs bias claim on pension age
NINETY-ONE women whose employer raised their pension age from 60 to 65
without their consent are being backed by the Equal Opportunities Commission
in a claim of unlawful sexual discrimination.
The women, who work for Avdel Systems, the industrial fasteners maker based
in Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire, had planned to retire at 60 on full
pension. They were told that unless they continued to work until they were
65 their annual pensions would be reduced by 4 per cent.
Equality of retirement ages has been required by UK law since the European
Court judgment in the case of Barber v Guardian Royal Exchange in 1986.
The Avdel case is the second to be financially supported by the EOC at an
industrial tribunal hearing.
A similar, smaller case has been delayed for technical reasons. This
involves 30 clerical workers at the Cameron Iron Works in Leeds. They argued
at an industrial tribunal that a reduced pension on retirement at 60
amounted to a worsening of their terms of employ-ment.
The EOC said that if the 91 women were successful an important legal point
could be made which might affect many employers.
A recent survey by the National Association of Pension Funds found that more
than 60 per cent of employers had decided to raise the pension age of women
workers to 65 - the same age as men  - to comply with the Barber judgment.
The EOC believes that in many cases employers were actuarially reducing the
pensions of women who wanted to retire at 60. It thinks this could be
unlawful.
Avdel Systems said yesterday that the equalisation of pension ages was part
of a package of changes that were introduced in the best interests of the
pension scheme as a whole. These changes put men and women on an equal
footing without reducing the value of women members' benefits.
It said: 'The company denies that the changes were introduced at the expense
of working women and notes that the EOC admits it is unsure of the legal
position.' More than 36,000 companies are to be sent a guide from the
government on equal opportunities at work, urging them to establish policies
to help women, ethnic groups and disabled people find jobs.
