FT  07 SEP 92 / Whisky sales push ouzo makers to seek markets in Europe:
Confidence is returning to the larger producers as exports find their way
onto more supermarket shelves
THERE is nothing as Greek as ouzo, the aniseed flavoured fiery liquor which
is the traditional drink of the country. But there is nothing modern Greeks
like better than whisky, and that has stimulated the ouzo industry to seek
new markets in Europe.
A surge in whisky drinking over the past decade has transformed the Greek
spirits market, traditionally dominated by ouzo and locally produced brandy.
The Greeks are now among the world's largest per capita consumers of whisky,
and drink considerably more vodka and other imported spirits than they used
to.
Ouzo accounts for just over 30 per cent of liquor sales, down from 70 per
cent in the mid-1980s. Another 30 per cent is covered by whisky, followed by
vodka and gin.
A recent study by Icap, a Greek market research company, found that ouzo
consumption in Greece dropped to 13.6m litres in 1991 from 24.3m litres five
years earlier. Small ouzo producers who relied on bulk sales or were unable
to distribute outside a regional network suffered most from the change in
drinking habits.
However, there is returning confidence among larger ouzo producers. Not only
is their product now recognised abroad as exclusively Greek, but their
request to retain a reduced VAT rate was upheld in last month's provisional
European Community agreement on indirect taxation.
Exports have shot up, mainly to Germany where ouzo is no longer drunk only
by expatriate workers from Greece and Turkey, or in the country's 6,000
Greek restaurants. Ouzo is on the shelves of a number of large supermarket
chains.
In addition, Greece's export promotion board has financed a Dr200m (Pounds
578,000) advertising campaign this summer to promote ouzo in Germany. But,
after consultation with ouzo-makers, the campaign's designers were careful
to avoid the 'blue sea and bouzouki music' imagery associated with Greece.
'There is only so far you can go with a tourist souvenir product. We're more
interested in positioning ouzo in its own right, as a unique drink,' says Mr
Dimitris Papazimouris, brand manager of Ouzo 12, the leading ouzo
manufacturer.
Last year, 10.3m bottles of ouzo were sold in Germany, a sharp rise from
5.6m three years ago. Germany now absorbs 70 per cent of ouzo exports, while
other traditional markets, mainly the US and Australia, show little change.
The turn towards exports even extends to a traditional ouzo producer on the
remote Greek island of Lesvos. The Distillers' Union of Mytilene (Epom) is
spending Dr200m on a new production line for its ouzo plant.
After several years of rapid sales growth in the Athens area, where
competition is fierce among ouzo manufacturers, Epom plans to boost exports.
It hopes it will be able to carve out a niche in an expanding ouzo market in
northern Europe.
Epom's turnover doubled to Dr1.3bn over the past three years, largely as a
result of selling directly to cafes and restaurants in Greece. Mr Nikos
Kalamidiotis, sales director, says: 'If we can keep up with the big mainland
producers, we can certainly sell more abroad, where quality is appreciated
and margins are much higher.'
Lesvos has a reputation for producing good quality ouzo with a distinctive
aroma that comes from flavouring with mountain-grown aniseed. Some Greek
distillers claim that ouzo, exported to France in the late 19th century,
inspired the invention of other aniseed-flavoured aperitifs, such as Pernod.
Epom, owned by 17 local ouzo-making families, developed a brand much lighter
than traditional ouzo, with an alcohol content of 36 per cent. Most ouzos
are over 40 per cent alcohol.
'We may have an edge in quality, but our disadvantage is in being 18 hours'
sailing time from Athens. We have to keep much bigger alcohol stocks in case
of transport problems. Overall, our production costs are about 5 per cent
higher,' Mr Kalamidiotis says.
There are other obstacles to expansion. Getting permission to extend the
Epom factory on the outskirts of Mytilene, the island's capital, is
time-consuming because it is built over the ruins of the ancient port.
The stainless steel vats for storing alcohol cannot be kept underground
because of objections by the archaeological service.
At the other end of the scale, Ouzo 12, with a 40 per cent share of the
domestic ouzo market, was acquired last year for Dollars 40m by Grand
Metropolitan, the British food, drinks and retailing group which already
owns Metaxa, the leading Greek brandy producer.
A relaunch for Ouzo 12 is planned for next year, both in Greece and across
Europe. The company's elderly copper stills are being transferred from its
factory in Thebes in central Greece to a new computer-controlled distillery
at the Metaxa plant in Athens.
As a result of gaining access to an international distribution network, Ouzo
12 sales have already grown in the rest of the European Community. Last
year, over 1m bottles were sold in western Europe, mainly in Belgium, the
Netherlands and Britain.
Mr Papazimouris says: 'We think that ouzo has the potential to become an
international brand. With the right support, there's no reason why it
shouldn't become as popular as tequila.'
