FT  05 JUN 92 / International Company News: Nestle's bid for Perrier gives
rise to cartel doubts
NESTLE, the Swiss food multinational, yesterday revealed that European
Commission anti-cartel investigators are challenging its FFr15.46bn
(USDollars 2.8bn) bid for Perrier, the French supplier of mineral water.
A preliminary finding by a commission task force 'raised serious doubts' on
the grounds that it thought the bid created a duopoly of Nestle and BSN, the
French food group, on the French mineral water market, said Mr
Francois-Xavier Perroud, spokesman for the Swiss group.
"We have a good case and remain optimistic,' said Mr Perroud, who said
Nestle would contest the task force on every point.
Nestle had already pledged to sell Volvic, one of Perrier's brands, to BSN
to avoid monopoly problems and to obtain the French group's support in the
battle for Perrier against Italy's Agnelli family, the rival bidders.
Nestle's bid was suspended in late March when the commission opened a formal
inquiry - which it only does if it already has doubts - to last until the
end of July. If the task force finds against Nestle, a full meeting of the
17 commissioners will then decide whether to veto the deal or demand
changes.
Brussels has the right to ask Nestle to sell other mineral water brands to
reduce its market share. The Perrier purchase also includes the
Contrexeville and Vichy brands.
Nestle believes that the bid will raise its share of French mineral water
sales from 15.6 per cent to 36.8 per cent and BSN's market share from 20.2
per cent to 30.9 per cent.
The remainder is still held by France's powerful supermarket chains, with an
unchanged 32.3 per cent, according to a study for the group by Canadean, the
UK drinks industry consultancy. The task force finding ignores the
supermarkets' competitive power, said Mr Perroud.
Earlier, Mr Serge Milhaud, head of Nestle's mineral water division, told a
French newspaper the task force had failed to take into account the overall
European Community market, of which Nestle plus Perrier had a mere 14.3 per
cent share. The news sent both companies' share prices down 0.9 per cent to
FFr36,100 for Nestle and FFr1,091 for BSN.
Apart from the agreement to sell Volvic, there was no other link in France
between Nestle and BSN, which remained fierce competitors there, said Mr
Perroud.
The commission task force's worries contrast with the neutrality of a French
government, which has sometimes been known in the past to rush to the
defence of embattled French companies. Perrier's fate appears to invite no
national industrial policy interest, in contrast to Aerospatiale's bid for
de Havilland, the Canadian aircraft group, which the commission blocked last
year, provoking widespread outrage in France.
