FT  03 DEC 92 / Germany's citizenship challenge: The hurdles placed in the
way of those seeking naturalisation
OBTAINING German citizenship is largely a question of German blood, said Mr
Michael Schlikker a 31-year-old legal expert at the Federal Office for
Problems of Foreigners.
Leafing through a heavy tome, he finds article 5.7 of the 1913 Reichs- und
Staatsangehorigkeitsgesetz, or Imperial and State Citizenship Law
'Through birth, one can acquire citizenship if the legitimate child has a
German parent; and if an illegitimate child has a German mother ..'
This short article means that the 6.2m foreigners in Germany have little
chance of obtaining German citizenship.
Yet as the government and the opposition Social Democratic Party prepare to
resume talks on amending the country's liberal asylum laws to curb the
influx of foreigners, there is a growing consensus that what Germany really
needs is an immigration law.
Many legal experts believe that without such a law, there is little chance
of integrating foreigners into German society, and the possibility of social
unrest could increase.
Under current regulations, there are some opportunities to obtain German
citizenship. For instance, if a Russian marries an ethnic German, and both
decide to live in Germany, the ethnic German, or Aussiedler has by law the
automatic right to German citizenship, and the Russian can be naturalised
almost immediately.
However, if a Russian (or any other nationality) marries a German in
Germany, remains married for two years, and lives without interruption for
five years in the country, only then can he or she apply for citizenship.
There is still no guarantee that the application will be successful. To
obtain citizenship, the spouse must have no criminal record, a job, a fixed
abode, fluency in German, and a knowledge of German culture.
A foreigner who is not married to a German, must meet these conditions as
well. In addition, he or she must have lived in Germany for 10 years before
lodging an application. After a further five years, when the heavy weight of
German bureaucracy will have run its full course, the foreigner will be
naturalised. But in common with all applications, original citizenship must
be renounced because Germany does not allow dual citizenship.
In recent years, some concessions have been made toward integrating the
children of the Gastarbeiter - those invited to Germany in the early 1960s
to make up the labour shortfall.
However, children born in Germany of non-German parents can only apply for
citizenship between the ages of 16 and 23, again under certain conditions.
These include residence in Germany for at least eight years, the renouncing
of previous citizenship, and six years at a German school.
Ms Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen, head of the foreigners office, says many
Turkish teenagers want citizenship but their parents prefer them to retain
Turkish citizenship.
'Its disgraceful that we make it so difficult for them to become German
citizens. They will always regard themselves as foreigners,' she added.
Refugees who have recognised refugee status in Germany, which means that
they can live and work in the country, are confronted with a maze of
obstacles before they can gain citizenship.
'The refugee has no legal entitlement to citizenship,' said Mr Walter Brill,
a legal officer at the Bonn-based United Nations High Commission for
Refugees. 'It is discretionary. There is never really a situation where the
applicant has fulfilled all the conditions for citizenship because it is not
stated in the law,' he added.
Moreover, even if the refugee's application is treated favourably, there is
another hurdle: original citizenship must be renounced. This is often
difficult because the applicant must seek permission from those same
authorities which forced the applicant to flee in the first place.
Mr Brill agrees that it is time for Germany to introduce an immigration law
which would give foreigners easier access to citizenship and political
rights. 'The climate is finally changing,' he said. But Mr Schlikker still
wonders if the right wing of the German establishment is prepared to dilute
German blood as the price for an ethnically heterogeneous society.
