FT  01 AUG 92 / How To Spend It: You too can be dressed to kill
BANKS MAY fold, pension funds disappear, company profits tumble but, judging
by the activity among purveyors of traditional country clothing and
accessories, taking pot shots at birds, stalking deer and casting for salmon
goes on for ever.
Even now the keen shot is oiling his gun, bringing his plus-fours out of the
wardrobe and packing his bags, ready to head for hill and heather.
When it comes to clothing most aficionados know that the old names are the
safest. They may safely put themselves and their needs in their hands,
confident that in their clothing and accessories they will breach no rules,
offend no etiquette.
At Holland &amp; Holland, 31 Bruton Street, London W1, there has been a great
deal of new activity since it was taken over by Chanel last year.
It has always had a good collection of traditional country wear but, this
season it has its first own-label collection, all British-made, on sale.
As women shots are increasingly being allowed to do more on the moor than
just see to the lunch, proper shooting clothing for women is a necessity
and, in September (sadly not in time for the glorious 12th) Holland &amp;
Holland will have tweed jackets which can be teamed with tweed breeches,
skirts or trousers in two or three colours.
Chaps, though, can get themselves splendidly kitted out - the shooting suit
pictured (above left) comes in two different tweeds. Its particular
claim-to-fame is that it has a phitwell, or cross-gartering elastic, across
the shoulder blades, making it splendidly easy to raise the arm to take aim.
They can be bought off-the-peg or made-to-measure, from Pounds 1,350.
There is also a splendid collection of unisex weatherwear which is designed
to cope with the kind of foul weather that seems to go hand in hand with
shooting, deer-stalking and fishing.
Made from 100 per cent waterproof traditional mackintosh fabric, it is lined
in old-fashioned Austrian Loden - not as breathable as Goretex, but warmer
and, of course, completely waterproof.
It comes in all sorts of shapes and lengths, from full-length raincoats, to
three-quarter length coats and jackets.
Some have quilted linings with detachable hoods, others have special pockets
for carrying dog leads, for wet gloves and no doubt even for stuffing away
the odd bird. Prices start at Pounds 325.
Footwear is important. Before the war, it seems, gentlemen wore leather
boots or puttees; today a gentleman might look at Holland &amp; Holland's
Churchill shoes, photographed above left.
Water-resistant, with very strong grip soles, they are Pounds 295.
Photographed beside them is a selection of shooting stockings, Pounds 55 a
pair. If it is really likely to be damp and cold leather-lined wellington
boots are the real chill-beaters.
Gieves &amp; Hawkes pukka shooting gear has been developed exclusively for
Asprey (as I report elsewhere on the page) but, being long-established
gentlemen's tailors, there has always been a good selection of traditional
country wear.
For this winter Gieves &amp; Hawkes has brought out a collection of country
clothing that can be happily and fashionably worn both on and off the grouse
moor.
Photographed top right are some selections from the collection. A waxed
cotton sleeves gilet jacket (Pounds 225) is worn over a pure wool crew neck
sweater (Pounds 125). The shirt is pure cotton (Pounds 49), the tie, pure
silk (Pounds 45) while the brown check plus-twos (less conspicuously full
than plus-fours) are in pure wool and cost Pounds 150.
Hands and feet get very cold on those damp moors so the soft leather
shooting gloves with silk linings sound worth the Pounds 65 outlay. The
leather-lined Wellington boots are Pounds 180. Shooting stockings (never,
call them socks) come in various colours and patterns and cost Pounds 59 a
time while the essential garters are Pounds 7.50. Gieves &amp; Hawkes are at No.
1 Savile Row, London W1X 2JR.
