FT  01 JUN 92 / A marketing prescription for Wellcome / John Robb talks
about prospects for the drugs group
WELLCOME'S chief executive, Mr John Robb, prides himself on his
market-orientated approach to business. The 56-year-old Scot and former
consumer products executive at Beecham has proved determined to make the
group more market-driven since he was appointed by chairman Sir Alistair
Frame in July 1990.
But Mr Robb is now faced with the biggest marketing challenge of his life -
the sale of up to 50 per cent of the group in the largest-ever issue by a
privately-owned British company. The offer, scheduled for mid-July, could
raise as much as Pounds 4bn.
At first view his task should not be difficult. The company is the fastest
growing among the world's 20 largest pharmaceutical companies. On a
five-year average, Wellcome has enjoyed the highest earnings-per-share
growth rate of any pharmaceutical stock - some 30.3 per cent compared with
17.6 per cent for Glaxo and 15.7 per cent for SmithKline Beecham.
In addition, the company has a dominant position - about 80 per cent - in
the fast-growing anti-viral market. Sales of Zovirax, its herpes treatment,
are expected to grow by about 20 per cent during the next two years,
reaching Pounds 820m by 1994. Retrovir, the anti-Aids drug also known as
AZT, could reach annual sales of Pounds 340m in 1994, according to a recent
note by SG Warburg, the company's brokers.
But although Wellcome's short-term future looks bright, Mr Robb's task is
complicated by two doubts on its long-term growth.
First, the beneficial effects of the group's wide-ranging disposal programme
run out next year.
Since he took over the helm, operating margins have improved from 21.2 per
cent in 1990 to 24.6 per cent last year. During the first half of this year,
they rose 2.5 percentage points to 26.7 per cent. However, more than half of
that improvement came from a programme of disposals which is now coming to
an end.
The second threat is the end of patents for Zovirax. During the first half
of 1992, sales increased 26 per cent. Commentators believe as much as 40 per
cent of Wellcome's revenue growth could come from this product next year.
Its main patents expire in Germany next year, the UK in 1995 and the US and
Japan in 1997. Sales are still growing remarkably fast, given that it was
launched
Mr Robb says he recognises the threat to Zovirax and has developed a twin
strategy to deal with the problem. The first element consists of two new
compounds known as 256U and 882C which should eventually replace Zovirax.
The two drugs should be launched in 1995 and 1996, although both are still
in clinical trials. Timing will be crucial. SmithKline Beecham, which Mr
Robb acknowledges has an excellent marketing track-record is scheduled to
launch a competitor drug, Famciclovir, in 1995.
The other element of Mr Robb's defence strategy is to sell Zovirax without a
doctor's prescription in chemists. 'We don't have the marketing clout to
exploit Zovirax in the OTC (over-the counter) market on our own,' admits Mr
Robb. 'We are looking for a partner, particularly in Europe. Two or three
are left on the short-list.'
He plays down another possible threat - that to Retrovir, Wellcome's
anti-Aids drug. He argues analysts at one stage became fixated by Retrovir,
seeing the group merely in relation to Aids, although the drug represented
only 11 per cent of group turnover last year.
Competition to Retrovir from new drugs is unlikely to make much impact in
the medium term, reckons Mr Robb. 'Our view is that Aids will continue to be
treated with Retrovir in combination with other therapies at least for the
next five years. The market is growing and the competition is more noise
than anything else at the moment.'
Concern does exist about a challenge to Retrovir's US patent, however. The
patent's validity is being challenged by Barr Laboratories, a US group. The
outcome of the case is unclear, since it will be decided next year by a jury
in North Carolina. If Wellcome loses it plans to appeal, but Barr would
probably be able to market a generic version of the drug in the meanwhile.
In spite of the problems facing the group, Mr Robb is confident he can
deliver the targets he has promised. These include underlying sales growth
in excess of 10 per cent, an operating margin of 30 per cent by 1996 and
earning-per-share growth of more than 15 per cent a year.
The group's research and development has become much more focused, he says.
The company remains committed to outstanding research, but has adopted the
project management approach perfected by Glaxo in the 1980s, which involves
dropping compounds which fail to reach development targets on time. Since
September 1989, the number of compounds in development has fallen from 78 to
34.
Those drugs that are fully developed will be launched in all possible
markets to justify the money invested in them - it costs up to Dollars 230m
(Pounds 127m) to bring a drug to market.
'Marketing is terribly important. We have a great reputation in research and
development, but not a comparable reputation in marketing,' he says. 'We
used to think if we got the research and development right the products
would sell themselves.'
He plans to improve marketing by expanding Wellcome's sales force. He has
also hired new sales managers for the US and Japan. Elsewhere he will
continue his strategy of co-marketing with other companies.
'It's incredibly important to raise our marketing skills to the same level
as our research and development skills,' says Mr Robb. 'If we don't we'll be
in trouble.'
As he launches a world-wide marketing campaign on Thursday, his most
immediate challenge is to make sure the flotation itself does not run into
trouble. With as much as Pounds 4bn at stake, his much-vaunted marketing
skills will be in demand.
