FT  21 NOV 92 / The FT Goes Shopping (9): Conspicuous wealth is out, Grunge
(sleaze to you) is in - The fashion excesses of the 1980s must be atoned for
DURING THE 1980s, sales of luxury goods soared and the labels with
class-related cachet soared highest. Loewe's hunting collection in green
suede and brown leather, the aristocrat of huntin', shootin' and fishin'
gear, was snapped up by the upwardly mobile to be sported together with the
Barbour, the Hermes silk square with stirrup motif, the caramel and black
initialled Vuitton cases, the Gucci moccasins with horsebit trim, the
quilted Chanel handbag, the Cartier watch, the Dunhill document case and the
Porsche for town, the blond Labrador and the Range Rover for the country.
If we aspire to be what we buy, then, as Ralph Lauren and Roger Saul of
Mulberry so sharply intuited back in the 1970s, for several years many of us
wanted to be rich. We seemed to crave a lifestyle which divided its time
between the stress of the City boardroom and the tedium of competitive rural
pursuits. If we could not have what we craved, we dressed for it anyway.
But a profound change has occurred in the fashionable person's
consciousness. The psychological effects of the recession are, in the long
term, going to be more important than the simple belt-tightening dictated by
economic necessity. There is a sense, particularly among those aged between
20 and 30, of crime and punishment. The excesses of the 1980s must be atoned
for. A system which seemed to exalt greed, selfishness and the flaunting of
wealth must be rejected and replaced by something more spiritual.
Fashion is always an early indicator of shifts in cultural direction, so the
current revival of the styles of the late 1960s and early 1970s, the era of
love, peace and hippy idealism, indicates parallel preoccupations. It is,
put simply, a more outward-looking and generous mood. The squandering of
resources is over. We must save and conserve.
In the hands of Karl Lagerfeld or Ralph Lauren the look is romantically
nostalgic, but younger designers in Paris, London and New York handle it
more aggressively, applying overtones of late 1970s Punk. The most
apocalyptic version of the look, espoused last month by New York's hottest
young designers, Marc Jacobs and Christian Francis Roth, is called 'Grunge,'
after the sleaze-celebrating, anti-materialistic music movement which
started in Seattle.
'Grungy' clothes, as affected by young music fans, are ill-fitting, droopy,
decayed, inside-out, charity-shop, uncoordinated, scruffy and, ideally,
repulsively stained and malodorous. The designer version is, of course,
cleaner, co-ordinated - and pricy.
It is unlikely that 'grunge' will be embraced by the core consumers of
Vuitton, Gucci, Ferragamo, Hermes, Cartier et al, but the enormous growth in
sales which the status-defining brands enjoyed in the 1980s was fuelled by
fashion. It was fashionable to appear wealthy and an army of the
fashion-aware would break the bank to own the correct accessories, to signal
that they belonged to a club based on wealth and taste. Now, for these
people status-dressing is history. Arguably, boredom would eventually have
done for it anyway.
The traditional Vuitton travel goods, Gucci's shoes, belts and bags, Hermes
scarves and bags, Cartier watches and Chanel costume jewellery are the most
copied and counterfeited artefacts in the world. Valued initially for the
craftsmanship with which they were made, price made them exclusive and
exclusiveness made them covetable.
Such was the boom of the 1980s that, even without copies on the market, the
goods sold by Vuitton, Hermes etc themselves flooded it. 'There is a danger
of the product becoming too widely owned,' warned Jonathan Falkner, managing
director of Louis Vuitton UK, nearly two years ago. 'Then it becomes a
cliche and it loses its exclusiveness.'
The frantic expansion of the great accessory brands was triggered in 1986 by
the relaxation in France of regulations governing takeovers and mergers
which, in turn, attracted new investment. Bernard Arnault, owner of the
Christion Dior couture business, exploited the situation to acquire Celine
from its founders and owners, Richard and Celine Viplana, and then set his
sights first on Parfums Christian Dior, owned by the luxury goods
conglomerate, Moet-Hennessy, and eventually on dominating the expanded group
which, having acquired Louis Vuitton, became LVMH.
Even the public power struggle between Arnault and LVMH's Henry Racamier,
also an imaginative entrepreneur, did not appear to dissipate the products'
glamour for the consumer. Arnault's strategy was to strengthen his 'grandes
marques' by clawing back power and profits from licensees and
franchisees,strictly controlling products to which the great names were
applied. He was watched by rivals in France, Italy and Britain. All
recognised the need to protect their most important asset: their name.
Since quality, classicism and longevity were their stock in trade, they
could not, as the fashion designer does, bring out a startling new style to
supplant the old one every season. But they could expand their product
bases, spread the cachet a little wider without undermining the traditional
lines which sold so well in Japan and the rest of the Far East.
At Vuitton it is Francoise Jollant Kneebone, erstwhile director of the
Centre Pompidou and now design director at Louis Vuitton, who, in
commissioning some of the great names of design - Philippe Starck, Gae
Aulenti, Andree Putman - has created, among others, the dashing Epi range.
At Hermes, Claude Brouet fulfills the some function, as does Dawn Mello at
the dynastically strife-torn Gucci. These women are all design managers.
Jollant Kneebone was an academic, Brouet a journalist/stylist, Mello a
merchandiser, former president of Bergdorf Goodman. Their brief is to
restore to the great labels the quality which made them great: invention,
innovation and a style which expresses their present, not their past. It is
likely that surviving the recession will depend on new products rather than
on the currently discredited classic cliches.
In Britain the cash-rich Dunhill (lighters, watches, luggage, accessories,
fragrance) group has, in a shopping spree which started in the mid-1980s,
acquired Mont Blanc pens, the Hackett menswear chain and the French fashion
houses, Chloe and Karl Lagerfeld. Interim results announced this month show
a dip in profits from Pounds 80.8m to Pounds 30.1m. When the last
acquisition was made, in June this year, Lord Douro, the group's chairman,
made clear that he was putting his money on fashion rather than status - or,
at least, hedging his bets.
The more solid of the great accessory companies have always looked forward
and embraced change, maintaining their identity not in aggressive logos and
instantly recognisable forms but in reassuringly high standards of quality
and creativity. Loewe in Spain or Ferragamo in Italy are companies which
have expanded slowly, an eye always on the first principles of their
founders who were, above all, supremely innovative designers.
The late 1980s saw the creation of several pre-aged brands. Arnault himself
attempted, in Christian Lacroix, to create a couture house. Hackett, the
august-looking menswear chain now owned by Dunhill, is hardly a decade old.
In Italy, Giralmo Etro, the fabric manufacturer, turned his passion for
paisley and all things nostalgically British into a range of scarves,
shawls, ties, bags, cushions and those expensive little indispensibles known
as small leather goods which, when sold in an oak-panelled Victorian
ambiance, gave an illusion of antiquity.
As Francoise Jollant Kneebone of Vuitton says: 'A culture is its collective
memory and its artefacts are significant definers of its cultural identity.
What we made and used tells an archaeologist who we were. What we, today,
buy and use provides information about who we aspire to be and how we wish
to be perceived.'
While there are people with money to spend, they will buy and use beautiful
and clever things. What the accessory companies seen to be facing up to -
some faster than others - is that in the future different criteria are
likely to apply. Pickings will never be so rich again.
