FT  05 OCT 92 / El Al cargo jet hits Amsterdam
SCORES OF people were feared killed last night after an El Al cargo aircraft
crashed into two nine-storey blocks of flats on the outskirts of the Dutch
city of Amsterdam.
Twelve bodies were recovered from the wrecked buildings but, with rescue
work continuing, firemen said there was virtually no chance of there being
any survivors in the 80 flats destroyed in the crash or gutted by flames. It
was not clear how many of the 239 people registered as living in the flats
were at home.
All four aboard the aircraft - three crew and one passenger - were believed
killed. At least 29 people were injured, some while leaping from the
high-rise buildings.
Although airline officials were careful not to commit themselves, early
indications suggested that mechanical failure led to the accident.
A spokesman for the Dutch civil aviation authority said the Israeli
airline's Boeing 747 appeared to have exploded on impact with the buildings
and there was no evidence so far that the aircraft had blown up in the air.
However, some eyewitnesses quoted by Dutch television reported seeing an
explosion before the crash.
The aircraft, which was en route from New York to Tel Aviv, had just
completed a stopover at Amsterdam's Schiphol airport. About 10 minutes after
take-off, the crew had reported flames shooting out from two of its four
engines and the aircraft was attempting to return to the airport when it
went down, hitting the two adjoining blocks, containing 480 flats.
The flats, located in the outlying Amsterdam neighbourhood of Bijlmermeer,
were constructed in the 1960s and house a mainly immigrant population.
Eyewitnesses said the aircraft appeared to have dumped fuel just before it
went down on its way back to Schiphol. The civil aviation authority said it
received a distress signal just before the crash. Officials said later that
two of the aircraft's four engines had fallen off and were recovered from a
lake 15km (9 miles) from the crash site.
An investigation into the incident - the worst civil aviation disaster in
the Netherlands - was launched immediately. In Israel, Mr Rafi Har Lev,
chief executive of El Al, said a team of Israeli investigators would leave
for Amsterdam to take part. Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli prime minister,
expressed his shock at the disaster.
Since the surge of hijackings by Arab and other international terrorist
groups in the 1970s, El Al has imposed probably the toughest security
measures of any airline in the world. It has suffered two mid-air hijackings
and several attacks on its aircraft and passengers on the ground in Israel
and elsewhere. But the airline has never lost an aircraft, cargo or
passenger to sabotage in mid-air.
On cargo flights freight is subject to strict controls which can result in
slower turnaround times than on rival airlines.
