FT  20 FEB 92 / Canada breaks ranks with G7 over credit for Kiev
CANADA'S decision this week to open a CDollars 50m (Pounds 24m) credit line
to the Ukraine appears to have weakened the common front on Soviet debt
repayment put up by the Group of Seven most powerful industrial countries.
The G7 nations, most vocally Germany, have maintained that Ukraine would be
denied promised foreign credit until it agrees to assume 'joint and several'
responsibility for the Soviet Union's foreign debt together with other
former Soviet republics.
Canadian diplomats yesterday confirmed that the credit to Ukraine had been
unfrozen on Tuesday. According to Professor Volodymyr Vasylenko, a senior
adviser to the Ukrainian government, this followed a proposed compromise by
Ukraine's President Leonid Kravchuk in a letter to Mr Brian Mulroney, the
Canadian prime minister. In addition to its agreed 16.37 per cent, or
USDollars 13.42bn, share of the debt, Ukraine would take responsibility for
some of the debts of the smaller republics, Mr Kravchuk wrote.
Mr Oleksandr Savchenko, deputy head of the Ukrainian national bank,
estimates that Ukraine could assume about 21.13 per cent, or Dollars
17.32bn, of the total debt, with Russia shouldering the remainder.
Yesterday, Mr Savchenko applied for CDollars 5m of the Ottawa credit to pay
for the new Ukrainian currency now being printed in Canada. Spokesmen for
the Canadian Bank Note Company said yesterday the first shipments of notes
would be ready to be flown to Ukraine within two to three weeks.
Fresh from a conference in Brussels, where they reached an agreement with
Russia on introducing a new currency, senior Ukrainian officials were
hopeful that the G7 and the Paris Club of creditors would soon be reconciled
to the Ukrainian position.
'Very slowly they are changing their positions,' said Mr Boris Soboliev,
deputy minister for foreign economic relations. The Canadian decision could
foreshadow a deal at the scheduled March 3 meeting of the Paris Club
allowing Ukraine to pay its debt independently, he added.
In tandem with a debt agreement, Ukraine will press for a more equitable
division of the Soviet Union's foreign assets. Russia, which has
unilaterally taken over all the assets, has ducked the issue. But Ukrainian
officials say it will be at the top of the agenda when they host the next
Commonwealth of Independent States meeting on March 20.
