FT  08 MAY 92 / International Company News: Managed futures industry get its
first break - US regulators have proposed a rule to ease constraints on
commodity pool money
The managed futures industry is about to get its first big regulatory break
in America.
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) has proposed a rule - known
as 4.7 because of its place among the agency's regulations - that will allow
commodity pool operators to offer unit shares to institutional investors
without the complicated disclosure, reporting and record keeping entailed
when such products are offered to the ordinary investing public.
The managed futures industry, which has mushroomed from an estimated Dollars
250m business in 1980 to one with over Dollars 21bn under management, has
been pressing for this and other regulatory changes for several years. It
argues that US regulation has begun to stunt growth, particularly with
regard to institutional customers, which represent the greater part of
business.
Institutional customers and wealthy individuals are those most interested in
privately placed pools, but until now American regulatory constraints have
put US pools at a disadvantage. Consequently, commodity pool money has moved
increasingly offshore.
For example, Chase Manhattan, the only bank that offers commodity pools,
says that 75 per cent of the Dollars 200m it has in pools is offshore. Mr
Charles Minnaar, chief of Chase's managed funds group, says that offshore
pools have been preferred because under US regulation 'it takes an
incredibly long time to bring a product to market'. A private placement
offshore is also less expensive.
An offshore fund can be put together quickly at costs of about Dollars
10,000-Dollars 20,000, while a US private placement of a commodity pool can
easily take six months and run to over Dollars 50,000.
All of this would be expedited and made less costly by Rule 4.7. It would
exempt private offerings from the usual requirements of disclosure and
record-keeping for what the CFTC calls 'qualified eligible participants' -
such as banks, pensions funds, insurance companies and high net worth
individuals.
Those who qualify under the CFTC's guidelines, are assumed to be
sufficiently knowledgeable of the risks of futures trading.
The CFTC says its proposal is intended to harmonise its rules with those of
the Securities and Exchange Commission, the US securities industry
regulator. The SEC has had an 'accredited investor' rule for 10 years. This
exempts securities products for sophisticated investors from the usual
disclosure and reporting requirements. The harmonisation of rules is
particularly relevant to managed futures funds because, while using the
futures markets, they are packaged as securities and must be registered with
the SEC as well.
While harmonisation makes sense from the regulatory point of view, industry
leaders say that the proposed rule 4.7 does not go far enough toward that
goal.
Mr Robert Easton, president of Commodities Corp, which has about Dollars 1bn
under management, says the proposed rule 'is an important first step'. But,
like others in the industry, he contends that the CFTC's standards for
determining who is a 'qualified eligible participant,' or QEP, are too high.
For example, instead of using the SEC's assets tests of accredited
investors, the CFTC has doubled or quintupled the standards. For
institutional clients, the CFTC has proposed they must have Dollars 10m in
assets, twice the Dollars 5m SEC standard. In the case of individuals, the
CFTC has set the assets test at a net worth of Dollars 5m, or Dollars 1m in
margin deposits or option premiums for commodities trading. The SEC only
requires an individual net worth of Dollars 1m.
Mr David Yeres, a commodities attorney with Baer, Marks &amp; Upham in New York,
said: 'We have long experience with the securities scheme and it has worked.
It seems counter-productive to arbitrarily move the goal-posts.'
The industry is happy that at least some relief is on the way. Some pool
operators have been given temporary exemptions under the terms of the
proposed version of 4.7, pending final approval of the rule.
The industry is pleased overall with the CFTC's recent efforts at regulatory
reform. For example, the commission has proposed an increase in speculative
position limits for an array of commodities, including some agricultural
contracts. It has developed a new two-part disclosure document to simplify
the process for pool operators.
An 18-page summary has been culled from some 200 pages of the document and
this is followed by a longer, more detailed portion for optional reading.
In recent months, it has allowed exchanges to use average pricing for big
orders that have been executed at multiple prices, a helpful step for
managed futures funds.
While in line with the Bush administration's new anti-regulatory strategy,
the CFTC's moves have been prompted as well by the steady slide of world
market share for US futures markets and the tide of money that has rolled
into offshore managed futures funds.
The CFTC hopes that streamlining its regulatory scheme can help the US
futures industry to regain some lost ground.
