FT  05 JUN 92 / Agenda 21, ambitious action plan to clean up planet: The big
unanswered questions are who will pay and how much
BY far the most forbidding document for consideration at the Earth Summit is
the so-called Agenda 21, an action plan to clean up the planet which runs to
490 pages, with 40 chapters and no fewer than 115 specific clean-up
programmes.
But this weighty tome will also be one of the hottest items at Rio because
it raises the question of who pays for the clean-up. Although most of the
text was agreed before Rio started, the section on finance is still
completely blank, and Mr Joseph Wheeler, the UN official overseeing it says:
'The finance negotiations will be very tough. We'll not see the results
until the very last minute.'
The whole tone of Agenda 21 (so-called because it is targetted at the 21st
century) is based on the view that the world stands at a critical juncture,
and that it will have to 'change course' to survive - a familiar Rio battle
cry. The new course will be sustainable development, meaning that present
day consumption must not impair resources for future generations.
But Agenda 21 also asserts that poverty, and the gap between North and
South, must be overcome if the world economy is to flourish. Hence its
strong emphasis on the need for greater flows of aid money and technology
from North to South, something the rich countries are wary of.
One of the largest sections deals with ways of protecting all features of
the environment, the atmosphere, land, water, forests, mountains and so on,
some of which will be backed up by separate Rio treaties. It also addresses
the need for better management of waste: toxic, hazardous and radio active.
A further section discusses the role that various groups can play in
improving the environment: women, children, local authorities,
non-governmental organisations, business, scientists, farmers and even trade
unions.
Most of this is so obviously desirable that it was approved with little
controversy, though specific interest groups are agitating for improvements
in their pet subjects.
The big problem comes in the North-South issues. Many industrial countries
think Agenda 21 is tilted too much in favour of the Third World, and they
are worried that it could turn into a massive demand for aid. Some of them,
including the US, also resent a statement early in the document which says:
'One of the most serious problems facing the planet is unsustainable
consumption and production patterns leading to environmental degradation,
aggravation of poverty and imbalances in the development of countries.' They
see this as a direct attack on their economic policies and want it excluded.
On the other hand, Third World countries think Agenda 21 favours the rich
countries because, in their view, it is soft on trans-national corporations
and transfers of technology.
When UN organisers of the Earth Summit were asked to produce estimates of
how much it would cost to implement Agenda 21 in the Third World alone, they
calculated it at Dollars 625bn a year - a headline-grabbing figure if ever
there was one. This was not intended to be an aid demand, but it was widely
interpreted as such and did considerable damage to Agenda 21's prospects.
Of this sum, Dollars 500bn was supposed to come from the Third World itself,
which upset many of those countries because they thought the rich countries
should shoulder the burden. The remaining Dollars 125bn was supposed to be
in the form of aid from industrial countries, which upset them as well.
No one takes any of these figures seriously now, and it seems most unlikely
that they will survive Rio. Mr Gordon Shephard, an official with the World
Wide Fund for Nature, says: 'What matters is not how much money there is but
how it is spent.' But that is not to say that the industrial countries will
dismiss all requests for aid.
Many of them, including EC members, have agreed to make 'new and additional
funds' available, and the next 10 days will show how willing they are to
dress that up with hard cash. Dr Asnar Vogel, the director general of the
German Environment Ministry, says: 'Industrial countries have to give a
clear signal to the world that they consider themselves in a position of
responsibility, and that means helping developing countries.'
Agenda 21's final section proposes ways of ensuring that the work is carried
out. It proposes the creation of a Commission on Sustainable Development
which would be part of the UN and have the job of keeping up the pressure on
signatories. The UN General Assembly would hold a special session no later
than 1997 to review and appraise Agenda 21.
