FT  05 FEB 92 / Venezuelan coup attempt foiled by loyalist troops
VENEZUELA'S President Carlos Andres Perez last night said that loyal troops
had finally stamped out all resistance from soldiers attempting to topple
the democratically-elected government.
Nearly 24 hours after the coup attempt, Mr Perez said in a televised address
that 'all those who participated in this disgraceful attack either gave
themselves up or were beaten'.
General Fernando Ochoa Antich, the defence minister, told a press conference
that the military counted 14 dead and 51 wounded as a result of the attack -
including both loyal forces and rebels. The loyalists detained 133 officers
and 956 soldiers.
Those captured included the coup leader, Commandante Hugo Chavez who also
appeared on television, urging his comrades to surrender. He said his
faction was called the Movimiento Militar Bolivariano, named after Simon
Bolivar, the Venezuelan who liberated South America from Spanish rule.
As Mr Perez sought yesterday to bring the country under his control, the
government decreed a 10-day suspension of constitutional guarantees. This
provided a wide range of special powers, including the right to search homes
and detain citizens without warrants.
Stock market activity was suspended for two days and a two-day halt decreed
in foreign currency transactions to avert panic in markets, Mr Ruben
Rodriguez, the labour minister, announced.
Gen Ochoa said the foiled coup, which started around midnight on Monday in
Caracas, the capital, and three other cities was organised by five army
units. It was the first attempt at a coup in Venezuela since the early 1960s
and follows growing anger over economic reforms that have failed to benefit
the majority of Venezuelans. However, the uprising took the country by
surprise despite rumours of a coup late last year.
In an earlier televised appearance yesterday Mr Perez, looking shaken, said
the rebels had tried to kill him.
President George Bush condemned the attempted coup and telephoned Mr Perez
to assure him of full US support. The European Community and 16 Latin
American presidents also condemned the attack.
The president was warned about the uprising upon his return to Venezuela
from a trip to Davos, Switzerland, and he went immediately from the airport
to the Miraflores presidential palace in Caracas. Rebels, who first sought
him out at the La Casona presidential residence, then attacked the palace.
A senior officer said the rebels were within a few rooms of the president
before security staff took him to safety.
Gen Ochoa said the rebellious units also attacked the Defence Ministry, a
military airport in Caracas and other military targets.
Yesterday afternoon F-16 jets swooped over the capital as loyalist troops
sought to flush out resistance at the airport. During the uprising, the
commandant of the air force and the governor of Zulia state were taken
hostage.
Uneven share of riches, Page 6
Debt slips, Page 25
