FT  19 OCT 92 / Survey of Italian Industry (5): Keen to forge alliances /
Profile of Montedison, world leader in plastics
EVER since a team of scientists in Ferrara discovered polypropylene (PP) 30
years ago, Ferruzzi-Montedison, the Italian food and chemicals company, has
dominated the world's production of this widely-used plastic.
As a result of funding the team's research, led by the Nobel Prize winner
Professor Giulio Natta, the Italian group was able to invent the best
technological processes for the production of PP.
Himont, the group's chemicals subsidiary, is the world's leading producer of
PP, accounting for about 16 per cent of the world's capacity of 16m tonnes a
year. It is also estimated that about 60 per cent of the world's PP
capacity, existing and planned, is based on Himont's licences.
Himont's production process for PP, under the trademark Spheripol, is
generally accepted as the best in the world. Using this process, the plastic
is produced in little balls, making it more malleable than when it is
produced in
Himont has adapted its highly-efficient Spheripol process to produce
polyethylene (PE), under the trademark Spherilene. Of all the
polyolefin-based materials, PE is produced in the greatest volume. But PP is
increasingly being substituted for PE, especially in packaging materials.
Ferruzzi-Montedison is keen to hold on to its leading position in plastics
but it is looking for alliances with its competitors in order to share the
investment in research and development, and the high fixed costs of plants
and
In September, Montecatini, the subsidiary which co-ordinates
Ferruzzi-Montedison's chemical, pharmaceutical and energy activities, and
Shell Chemicals, part of the Anglo-Dutch oil group, announced a proposal to
merge their activities in PP and PE.
The proposal, which needs approval from the European Commission because it
would link Europe's largest PP producers with a combined capacity of 3m
tonnes, appears to be a perfect fit. Montecatini has only modest PE
production capacity - it has a plant in Texas with annual production
capacity of some 10,000 tons and it is building another in Louisiana with
capacity of 200,000 tons. But Shell already has production capacity of
500,000 tons, using Montecatini's Spherilene licence.
Mr Carlo Sama, the managing director of Montedison, is keen to find further
alliances for Montecatini's other chemicals and pharmaceuticals activities,
mainly to reduce the company's high debt - mostly the result of series of
acquisitions in recent years.
The group's net debt-equity ratio has jumped from 0.88 at the end of 1991 to
1.06 by June 30 this year, but the company intends, through these alliances,
to halve this by the end of 1993 by continuing to cut costs and jobs, and
through the sale of non-strategic real estate and minority stakes.
As a result of the re-organisation of the Ferruzzi-Montedison group and the
merger of Eridania with its French sister, Beghin-Say, its earnings are now
better protected against the cyclical chemicals sector.
In 1991, food accounted for 64.7 per cent of total sales of L15,732bn and 54
per cent of gross operating profit of L1,828bn. By contrast, chemicals
accounted for 20.7 per cent of sales and 19.9 per cent of gross operating
profit.
Ferruzzi-Montedison is now one of the leading producers of sugar, edible
oils and starch in Europe, with particular strength in Italy, France and
Spain.
At the same time Ferruzzi-Montedison is investing in research and
development to find further industrial uses for its agricultural products.
It has developed the technology to produce a diesel fuel from soya,
sunflower and rapeseed oils.
The fuel provides the same performance as traditional diesel, but it
pollutes less, producing only half as much exhaust emissions, and no
sulphur. The distribution of 'Diesel-Bi' is still at an initial stage,
though it is being used by buses and taxis in several European cities,
including Florence, Genoa, Zurich and Freiburg.
Montedison is building a plant with capacity of 60,000 tonnes in Livorno,
which should be in operation by the end of the year. The cost of producing
this environmentally-friendly diesel is more expensive than traditional
diesel, mainly because of the lack of economy of scale, but because it is
not taxed, the cost to the consumer is the same.
The group has also discovered a way to make a bio-degradable thermo-plastic
material from corn starch. This plastic will only be used in niche areas,
such as in the production of nappies, sanitary towels and other hygiene
products, as well as the production of large plastic sheets to protect
farmers' crops in winter.
While these innovations are important from a technological point of view, it
will be many years before they make a significant contribution to profits.
However, government plans partially to privatise the Italian energy industry
could well boost the company's earning power.
Edison, which consolidates the group's energy activities, is Italy's largest
private producer of electricity, with 21 hydro-electric power stations and
two thermo-electric power stations in northern Italy. At present Edison only
generates energy for internal use, but a change in the law would allow it to
sell excess output to Enel, the state electrical authority.
