FT  30 OCT 92 / Management: Run your business by the book - How a company
benefits from good documentation
WHO needs paperwork? Anyone who wants to get the most out of their buildings
and plant, according to Maurice Ault, who believes technical documentation
should be recognised as an invaluable management tool.
Too many businesses, he contends, operate even state-of-the-art premises by
the seat of their pants, never having properly conducted an audit of the
physical assets they control or setting down best-practice guidelines.
'All too often, managers have no clear understanding of what they have under
their control, how it works and how to get the best out of it. The result is
that businesses can be run sloppily and even dangerously.'
One of the keys to safe, reliable and profitable business operations, says
Ault, is high-quality documentation. Like a car handbook, a set of manuals
exposing the nuts and bolts of every operational facility, can guide an
ever-changing cast of managers through training to the operation and
maintenance of plant.
'Only when you describe a plant in detail can you understand what it is and
what it does. Then you have to explain how you operate it. Many of those
responsible simply do things as they have always been done, without any idea
of whether it is the best way.
'Done properly, documentation will optimise any company's technical and
financial performance. Without it, costs and inefficiencies can escalate,
losses will mount and there is even a danger of physical risk to personnel,'
Ault adds.
As the man responsible for marketing Technical Publications Management
Services (TPMS), purchased recently from National Power by shipbuilding and
engineering group Vosper Thorneycroft, Ault has a vested interest in getting
his message across.
But it is being taken on board by British companies in search of competitive
edge, not least because technological developments and statutory safety and
environmental requirements increasingly demand standards which can be met
and maintained only with reference to formal documentation.
Given its power industry roots, the recent growth of TPMS has been largely
based on its success in offering a documentation service to the operators of
highly technical, complex plant - such as power stations and offshore
installations - although it is now branching out into the water treatment
and supply, defence and aerospace industries.
But Ault believes the need for quality documentation is becoming paramount
in far less technically-oriented businesses - such as hotels, theatres and
cinemas and manufacturing facilities, where safety and health standards have
to be based on a proper understanding of a building's working
characteristics.
'Technical documentation may look like a Cinderella activity but it involves
a fundamental management discipline of increasing importance. Walk around
any factory or plant and you can identify those which have already got the
message and those which are inviting big trouble.'
