FT  22 OCT 92 / Heseltine retreats again over coal
FRESH CONCESSIONS to head off the revolt by Tory MPs over coal closures were
made yesterday by Mr Michael Heseltine - including offering a slight hope
that the 10 pits excluded from the moratorium announced this week could yet
be reprieved.
The trade and industry secretary agreed the planned review of the coal
industry should cover subsidies for nuclear power. He also said the impact
of legislation introduced by the government affecting the markets for the
coal and electricity generation industries would be covered.
Mr Heseltine's concessions - aimed at addressing the specific concerns of
possibly rebellious Conservative MPs - came after three tortuous days of
retreat in which he conceded first a delay and then a full review of the
closure programme. The case for closure will now be scrutinised separately
for all pits.
In spite of a bravura performance during a stormy Commons debate, Mr
Heseltine's political reputation, and Conservative MPs' faith in the
sure-footedness of Mr John Major, have been damaged by the back-tracking.
Government whips and ministers worked furiously to minimise the number of
dissidents in last night's vote.
The all-party Trade and Industry Committee meets today to decide the scope
of its inquiry into the future of the coal industry and will call Mr
Heseltine to give evidence next week.
Speaking in a Labour-initiated debate, Mr Heseltine said the review by his
department would be wide-ranging and consider evidence from all interested
parties, including the trade unions. Apart from evidence given in commercial
confidence, as much as possible would be made public.
The inquiry would be 'without restrictions' and have 'no pre-ordained
outcome'. Boyds, a specialist mining consultancy firm, would be employed to
give evidence on the viability of pits and the prospects for British Coal.
Out of the 31 pits originally listed for closure by British Coal, 21 have
been reprieved until at least the new year, pending the review. But Mr
Heseltine was pressed by Labour MPs and rebel Tories on the status of the
other 10, which British Coal has advised have no prospect of being
economically viable and are due to be shut down after a statutory 90 day
consultation period.
He said British Coal was compelled, during the consultations, not to take
any action which might prejudice the possibility of the pits continuing in
operation afterwards, 'and that means they have to indulge in the
appropriate care and maintenance in order to keep open that option'.
But he sought not to raise expectations, emphasising that British Coal had
advised him the 10 pits were lossmaking, and there was 'no case' for waiting
until the end of the general moratorium before beginning the statutory
consultation period.
Mr Heseltine shrugged off jibes by Mr Robin Cook, Labour's trade and
industry spokesman, directed at the extent of the government's concessions.
He said there would be a white paper next year setting out the result of the
inquiries, the government's energy policy, the consequences for British
Coal, the implications for individual pits and employment prospects in the
industry.
Mr Cook said Labour objected to the government's review because it only
covered the 21 pits included in the moratorium and would be carried out by
the government. He said the government had no energy strategy.
More reports, Page 9
Search for a balance of power, Page 9
