FT  01 APR 92 / UN votes for Libya sanctionsfrom April 15
THE United Nations Security Council last night voted for a showdown with
Libya - deciding to impose sanctions from April 15 unless it hands over the
two alleged Lockerbie bombers.
Ten countries including Britain, the US, France and Russia backed the
punitive measures, but as many as five others, among them China and India,
abstained.
Libyan television said the decision was 'unjust and unfair'. Libya's
ambassador to the UN, Mr Ali Elhouderi, said earlier he feared the UN move
was paving the way for new air attacks on Libya as in 1986.
The sanctions will mean that all Libya's air links will be cut off, arms
sales to the Libyans will be banned and Libyan embassy staff around the
world will have to be cut. But the UN move will not mean an oil boycott or
block most other trade with Libya, although there will be a ban on shipment
of aircraft and parts to the Libyans.
This is only the fourth time that the Security Council has imposed
sanctions, the earlier cases being against Rhodesia, South Africa and, most
recently, Iraq.
The relatively large number of abstentions in the 15-member Security Council
reflected the view that western powers were in too much of a hurry and ought
to wait for an interim ruling by the International Court at The Hague. The
court is considering a complaint brought by Libya against the US and
Britain.
Apart from China and India, the other abstainers were Morocco, Zimbabwe and
Cape Verde.
India and Zimbabwe indicated most UN members, being Third World states, were
probably against the UN resolution. Zimbabwe's ambassador said any idea that
international law could be made by majority decision of the Security Council
could damage the UN.
Sir David Hannay, the UK delegate, stressed that if Libya handed over the
two for trial in the US or Britain, sanctions would be unnecessary.
Libya will still have until April 15 to hand over the two men, accused of
masterminding the bombing of the Pan Am jet that exploded over Lockerbie in
Scotland in December 1988 with the loss of 270 lives.
The UN is also demanding that Libya co-operate with an investigation into
the bombing of a French UTA jet over Niger in September 1989, in which 171
people were killed.
In a warning to the Libyans, Sir David Hannay said any restraint on foreign
nationals who wished to leave Libya would be regarded 'with the utmost
seriousness'. The Foreign Office in London, echoing reports from European
embassies in Tripoli, said several people had been refused exit visas in the
last 10 days.
But Mr Elhouderi denied Libya was holding foreigners against their will. 'It
is truly a baseless allegation,' he said.
Under last night's resolution, Tripoli is required to cease all terrorist
action and demonstrate its renunciation. Britain may therefore be able to
demand details of IRA agents suspected of having received training in Libya.
Tony Walker adds from Cairo: Traffic across Egypt's remote western border
with Libya is expected to increase after the imposition of the UN ban on
aviation links.
Shipping from Egyptian ports is also likely to benefit from the air embargo.
Others among Libya's neighbours who are also certain to experience a jump in
transit traffic include Tunisia, which shares a land border, and Malta.
Col Gadaffi's recent threat, in an interview with the French weekly Figaro
magazine, that he would refuse to do business with 'hostile' countries, such
as France, indicates Libya will endeavour to be more selective in its choice
of trading partners.
Lonrho, Page 25
