FT  08 AUG 92 / Japan upset at 'bribery' by Russian
THE JAPANESE and Russian governments maintained an embarrassed silence
yesterday, amid allegations that Russia's third-ranking trade representative
in Tokyo had fled, after police uncovered bribes made to a local trading
company executive.
Japanese press and television reports said Mr Vladimir Davidov, vice trade
representative at the Russian embassy, had sought to buy satellite equipment
and sophisticated memory chips, in violation of Cocom regulations
restricting sales by the west of high technology with security applications.
Attempts to procure 4-megabit D-Ram chips and a relay amplifier for a
communications satellite were claimed to have continued into this year,
after the break-up of the former Soviet Union.
The reports come at an awkward time for relations between the countries. Mr
Mikhail Poltoranin, Russian deputy prime minister, has been in Japan this
week preparing for a visit next month by President Boris Yeltsin, when the
future of the Kurile islands off northern Japan will head the agenda. The
islands were occupied by the Soviet Union at the end of the second world
war.
They also coincided with the presentation to the cabinet yesterday of the
Japan Defence Agency's annual report. Although acknowledging that the risk
to Japan's security from the former Soviet bloc had been significantly
reduced, it said arms cuts east of the Urals had not matched those deployed
to the west, and military forces and hardware in the region closest to Japan
had been upgraded.
Mr Davidov's unnamed Japanese contact was described as a 57-year-old
executive of a Tokyo-based electronics sales company who was alleged to have
received some Y1m (Pounds 4,100) cash from him. No merchandise was
reportedly handed over, but the executive is said to face charges of
accepting remuneration for undertaking illicit activity.
Mr Davidov, who had diplomatic immunity, returned to Russia in mid-May. The
Japanese Foreign Ministry had no comment on reports that this was an
immediate result of its conveying a police request to interview him.
The Russian embassy said that, while it would neither confirm nor deny the
allegations, the emissary had finished his term in Japan and was now on
'home leave' in Russia.
The US embassy said merely that it was aware of the case.
Japanese companies have periodically been in the spotlight for sales of
technological equipment to unauthorised countries. Three executives of Japan
Aviation Electronics Industry this week pleaded guilty in the US to the
illegal transfer of jet parts to Iran.
