FT  14 FEB 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Price rise brightens outlook
for New Zealand dairy farmers
THINGS ARE looking up for New Zealand's dairy farmers, thanks to currency
changes and firmer international demand.
Yesterday the New Zealand Dairy Board announced they are to receive an
unexpected 60 NZcents (18p) a kilogram for milk fat equivalent in their
latest seasonal quarterly adjustment. This brings the pay out so far this
season to NZDollars 4.70 a kilogram. Mr Dryden Spring, the board chairman,
said that the probable final price for the season was be between NZDollars
5.10 and NZDollars 5.20 a kilogram.
The extra payment represents an NZDollars 8,000 boost to the average dairy
farmer when the money is paid out on February 20, on top of an average
NZDollars 10,000 monthly payment for the 10 month season, out of which they
have to pay farm costs, tax and interest charges.
The change has come relatively quickly. Last season was disastrous for the
industry, with returns at historic lows. Most farmers, who receive no state
assistance or subsidies, operated at a loss, and there was real concern that
many would abandon their farms. The total board payout was NZDollars 3.50 a
kilogram and the board was compelled to inject NZDollars 50m of its reserves
to bring the payout to NZDollars 3.70.
The 15 companies who form the New Zealand Dairy Board, which is a national
co-operative, are likely to make additional payments from their own profits.
This has averaged 55 cents a kilogram and a similar figure is predicted for
this season, suggesting that the average farmer will receive a total payout
of about NZDollars 5.60 a kilogram.
Even at this level, returns will not have regained the levels of the late
1980s. In 1989 the payout was NZDollars 5.80 a kilogram, falling to
NZDollars 3.70 in 1990 and Dollars 3.50 last season.
The new season began on a somewhat happier note in July, and the board said
in October that it hoped to raise its payout to about NZDollars 3.90. In
November it announced a payout of NZDollars 4.10 for that quarter, and said
that if present trends continued the end of season payment might reach
NZDollars 4.25. The change means that the dairy industry will earn New
Zealand more than NZDollars 3bn this season, compared with NZDollars 2.4bn
last year.
The devaluation of the New Zealand dollar, of about four per cent since the
end of November, made a significant contribution to the improvement in
returns.
Exchange movements of the US dollar, in which the international trade is
conducted, against European currencies have also been to New Zealand's
advantage, as they have raised the price of European exports, leading to a
strengthening of international prices.
This was helped by a drop in supplies coming on the market, because of a
fall of about 2 per cent in European production. The flood of supplies from
the former communist states in eastern Europe, which had helped disrupt the
market last season, also ebbed.
Mr Spring said New Zealand had also benefitted from continuing growth in
consumption in the developing Asian markets, and Latin America. Growing
wealth is seeing a steady rise in consumer interest in dairy products in
these regions.
These favourable factors allowed the board to reduce its stocks during the
season. They had been high when the season began. The board does not
announce its stock levels for commercial reasons, but Mr Spring said he was
'comfortable' with the present situation.
Board staff say, however, that the improving situation will be monitored
closely. The world is still producing much more milk than it needs, mostly
because of subsidies, and the potential this has to disrupt the market
remains a matter for concern.
