FT  11 NOV 92 / International Company News: Cartel body rules Metro-Asko
deal anti-competitive
GERMANY'S federal competition authorities yesterday dealt a blow to plans to
create one of the world's largest retail groups with sales of more than
DM70bn (Dollars 46bn).
The Bundeskartellamt provisionally ruled that the planned purchase by Metro,
Germany's biggest stores group, of a majority stake in Asko Deutsche
Kaufhaus would be anti-competitive in a number of areas.
The privately controlled Metro, which is domiciled in Switzerland, already
has an 11 per cent shareholding in Asko. It announced its plans for a
takeover in July this year and the move has the support of Asko's
management.
However, the Bundeskartellamt concluded that in a number of sectors the
combined group would have anti-competitive market dominance in certain parts
of Germany. The authorities said yesterday that the sectors involved are
food, furniture and DIY, but gave no further details.
The ruling will not automatically lead to the unscrambling of the
acquisition plan as Metro, Asko and the authorities have until the end of
this month to negotiate over a possible compromise.
This could involve selling stores in the areas the Bundeskartellamt has
identified, but neither company commented yesterday on a likely response to
the ruling. If no compromise can be reached, Metro could challenge the
ruling in the Berlin courts.
Last year Metro reported turnover of DM46bn, of which more than DM30bn came
from its extensive network of retail businesses within Germany, at the core
of which is the majority owned quoted Kaufhof group. The business was
founded by the reclusive Mr Otto Beisheim, who copied the 'cash and carry'
concept from the US and opened his first store in Germany in 1964.
In July, shortly before Metro unveiled its plans, Asko reported sales up 64
per cent to DM19.9bn for 1991, reflecting the acquisition of the Co-op
retail group. Write-offs on acquisitions and share stakes meant the parent
company reported a loss of DM269m after a pre-tax profit of DM106m in 1990.
Sales this year are likely to be around DM22bn.
