FT  28 JAN 92 / UK News (Employment): Sharp rise in bias cases for Acas
A RECORD number of individual unfair-dismissal or discrimination cases was
referred to Acas, the government conciliation service, last year. The total
was 60,605, an increase of more than 15 per cent on 1990.
The figures, which will be published in the spring, show the increased
readiness of individuals and unions to pursue such cases. They also reflect
the depth of the labour shake-out which began gathering pace from the middle
of last year.
Acas has a statutory duty to try to conciliate between employees and
employers before a case goes to an industrial tribunal, and is usually
successful in that. Of the 60,605 individual conciliation cases referred
last year, 36 per cent were settled at Acas, 32 per cent were withdrawn and
only 32 per cent went to tribunals.
The most dramatic percentage increase last year was in the area of sex
discrimination, where, according to Mr Brian Atkins, director in charge of
individual conciliation, the number of incoming cases rose by 119 per cent
to 3,500. That was mainly because of a wave of cases influenced by the
European Court's Barber judgment, which extended the definition of pay in
equal pay cases to include pensions.
There was also a 45 per cent increase to 12,000 in the number of cases
brought under the Wages Act, where employers are alleged not to have paid
wages or benefits laid down by wages councils. Mr Atkins said the increase
was connected with a sharp rise in redundancies, with workers trying to
claim unpaid benefits, such as holiday pay, which may have been outstanding.
The number of race discrimination cases increased by 24 per cent to 1,500
and the number of cases under the Equal Pay Act also rose by more than 20
per cent to 941.
The number of straightforward unfair-dismissal claims, always the biggest
category, rose by only 1,700 to 39,200. The number of collective
conciliation cases, of which about half concerned pay, rose 10 per cent to
1,400. More than a third of all Acas arbitration cases during the
organisation's first 10 years from 1975 to 1985, involved Britain's largest
union, the TGWU general union.
The figure, probably reflecting the influence of Mr Jack Jones, a former
TGWU leader and one of the founders of Acas, is contained in unpublished
research into arbitration in post-war Britain by Dr Alice Brown of Edinburgh
University.
Arbitration was mainly used by workers with highly developed bargaining
structures, the analysis concludes.
