FT  22 OCT 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Italy may resort to decree on
milk quotas
THE ITALIAN government is prepared to resort to the use of a decree in order
to have legislation on milk quotas ready for the next meeting of European
Community agriculture ministers, which is scheduled to be held on October
26.
The law is designed to bring Italian milk production policy into line with
the community's and is an essential part of the government's strategy to try
to persuade the EC to think again about the size of the reduction demanded
in Italy's milk quota.
Italy has been given an annual quota of 9m tonnes of milk, compared with its
present production of 11.5m tonnes. This quota has sparked strong protests
from the producers, who claim they are being asked to make an unacceptably
large cut. The government for its part has responded by trying to seek a
better deal, which would raise the quota by 10 per cent.
However, the government is well aware that its community partners have been
antagonised by the behaviour of previous Italian administrations, which
consistently denied that the industry was over-producing and concealing the
true extent of production. As a result the new law on milk quotas has been
drawn up to forestall further criticism from the EC and bring Italy into
line.
The law fixes individual quotas for producers and proposes a three year
period, 1992 to 1994, over which Italy would reduce production.
This legislation risks being held up in parliament because of the need to
give early approval for the 1993 budget. Resort to a decree will also get
round some of the amendments the milk lobby is seeking to make in the
chamber of deputies.
With the new law in hand, the government hopes to demonstrate Italy's good
intentions to comply with the quota scheme - at one stage the Italians were
threatening simply to ignore the quotas.
The government next week will also repeat its argument for a raising of the
quota level, pointing out the country's high level of milk imports - about
9m tonnes. Italian officials hope the matter can be resolved by the end of
November.
