FT  18 APR 92 / Force of arms pushes Afghans near chaos / Assessing problems
in the wake of President Najibullah
TWO weeks ago, Mr Benon Sevan, UN special envoy, was confident that
President Najibullah of Afghanistan would step down soon in favour of a
neutral council which would pave the way for an interim government and
elections.
Najibullah has indeed left office. But the manner of his leaving - forced
out on Thursday by his own ruling party as rebel guerrillas advanced on
Kabul - was not what Mr Sevan had hoped for after months of diplomatic
shuttling to seek a peace accord.
The era begun by the Soviet invasion in 1979 has ended. Najibullah was
security chief for Babrak Karmal, installed by Moscow as president, and he
superseded Karmal in 1986. He had been clinging to power as Moscow first
withdrew its troops in 1989 and then cut off all support this year.
However, it is unclear whether Najibullah's fall will lead to peace, or to
renewed bloody civil war between rival Islamic fundamentalist guerrillas.
Between 1m and 2m people have died in the conflict so far.
The international community's extreme concern was underlined by a UN
Security Council call, after an emergency session on Thursday night, for
restraint and a political solution. The US said it feared chaos and appealed
to all parties to lay down their arms and co-operate with the UN in
arranging a peaceful transfer of power.
But the many foreign countries which have participated in, financed or
manipulated Afghanistan's 13-year war now appear virtually powerless to
influence the immediate course of events.
Mr Abdul Wakil, Afghan foreign minister, said the new regime would continue
to be committed to the UN peace process. However, the ruling Watan
(Homeland) party's hold on power appears increasingly tenuous. Yesterday, Mr
Wakil left Kabul briefly to seek a meeting with Ahmad Shah Masood, leader of
one of the main guerrilla factions.
Forces loyal to Mr Masood, commander of the Jamiat-i-Islami group, have
taken Bagram air base, 30 miles from Kabul. Mr Najibullah Lafraie, Jamiat
spokesman in the Pakistani city of Peshawar, said the forces were poised
close to Kabul but had orders to halt outside the city. 'We are confident
that the citizens of Kabul, army officers and officials have good opinions
of Masood. We hope that the situation will go in favour of the mujahideen
(guerrillas), without bloodshed,' he said.
A deal between the government and Mr Masood, however, would almost certainly
be unacceptable to Mr Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, leader of the Hezb-i-Islami
guerrillas, who are also not far from Kabul. Mr Hekmatyar has rejected the
UN peace process.
Intense rivalry between mujahideen groups - these are the two most powerful
of many factions - is the biggest obstacle to peace. Their common goal, the
removal of Najibullah, has been achieved with the support of western and
Arab arms and aid. But the temptation to pursue separate military courses is
great now that military victory over government forces also appears so
close.
Mr Masood controls much of northern Afghanistan through his Supervisory
Council of the North. Mr Hekmatyar's territory is mostly south of Kabul. For
some time the government has controlled less than 20 per cent of the
country.
Pakistani officials have been meeting mujahideen leaders, many of whom are
based in Pakistan, since Wednesday to seek agreement on the composition of a
15-member neutral council due to take control of Afghanistan under the UN
peace plan. They are con-cerned that agreement will not be reached in time
for mujahideen leaders to return to Kabul so as to join new administrative
arrangements.
The West has supported the mujahideen but the prospect of a radical Islamic
state emerging in Afghanistan is a principal cause of international concern.
Afghanistan's historical role as a buffer state between empires would be
superseded, in the west's eyes, by one in which it was part of a growing
radical Islamic swathe.
Even more worrying for the west and for Moscow would be a balkanisation in
which warring guerrilla groups held various parts of the country and sought
to form links with their neighbours, including the central Asian republics
that were in the Soviet Union.
A further motive for international concern is Afghanistan's role as the
largest regional producer and exporter of heroin. A further period of
unstable, decentralised control would prevent attempts to bring the growing
and processing of opium poppies under control.
The refugee problem is also enormous. More than 3m Afghans have fled to
Pakistan during the war and more than 2m to Iran. Their resettlement in a
mine-studded country with a collapsing economy will be a huge challenge for
the international community when peace returns at last. They may have to
wait a long time to return home.
