FT  29 FEB 92 / Elephants in their sights: The arguments for lifting the
ivory trade ban
A Zimbabwean villager had a blunt riposte to the world's 'elefriends'
gathering in Kyoto this weekend, intent on maintaining a ban on ivory trade:
'Elephants eat people's food, and people are dying of hunger.'
The question of whether to lift the ban will be among the most controversial
issues this week at the triennial meeting of the Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species (Cites). As a test case for the effectiveness of
trade measures in achieving environmental ends, it will provide important
signals for action in defence of endangered animal and plant species.
Although elephant populations have recovered in some areas, such as
Zimbabwe, since the imposition of a ban on ivory trade in 1989, the species
remains in danger. There is a heated debate over the extent to which the ban
on trade has been responsible for the slim, localised recovery and whether
extending the life of ban will sustain or undermine the future of the
elephant.
The danger facing the elephant is not in dispute. Africa's elephant
population slumped from 1.2m to 600,000 between 1980 and 1988. Total trade
in unworked ivory rose from about 200 tonnes a year in 1950 to about 1,000
tonnes a year in 1980, and remained at this level throughout the 1980s. The
total of ivory exported between 1979 and 1988 accounted for more than
700,000 elephants.
Since the imposition of the trade ban at the last Cites meeting in 1989,
there has been progress. Demand in Europe and the US for ivory has virtually
disappeared, according to customs statistics. Poaching has not been
eradicated, but in certain countries (notably in southern Africa) success
has been such that elephant herds now need to be culled.
But can the trade ban be credited for these successes? And can they be
maintained?
Evidence derived from the ivory trade debate suggests that the ban is
valuable as a source of publicity and has helped to reduce consumer demand
for ivory products. As long as legal ivory cannot be distinguished from
illegal ivory, a total ban also simplifies the international policing
effort. But there are also concerns among conservation groups that success
is only partly due to the ban and that illegal trade channels may expand and
reverse the progress which has been achieved.
Even the Worldwide Fund for Nature, a committed campaigner for maintaining
the ban, concedes in a report published this month: 'These dramatic drops
(in poaching) were brought about through increased law enforcement efforts.'
African governments which are calling for a lifting of the ban base their
case on the need to strike a balance between their rural communities and the
local elephant population. The concern underpinning Zimbabwe's call for a
resumption in trade is that the rising number of elephants, with their
voracious appetites, are threatening the livelihood of the agricultural
community. While they have no economic value, there is no incentive for
villagers to tolerate them. The Zimbabwean government insists, therefore,
that a controlled resumption of trading in ivory would provide villagers
with an incentive to tolerate and protect local elephant populations.
An alternative strategy is to promote Safari tourism. According to research
by Dr Edward Barbier at the London Environmental Economics Centre, the
annual value of ivory exports from Africa amounted to between Dollars 50m
and Dollars 60m in the 1980s: 'Other values of the elephant, such as its
importance to tourism earnings, may be considerably more significant,' he
says.
In a recent study of the economic value of elephants, colleagues at the
Centre pointed out that in Kenya, earnings from viewing elephants came to
about Dollars 25m a year - about 10 times the estimated value of poached
ivory exports from Kenya.
But despite the array of arguments mustered in favour of lifting the ban,
such a policy poses clear dangers. Resumed trading would provide an avenue
for poachers in countries where elephants remain under threat to 'launder'
illegal ivory by mixing it with ivory from legal culls.
Tests can now identify the DNA characteristics of individual pieces of
ivory. It is therefore technically possible to identify poached ivory. Just
how simply or effectively such tests could be administered is another
matter. It is clear that no retail purchaser of ivory could tell the
difference on a shop shelf, so oversight would need to be effective at
source.
Environmentalist groups, such as the Environmental Investigation Agency also
emphasise the practical difficulties of monitoring the ivory at its source.
They argue that corruption in large parts of Africa, and military conflict
in Mozambique and elsewhere, as reasons for doubting whether DNA testing
could be effective in preventing poached ivory from reaching world markets.
Thousands of miles from the arguments in Kyoto, the elephant is unable to
rest easily. Its security will not be guaranteed until demand in end-user
countries has been staunched; until village communities in Africa can see
some economic benefit from preserving this immensely disruptive pachyderm;
and until the corruption and conflict on which poaching thrives have been
brought under control.
