FT  29 OCT 92 / Survey of Hungary (5): New ideas well received - Agriculture
NATURE has not been kind to central Europe this summer and Hungarian
agriculture in particular has suffered one of the worst droughts on record.
In spite of lower production, however, exports are expected to exceed last
year's record Dollars 2.7bn by around Dollars 200m, underlining the
importance of the farming sector to Hungary's overall economic performance.
The European Community is the main market for Hungarian food exports thanks
to lower production costs than Poland and and average export subsidy to
producers of around 20 per cent. Germany is the biggest single market but
the EC association agreement, which lowers levies and allows a 10 per cent
annual rise in export volumes, gives a framework for further steady
expansion in EC markets generally.
The aim of government policy is to make Hungarian agriculture
internationally competitive without subsidies, and it is this aim which
drives the large scale restructuring and privatisation of both land and the
broader agro-industrial complex now under way. The legal framework for the
transformation of the communist collectivised agriculture is in place and,
by the end of 1994, nearly 80 per cent of Hungary's 6.5m cropland hectares
should be in private hands.
After over four decades of collectivised farming, however, there is little
desire or ability to return to small scale peasant farming. Ownership of
most of the nearly 1,400 agricultural co-operatives will be transferred into
the hands of 270,000 active co-op members, 380,000 pensioners and 460,000
former members and former owners or their heirs.
The co-ops will lose their social obligations to local villages and many of
their agro-industrial activities will be hived off and privatised. They will
be re-laced by a mixture of private and family farms, farming associations
and new-type co-operatives based on shared ownership and market-related
production.
Most of the 130 state farms will also be privatised although 14 of the
largest and most technically advanced will remain in state hands to ensure
that valuable stock breeding, seed selection and other expertise is not
dissipated.
A typical example is the Babolna State Farm, created by the Habsburg state
in 1796 and with an international reputation as a breeder of Arab stallions.
Always a flagship of Hungarian agriculture, today Babolna runs a successful
joint venture chicken breeding operation with Arbor Acres of the US and
supplies beef and chicken hamburger patties to McDonalds, which is fast
expanding throughout Hungary. Several other foreign joint ventures are under
negotiation.
Babolna exports widely through the Middle East and Latin America as well as
Europe and retains links with the huge potential markets of the former
Soviet Union which it is re-developing on market-based principles.
Opening up Hungarian agriculture to new ownership, new methods and new
markets reflects awareness of the need for fresh capital and fresh ideas.
This approach has been welcomed by the multi-national food companies. Kraft,
Philip Morris, Tate &amp; Lyle, Knorr, Ferruzzi, Unilever and others have all
made substantial investments and are busy improving productivity, product
lines and packaging.
Mr Gyorgy Rasko, state secretary at the ministry of agriculture, who is a
leading advocate of the need for foreign investment to increase the value
added to farm products, points to Phillip Morris as an example of the
benefits. Last year PM exported Dollars 20m worth of cigarettes to the
Ukraine from the newly acquired Eger tobacco factory which never exported
that amount during its 40 year existence as a state factory.
