FT  03 AUG 92 / US denies provocation of Iraq: Cheney says task force sent
to Kuwait under a deliberate programme
THE US decision to dispatch 2,400 troops to Kuwait this week is designed to
send a message to Iraq's President Saddam Hussein, but not to provoke him,
according to US officials.
Mr Dick Cheney, secretary of defence, said at the weekend that the presence
of the reinforced armoured battalion and its participation in joint military
exercises was part of a deliberate programme.
This, he said, 'allows us to demonstrate to would-be adversaries that the US
is ready to go on short notice and to reassure our friends - such as the
Saudis, such as the Kuwaitis and the other Gulf states - that we are
prepared to come to their assistance it it is needed'.
But he added it was as wrong to suggest the US was seeking to provoke Mr
Saddam as it was to accept that there was any basis in the Iraqi president's
claim to sovereignty to all or part of Kuwait.
There is concern in the US government that Iraq has begun to reassert such
claims, much as it did prior to its invasion of Kuwait two years ago
yesterday.
The inclination is to see this as a pattern of bluster by Mr Saddam, also
known as 'cheat and retreat', of which denial of access to United Nations
inspectors was a part. But failure to take such signals seriously two years
ago is a mistake that the administration knows it cannot afford to repeat.
The battalion-sized task force, drawn from the 1st Cavalry division in Fort
Hood, Texas, and the 5th Special Forces group based in Fort Campbell,
Kentucky, combines tanks and mechanised infantry. Both units fought in the
Gulf war and will take part in exercises code-named Operation Intrinsic
Action, scheduled to start in September but now brought forward.
This operation - plus two others due to start today involving naval, marine
and amphibious forces - stem from last September's defence co-operation
agreement between the US and Kuwait. The decision to advance them was taken,
according to the Pentagon, 'when the difficulties started with inspections
in Baghdad'.
The new US military presence in the region is not of a size to suggest a
combat mission against Iraq is imminent, although the contingency plans for
air strikes against Iraq, involving US, British and French aircraft, were in
an advanced state of preparation during the recent confrontation with UN
inspectors in Baghdad.
Reuter reports from Baghdad: An unidentified gunman shot at a UN guard in
front of a Baghdad hotel yesterday in the latest of a series of problems
faced by UN staff in Iraq.
A UN official said the shooting was the latest of a series of security
'difficulties' for the guards.
No one has been hurt since security problems in Baghdad increased
dramatically in July. But vehicles have been daubed with paint and staff
have been insulted, spat on and intimidated.
Meanwhile, Iraq repeated its claims to Kuwait yesterday. The daily Babil
newspaper published a front page colour photograph of Mr Saddam praying on
the Kuwait City seafront in October 1990 with the headline: 'It will happen
again, God willing.'
