FT  14 NOV 92 / Late consent on Iraq sales disclosed
THE UK government was clearing export licences for the last batch of Matrix
Churchill machine tools for Iraq on the day before the invasion of Kuwait in
1990.
The clearances strongly suggest that a meeting of ministers two weeks
previously, chaired by Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, led to
significant relaxation of restrictions that had been holding up machine tool
exports for months previously.
Mr Paul Henderson, former managing director of Matrix Churchill, has
confirmed that he was given clearance for exports by the Department of Trade
and Industry on August 1 1990. The clearances came after earlier hold-ups
caused by the refusal of the Foreign Office to let the exports go through.
Stonewalling by Mr William Waldegrave, then a Foreign Office minister
concerned about the implications of the exports, was overcome after Lord
Ridley, then trade and industry secretary contacted Baroness Thatcher, who
was then prime minister.
With her agreement Mr Hurd was asked to convene a meeting of ministers on
July 19, less than two weeks before the invasion, to discuss the guidelines
on supplying defence-related equipment to Iraq.
A number of options were on the table, ranging from a Ministry of Defence
proposal to dispense with the guidelines to the Foreign Office preference
for keeping them.
The government has not revealed the outcome of the meeting, but the DTI's
intervention to clear the machine tool export applications suggest that the
government had given the green light to hitherto controversial licence
applications.
The revelations show that the Ministry of Defence and the DTI, which had
been pushing hard for relaxation of controls, had succeeded in winning the
approval of senior cabinet ministers. According to documents released to
defence counsel in the Matrix Churchill trial, the outcome of the meeting
would have been reported to the prime minister.
Mr Henderson said there was no question in his mind that the government had
relaxed the guidelines. 'Because they were relaxing Cocom regulations it was
applying to Iraq as well.'
Mr John Nosworthy, the former director of the Machine Tools Technologies
Association, confirmed that he was passed documents from the DTI at the time
revealing details of the relaxation of regulations under Cocom (the
organisation which controlled sale of western high technology to Communist
countries) that had a direct bearing on exports to Iraq.
Labour has stepped up its efforts to challenge Mr John Major over
arms-related sales to Iraq, by releasing further documents and calling on
him to say how much he knew about the issue of export licences when he was
foreign secretary.
Mr Robin Cook, the shadow trade and industry secretary, yesterday published
three papers from the few months in 1989 in which Mr Major was at the
Foreign Office. He described them as a 'smoking Howitzer' which showed that
Mr Major 'knew the machine tools were going to arm Saddam in contravention
of the guidelines'.
