FT  25 JAN 92 / Birmingham wins urban development corporation
AN URBAN development corporation is to be set up for part of Birmingham with
an injection of Pounds 50m over five years.
The announcement yesterday by Mr Michael Heseltine, the environment
secretary, confirmed a report earlier this week that a new corporation would
be established for the Heartlands area of east Birmingham.
The Pounds 50m from the government was described as 'crucial funding' by Sir
Reginald Eyre, chairman of the existing development agency for the area, who
is to chair the urban development corporation. The corporation will also be
equipped with statutory powers, including land-acquisition and planning
responsibilities.
Sir Richard Knowles, Labour leader of Birmingham City Council, will be
deputy chairman of the corporation. Mr Heseltine's readiness to give the
council a significant role emphasises the government's more flexible
attitude to working with Labour councils.
The 11 existing urban development corporations are due to be wound up in the
mid 1990s. The announcement of another one appears to be a pragmatic
response to the particular obstacles to regenerating the Birmingham
Heartlands area, rather than a new lease of life for the corporations.
Heartlands consists of 2,350 acres of industrial estates, low-cost and
council housing, distribution depots and derelict land, criss-crossed by
roads, railways and canals. With a population of about 13,000, it is south
and east of the M6 'Spaghetti Junction' and north-east of the city centre.
Since 1987, the development agency for the area has been Birmingham
Heartlands, a company 35 per cent owned by Birmingham City Council and 65
per cent by five construction groups: Bryant, RM Douglas, Galliford, Tarmac
and Wimpey.
Seen as a model partnership for stimulating economic and social revival in
decayed areas, Heartlands relied on government money to prime development.
Individual projects received grants and the Department of Transport agreed
to provide most of the finance for a Pounds 84.7m road through the area to
open up new sites for development.
The government has recently focused its urban regeneration effort on City
Challenge, in which local authorities draw up development schemes and
compete for government funds. Birmingham City Council was unsuccessful in
last year's first round of City Challenge bidding, leaving a Pounds 37.5m
hole in plans for land reclamation and infrastructure projects.
The recession made private-sector partners increasingly reluctant to commit
funds to speculative property ventures, further reducing development. In
response, Sir Richard and Sir Reginald asked ministers to create an urban
development corporation.
