FT  28 OCT 92 / Management: BhS transformed - John Thornhill charts the
retailer's fortunes as the sale of Habitat and Richards puts it centre stage
Retailing often resembles a pendulum; big store chains rarely go bust, they
just swing into, out of, and back into fashion - much like the goods they
sell. Such has been the fate of BhS, the clothing and homeware retailer,
once known as British Homes Stores, which has thrived and dived and seems
set to thrive again as it re-emerges in clearer light this week from the
shadows of the Storehouse conglomerate.
Throughout the 1970s, British Home Stores was one of the strongest retailers
on the high street, retaining a fine reputation in the City. Fund managers
investing in the stores sector were faced with a simple choice of buying
shares in either British Home Stores or Marks and Spencer.
But in the 1980s the fortunes of the two companies drastically diverged.
Crudely put, M and S prospered as a result of the excellent execution of a
simple strategy; British Home Stores struggled through the faulty
application of a bad one. M and S now makes as much profit as BhS makes
sales.
After being swept up into Sir Terence Conran's Storehouse group in 1985, BhS
ossified during the rest of the decade, growing slow and unresponsive.
Profits slumped from Pounds 71.1m in 1987 to Pounds 27.5m by 1990 and as
recession gripped, the company appeared to be heading for a crisis.
The failure of the merger was recognised this week as Storehouse disposed of
Habitat and Richards, shattering Conran's original design of a diversified
retailing group and returning BhS to something like its original form.
But as a result of clearing the clutter, shareholders may now be better able
to appreciate an eye-catching comeback that has been staged at BhS over the
past three years, finally resulting in impressive gains in profits - albeit
from a low base. The Pounds 108m proceeds of Storehouse's disposals will now
be largely used to accelerate this renewed organic expansion.
At the leading edge of BhS's revival has been David Dworkin, who was chief
executive of BhS from November 1989 until he assumed the same role at
Storehouse this July.
A sardonic, undemonstrative American who resembles a hip professor at a
Californian university, Dworkin has presided over a radical process of
change at BhS, which has intrigued the academic world and been used as a
case study at Harvard Business School to demonstrate how to effect change in
a service sector business.
Dworkin says he had never heard of BhS when he was asked to become its chief
executive. He believes his ignorance was a blessing in that he viewed the
business in a truly objective light.
'A person who had grown up in this country could not have come in and done
what was necessary because they would have had too much mental baggage. They
would have been locked into too many haunting demons,' he says.
When he studied BhS he saw an overstaffed static company with little
strategic vision and still less determination to impose one. But with 130
well-located stores, 3.5m shoppers a week, annual sales of more than Pounds
600m, and a surprisingly high degree of customer goodwill, Dworkin believed
the business had great potential - it was simply a question of unlocking it.
To help him achieve the task, Dworkin assembled a core of like-thinking
people both from within and outside the company. Prominent among them were
Ann Iverson, a fellow American retailer (now entrusted with the task of
reviving Mothercare), and Steve Bedford, BhS's human resources director, who
had already thought deeply about how to change the company's culture.
These directors were a complete contrast to the previous BhS management. The
new team not only read the works of management gurus such as Michael Porter
and Tom Peters; they even believed them.
Women were represented on the board for the first time. Six of the seven
directors were under 40.
'We are a different generation and have more open-minded attitudes. We are
the children of the 1960s. Hey, if our sales go up any more we'll all be
smoking dope,' says one director.
Dworkin's first priority was simply to improve the standards of retail
practice. He was horrified to learn that some stores were unable to take in
the new season's stock because their stock rooms were full of unsold
merchandise from four years ago. In the American tradition, Dworkin
ruthlessly marked down prices in order to shift unwanted stock.
With the help of outside consultants, the new team studied every link in the
company's supply chain, speeding up the time it took to bring goods from the
factories to the shop floor and reducing the number of suppliers from 850 to
500. By doing so, BhS increased the volume of goods it bought from any one
supplier, thereby improving buying terms and service.
The company also upgraded the physical fabric of the stores: display
wardrobes were ripped out and more open lay-outs introduced; aisles were
widened; the internal lighting was sharpened up. Computer systems were
introduced giving the company more accurate sales data, and electronic links
were established with suppliers to ensure a more rapid replenishment of
fast-selling goods.
Under the direction of Helena Packshaw, the marketing department began fully
to support the company's buyers for the first time. An enormous number of
interviews were conducted to determine shoppers' needs. A BhS Choice card
was successfully introduced offering discounts for frequent shoppers.
All these 'hard' problems were relatively simple to identify and solve. But
at the same time Dworkin increasingly realised there would have to be a
revolution in the 'soft' side of the business - radically changing the way
people thought and acted in order to 'free up' the organisation and
'empower' the staff.
However, this process was - in part - a brutal business. Layers of
management were hacked out and 900 staff were sacked. 'Waving a magic wand
and shouting 1990s buzz-words was not going to solve anything. We needed to
change a lot of people first,' he says coldly.
This is the first of two articles. The second describing BhS's 'people
revolution' appears next week.
1928  British Home Stores founded by a group of American financiers
1985  British Home Stores is merged with Habitat creating the
Storehouse group.  Trading profits stand at Pounds 55.4m reaching
Pounds 71.1m in 1987.
Nov 1989  David Dworkin recruited as chief executive of BHS.
1990  Profits fall to Pounds 27.5m.
Jul 1992  David Dworkin succeeds Michael Julien as chief executive of
Storehouse.  BHS profits forecast to rise to Pounds 37.5m.
