FT  25 NOV 92 / Irish poll sidelines abortion questions
IRISH people vote today on a 'substantive issue' - not jobs or the currency
crisis or even Northern Ireland - but the curious euphemism coined by the
political establishment to describe the most controversial of three
referendums on abortion being held alongside today's general election. The
word 'abortion' does not appear once in any of the referendum texts.
Mercifully for the politicians battling to hold on to their seats in
conservative rural constituencies, abortion has figured only marginally in
the election campaign. But the outcome of the three referendums could become
one of the first battlegrounds for the incoming government.
Judging by the opinion polls, two of the referendums are expected to be
passed by a comfortable majority.
The first concerns whether women should have the right to travel to obtain
an abortion abroad. The second is whether women should be entitled to
receive information in Ireland on how to obtain an abortion.
The third referendum question - the so-called 'substantive issue' - is
whether limited abortion should be available in Ireland in circumstances
where 'termination is necessary to save the life, as distinct from the
health, of the mother. . .'
However, the threat of suicide - which was made in the controversial case of
the 14-year-old rape victim refused leave by the High Court to travel to
Britain last February for an abortion - is ruled out as grounds for a
termination.
The High Court argued that a 1983 right-to-life amendment to the
constitution would be violated. The Supreme Court overturned the decision,
ruling that suicide was a life-threating risk for the mother, but that in
non-life threatening circumstances, injunctions could be sought to prevent
women travelling abroad for an abortion.
This last referendum has upset lobbies on both sides of the abortion debate
 -the self-styled 'pro-life' campaigners who will vote 'no' to all three
referendums, as well as the 'pro-choice' lobby that favours liberalisation
of legislation but feels the distinction made between the mother's health
and her life is offensive and lays a legal minefield.
Mr Padraig Flynn, the justice minister, justified the distinction by saying
that 'the experience in other countries has been that grounds for abortion
related to health, physical or mental, led to abortion on demand'.
All the opposition parties, as well as the main women's groups and the Irish
Congress of Trade Unions, are recommending a No vote on this because they
favour a legislative solution, rather than a constitutional amendment, to
resolve the dilemma created by the Supreme Court ruling.
The Catholic Church has been ambiguous, fearing that a No vote would leave
the Supreme Court ruling as the only basis for abortion legislation.
The opinion polls now indicate a narrow vote against. So it looks as though
the problem will go back once again to the politicians.
