FT  11 JAN 92 / Kazakhs threaten to sell arms as CIS crisis grows
THE republic of Kazakhstan yesterday threatened to form its own armed forces
and sell arms abroad, as the crisis deepened within the military structures
of the Commonwealth of Independent States, successor to the Soviet Union,
John Lloyd writes from Moscow.
Mr Nursultan Nazarbayev, the Kazakh president, promised the republic would
take its own measures in response to an oath which Russian president Boris
Yeltsin has said must be sworn by all members of the formerly Soviet
military.
The oath pledges allegiance to 'the Russian Federation and its people', and
appears to apply to soldiers of every nationality serving in any republic.
'All officers and men must remain loyal to the first oath that they took (of
allegiance to the USSR),' said Mr Nazarbayev.
The republic's security council yesterday decided to form a national guard
of 2,000 men; and Mr Daulet Simbayev, the deputy prime minister, said the
republic could soon start selling arms abroad.
The move came as the commonwealth's foreign ministers met in Moscow, with
control of the Black Sea Fleet high on the agenda of talks which Mr Andrei
Kozyrev, the Russian foreign minister, said would have to deal with 'acute
problems'.
The war of words between Russia and Ukraine over the fleet continued
yesterday, as Admiral Igor Kasotonov, the fleet commander, said that
dividing the ships would upset the strategic balance of forces in the area
in favour of the US Sixth Fleet. He said the Ukrainian demands for control
of the fleet were 'absurd and untenable', and accused the Ukrainian defence
ministry of incompetence.
Lt Col Sergei Starykh, chairman of the Independent Association of Officers
of the Ukraine, said air force pilots based in the republic might soon start
repatriating their aircraft to Russian airfields because of the
'psychological pressures' put on the officers to sign an oath of loyalty to
Ukraine.
He said half the personnel in the seven air force units in the republic had
refused to take the oath.
In comments to a visiting US delegation, Mr Leonid Kravchuk, the Ukrainian
president, has said the republic intends to remove all tactical nuclear
weapons from the territory by July this year and destroy all strategic
weapons by 1994. All 176 launch silos would be destroyed within three years,
instead of 130 within seven years as stipulated in the strategic arms
reduction treaty treaty signed between the US and the Soviet Union, he said.
Mr Kravchuk said he would soon have a 'special device' in his office to
block the launching of any missiles anywhere in the former Soviet Union
without the consent of all of the presidents of the states with strategic
missiles - Russia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus.
David Gardner adds from Brussels: In Brussels, EC foreign ministers
yesterday decided that new agreements were needed with the former Soviet
republics, to bind them into western Europe's free market and democratic
system.
It was agreed that traditional trade and co-operation agreements were
insufficient for states committed to democratisation and transition to the
market economy.
The Commission argued for intermediate treaties between these and the
so-called Europe agreements signed last month with Hungary, Czechoslovakia
and Poland, which refer to these countries joining the EC in future.
The object would be 'the widest possible opening of markets' and 'special
emphasis on support for institution building and the strengthening of civil
society,' the Commission told ministers.
Senior diplomats said that efforts to seek such agreements would concentrate
initially on Russia, Ukraine and Belarus.
REPUBLICS of the former Soviet Union agreed in talks at Nato headquarters in
Brussels yesterday to enforce reductions in heavy army weapons and aircraft
as soon as possible and without renegotiating the 1990 Conventional Arms
Forces in Europe treaty, David White writes.
The agreement to assume Soviet treaty obligations was reached at talks
attended by officials from 10 former Soviet republics, including the three
Baltic states, as well as other members of the defunct Warsaw Pact and Nato
allies.
The Baltic states are considered as being outside the treaty, but it is
thought they may later join it.
Mr Dick Cheney, the US defence secretary, warned yesterday that the Black
Sea row might lead to a dispute about control of the nuclear stockpile. The
US was watching the situation 'very carefully', he said before leaving the
UK for Germany.
Under yesterday's agreement, Russia, Ukraine and the other newly independent
states are to share out the Soviet Union's arms cuts 'in a manner acceptable
to all parties' to the CFE treaty.
They agreed they should all ratify the treaty, which the Soviet Union failed
to do before its demise. Some updating of the treaty would be needed after
it came into effect.
