FT  09 JUN 92 / International Company News: Groupe Bull arm to launch 40
models in strategic overhaul
ZENITH Data Systems (ZDS), the US-based personal computer arm of Groupe Bull
of France, will today announce the most radical changes in corporate and
product strategy since it was established 13 years ago.
The changes, which have been planned over the past 18 months, are designed
to return ZDS to profitability in a market where prices are collapsing and
many suppliers are chasing too few customers.
They will also indicate that ZDS is once again a force to be reckoned with
after a period in which it seemed to have lost drive and direction.
The announcement, to be made in Paris by Mr Enrico Pesatori, ZDS president
and chief executive officer, will include the launch of 40 new computer
models in five families. All have been developed by ZDS since the personal
computer manufacturer was acquired from Zenith Electronics Corporation in a
controversial Dollars 500m deal three years ago.
It will mean that ZDS' entire line of notebook, desktop and network-server
computers will be revamped overnight. It will claim industry leadership in a
several areas, including portability, battery life and pricing.
'We have a new corporate look that includes everything from our products to
our logo,' Mr Pesatori said. 'ZDS is a whole new company.'
The company, a pioneer in portable computers, has been losing money since
the Bull takeover. Mr Pesatori agreed it would not be profitable in the
half-year to the end of June.
The success of ZDS is critical to Bull, which is hoping it will provide up
to 40 per cent of overall revenues by 1994, compared with about 20 per cent
now. ZDS currently turns over more than Dollars 1bn; Bull, about Dollars
6bn.
As part of a deal made this year with International Business Machines, ZDS
will manufacturer 150,000 notebook computers a year to IBM's specification.
A key part of the new strategy is to segment the product line, offering
separate families of machine to the cost-conscious and to the professional
computer user.
The important low-cost sector of the market is being addressed by large
manufacturers. Compaq, a leader in high performance machines, will soon
launch its first inexpensive models; IBM has formed a wholly-owned
subsidiary in Europe to sell inexpensive computers sourced from Asia.
Mr Pesatori said company strategy was now based on four principles: simple
ways for customers to upgrade their machines as technology advances; simple
ways to connect them together; simple ways to use the computers; and elegant
and ergonomic design.
Critics argue that despite the quality of build and design, the new Zenith
machines are essentially the same technology and price as other machines on
the market. Mr Pesatori says, however, that customers will increasingly
choose well known names over cheap, anonymous brands.
