FT  29 APR 92 / PM rejects European super-state
MR JOHN MAJOR, the prime minister, yesterday pledged Britain to a central
role in a Europe of nation states but said he intended to 'hold at bay' the
EC social chapter, which would damage British industry and destroy jobs.
Mr Major, whose speech to the annual conference of the Institute of
Directors brought him a standing ovation, said he was not prepared to see 'a
centralised United States of Europe' which could never be in the interests
of the British people.
The prime minister emphasised that when Britain assumed the EC presidency in
July the completion of the single market would be its first priority. But he
made clear his determination to restrain the community from reaching
decisions which he believed would damage Britain or which could better be
taken at national or local level.
Referring specifically to the EC working time directive, which seeks to
change existing employment laws and to restrict working hours, Mr Major said
he was not prepared to wave through plans that would add Pounds 5bn to the
costs of British industry.
Attacking the proposals, he said he wanted it clearly understood throughout
the Community that unnecessary interference with working practices was bad
for business. He believed strongly in de-regulation and in getting
government off the back of business and was not prepared to let Brussels
intervene in areas which Westminster had decided to leave alone.
On the working time directive plans, he added: 'They are not for us. No one
should be in any doubt. A Conservative government will strongly oppose such
damaging regulation wherever it is found, and we will not readily acquiesce
in any attempts to impose these costs on our industry.'
Mr Major said the British people had recently voted against the restoration
of trade union power, and completion of the reform of employment laws was a
priority for his new government.
He said legislation would be introduced soon to make unlawful the automatic
deduction of union membership dues without written authorisation.
Individuals would be given greater freedom to choose a union and all
pre-strike ballots would be postal and subject to independent scrutiny.
Seven days' notice of strike action would have to be given after a ballot.
Mr Major said that in spite of the recession there remained a new spirit of
enterprise throughout Britain, with government policies making the country a
magnet for overseas investment. He added: 'It is high time people stopped
writing down our skills and damaging British manufacturing industry.'
Britain, he said, was set for a new era of prosperity, the foundations for
which had been laid by the recent election victory. The government intended
to 'root the values of enterprise, choice, ownership and opportunity even
deeper into the bedrock of Britain.'
