FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of World Banking (3): Consolidation starts at home -
Acquisition or alliance? Peter Montagnon on a single-market dilemma
THE DEVELOPMENT of the European single market has confronted bankers with a
dilemma.
On the one hand, they feel under pressure to expand across the national
frontiers that have hitherto divided the European Community. On the other,
they know that, even if the theoretical barriers to such expansion have
broken down, differences of market practice and tradition remain a
formidable obstacle.
The problem is less acute with specialised wholesale banking, which is more
or less a global business anyway, than with retail banking, which requires a
physical presence in the foreign market.
That raises the question of how such a presence should be established.
Should it be through acquisition and merger, or by collaborative alliances
which may involve an exchange of shares? Or should it come through a direct
attempt to establish a presence from scratch?
Of all these options, the latter is probably the most difficult of all.
Customer preferences are deeply ingrained in national retail markets, and
newcomers face stiff psychological resistance; but that does not mean the
alternatives are easy either.
Though the run up to the single market has seen some cross-border
acquisitions of retail banks, such as the purchase by Deutsche Bank of Banca
d'America e d'Italia, bankers generally reckon that such an approach has
many pitfalls for management unfamiliar with the territory into which they
are expanding. The trouble is that collaborative alliances can also prove
fragile and not particularly lucrative.
One of the older of such alliances is that between Banco Santander and the
Royal Bank of Scotland, which involves the Spanish bank holding a 10 per
cent stake in its Scottish partner. The relationship has allowed the Royal
Bank to develop and market an online service, giving its UK customers
effective access to Santander branches. This is now being extended to other
European countries as well. Yet it is difficult to detect ways in which the
relationship has been a dynamic generator of profits over the years. A
cynical view might be that the greatest benefit of the arrangement, which
also involves a Royal Bank stake of just over 2 per cent in Santander, is
that it discourages outsiders from bidding for the Royal Bank.
Last year, meanwhile, saw the failure of efforts by Credit Lyonnais and
Commerzbank to agree the terms of a collaborative alliance, apparently
following differences over strategic direction after German unification and
a clash over Credit Lyonnais' ambition to adopt a dominant role.
Negotiations on a share swap between Dresdner Bank and BNP are proceeding,
though this is clearly a lengthy process. In the meantime, the main thrust
of their collaboration has been in countries outside the EC, such as
Switzerland and Hungary.
It is thus ironic, but not surprising, that one of the main trends of
European banking in the run-up to the single market has been for the
industry to consolidate at national level. In this context, Lloyds' interest
in acquiring Midland scarcely seems out of place, even if it does pose
competition policy problems in the UK. According to the OECD, the number of
European bank mergers within national borders is running at nearly twice
those across borders within the Community.
The trend is clearly seen in the experience of Dutch banking. After the
failure in 1989 of the proposed merger between Amro Bank and Generale de
Banque, of Belgium - attributed in part to the difficulty of maintaining
separate identities for the two banks within their old home markets - the
Dutch bank turned instead to a merger with its compatriot, ABN. The result
is a bank powerful enough to deflect outsiders from harbouring ambitions in
the small Dutch market, while also being of a size large enough to expand
abroad.
The trend to consolidation is yet more marked in the countries of southern
Europe, where banking was less well developed before the single market
concept was launched. Having realised that its high margins made Spain a
juicy prospect for foreign banks, the authorities there actively promoted a
process of consolidation, starting with the merger of Banco Bilbao and Banco
Vizcaya in 1988. The process was far from easy, but has produced results in
the form of significant cost savings.
Under its Amato law, which confers tax privileges on banks which merge,
Italy is belatedly following suit. The prime motivation may be the
modernisation of the industry and financial system in a way that will
discourage predatory foreigners; but mergers in the home market also appeal,
because they create much greater scope for cost savings.
Lloyds, for example, has identified some Pounds 700m annually that could be
saved if it were allowed to amalgamate with Midland. The alternative offered
by the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation is a strategy of regional
synergies, whose benefits are harder to quantify.
A similar lesson emerges across the Atlantic, where mergers such as that
between Manufacturers Hanover and Chemical Bank have as much to do with the
cost savings from rationalisation than with a desire to benefit from
liberalisation of interstate expansion. The US, it will be recalled, already
has the benefit of a single currency. Only when that comes to Europe, too,
are cross-border mergers of banks likely to make a great deal of sense.
