FT  10 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Expanding Takare jumps 72% to Pounds 7.5m
TAKARE, the expanding nursing group for elderly and chronically ill
patients, yesterday announced a 72 per cent increase in pre-tax profits,
from Pounds 4.4m to Pounds 7.5m, for the year 1991.
After raising Pounds 74m last September in further equity and debenture
funding, the group said it was confident that it could grow at 1,200-1,400
beds per annum without going back to shareholders for at least another 18
months.
Sales doubled to Pounds 29.6m (Pounds 14.8m) and earnings per share
increased 40 per cent to 10.1p (7.2p).
A proposed final dividend of 1p makes a total of 1.5p compared with 1p.
Mr Keith Bradshaw, chairman, said the company took heart from both
Conservative and Labour party proposals on health care.
If the Conservatives were re-elected, the April 1993 introduction date for
the government's initiative to provide more care in the community is
expected to boost Takare's involvement with health authorities and health
boards.
Labour has a similar pledge for improving services in this area. Its policy
document, Better Community Care, states that Labour is committed to making
comprehensive community care 'an ideology-free zone'.
He said: 'The company's expansion over the past two years has been conducted
against a backdrop of uncertainty as to future public policy on funding
chronic care within the UK.
'But with the certainty that our formula represents a major plank in any
integrated programme to deal with today's demographic time bomb.'
The group may launch a new post-operation service in its nursing homes.
According to officials at the Department of Health as many as 40 per cent of
hospital beds are occupied by patients who are recovering from serious
operations but who have not yet reached the stage when convalescence can be
continued out of hospital.
COMMENT
Takare's distinctive formula of providing healthcare for the elderly and
chronically ill is unlikely to be threatened by a Labour government. Mr
Bradshaw points out that 80 per cent of its 4,500 beds are situated in
Labour-controlled areas which have been supportive of his company. Apart
from the inevitable confusion that results from a change of government,
there is no reason to believe that the political uncertainty could be a
significant problem for the group. It wisely took the view that 1992 was a
year to be long on cash and short on debt: borrowings were just Pounds 5m at
end-1991, representing gearing of 9 per cent (26 per cent). With forecast
profits of Pounds 11.8m, giving earnings of 12.1p, the shares are on a
prospective multiple of 15.5, which is not expensive given the group's
above-average earnings.
