FT  28 NOV 92 / Neo-Nazis banned as Turks mourned
THE German government yesterday banned a small neo-Nazi movement in the
first step of a promised crackdown on extreme right-wing organisations, as
10,000 people attended a funeral for a Turkish woman and two children killed
in an apparent neo-Nazi arson attack.
The order to close the 130-member Nationalist Front, based in Detmold in
North Rhine-Westphalia, was served by police in mid-afternoon.
Mr Rudolf Seiters, the interior minister, said it was an 'unmistakable
warning signal against extreme right-wing agitation and violence'.
At the same time, orders were issued to arrest eight further members of a
separate extreme right-wing group in the northern town of Gudow, near Molln,
where the Turkish victims died in a fire on Monday.
The leader of this group, Michael Peters, is already in detention, accused
of forming a right-wing terrorist group, and taking part in at least two
arson attacks on foreign asylum-seekers' hostels.
However, Mr Alexander von Stahl, the chief federal prosecutor, who has taken
over the case on the grounds of a threat to national security, said there
was still no evidence to link the group to the Molln attack.
Two houses occupied by Turkish families were set on fire, and an anonymous
caller tipped off the police with the words: 'Heil Hitler]'
In spite of that suggestion of neo-Nazi involvement, German television has
reported 'strong suspicion' in the police department that rivalry between
Turkish gangs may have been behind the attack.
The theory has been denied in the Turkish community.
More than 10,000 mourners turned out in Hamburg at the funeral for the
51-year-old grandmother, her 10-year-old granddaughter and 14-year-old niece
who died in the blaze.
The funeral was attended by Mr Klaus Kinkel, foreign minister, and Mr
Norbert Blum, labour minister, on behalf of the German government.
Mourners at the funeral, held at the Al-Aksa mosque, held Turkish flags and
waved banners saying: 'Stop Racism'.
There were spontaneous demonstrations against racism across the country.
Some 200,000 members of the IG Metall engineering union in northern Germany
stopped work for one minute in sympathy. In Dortmund, 10,000 schoolchildren
marched in solidarity.
The Nationalist Front was founded in 1985 and, the Interior Ministry says,
was 'an active fighting organisation dedicated to the overthrow of the
democratic order'.
Its programme included policies similar to those of Adolf Hitler's Nazi
party, and its immediate aim was the expulsion of foreigners from Germany.
It presented candidates at state elections in Bremen last year, and won just
0.03 per cent of the vote.
Living with a legacy, Page 9
