FT  29 APR 92 / Business and the Environment: Noise goes out with a bang
On a trip to Hong Kong in the early 1980s, Ulrich Schoene recalls seeing an
old mattress wrapped around a hydraulic hammer to muffle the noise as it
toiled away on one of the colony's construction sites.
A rough and ready solution, perhaps, to the noise from large hammers - or
breakers - attached to the booms of heavy-duty excavators. Hydraulic
hammers, invented by Krupp Maschinentechnik in 1963, may be one of the most
economical tools available to the building trade and other industries, but
few would deny they are a noise nuisance, especially in residential areas.
Increasingly, says Schoene, head of Krupp Maschinentechnik's construction
division, noise is being seen as pollution. Companies such as Krupp, which
claims about 20 per cent of the world hydraulic hammer market, Sweden's
Atlas Copco, and Furukawa of Japan, are being forced to respond.
The pressure takes two forms: the first is a demand for quieter hammers,
which - along with many aspects of environmental legislation - originated in
Germany a decade ago and is rapidly spreading.
In the past year or so, the ripple-effects have crossed the Channel. David
Slack, UK marketing manager for Furukawa hydraulic breakers and rock drills,
says: 'Germany's always ahead, but noise is now very much a concern in the
UK.' The focus of attention, naturally, is demolition sites close to houses
rather than quarries in thinly-populated areas.
Krupp, perhaps because it is German, makes more noise about its efforts to
produce quieter hammers than some of its rivals. The product catalogue of
Montabert, the respected French producer, stresses factors such as optimal
production/weight ratios, output and reliability through design superiority
and quality, with optional sound-proofing thrown in as an afterthought.
While marketing may differ, though, all the suppliers are taking a similar
approach to noise reduction, and have come up with a solution that imitates
the mattress. While the working parts are more or less unchanged,
considerable improvements have been introduced recently in the housings that
encase them.
Atlas Copco's TEX-H breakers have a sound-deadening material integrated in
the housing, substantially reducing noise from the breaker itself, while in
Krupp's Compact System, introduced three years ago, the percussion mechanism
is suspended and damped by two special plastic elements.
The system is aimed partly at reducing the recoil on the excavator and
improving driver comfort, but also reduces noise by 5-8 dB. At 8 dB, this
means that to the human ear the noise appears to be only half as loud. Slack
notes that the approach taken by the industry has added about 12-15 per cent
to the cost of hydraulic hammers.
Krupp first began putting such boxes round hydraulic hammers about 10 years
ago, and offers a system which can be retrofitted to previously unprotected
hammers. But further reduction in noise levels is likely to be marginal, and
that still leaves a lot of noise from the sharp end of the hammer, for which
there is no effective solution.
The need to reduce noise, along with a second pressure on hammer users -
limits on hours of operation - has prompted the equipment industry to
introduce hydraulic concrete crushers as a substitute for hammers. The
massive, scissor-like crushers are fitted to excavators and rip into
concrete without the noise and vibration of hammering.
In environment terms, crushers have a further advantage over hammers. Their
ability to separate the reinforcing bar from the concrete as they tear a
building apart produces steel for recycling and pure concrete for fussy
landfill sites.
