FT  17 JUL 92 / Taxpayers' bill set to exceed Pounds 35m
TAXPAYERS are now set to pick up a bill in excess of Pounds 35m after the
overturning of the convictions in the year-long Blue Arrow trial.
Yet the costly failure of the prosecution was far from unpredictable.
The three appeal court judges have yet to give their reasons for quashing
the convictions. However, the arguments of the defendants' lawyers were
plain enough - the mammoth, year-long proceedings had put too heavy a burden
on the jury and the decision by the trial judge dramatically to scale down
the indictment unfairly distorted the trial.
Like many disasters, the seeds of destruction in the Blue Arrow prosecution
lay in decisions taken early on.
In early 1989 the Department of Trade and Industry report into the Blue
Arrow rights issue was published and passed to the SFO. At that time the SFO
was a young organisation, less than two years old, with a reputation to make
and its innovative multi-disciplinary approach largely untested.
The DTI report was passed to Mr Nicholas Purnell QC, an experienced criminal
prosecutor. From then on, every big decision connected with the prosecution
was taken by him.
Mrs Barbara Mills QC, now director of public prosecutions, but SFO director
for most of the Blue Arrow case, consulted Mr Purnell frequently about its
progress. However, she was content to leave most of the decision-making to
Mr Purnell, with whom, when a practising barrister, she had shared chambers.
Unlike most SFO cases, the Blue Arrow affair apparently required little
investigation. The bulk of the digging, it seemed, had already been done by
DTI inspectors.
Comparatively little follow-up work by the police was considered necessary.
The 11 individual defendants were not interviewed before they were arrested
in November 1989. Evidence given to the DTI inquiry was to form a
substantial plank of the prosecution's case.
From the outset it was clear that the trial was going to be one of enormous
proportions, putting great stress on the system of trial by jury. During the
50-day pre-trial hearing, designed to ensure that the trial itself was
manageable, the prosecution was repeatedly warned by defence lawyers that it
was being too ambitious.
Mr Purnell resisted the arguments, insisting that one 'mega-trial',
involving all 11 individual and three corporate defendants was the only fair
and sensible way forward. He told Mr Justice McKinnon, the judge, that the
trial would last between four and six months.
Against Mr Purnell's will, Mr Justice McKinnon insisted on two trials to
keep proceedings manageable. By his own admission, the judge was later
proved wrong. Merely dividing the proceedings into two trials was not to be
enough.
The prosecution ran into serious difficulties once the Crown had closed its
case. The evidence provided by the DTI report came under close scrutiny,
notably by lawyers for Mr Stephen Clark, County NatWest's former finance
director, who was acquitted on the judge's direction, the case against him
'completely destroyed'. Mr Alan Keat, the Travers Smith Braithwaite
solicitor, was also acquitted.
In legal arguments with the jury excluded, defence lawyers began lengthy
protests that the trial had already become too large and unwieldy to be
fair.
The judge allowed the trial to continue, but was strongly critical of the
prosecution. It had lost sight of the limits of the jury system, he said. In
grappling with the case to make it manageable, he felt like a dentist
extracting teeth, he said. Relations between him and Mr Purnell became
visibly and increasingly strained.
However, it was after all the evidence had been heard and the closing
speeches made that the difficulties came to a head.
Mr Justice McKinnon decided that the evidence was too much for the jury to
cope with. The indictment was cut radically, with the jury left to decide
only on the issue of the late taking up of shares on the night the rights
issue closed. Three quarters of the evidence had to be disregarded. The
evidence that remained had almost all been given in the early weeks of the
trial.
The judge's move left everyone in court and many at the Bar astonished. It
was, everyone agreed, a decision that should have been taken before the
trial had started.
Mr Justice McKinnon told defence lawyers: 'You are all entitled to one 'I
told you so'.'
Lawyers have for months been assigning the blame for the Blue Arrow debacle
to various quarters. Barristers have privately expressed criticism of Mr
Purnell for maintaining such a large case. While the jury were out
deliberating, Mrs Mills held an unprecedented off-the-record press briefing
at which she criticised the judge for his non-interventionist handling of
the trial.
Wherever the blame lies, there is no doubt that the trial has prompted both
judges and prosecutors to recognise the need to tailor future cases to the
limits of the jury system.
Few think a trial of the size of Blue Arrow will be attempted again. As one
onlooker in the public gallery observed drily during the trial: 'It's like
sailing on the Titanic, blessed with the gift of foresight.'
