FT  28 MAR 92 / NF votes spark row for Mitterrand ministers
A ROW erupted between French political party leaders yesterday after two
ministers in the Socialist government were elected presidents of their
regional councils with the apparent support of the extreme right-wing
National Front.
This is an electoral accident which will embarrass the government further at
a time when the Socialists' fortunes are at a record low. Last weekend they
polled an ignominious 18.3 per cent in the regional elections.
At the same time, voting throughout the country by the new regional
councillors to choose their presidents revealed a deep split between the
Socialists and the Communists. This is being taken as an advance warning
that the Communists are in future likely to be considerably more
antagonistic to the government in parliament.
The main surprises yesterday were the election of Mr Jean-Pierre Soisson,
minister for public administration in the Socialist government, as president
of the Bourgogne regional council, and of Mr Jean-Marie Rausch, minister of
posts, in Lorraine.
Both ministers are moderate conservatives who joined the Socialist-led
government as part of President Francois Mitterrand's policy of an opening
towards the centre.
Neither had expected to be elected following the Socialists' heavy defeat
last weekend. However, the National Front yesterday threw its weight behind
the two candidates because they said: 'We wanted to elect two ministers
without party alliances.'
Mr Jacques Chirac, leader of the Gaullist RPR party, denounced the election
of Mr Soisson in Bourgogne as 'this additional turpitude of the Socialists,
which has taken another step forward in their relations with the National
Front'.
Mr Francois Bayrou, secretary general of the centre-right UDF umbrella
grouping, called on Mr Soisson to resign from the government immediately, or
explain this new alliance strategy on the part of the government. 'This is
the end of the government,' he said.
Mr Soisson, surprised by his victory, described it as 'a spectacular
reversal'. He claimed it was due to the transfer of votes from the
centre-right.
There were however other explanations for Mr Soisson's victory. Mr Charles
Pasqua, elder statesman of the Gaullist party, blamed the result on a broken
agreement between the two traditional conservative groups, the centre-right
UDF umbrella grouping and the RPR Gaullist party.
Mr Pasqua clearly indicated that he thought it was possible Mr Soisson might
have been elected through the defection of some angry UDF members.
The hardening of the Communist attitude promises a much harder road for the
government in future. In several key regions, the Communists insisted on
maintaining their own candidate for the presidency throughout the three
successive rounds of voting, even though they could not be elected, rather
than line up behind the Socialist candidate.
