FT  02 DEC 92 / Management: Trial by fire
FOR THE last 11 months Bill Slowikowski has been submitting himself and his
colleagues to what he calls 'trial by fire'.
The 49-year-old American has been running the second largest chemical
division of Monsanto from Brussels, in the heart of the European Community,
instead of from its long-standing base at the group's St Louis headquarters,
deep in the US Midwest.
Slowikowski's move, along with half his 13-strong team at the head of
Monsanto's Dollars 700m (Pounds 460m) resins division, puts the group in the
same league of pioneers as IBM, Unilever, Siemens and ABB.
Since the late 1980s each has moved the head office of at least one global
division out of the parent company's home country, either to be closer to a
key foreign market, or to foster international thinking and staffing. A step
of this kind would have been heresy just a decade ago, so strong was the
traditional assumption that the 'brains' of all a multinational's businesses
should be based 'at home'.
Like most of these other moves, Monsanto's was both obvious and overdue. The
resins division's largest business by far is the vinyl which goes into
laminated vehicle windscreens and some architectural glass; using the brand
name Saflex, Monsanto is twice as large as its closest rival.
Only 40 per cent of Saflex sales are made in the Americas, against 50 per
cent in Europe and 10 per cent in Asia - both of which are expanding faster
than the US.
Not only that, but the vast proportion of the division's customers are
global glassmakers - St Gobain, Pilkington, PPG, Asahi and others - most of
which are headquartered outside the US. Thanks to the German car and
building industries, and the Japanese, many of the most innovative customers
are also outside the US.
Yet until the Brussels move, which took effect in January, Slowikowski says:
'Quite frankly we had an organisational set-up that forced us to focus
primarily on North America' - at the expense of product and market
opportunities elsewhere. 'Supposedly, we watched around the world. But we
didn't really look at it properly.'
'We're having a hell of a time going global,' confirms Martin Kallen, a
Dutchman who chairs Monsanto Europe but knows St Louis well. 'The mindset in
the US and the company's structure suggest that we put a fair amount of
obstacles in our way. Being in the Midwest is a limited view location.'
In resins, that has now changed. 'In the last few months the time spent
strategy-making for north America has shrunk by a factor of probably 10,'
says Slowikowski. The senior manager below him is no longer a man who - in
an arrangement typical for Monsanto and other US multinationals - carried
the title of 'worldwide business manager', but had direct control over only
North America.
Instead Slowikowski has created a more balanced international structure in
which north America has been given the same regional status as Europe and
Asia.
With a largely new management team, nearly half of whom are non-Americans,
Slowikowski says he is now 60 per cent of the way towards creating what he
calls 'a global mindset' in resins. The attitude he is trying to foster is
that the division's HQ 'might just as well be on a barge somewhere -
globalisation is a state of mind'.
