FT  23 JAN 92 / Survey of Cheshire (4): Broad base for recovery - Chemicals
are at the heart of the county's industry
LIKE OTHER old industrial areas, Cheshire suffered decline in the recession
of the early 1980s. Unlike other parts of the north of England, Scotland and
Wales though, while manufacturing industries rationalised they did not
disappear altogether as they did in some steel, coal and shipbuilding towns.
The county thus had a firm broad base on which to build. At the heart of it
is the chemicals industry. Both ICI and Shell are present in the north of
Cheshire in some force.
ICI has been in Cheshire since its formation in 1926.
Brunner Mond, one of the four companies from which ICI was formed, has been
in Cheshire since 1873.
The original reason for the Cheshire location was the presence of vast
quantities of salt in the county. Salt in various forms is the basic
feedstock for a range of chemicals. Processes include the electrolysis of
brine for chlorine and caustic soda.
Although ICI Chemicals and Polymers is not exclusively involved with
salt-based products, as Mr Edward Brady, of ICI, puts it: 'In simple terms,
the salt-based products are made in Cheshire; petrochemicals are produced on
the other side of the country on Teesside.'
ICI Chemicals and Polymers employs around 5,500 people in Cheshire and
Merseyside, mostly at its main base in Runcorn. ICI also has a
pharmaceuticals division at Alderley Edge, in the prosperous eastern part of
the county near Macclesfield.
Shell UK also dates its involvement in Cheshire from the 1920s, although the
emphasis is on petrochemicals rather than salt-based products.
Mr Harold Bardsley, of Shell UK, says: 'The big expansion in Cheshire
started in the 1950s. Shell already had storage depots. In the 1950s
refining facilities were put in as consumption of oil and its products
expanded rapidly.'
Today Shell employs around 1,900 people at the main base in Stanlow and
another 1,000 throughout the county, including the new Shell Chemicals
headquarters in Chester.
Not only is Cheshire a chemicals base but the physical sciences are well
represented with British Nuclear Fuels, the Atomic Energy Agency and
National Nuclear Corporation all established in the county. British Nuclear
Fuels is a large employer with nearly 4,000 on the payroll. The AEA has
2,750 employees in a number of establishments, and the NNC some 1,700
workers.
Apart from ICI, other pharmaceutical concerns have been attracted to
Cheshire. Ciba-Geigy completed its headquarters move to Macclesfield in
1989, having had production facilities in the county, and the Wellcome
Foundation has a marketing and distribution operation in Crewe.
The county is well represented in engineering with Rolls-Royce Motors at
Crewe, and General Motors in the shape of Vauxhall at Ellesmere Port.
Vauxhall now employs 5,000 people. British Aerospace is just across the
border in Clwyd, Wales, but most of the workforce lives in Cheshire.
Since the early 1980s, using this industrial base, companies have been
attracted into the county in electronics, telecommunications, information
technology and motor components.
Electronics companies in Cheshire include Digital, Mercury
Telecommunications and ICL. The county council targeted electronics concerns
because it felt Cheshire had a pool of skilled labour that would chime in
well with such companies.
The companies were partly drawn by the assistance available because parts of
Cheshire were a development area but also because of the good communications
and the availability of labour and modern factories and offices.
In the second half of the 1980s the county council tried to diversify the
economy into such areas as financial services by encouraging the building of
quality business parks such as Chester Business Park, seen as a place where
white collar service companies would relocate.
Besides Shell Chemicals, Chester has become a headquarters for Marks and
Spencer Financial Services and the North West Securities Bank, part of the
Bank of Scotland.
Of the total workforce of 360,000, 29 per cent are employed in
manufacturing. This is above the national average of 24 per cent but low for
this corner of the country.
Around 61 per cent are employed in services, including the county council
and education and health. Between 1980 and 1988 there was an 83 per cent
rise in the numbers employed in the the finance, property and services
sector. By 1990 there were 51.000 employed in banking and finance and 74,000
in other services excluding distribution and catering.
A special effort was also made to encourage small businesses. The county
council set up 10 business generation centres in Cheshire. These centres
built small starter factories. Two thousand companies employing fewer than
50 people were established. Despite the recession the occupancy level of
these factories and workers is over 90 per cent.
Mr Michael Pitt, chief executive of Cheshire County Council says: 'We have
done well during the 1980s. Unemployment has been consistently in line with
the national average and well below the regional average.' At the end of
last year, unemployment was put at 7.8 per cent.
As the recession drags on, Cheshire like elsewhere is seeing its jobless
level creep up, and is developing one or two black spots.
Crewe is one cause for concern for the county authorities, since both
Rolls-Royce and Brel, the privatised British Rail engineering company, which
are based in the town, are experiencing difficulties.
Rolls-Royce Motors cut production in December in response to the continuing
steep fall in worldwide sales. Earlier in 1991 the company introduced a
three-day week for some workers.
Brewing is another industry where they has been rationalisation and job
losses.
Besides its black spots, Cheshire also has the problem of wide regional
variations in employment.
The county has the factories and offices in place and has the labour
available. It is a question of waiting for the recession to end before
further diversifying its economy.
Its communications should further improve with the opening of the Channel
tunnel. There is to be a passenger terminal at Crewe, the old railway town.
The county authorities are pushing hard for a freight terminal at Crewe
also.
