FT  06 JUL 92 / Monday Interview: Tireless champion of trade - Arthur
Dunkel, director-general of Gatt, talks to David Dodwell and Frances
Williams
When Arthur Dunkel was born in Switzerland in 1932, the world was locked in
the Great Depression. Europe was heading for world war. The rise of
protectionism and the collapse of the multilateral trading system had played
a critical trigger role in creating the turbulent world in which he grew up:
'Too many people are still alive who learnt at school the result of
destroying the multilateral system in the 1930s, to see it happen again,' he
says.
This early experience, and an unflinching confidence in the sagesse des
nations, makes Mr Dunkel, director-general of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) since 1980, confident that world leaders gathering
today in Munich for the Group of Seven summit can rise above domestic
economic and political difficulties to rescue the long-stalled Uruguay Round
of talks on world trade liberalisation: 'Surely you did not think the
director-general of Gatt could say the round is dead?' he smiled over a
first Gitanes cigarette.
For the past 18 months, progress in the Uruguay Round has been stalled by a
clash between the EC and the US over liberalisation of farm trade. Since
publishing a draft agreement in December - often referred to as the Dunkel
'final act' - in an effort to concentrate minds towards conclusion of the
round, even Mr Dunkel has been a restive spectator on events: 'It was
difficult to start the Uruguay Round, but it's even more difficult to finish
it,' he reflects, with a rare hint of impatience.
Painstaking negotiation has brought the US and the EC to within inches of a
conclusion - so close that most observers are baffled that agreement remains
so elusive. Deadline after deadline has been missed in spite of the critical
importance of the round and the fact that success is predicted by various
economic models to expand international trade by about Dollars 195bn a year
by the end of the decade. Attention is being diverted by conflict in
Yugoslavia, the problems of ratifying the Treaty on European Union,
referenda in France and Canada, and elections in Japan, the US and Korea.
There is a danger that not only the world trading system, but the
institution of Gatt itself, is being jeopardised by the impasse. Mr Dunkel
has been asked to delay his retirement to March next year because of the
impossibility of finding a successor to an organisation the fate of which is
so unclear.
The ultimate deadline for completing the Uruguay Round - the expiry of the
US administration's fast-track authority, which prevents Congress from
delaying enactment by examining the round paragraph by paragraph, in March
next year - looms close. Even if EC and US leaders can put aside their
differences and reach agreement at or shortly after this week's summit,
negotiations over trade in services, and on market access, need months of
attention. Fierce disputes over shipping, financial services, and even
ostensibly small matters such as trade in bananas, lie in wait.
With a lifetime of negotiating experience behind him, and a perspective that
draws upon memories of grim periods during the early and middle 1980s - such
as the infamous ministerial meeting in 1982 at which trade war was narrowly
averted, and the walkout by Argentina and other farm exporters in Brussels
in 1990 - Mr Dunkel refuses to be overcome by the prevailing gloom.
He feels that success in negotiations over farm trade will provide the
momentum needed to resolve other outstanding differences: 'I still have
great confidence in the wisdom of nations. What we are doing is like
climbing the last few metres of Everest without oxygen: we have to train a
lot to be able to do it and the last 200 to 300 metres are tremendously
difficult.'
Mr Dunkel, slouching over his fourth Gitanes, remains unruffled by talk of
imminent deadlines: 'My ambition is to reach the point where we initial the
text with as few as possible participants saying their hands have been
forced. If we want to achieve this ideal we need time,' he says, adding
'when people are convinced it is the 11th hour', there will be a settlement.
He remains confident that success will eventually come because publication
of the 'final act' took talks 'beyond the point of no return', and because
it provided negotiators for the first time with a concrete picture of what
stood to be gained: 'The round has had more results than we think.'
Throughout the turbulent and often hostile talks since 1982, when a new
trade round was first proposed, 'the reality is that we have moved. A large
number of governments have reformed their policies very much in line with
the (multilateral) objectives of Gatt.'
He believes that the Uruguay Round has been so difficult because it is
'completely different' from previous rounds. Its dauntingly wide-ranging
agenda, covering everything from textiles to telecommunications, touches
upon areas that governments have always regarded as their autonomous
preserve - such as domestic farm subsidies or rules on services and
intellectual property.
Compared with previous negotiating rounds, which he describes as 'a sort of
exercise among small groups of government specialists', he says that in the
current talks 'people in the street see a direct link between the round and
what they are doing.'
Glancing wistfully at a tiny oil painting of Punta del Este, where the
Uruguay Round agenda was set in train in 1986, he rebuts any suggestions
that its aims were unrealistically ambitious: 'If you have no ambition, you
never do anything. Can someone tell me it was wrong to put order into
agriculture? Was it wrong to want to bring textiles into the Gatt - which
were setting a bad example in other areas. Wasn't it right to put services
into the round? Of course it was right. We need a multilateral system in
these areas.'
The result of the pressures to include these areas is that the Uruguay Round
agenda is 'perfectly logical and defendable', now it is an immensely heavy
agenda.
Part of Mr Dunkel's optimism springs from a belief that, for the countries
involved, there is little alternative to agreement. Failure of negotiations
would leave unresolved the problems that forced trading countries to the
negotiating table in the first place. As a result, Mr Dunkel believes that
the round could not be broken off for long. 'If we came to the tragic
situation of missing the fantastic opportunities the round is offering, I
will think it was an accident. I am sure that very soon afterwards
governments will come together and relaunch the round.'
For the moment, Mr Dunkel is faced with the paradox that just as
commentators are talking of the world trading system on the brink of
collapse, the Gatt is being used more extensively than ever before. It is
seeing unprecedented activity in handling disputes, examining regional trade
agreements, reviewing countries' trade policies, not to mention dealing with
a long queue of applications for accession and observer status.
It is also closer than at any time in its history to having a membership
that embraces the entire world. The collapse of the Soviet empire has
brought dozens of countries that historically have been outside the Gatt
system to the organisation's doors. This includes not just eastern European
countries such as the Baltic states and Czechoslovakia, but also Mongolia
and other former Soviet republics, and Vietnam. China and Taiwan are
expected to be full members within a year.
Success in the round would of course put Mr Dunkel into the history books,
but here he is modest: 'Success or failure doesn't depend on one person. It
will be a collective result. If we succeed, lots will want to say they
played a part. If we fail, I suspect there will be people looking for
scapegoats.'
Either way, by this time next year, he is likely to have moved aside. At
present, he is keeping options open for his 'fourth life' - his first three
having been his student days, his service in the Swiss government service,
and most recently his leadership of Gatt. 'Perhaps I could write a book
analysing the negotiating process in the Gatt.' After his experience in
smoke-filled rooms, it would be a long, but no doubt worthwhile, read.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
PERSONAL FILE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1932 Born in Switzerland.
1956 Graduated from University of Lausanne, degree in Economic and
Commercial Sciences.
1956-60 Swiss government, in office for Foreign Economic Affairs.
1960-64 Swiss government, responsible for OECD affairs.
1964-71 Swiss government, responsible for section for co-operation with
developing countries.
1971-76 Swiss representative to Gatt.
1976-80 Head of Swiss negotiating team in Tokyo Round.
1980- Director-general of Gatt
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
