FT  24 MAR 92 / Germany takes a hard line on Delors budget
GERMANY, struggling to meet the mounting cost of unification, is determined
to resist European Commission plans to increase EC revenue by nearly a third
over the next five years.
German officials negotiating the EC's new medium-term finance package say
Bonn will not accept the full increase being sought for 1993-97, which needs
approval by all 12 member states. Nor does Germany intend to let the rebate
the UK has received from the EC budget since 1985 pass unchallenged, the
officials said.
They added that they did not expect the new revenue base to be in place
before 1994. The Commission had hoped for agreement on the new package at
the Lisbon summit in June. Any long delay risks complicating ratification by
the 12 of the Maastricht treaty, which is due to come into effect next year
and foresees new fiscal transfers to the EC's four poorest member states,
Spain, Ireland, Portugal and Greece.
Germany wants the Commission to scale back its plans to double these
transfers to these four to raise their per capita income. It is incensed
that Mr Jacques Delors, Commission president, last week linked this aim of
'cohesion' with 'convergence' - the tight financial targets Maastricht set
for entry into monetary union later this decade. Mr Delors told EC finance
ministers last week the doubling of transfers was essential for the four
countries to 'surmount the contradiction' between tightening their budgets
and modernising their economies. This is also the thesis of Spain, which
made its approval of Maastricht conditional on 'cohesion' transfers.
If the transfers 'have a positive effect on convergence, so much the
better', said a senior German finance ministry official. 'But we refuse to
accept any cause-and-effect relation.' The transfers were a gesture of
solidarity, whereas meeting criteria for monetary union 'is a strictly
national effort.'
Bonn had little option but to resist Brussels' revenue ambitions at a time
when Germany was having to rein in its own spending, and during a public
backlash against currency union. Germany, like the UK with which it is
allied in resisting the size of the budget increase, reckons the Commission
could get two thirds of what it wants without changing the EC revenue
ceiling.
This ceiling, which has not yet been reached, now stands at 1.2 per cent of
EC gross national product and Brussels wants to raise it to 1.37 per cent by
1997. The plan would give an increase from Ecu66bn (Pounds 47.2bn) now to
Ecu87.5bn in 1997, at 1992 prices.
