FT  13 OCT 92 / Businessmen in Iraq trade trial deny deceit
THE Department of Trade and Industry was deceived by three directors of
Matrix Churchill, the Coventry-based machine tool manufacturers, into
believing equipment exported to Iraq was for civilian, not military, use, an
Old Bailey jury heard yesterday.
The pretence by the three businessmen was an attempt to evade the ban on the
export of military equipment and sell Iraq machine tools and computer
software to manufacture bomb fuses, Mr Alan Moses QC, prosecuting, said.
Mr Paul Henderson, a former Matrix Churchill managing director, Mr Trevor
Abraham, a former commercial director of the company and Mr Peter Allen, a
former sales director, all deny four counts of breaching export regulations
between July 1988 and August 1990.
Mr Moses, for Customs and Excise, which is bringing the prosecution, said
contracts and other documents showed that the machine tools and software
exported had always been intended for military use.
A report by a Matrix Churchill employee after a visit to Iraq referred to a
fuse project. A contract signed in 1988 between the firm and Industrias
Cardoen, a Chilean company involved in the transaction, referred to fuses to
detonate bombs.
Matrix Churchill supplied a complete package including the training of Iraqi
personnel in the use of the machine tools. Their manufacture was sometimes
sub-contracted to other companies but Matrix Churchill always took
responsibility for seeing that export regulations were adhered to, Mr Moses
said.
However, all three defendants had played parts in deceiving the DTI to get
round the ban on exporting military goods and obtain the necessary export
licences, he said.
They gave false descriptions of the purposes the equipment would be put to
and all three, particularly Mr Henderson, suggested it could be used for
civilian purposes, Mr Moses added. The DTI suspected that the equipment
could be used for military purposes, but had accepted assurances given by
the three directors that the equipment was for civilian use.
The trial, expected to last about eight weeks, continues today.
