FT  08 DEC 92 / EC strives for Danish solution ahead of summit
EUROPEAN Community foreign ministers are braced for a bruising clash today
as they mount a final effort to resolve the Danish question which has the
potential to wreck this week's summit in Edinburgh.
Officials in London also warned they were far from optimistic about
agreement being reached on future financing and on progress towards
enlargement of the Community.
A British presidency draft aimed at finessing Denmark's demands for
exemptions from the Maastricht treaty on European monetary and political
union has been attacked on all sides.
In Brussels, EC officials reacted with dismay to reports that Danish
opposition parties would force the minority centre-right government in
Copenhagen to present a long list of objections to the UK paper at today's
meeting of EC foreign ministers.
Mr Uffe Elleman-Jensen, Danish foreign minister, gave a foretaste of the
clash when he told his EC counterparts meeting in Brussels that the UK text
'does not go far enough'.
Mr Poul Nyrup Rasmussen, leader of the opposition Social Democratic party,
said after a meeting of the three parties that the British plan was
'generally not clear enough'.
He said Denmark wanted any agreement to state clearly that the country would
not take part in the treaty's general drive towards European union, but
declined to elaborate on other desired changes. 'The British plan must be
changed. If not, we cannot hold a new referendum,' Mr Rasmussen stressed.
Amid signs of British efforts to lower expectations of a breakthrough, Mr
Douglas Hurd, UK foreign secretary, said that it would be 'bad news' if
there was no Danish deal but the EC would press ahead with efforts to reach
an agreement next year.
Senior UK officials recognise, however, that the Danish question could
jeopardise efforts in Edinburgh to reach a budget deal and other agreements
on subsidiarity and enlargement, threatening a diplomatic debacle for Mr
John Major, who is hosting the summit.
In London, as the prime minister completed his tour of EC capitals with
visits to The Hague and Dublin, officials said member states remained 'a
long way apart' on a new community budget, while difficulties remained over
Denmark.
The UK draft on Denmark chose a middle path between Euro-federalism and
Danish minimalism on Maastricht, with ministers gambling that fear of
failure would galvanise the 12 member states to reach an agreement and end
the uncertainty over the Community's future.
Denmark is pressing for a legally binding agreement for a UK-style opt-out
on a single European currency, a putative European army, EC citizenship and
wider EC co-operation on justice and immigration.
A clear majority of British voters want a referendum before the government
ratifies the Maastricht treaty, according to a poll by Gallup for the BBC.
More than half of the 7,000 voters surveyed thought Britain's future lay
with Europe, but 75 per cent were in favour of a referendum. Only 28 per
cent thought Britain should pull out of the EC.
EC budget, Page 2
Trade-off with France keeps Gatt on course, Page 5
Government bonds, Page 24
Currencies, Page 27
