FT  20 JAN 92 / Arts: New life for old buildings / Discussing the Georgian
Group's plans - Architecture
Change at the expense of character in England's smaller towns was the theme
of a symposium held in London last week under the auspices of the Georgian
Group. The Group has spent the last two years carrying out photographic
surveys of market towns with the object of presenting a clear picture of
their architectural condition as they cope with the arrival of by-passes,
shopping malls, supermarkets, and businesses.
The fruit of these photographic labours can be seen in an exhibition, The
Future of the English Town sponsored by the Department of the Environment
and the Monument Trust. The exhibition, which will travel, can currently be
seen at The Nash Room, 12, Carlton House Terrace, London, SW1 until February
9 (10am to 5pm Monday to Saturday).
Naturally you would expect an outfit like the Georgian Group to be concerned
with conservation and preservation, but the Group has recently effectively
widened its concerns to cover planning and the architectural debate. It was
something of a breakthrough to have at the symposium the incumbent President
of the Royal Institute of British Architects, Richard MacCormac, who spoke
effectively to the gathered conservation officers about new buildings.
It was John Fidler, the head of architecture and conservation at English
Heritage, who presented the facts about the state of protection of historic
towns. Although developers may feel otherwise, it is worth noting that there
are only 438,000 listed buildings in England and some 7,500 conservation
areas. The total number of listed buildings represents only six per cent of
the whole national building stock. As Fidler very wisely said, these listed
buildings represent a finite cultural resource, and one that cannot be
placed in a museum. In each of the 951 recognised historic towns in England
we see a palimpsest of the nation's history. As three listed buildings a
week are quite legally demolished it can be seen how vulnerable our historic
towns are. At this particular time it is the edges of towns that are easily
eroded for car parks, supermarkets and roads.
So often it is the multi-storey car park that delivers the coup de grace to
the historic town but there are also more subtle threats. The decline of
residential occupancy at the centres of small and large towns causes
considerable loss and damage. There are many provincial towns where the
betting shop, the building society and the estate agent are practically the
only occupants - and the estate agents are waning fast.
There is one project which is not well enough known that is trying to do
something to increase residential occupancy in town centres. The 'Living
over the Shop' project funded by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation and the
Department of the Environment aims to encourage the residential use of
vacant space above shops. It was a change in the law in the 1988 Housing Act
that made it possible for Housing Associations to to own part-commercial
property. This important change means that owners of commercial properties
with vacant upper floors can now grant business tenancies to housing
associations which will allow vacant possession to return the owner by a
specific date. The Project offers an information service to local
authorities and owners and is working closely with the Housing Corporation.
A pioneer project will open soon in Stamford, Lincolnshire where four upper
stories of a 1790 listed building, which have been empty for 20 years, will
be let through a housing association as studios for single people on the
local authority housing waiting list. One small change in the law; one
benevolent charity and some lateral thinking, shows how a small start can be
made to rejuvenate historic town centres.
We are at the end of a decade of market led redevelopment and the symposium
concluded that now is a good time to stand back and consider the best ways
of achieving a solution to the deteriorating condition of town and city
centres. Is it true that the state of our cities is a direct result of the
rural bias of the planning system? There are also a multitude of
organisations for the protection and preservation of the countryside but, as
a speaker from the Civic Trust said, 'there is no Council for the Protection
of Urban England.' Urban England is not an image that comforts any
Englishman abroad in the way that he dreams of the Cotswolds when he is in
the Sahara. Is anti-urban sentiment so strong in England that there is no
intellectual impulse behind the whole subject of urban design ?
It was gratifying to hear the President of the Royal Institute of British
Architects say that the beginning of an urban renaissance depended on
analysing towns in terms of organisation, use and scale. There is no point
in looking at towns as places for the uncontrolled debate about
architectural style. Towns have every opportunity today of being places
where people live to enjoy the virtues of civilisation. We can drive to shop
just once a week to the out of town stores while our historic town centres
are rejuvenated for residential use. The corner shop and the specialist
store could occupy refurbished historic buildings with low tech businesses
with computer networks occupying the formerly unused upper floors.
The present slow period of recession and lack of redevelopment offers a
wonderful chance gradually to enhance our historic towns. Newbury, Frome,
Melbourne, Castle Donnington, Cirencester, Beverley, Truro, Berwick,
Wisbech, Kendal,Chesham, Newark, Farnham, Knutsford, Chippenham, Richmond
and Wotton - the litany of names of towns in the exhibition is just the tip
of the glorious urban vision waiting to be rediscovered.
