FT  02 MAY 92 / New times, new comrades new May Day in Moscow
'It's the First of May here, what's wrong with that?' was the defensive
splash headline yesterday in Pravda, the former main organ of the former
Communist Party of the former Soviet Union. Its defensiveness was compounded
by being placed next to a lead story which reported glowingly on a
demonstration in Warsaw 'For work and Bread]' organised by . . . Solidarity,
which Pravda had anathematised for most of the past decade.
New times, of course, mean new comrades: the former Communists who marched
in modest numbers (about 10-15,000) in Moscow yesterday found, when they
arrived in Red Square, that they were in the midst of a street party which
the authorities had organised for orphans, and were surrounded by
advertising hoardings, including a striking one proposing holidays in the
Canaries - a genuflection to one of the party's sponsors, the Spanish
Ministry of Tourism.
It was the first First of May with no top Communist on the Lenin mausoleum:
no banners on GUM, the vast department store (many departments, no stores):
no obeisance to the Gods of 19th century historical materialism. Last year
they got rid of the tanks: Mr Mikhail Gorbachev, the former Party general
secretary, had stood on top of the tomb waving listlessly at a ragged
procession. This year, the 'workers' had to fend for themselves.
'Where are the workers?' asked one crone carrying a picture of Lenin. 'I
don't know, taking it easy,' said an onlooker. 'They should be here]' said
the crone, waving a portrait of the Workers' Best Friend. 'Their life is
being destroyed, they should be here]' Certainly the march spoke in their
name. Organised by the Moscow Federation of Trade Unions (there are many
such bodies now) it singled out the slowly developing capitalism for attack.
'Privatisation: the millionaire's fiance and the workers' grave' (it rhymes
in Russian); 'Down with the dictatorship of the Mayor of Moscow and the
President: up with the dictatorship of the Workers' Councils'. A man in a
car screamed through a loudspeaker: 'Privatisation: a foreign word for a
foreign process]'
In other cities, turnout was smaller. In Ukraine, the Socialist Party,
successor to the Ukrainian Communist Party, advised its members not to
demonstrate because they had nothing to celebrate. Even on a fine May Day,
the old forces again showed their inability to capitalise on the economic
grievances of the masses. Worst of all for the old Communists, the march
showed they had competition on the left. Young Trotskyites handed out
leaflets from the Spartacist League which called for the workers to arise.
Privatisation is one thing: but when Trotskyists appear, the game is
probably up. Capitalism is back.
