FT  02 NOV 92 / Leading Article: One-stop advice
SUPPORT FOR business in Britain is fragmented, under-funded and of variable
quality. Smaller companies, in particular, often do not know where to go for
advice or help with raising finance.
Mr Michael Heseltine thinks he has the answer. His officials at the
Department of Trade and Industry are working on plans to establish a
nationwide network of 200 'one-stop shops', advice centres which would bring
together various sources of business support.
The Training and Enterprise Councils (TECs) are to be asked to co-ordinate
local partnerships to bid for the franchise to run the centres, which would
combine the efforts of chambers of commerce, enterprise agencies, local
authorities and others on a single site primarily to assist smaller,
established businesses. The centres are intended to provide a level of
service which matches that provided by the continental European chambers of
commerce but without the obligation for all local businesses to register or
become members.
In principle the plan is to be welcomed, but a number of issues need to be
tackled if the venture is to succeed.
Most obviously, the funding for the new network will have to be right, since
the rise in unemployment and related training is already placing a heavy
burden on the TECs' budgets.
Care is also needed to define the role of the institutions involved. Some
TECs are already directly providing business services in competition with
existing business support organisations instead of concentrating on
co-ordinating the delivery of services by others. The relationships between
TECs and other agencies is uneasy in many areas as a result.
Meanwhile, the chambers are halfway through a revamp of their own network
with a programme from which the DTI appears to have borrowed generously. The
chambers were wrong-footed by the creation of the TECs and they seem to have
been caught again by the latest proposals.
A careful, sustained effort by government to co-ordinate the efforts of
these agencies is badly needed. A superficial and poorly funded exercise,
strong on publicity, weak on organisation, would do a great deal of harm.
