FT  09 JAN 92 / Technology: Breast implant ban would cost Pounds 400m
If the US Food and Drug Administration converts its moratorium on the use of
silicone breast implants to a permanent ban, it will destroy a medical
industry with a worldwide turnover estimated at Pounds 400m a year.
Breast enlargement and reconstruction is one of the largest categories of
cosmetic surgery. In the US at least 10,000 women a month receive breast
implants - about 80 per cent are cosmetic operations and the remainder are
to replace diseased breasts, usually after cancer.
The UK has 500 implant operations a month, half for cosmetic and half for
medical reasons. The operation typically costs Pounds 2,500 for a private
patient. Most of this is to cover surgical and hospital fees. A pair of
implants costs around Pounds 400, says Jim Bolland, European clinical
affairs manager for Dow Corning, the world's largest mammary implant
manufacturer.
Dow Corning, a US company owned jointly by Dow Chemical and Corning Glass,
suspended shipments worldwide following this week's FDA decision to stop the
use of silicone implants while an expert panel assesses evidence about their
safety. The implants have been linked particularly to diseases of the immune
system such as scleroderma, which causes hardening of the skin and
stiffening of the joints.
Most plastic surgeons in the UK have expressed dismay at the FDA action,
which they say is not justified by the very small incidence of side-effects
among more than 2m women worldwide who have had silicone implants over the
last 30 years. Many agreed with Gus McGrouther, professor of plastic surgery
at University College Hospital, London, who accused the FDA of
scaremongering and creating an unnecessary 'wave of international panic'
among women who have received implants.
'I shall carry on operating for as long as I can obtain the implants,' says
David Sharpe, consultant plastic surgeon at St Luke's Hospital, Bradford. He
still has stocks of American implants and if they cannot be replenished he
hopes to get replacements from Europe.
Most implants today are filled with silicone gel, which has the right amount
of chemical cross-linking to mimic the consistency of natural breast tissue.
The old type of 'saline' implant, filled with a solution of salt water,
accounts for 10 to 15 per cent of the UK market.
Saline implants are not included in the FDA moratorium but they suffer from
several disadvantages, Sharpe says. They feel less natural than silicone and
are more liable to leak or collapse.
Unfortunately the original smooth-surface silicone implants often cause
'capsular contraction'. This occurs when a hard layer of collagen (fibrous
protein) forms around the device.
One solution was to coat the silicone with polyurethane. Surgitek, a
subsidiary of Bristol-Myers Squibb, the US pharmaceutical group, pioneered
polyurethane-coated implants during the 1980s. They were popular with
surgeons and patients but were withdrawn from the market last year after the
FDA expressed concern that the coating could release carcinogenic chemicals
into the body.
Plastic surgeons now favour implants with a 'textured' silicone surface
which are less liable to cause capsular contraction that the original smooth
surface.
As an alternative to an artificial implant, it is possible to enlarge the
breasts of some patients by transplanting fat and muscle from their own
buttocks or abdomen. But this is a potentially complex and hazardous
operation and it could not be used on such as wide scale as silicone
implants.
Whatever one's views on the merits of purely cosmetic breast enlargement (or
augmentation as it is known in the trade), breast reconstruction has become
a medical necessity for women forced to undergo mastectomy following cancer,
Sharpe says. And the prospect of having their breasts replaced helps
patients come to terms with the disease. An unfortunate side-effect of the
FDA scare has been to frighten companies such as Bristol-Myers out of
implant manufacturing, instead of developing new and safer devices.
