FT  18 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Lottery launched amid pools row
MR PETER BROOKE, the national heritage secretary, posed happily yesterday
beside an ancient oak chest with 18 locks on the front and sides and six
padlocks on the lid. It was one of the chests used in the Million Lottery
held in 1694 to raise money for an English war against the French.
'Samuel Pepys (the diarist) said it was the talk of the town; we hope our
new lottery will become the talk of the nation,' said Mr Brooke as he
outlined details of the bill to establish the first national lottery in the
UK for more than 150 years.
The proceeds of this latter-day lottery, which could eventually raise
several billion pounds a year and is expected to have a top prize each week
of more than Pounds 1m, will be split equally between the arts, heritage,
sport, charities and a new fund to celebrate the year 2000.
'The National Lottery will be an additional source of money for schemes that
might otherwise never be realised. This money will not substitute for other
government spending,' Mr Brooke insisted.
The lottery will be run by the private sector, regulated by a
director-general of the National Lottery - Oflot. A single main licence will
be awarded by tender for the setting up of the infrastructure of the
lottery. There will be a series of sub-licences, which could go to separate
companies to run individual games. The main licence holder could also run
individual games.
Mr Brooke promised games ranging from scratch cards with instant prizes to
weekly computer draws. Tickets will cost Pounds 1.
No one would predict yesterday how much the lottery was likely to raise,
what the level of taxation would be or what proportion of the money would go
in administration.
A turnover of Pounds 1.5bn a year, Mr Brooke suggested, could mean around
Pounds 14m in prizes a week - a prize/turnover ratio of just under 50 per
cent. The level of tax is expected to be less than 20 per cent.
The National Lottery, which should be operating before the end of 1994, is
designed to provide everything from swimming pools and sports complexes to
theatres and arts centres.
The money raised will go to a National Lottery Distribution Fund, to be
split into five separate accounts for the five good causes. The money will
then go to five specialist bodies, each of which will have 20 per cent of
the proceeds for distribution.
For the arts - 97.2 per cent will go to the Arts Council of Great Britain
and the remaining 2.8 per cent to the Arts Council of Northern Ireland.
For sport - 83.3 per cent will go to the Sports Council, 8.9 per cent to the
Scottish Sports Council, 5 per cent to the Sports Council for Wales and 2.8
per cent to the Sports Council for Northern Ireland. The allocations are
based on population.
For heritage - the Trustees of the National Heritage Memorial Fund, which
tries to save mansions and paintings for the nation. Its lottery
distribution will be separated from its grant-funded work.
For charities - a new National Lottery Charities Board will distribute funds
earmarked for charitable organisations.
For the Millennium Fund - a Millennium Commission will be set up to consider
and distribute money for projects to mark the beginning of the third
millennium.
The heritage secretary will be able to vary the percentage of money for the
five main categories but not less than 5 per cent should go to each. The
millennium commission will be chaired by the heritage secretary. Members
will be appointed by the Queen.
'I believe the public will come forward with many exciting ideas about how
best we should celebrate and commemorate the year 2000,' Mr Brooke said.
There were no concessions for the anxieties of football pools promoters,
other than a commitment to keep talking.
'Skill is a factor when filling in pools coupons,' Mr Brooke said.
'Lotteries are games of pure chance. The lottery will not attract the
gambler. We expect it to attract a new section of the population, people who
are willing to have a flutter knowing that - win or lose - money will be
going to good causes.'
