FT  24 SEP 92 / The ERM and Maastricht: French franc proves a tough nut to
crack - German commitment to preserve the parity of the embattled currency
has yet to face ultimate test
IT HAS been the French franc's turn to become the target of currency
speculators this week.
But events yesterday suggested that the embattled French currency will be a
tougher nut to crack than sterling or the Italian lira.
As the authorities in Paris, Bonn and Frankfurt stepped up their efforts to
support the franc, the tussle to maintain its position in the European
exchange rate mechanism crystallised into a struggle between market forces
and a number of powerful political imperatives.
The shock waves from a devaluation of the franc or its forced exit from the
ERM would be felt far beyond Paris, where such a move would mark a
humiliating end to the French government's franc fort policy. Failure to
hold the franc would deal a crippling blow to what is left of the EMS as a
zone of monetary stability in Europe and mark its final eclipse as a
building block towards greater European integration.
The French economy is fundamentally stronger than Britain's, or even
Germany's, leaving no economic reason for a franc devaluation.
French inflation has been below the German rate since June 1991, its hourly
wage costs are 16 per cent below those in Germany and it runs a tighter
control of its budget than its neighbour. France's budget deficit was 2.1
per cent of gross domestic product last year, as against Germany's 2.9 per
cent.
Franc devaluation would penalise a virtuous currency.
That the battle for the franc is qualitatively different from those last
week to prop up the British and Italian currencies was highlighted yesterday
by the powerful joint efforts of Germany and France to support the currency.
Not only did the Bank of France raise its important five to 10 day
repurchase rate by 2 1/2 percentage points to 13 per cent, the French
authorities then intervened continuously in the market throughout the
morning, buying francs, to support the currency.
In addition, in an unusual move demonstrating solidarity, the Bank of
France, the Bundesbank, the French finance ministry and the finance ministry
in Bonn issued a joint statement, declaring that there was no justification
for a change in the franc's parity.
Yesterday, these efforts appeared to be meeting with some success. Unlike
sterling the week before, the franc responded positively and immediately to
the central bank's decision to raise rates. Thus far, there has been no risk
of the currency falling below its floor.
'The difference between what is happening to the franc now and what happened
to sterling and the lira last week is that many people agreed that they were
overvalued. Both the Bundesbank and the Banque de France are solidly in
favour of holding the value of the franc,' said Mr Philippe D'Arvisenet, a
vice president at Banque Nationale de Paris, the leading state-owned bank.
However, dealers said that the franc could still end up being devalued in
the current very turbulent currency markets. They point out that:
The credibility of the EMS was severely dented by last week's suspension of
sterling and the Italian lira. 'The authorities in Italy and the UK
repeatedly promised that there would be no devaluation of their currencies,'
said Mr Jeremy Hawkins, senior economic adviser at Bank of America in
London. 'There is no reason why the market should believe the French when
they make the same claim.'
The financial risks involved in selling the franc are as small as they were
for sterling and the lira. A dealer could sell the French currency yesterday
knowing that there was some chance of a devaluation or EMS realignment and
less likelihood of the franc rallying strongly against the D-Mark.
France's foreign currency reserves are thought to be low. They were put at
Dollars 31bn excluding gold last week. Dealers believe that France may have
spent over half of this figure in recent days. 'I would not be surprised if
those reserves were now in single figures,' said Mr Hawkins.
Dealers also believe that there are limits to how much the Bundesbank will
be willing to intervene. The German central bank spent DM60bn supporting
sterling and the lira up to last week and, according to some analysts, has
spent an additional DM30bn supporting the franc this week. Overnight rates
in the German money market were as low as  1/2 per cent yesterday,
reflecting the colossal quantity of D-Marks sloshing around the system.
But the Bundesbank has so far made clear that it stands behind the franc.
After the weekend meetings of Group of Seven and EC finance ministers in
Washington, Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the Bundesbank president, stressed that
he did not regard the franc as a candidate for devaluation.
He insisted that the French currency was fundamentally healthy and pointed
out that France had a lower inflation rate than Germany and that its level
of wage inflation was half the German level.
Currency speculators were 'not all-conquering', Mr Schlesinger said.
Speculation could only succeed when exchange rates were out of line, he
added. Yesterday this belief was reflected in the joint statement of the
French and German authorities which said that the central rates between the
franc and the D-mark 'correctly reflect the real situation of their
economies.'
The Bundesbank appeared to be putting its money where its mouth was
yesterday. Dealers said that it intervened to support the franc in the ERM
at levels above the mandatory intervention point - the first time in memory
that the German central bank had voluntarily added to its currency reserves
and so threatened to boost its already swollen money supply in that way.
However, the two countries' commitment to the franc has still to face the
ultimate test which is whether Germany would be prepared to cut its interest
rates to save the parity.
