FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (7): Harsh fortress for
defence - Kaliningrad, formerly Koenigsberg, remains a special case
KALININGRAD, currently an isolated Russian enclave of 900,000 people cut off
from the rest of the Russian Federation by Polish and Lithuanian territory,
bears eloquent witness to the changing fate of nations around the shores of
the Baltic.
It was better known for centuries as Koenigsberg, a rich and cultured port
city which served the orderly agricultural hinterland of eastern Prussia
when the southern Baltic was to all intents and purposes a Prussian lake.
That Germanic dominance of the southern shores of the Baltic began in the
12th century with the Drang nach Osten of the teutonic knights, and
culminated in the various partitions which wiped Poland from the European
map for 150 years.
It ended in misery as the defeated Nazi armies and millions of refugees
streamed westward before the Red Army steamroller, while Nazi generals on
Hitler's orders staged desperate and ultimately hopeless rear-guard
defensive actions by turning Koenigsberg and Danzig into defensive
fortresses. For weeks the city centre was pounded by British bombers as
Soviet troops encircled it.
To this day, however, the Prussian influence can be seen in many villages,
towns, and cities, in avenues of well-made cobbled roads, sturdy barns and
great monuments like the teutonic castle at Malborg. Traces also remain of
Hitler's unfinished autobahn, planned to run the length of the southern
Baltic to connect Berlin with Koenigsberg.
But Koenigsberg and Danzig, where the second world war began and ended, were
physically destroyed by weeks of heavy fighting. Danzig, whose Prussian,
Polish and indigenous Kashub inhabitants created a unique micro-culture
immortalised in The Tin Drum and other novels by Gunther Grass, was lovingly
rebuilt and reborn as Gdansk. A less fortunate fate befell Koenigsberg, the
birthplace of Immanuel Kant, the philosopher of pure reason.
When the war ended, Stalin redrew the map of central Europe. He moved the
Polish borders westward over 200kms to include most of former Prussia and
Pomerania, while much of pre-war Polish territory to the east was tagged on
to Soviet-controlled Lithuania, Belorussia and Ukraine. Millions of Poles
from these areas of pre-war eastern Poland now live in the western provinces
carved from the Nazi German Reich.
Koenigsberg was renamed in honour of Mikhail Kalinin, a Bolshevik nonentity
whom Stalin made the nominal Soviet head of state. Together with a
surrounding swathe of former east Prussian territory the city was placed
under Moscow's direct control.
For the duration of the cold war Kaliningrad was a closed military district,
home to a powerful Baltic fleet and a crucial trans-shipment and supply
point for crack Soviet forces in former East Germany.
Kant's grave is one of few monuments or traces of the long Prussian sojourn
left in a city virtually flattened by war and re-built in the numbingly ugly
Soviet way. Ironically, his memory - and that of the Prussian past - is
treasured by many of Kaliningrad's contemporary Russian and former-Soviet
inhabitants searching desperately for a new identity and purpose in the
post-Soviet world.
Much of present day Kaliningrad is ugly and harsh. For months ships and
trains have been disgorging arms and men, the detritus of a Soviet army
withdrawing from its post-war frontline positions in Germany and from
Poland.
Unwanted, and often uncared for, the combination of a demoralised soldiery
and masses of lightly guarded equipment and ammunition, has made Kaliningrad
a mecca for arms traders from former Yugoslavia, the Middle East and other
actual or potential hotspots around the globe. The presence of so many
weapons and so many soldiers - up to 300,000 according to some accounts - is
extremely unsettling, especially to neighbouring Poland and Lithuania, whose
governments want both removed or sharply reduced, as soon as possible.
As for its long term survival, local politicians are talking about their
region acquiring autonomy within the Russian federation and forging a
special relationship with Germany which would allow the descendants of the
former Baltic Germans to return, as investors, tourists and even settlers to
the city they once made great.
Boris Yeltsin, the Russian president, meanwhile backs plans to turn the
15,000 square km Kaliningrad region into a free economic zone in the hope,
as yet distant, of allowing it to develop a 21st century future as the Hong
Kong of the Baltic. The general aim would be the creation of a trading and
manufacturing hub for the enormous former Soviet hinterland, which would
enjoy free access to materials, capital and markets to both east and west.
The Lithuanian government has already guaranteed free road and rail access
to the enclave. The Russian authorities are trying to interest potential
Japanese, Chinese and Korean investment to turn Kaliningrad into the western
terminal of a new transcontinental link-up with Nakhodka, the planned free
zone near Vladivostok on the Pacific.
For such plans to prosper, however, Kaliningrad has to be re-integrated into
the region through improved road, rail and sea links, including the
completion of Hitler's unfinished autobahn to Berlin, and the Via Baltica
linking Scandinavia with St Petersburg.
All this seems far into the future. But it is not entirely fanciful to
imagine the re-emergence of a prosperous Baltic with Kaliningrad (probably
renamed) as its eastern fulcrum, early in the next century.
