FT  29 JUN 92 / French Bonds: Prices shadow Maastricht moves
WHATEVER else happens, or is about to happen, on the political and economic
front, one word will dominate the fortunes of the French bond market over
the summer - Maastricht.
President Francois Mitterand has hitched the tricoleur so firmly to the
cause of European union, that the slightest hint of a setback to the
Maastricht Treaty has a negative effect on French government bonds.
French bonds were faring well until the beginning of this month when the
Danes voted 'no' to Maastricht. The yield on the benchmark 10-year OAT
government bonds closed last week at 8.77 per cent, compared with 8.53 a
month ago. Significantly the spread of French OATs over German bunds, which
had been hovering at between 50 and 60 basis points before the Danish vote,
has since risen to around 80.
'The French government would like to think it has convinced the market that
France is so stable that the franc is as good as the D-Mark and OATs are as
good, if not better, than bunds,' said Mr Jean-Francois Mercier, an
economist at Salomon Brothers.
'But the reaction to the Danish referendum shows that investors still have
their doubts about the French economy and the government's long-term
commitment to low inflation. The problem is that this uncertainty will
continue until the French referendum on Maastricht, which probably won't be
held until early autumn. That means we may face three months of
nervousness.'
Maastricht apart, the outlook for the French economy seems reassuringly
stable. France began to benefit from the policy of low inflation pursued by
Mr Pierre Beregovoy, first as finance minister and now as prime minister, in
the middle of last year. The recovery is still relatively weak, with high
interest rates restraining both consumer spending and industrial investment.
This moderate revival seems set to continue. France cannot really hope to
reduce its interest rates until German rates come down without running the
risk of putting undue pressure on the franc. And there is little chance of a
reduction in German rates until the autumn.
However there are signs of a stronger recovery on the trading front. Last
week Mr Dominique Strauss-Kahn, trade and industry minister, announced a
trade surplus of FFr4.5bn in May, which was not only the fifth monthly
surplus in succession but the biggest single surplus for 20 years. This news
has added weight to the bullish statements on growth made by Mr Michel
Sapin, who recently replaced Mr Beregovoy as finance minister.
The latest forecasts from Goldman Sachs anticipate a fall in French
inflation from an average of 3 per cent in the second quarter to 2.8 per
cent in the third and 2.6 per cent in the fourth, with 1.9 per cent growth
in gross national product for the full year.
Accordingly, most analysts seem sanguine about France's economic prospects.
The bond market has already recovered from the rumpus caused 10 days ago by
the French Treasury's announcement of an exchange offer of new bonds for
older outstanding issues, which catalysed both an increase in yields and in
the spread over the bund.
'All in all the French market represents good value,' said Mr Francois
Xavier Chauchat, market economist at Banque Indosuez in Paris. 'But there is
still some nervousness about Maastricht after the Danish vote and it will be
some time before it disappears.'
