FT  05 MAY 92 / Survey of Hong Kong (3): Plans for a another miracle -
Inflation is a side-effect of the structural changes in the economy
HONG KONG'S role as service centre for and gateway to China should ensure
continued prosperity in the face of its rapidly diminishing manufacturing
sector. But in the longer term, its consistently high inflation may become a
serious concern.
Inflation is an inevitable side-effect of the structural changes taking
place in the economy. The traditional manufacturing sector has rapidly moved
to take the benefits of cheaper land and labour across the border in
Guangdong, creating a greater demand for workers in the more
labour-intensive service sector.
Demand for labour has been further enhanced by Hong Kong's role as regional
hub and springboard for investment into China. This has all taken place
against a backdrop of almost full employment, high emigration and one of the
lowest birth rates in the world.
A fall in the Hong Kong inflation rate from its April 1991 peak of 13.9 per
cent to an estimated 1992 average of 9.8 per cent might suggest there is
already a downward trend.
But out of the forecast 2.5 per cent decrease in inflation in 1992, 2 per
cent is directly attributable to increased indirect taxes introduced in
1991. The figures are therefore artificial and businessmen are beginning to
accept that double-digit inflation will become a matter of course in the
lead up to 1997.
The handing out of some HKDollars 20bn worth of contracts for the new
airport in the first six months of 1992, combined with an economic upswing
in the second half of the year, will put further pressure on prices.
Inflation is the main negative point in an otherwise optimistic economic
scenario. The phase of low growth and high inflation that followed the
disastrous consequences of Tiananmen Square and the Chinese austerity
measures of early 1989 are being replaced by a sharp trade-led economic
upswing.
Growth in Hong Kong's gross domestic product (GDP) slowed to 3 per cent in
1990, hit by the effects of the Gulf crisis, but the China factor enabled it
to accelerate by a healthier 4 per cent last year. A number of economists
expect it could rise to 6 per cent this year, compared with a government
forecast of 5 per cent; while corporate earnings growth for the 33 Hang Seng
Index constituent companies is expected to exceed 20 per cent this year.
The increase in foreign investment in southern China has encouraged a
significant boom in its highly competitive export industries; these products
have been processed through Hong Kong and its deep water port, resulting in
a substantial increase in the level of re-exports.
The demand for services in Hong Kong has also reflected developments in
China, as the colony has acted as the stepping off point for international
investors. A recent survey indicated there were 880 regional representative
offices in Hong Kong, with 26 regional headquarters set up in the first five
months of 1991.
Finally, there has been a substantial pick-up in tourist arrivals, following
the downturn that accompanied the invasion of Kuwait.
Against these factors, the inflation rate might seem a minor irritant. Some
economists even argue that the differential between inflation and interest
rates, is beneficial, since it has encouraged greater capital expenditure.
There have been sizeable negative effective interest rates and so far asset
inflation has been focused only on specific areas such as residential
property.
Unlike the manufacturing sector, services compete on more than price and
Hong Kong has in its favour the China factor. But in the long term, Hong
Kong could see multinational companies relocating to other regional centres;
while tourism is strongly linked to the cost of services. Inflation
therefore remains a very real concern.
With the evolution of Hong Kong's economy from manufacturing to services,
concern over the competitive position of the territory's export sector
becomes less important.
In 1991, total domestic exports increased by 2.3 per cent to HKDollars
231.04bn; re-exports jumped 29.2 per cent to HKDollars 534.84bn. This
underlines the speed with which the economy has relocated basic labour
intensive manufacturing to the Pearl River delta, instead concentrating on
servicing those displaced industries.
The manufacturing sector accounted for 31 per cent of the territory's GDP in
1970. By 1990, this had fallen to 16.7 per cent, although there has been a
substantial increase in capital spending in industry, to maintain
productivity against rising labour costs.
The trend away from manufacturing is continuing, with re-exports accounting
for almost 74 per cent of total exports in February.
Southern China has been the fastest growing economy in the world over the
past decade and as service centre for this region, Hong Kong's demand for
labour can only increase.
The government made a feeble attempt to influence inflation through interest
rates in May 1991, when it bucked the US trend by raising Hong Kong interest
rates by 1 per cent.
The result was to create the widest margin between the Hong Kong and US
dollar in the eight-year history of the pegged exchange rate. Interest rates
had to be brought down after five weeks.
The government claimed the exercise was a success, but economists pointed
out the increase in the money supply resulting from interest rate induced
capital inflows, may have offset any minor improvement.
Since interest rates have subsequently been discounted as a realistic tool
in the battle against inflation, increasing the supply of labour has to be
the most obvious choice, given the number of lesser-paid workers across the
border.
But this is rather more politically sensitive, since it raises concerns from
the trade unions over the impact of labour imports on local wage rates.
The Business and Professionals Federation of Hong Kong commissioned a study
on local inflation late last year and concluded 'high inflation threatens
Hong Kong's economic success and has socially divisive effects on income
distribution'. The report claims labour importation, combined with fiscal
discipline and a sensible policy on property inflation, would help address
the root of this problem.
The government has reacted positively. In January, it increased the number
of foreign workers that can be imported, from 13,000 to 25,000. This should
have a substantial impact on wage inflation.
