FT  20 FEB 92 / Australians find monarchy less than majestic: The growing
republican movement
AUSTRALIA'S nascent republican movement was given a boost this week when
fewer than 400 flag-waving royalists turned out to welcome the Queen at the
beginning of her 12th official visit to Sydney.
The modest turnout was in stark contrast to the scenes of adulation which
greeted the Queen on her first visit in the mid-1950s, when 1m people are
estimated to have lined the city's streets.
The low-key welcome reflects the growing influence of non-Anglo-Saxon
immigrants, as well as increasing scepticism about the value of Australia's
remaining links with Britain, the former colonial power.
However, the evidence is that while republicans are gaining confidence,
falling support for the monarchy is not being translated to widespread
support for abolition.
If these trends continue, it could set the scene for a lengthy conflict on
constitutional issues which would divide Australians at a time when they
face difficult economic and social problems. Historically, republicanism has
attracted many prominent Australians, including influential writers such as
Henry Lawson, the 19th century poet, and Professor Donald Horne, author of
The Lucky Country, an ironically titled catalogue of Australian shortcomings
which appeared in 1964.
The movement made little political headway until last year, when the
governing Labor party said it favoured the establishment of a republic by
2001, the centenary of the federation of Australia's six former British
colonies. Mr Paul Keating, the prime minister, has since added to the
republican tide by supporting the removal of Britain's Union flag from the
upper left quarter of the Australian flag - another symbol derided by many
as a hangover of colonialism.
Abolition of the monarchy would complete Australia's gradual drift away from
Britain, which began with federation and has since led to the abolition of
formal links such as judicial appeals to the British courts and the award of
imperial honours.
In recent years Australia has also replaced the British national anthem with
its own Advance Australia Fair, and formally separated the thrones of
Britain and Australia, although the sovereign remains the same person.
However, the Australian Republican Movement, of which Mr Horne is deputy
chairman, claims Australia is demeaned by the continued existence of a head
of state who lives 12,000 miles away and is also sovereign of a foreign
country.
Sir Richard Kirby, chairman of the Ausflag campaigning organisation, puts
forward similar arguments for the removal of the Union symbol from the
Australian flag, although he says a redesigned national flag need not lead
to a republic. Ausflag also claims that the existing flag confuses
Australia's Asian trading partners by casting doubt on Australian
sovereignty.
The anecdotal evidence of newspaper letters columns and radio phone-in
programmes indicates that many of these ideas have taken root, especially
among Labor voters. They are also beginning to prompt republican
demonstrations by a minority of public figures. For example, five Labor MPs
have said they will not attend social functions during the Queen's visit,
and a few will also boycott the ceremonial opening of the New South Wales
parliament.
However, both republicanism and changes to the flag are strongly opposed by
conservative organisations such as the Returned Services League, a veterans'
support group which complains loudly that republicans are traitors to
Australia's military dead.
The proposed changes are opposed equally strongly, if less stridently, by
the conservative Liberal/National party coalition, which is widely expected
to win the next federal general election, due by mid-1993.
Opinion polls suggest that the conservatives are correct in claiming to
represent the majority. A recent survey by the Australian National
University (ANU) found 58 per cent backing for the monarchy, down from 64
per cent in 1984. Only 22 per cent supported a republic, up from 19 per
cent.
There are also doubts about Labor's commitment to republicanism, and its
ability to deliver. The resolution passed by the party's biannual conference
in June contained no proposals for legislation, and is not binding on the
government, which has taken no steps to implement it.
Even if it wished to do so, such a major constitutional change could be
achieved only with the consent of the Upper House of the federal parliament,
which Labor does not control. The change would also require approval in a
referendum by a majority of voters in a majority of states - a
constitutional formula which has previously proved an insurmountable barrier
to proposed amendments lacking the support of major political parties.
Before reaching that stage, Labor would have to develop detailed proposals
to replace the present system, which could prove difficult and divisive. No
thought has yet been given, for example, to the relative merits of executive
and ceremonial presidencies, or to whether the president should be directly
elected.
Nor has Labor considered how to counter the argument that Australia is
already a republic in all but name because the Queen's powers are in
practice exercised by the governor-general, who is appointed for a fixed
term on the advice of the federal government.
Dr Clive Bean, the academic who compiled the ANU's recent survey on public
attitudes, says that in the face of these difficulties, the medium-term
prospects for Australia's republicans are bleak unless a more decisive shift
of opinion occurs.
'The Labor party will need to launch a very strong public education campaign
promoting what would after all be a major constitutional change if it is to
have any hope at all of succeeding with a referendum,' he says.
