FT  01 FEB 92 / Minding Your Own Business: High-tech growth on a fashion
farm - Suzanne Askham meets two young designers in the wilds of Scotland
TWO YOUNG fashion entrepreneurs are making a profit from an unusual clothing
company that has managed to overcome serious setbacks during the recession.
Paul Walker and Frances Slater's modest success is founded on two unusual
decisions. They have established their headquarters in the Scottish
Highlands, well away from London's ailing fashion industry. And they have
brought in a chemist specialising in synthetic yarns and inks to put them in
touch with futuristic developments.
They produce under two different labels. Out for Lunch, currently 70 per
cent of the business, consists of sweatshirts and T-shirts sold through
winter sports shops. Slater is a more up-market label, not as profitable,
but, Frances and Paul believe, with greater scope for international growth.
It includes black shirts and dresses that change colour as you wear them,
soft knitted silks and linens.
The Out to Lunch range wholesale for an average of Pounds 15 and the Slaters
range for Pounds 29-Pounds 35, giving a 35-40 per cent profit. It began
haphazardly.
In 1988, Paul, newly graduated from Dundee University, was selling sporty
sweatshirts in the Alps and on European beaches. He enlisted the skills of
Frances, a designer who had also studied in Dundee.
With an initial outlay of Pounds 3,500, they bought 500 basic dyed garments
from a manufacturer. Frances printed a range of designs in her home and Paul
sold them at a 50 per cent mark-up. It was a money-making hobby. Paul had a
full-time job selling office equipment and Frances was doing an MA at
Birmingham.
In February 1989, the two were given the chance by a friend in the business
to display a few of their more adventurously printed sweatshirts at a trade
show in Harrogate. They received advance orders worth around Pounds 7,000
for delivery in September, and on the strength of that, Paul toured winter
sports shops in the north of England and Scotland until he had netted orders
totalling Pounds 25,000.
'We did a balancing act over the next few months,' explains Paul, now
managing director of the company. 'We needed a unit in which to print our
designs, and we had to get capital. We chose Laggan Bridge in Scotland
because we liked the area and because the Highlands and Islands Development
Board gave us a grant of Pounds 6,000 towards the cost of our capital
equipment.
'We then needed another Pounds 9,000 for equipment, and provision for
initial running costs. We took our business plan to a couple of banks
without much success, but then, on the strength of our orders, we managed to
borrow Pounds 25,000 on overdraft from NatWest in Worcester.'
The two rented a farmhouse with outlying buildings, taking on a 25-year
lease with rent of Pounds 200 a month, fixed for 10 years.
'In six weeks flat we had to pull out the cow pens, totally strip the place
and install printing machinery,' says Paul. 'We did it all ourselves, and it
was very hard work. But we had a September deadline for our first orders.'
The design and printing aspects flourished from the start, as did the
selling.
'We have the space and air to think here,' says Paul. 'It's important from
the design point of view; we don't get dragged into a London way of
thinking, but keep a distinct identity.'
In the first year they had a turnover of Pounds 56,000, and managed to pay
off a large part of their overdraft. In their second year, though, the
company nearly foundered on problems that lay outside their immediate
control: the manufacturing and dying of the clothes.
Their first manufacturer provided garments with cheap dyes that ran. 'We
didn't know enough to specify the correct dyes,' admits Paul.
Reacting perhaps too quickly, Walker Slater then turned to a Tunisian
factory through the recommendation of a friend. It was an even greater
disaster, compounded by the fact it coincided with a foray into the US
market.
'The trouble was bad quality control. Each time they mixed dyes they came
out slightly differently, and tops and trousers that were supposed to match
didn't.
'We knew there was a problem almost from the start, and Frances went there
for eight weeks to try and sort it out. But while she got on with the
workers themselves, the management just didn't believe a woman held any
authority, and they kept cutting corners to the detriment of the quality.'
Unfortunately much of this production run was for valuable new US orders. In
spite of employing an agent in New York, the company failed miserably. US
buyers cancelled orders on seeing the bad colour matching; those who did
have decent colour matches were slow with payments. Altogether, Paul
calculates the episode cost them Pounds 12,000-Pounds 17,000, and created a
slight loss that year of Pounds 3,000.
'Having two dodgy manufacturers could have brought us down,' says Paul. At
any rate, it brought their overdraft up to its original level. But the US
experiment had one beneficial result. In October 1990 the two won a British
Airways award for export potential to the US. Through this, Walker was able
to make some useful contacts and establish a good working relationship with
Shapiro, a garment-manufacturing company in London whose other clients
include Arabella Pollen and Katherine Hamnett.
In October 1990 Walker Slater made an unusual hiring: chemist Michael Just.
The futuristic element, backed by top quality, gives the company a high
profile with buyers, leading to an estimated turnover in the current
financial year of Pounds 180,000. Orders totalling Pounds 15,000 were due
over Christmas, with a further Pounds 30,000 due in the spring. The company
has appointed an agent in London, enabling Paul, who has spent much of his
time selling, to concentrate on two largely ignored areas: marketing policy
and advertising.
Walker Slater, Laggan Bridge, Invernesshire, PH20 1AJ, tel: 05284-318.
