FT  11 SEP 92 / A rumour gets going, unnerves the markets, and is finally
squashed
FOREIGN currency dealers are well known for having an attention span of two
minutes. But yesterday, they were still discussing a news story which
surfaced on Wednesday night, suggesting the Bundesbank wanted to see a
devaluation of several European currencies, including sterling.
The story, published by an Anglo-French news agency on Wednesday,
immediately pushed the pound and the Italian lira down to new lows. Both
currencies recovered during trading in the North American market after the
Bundesbank, the UK Treasury and the Bank of Italy issued strong denials of
the rumour.
But the episode illustrated how nervous foreign exchange dealers have become
in the run-up to the French referendum on Maastricht on September 20.
'Rumours like this are coming in every 10 minutes in this market,' said Mr
Jim O'Neill, head of research at Swiss Banking Corporation in London.
'Rumours usually don't affect the foreign exchange market with this
frequency or intensity.'
At 4pm on Wednesday the AFX news agency, run jointly by Agence France-Presse
and Extel, issued a short story through its Frankfurt office. This said that
Bundesbank sources saw a realignment of the European Monetary System as
necessary, regardless of the result of the French referendum. The source was
quoted as saying that the Bundesbank believed the lira, peseta and sterling
were 'all candidates for devaluation'.
AFX had not directly interviewed a member of the Bundesbank. Its story came
from an internal circular written by an unnamed European bank. Yesterday,
the news agency refused to reveal its source, although several dealers
suggested the circular might have come from a big French commercial bank.
The report only came to the attention of the market at about 4.15pm, after
it was run by the Oracle television text service run by Britain's
Independent Television News. According to some market sources, the Oracle
text compressed the agency report, omitting its indirect nature.
A few minutes later, it was picked up in this form by the London stock
exchange's Topic news service and came to the direct attention of the
markets.
Sterling dipped to DM2.7808, its lowest point against the D-Mark since
Britain joined the Exchange Rate Mechanism. The lira was also heavily sold
and fell below L765, close to its ERM floor of L765.40.
At 5.30pm, both currencies started to recover as the Bundesbank, the Bank of
England and the Bank of Italy issued separate statements saying a
realignment of the ERM was out of the question. But there was intense
pressure on both currencies throughout European trading yesterday.
Analysts said the market had heavily over-reacted to the report. However,
its timing explained its impact. 'At some time in the next few weeks, we
will either see a realignment of the EMS or the Bundesbank will bring
interest rates down,' Mr O'Neill said. 'Anything which convinces the market
of one outcome or the other is bound to be sensitive.'
