FT  26 AUG 92 / Oceans' untapped potential stressed: British Association for
the Advancement of Science
THE OCEANS hold the key to supplying the world with energy during the next
century, the meeting heard.
Mr Ian Fells, professor of energy conversion at the University of Newcastle
upon Tyne, pointed out that the energy potential of the oceans 'has hardly
been tapped and represents an invaluable resource'. He suggested the
contributions that the oceans could make include:
Temperature differences between the warm surface of the tropical seas and
the cold waters beneath can drive heat engines in ocean thermal energy
conversion (Otec) plants. Floating Otec units weighing several thousand
tonnes and generating 20MW of power have been designed to 'graze' over the
oceans, Prof Fells said, identifying high thermal gradients to operate their
fluid turbines.
The energy of the winds blowing across the oceans can be tapped directly
through coastal wind turbines - or indirectly through the waves they whip
up.
Tidal power could make a large contribution. The proposed Severn Barrage,
with a cost estimated at Pounds 9bn, could produce 6 per cent of the UK's
electricity. But as Prof Fells pointed out, it 'would not be economic at the
high rates of return demanded by the City' without a special environmental
subsidy. A related but more speculative proposal is to harness the energy of
ocean currents such as the Gulf Stream.
Huge biomass farms could be established at coastal sites to grow algae for
energy. Experimental algae farms already exist in California.
The oceans contain large quantities of uranium which could be extracted to
fuel nuclear power stations if supplies from conventional uranium mines
become scarce. 'If tidal power stations are built, a uranium extraction
plant could be incorporated in the design,' Prof Fells said.
Mr John Collier, chairman of Nuclear Electric, the state-owned operator of
nuclear stations in England and Wales, said nuclear power 'clearly has an
essential role to play' in meeting future electricity demand while holding
down the emissions of carbon dioxide. He proposed a 50:50 split between new
nuclear and renewable energy sources over the next few decades.
