FT  26 FEB 92 / Leading Article: Anglo-Irish shutters
MR ALBERT REYNOLDS, the new Irish prime minister, said in his first
international interview that he would like to be remembered as 'the man who
opened up the shutters and let in the light'. He has had a tempestuous
start. News of the Irish courts' refusal to allow an abortion for a
14-year-old girl who had been raped reached the world faster than that of
his own inauguration or the latest atrocities in the north.
The case cannot be blamed on the new administration in Dublin. It is a
reminder, however, that if Ireland wants to live in the modern world - and,
in particular, the European Community - the international spotlight will
sometimes burn the skin.
In a development little noticed outside the Republic, the Irish government
negotiated a protocol to the Maastricht Treaty allowing it to maintain its
own anti-abortion laws, without being over-ruled by the European Court.
Since, in Ireland, Maastricht has to be ratified by referendum, all sorts of
troubles could be in store, including a referendum on Europe that becomes a
referendum on abortion.
That kind of problem over 'subsidiarity' in EC decision-making is familiar
enough to the UK government, to which Mr Reynolds pays his first official
visit as prime minister today. Dealing with Europe is not the only problem
they have in common; there is also the question of Northern Ireland. Given
the imminence of a general election, little new can be expected from the
British.
Constitutional change
Mr Reynolds has already stated his readiness to put articles two and three
of the Irish constitution, which claim the right to legislate for the whole
island of Ireland, on the negotiating table. That is not a huge advance on
previous Irish statements, but he has at least suggested it at the beginning
of his period of office and should be encouraged to build on it. In return
the British government should repeat that while it is opposed to the
unification of Ireland against the wishes of the majority of the people in
the north, it is not opposed to unity in principle. Such was the position
laid down in the Anglo-Irish Agreement of 1985, which made the frequency and
relative amiability of Anglo-Irish meetings possible.
The 1985 agreement is a flexible document. It can be amended and adapted as
the parties to it wish. Without it, it is doubtful whether relations between
two fellow members of the European Community would be as harmonious as they
are. But it has not proved so far a basis for solving the Ulster question.
Partly that is because some Unionists still challenge it; partly it is
because it has not stemmed the violence, recently at its worst for many
years. Successive political initiatives, like Mr Peter Brooke's, have been
tried and petered out.
Favourable straws
There are one or two mildly favourable straws in the wind. Part of the
Workers' party in the Republic is renouncing revolutionary links. Mr Gerry
Adams, the president of Sinn Fein, talked at the weekend of a political
rather than a military strategy. In the north there is a new movement,
Initiative 92, seeking solutions across the sectarian divide. None of these
moves represents a decisive, or even a genuinely new stride forward. But
they indicate, yet again, that determination in London and Dublin will not
necessarily go unrewarded.
On the eve of a close-run election campaign, the most helpful development in
London would be for the main political parties to state that they will not
buy votes from Ulster MPs in the event of a hung parliament. A fully
bipartisan approach from Labour and the Conservatives remains, sadly, a
distant prospect, but they could at least protect Ulster from the potential
horrors of Westminster power brokering by the unionists.
It is also time for British politicians to acknowledge that Northern Ireland
is too important to be hived off to a secretary of state. At a time of acute
pressure for constitutional change in Scotland, the debate about modes of
devolution is under way in earnest. Ulster has been allowed to get away too
long with claiming that its problems are uniquely intractable.
