FT  01 AUG 92 / Travel: To swim in the Dead Sea, first store your Sten gun -
Christian Tyler is intrigued and exasperated by Israel
DINING on St Peter fish on the promenade at Tiberias, with a bottle of Golan
white at my elbow, the waters of the Sea of Galilee at my feet and a sky of
black velvet overhead, I was ready to sink into a Biblical reverie.
Then the disco cruiseboat, fairy-lit from stem to stern, came throbbing
through the waves. A minute later, two flights of Cobra helicopter gunships,
lights extinguished, clattered across the firmament on their way home from a
retaliatory raid against the PLO in southern Lebanon.
Was this the 'Galilee Experience' promised by the neon sign on the town's
main street?
In the ruins of Caesarea, Herod the Great's Roman city on the Mediterranean
coast, a party of sixth-formers sat on the broken steps of the amphitheatre
to listen to their teacher read from the guidebook. Two of the giggling
girls carried automatic weapons and a curly-haired youth waved a
sub-machinegun.
Down on the Dead Sea shore a soldier in outsize battledress wandered into
the men's changing room of the spa hotel holding his ticket in one hand and
dragging a Sten gun with the other. We helped him cram the oily monster into
a tin locker so that he could undress for his swim.
At the foot of the tel at Megiddo, a mound of earth 25 layers deep in
history, a middle-aged couple from the Ukraine played 18th-century violin
duos. These genteel buskers in the ruins of Armageddon, scraping a living
within earshot of King Solomon's stables, were unemployable Zionist refugees
in the modern state of Israel.
In spite of its profound Biblical associations - ones which still infect the
extremes of national politics - Israel is not a country in which nostalgia
can be indulged for long without the intrusion of the present.
The five-star sites of Christian pilgrimage, such as Nazareth, Bethlehem or
Gethsemane, have been smothered by naive, overblown modern architecture.
Even the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in the Arab quarter of old Jerusalem
is magnificently vulgar.
But the new can never quite subdue the old. Parts of the Galilee lakeshore
remain untouched: you can wander down the grassy Mount of Beatitudes, swim
in the cold water and sit watching the ancient fishing vessels with only
lizards and rock rabbits for company.
Israel is a poor, progressive and neurotic country where past and present
are more entwined than in any other place I can think of. Nothing is more
ancient than the stony hills of Judaea and Samaria in the West Bank and
nothing more modern than the regimental lines of low-rent villas that are
being spread across them by the expansionist Israeli occupiers.
From the inside, Tel Aviv appears a raucous, modern European city. From the
outside it is a sprawling, polluted shambles. In the old city of Jerusalem
you can walk, in three paces, from the scruffy Arab souk to the triumphantly
restored Jewish quarter with its spanking new piazzas and condominiums.
Israelis have treated their past well: their museums must rank with the best
in the West. But it is the present that preoccupies them. My guide, a
paratrooper when on reserve duty ('elite corps,' he said, proudly patting a
middle-aged spread) and veteran of the 1981 invasion of Lebanon, was
irritatingly and charmingly typical. Like many younger Israelis, he is
agnostic, lives in Tel Aviv with a smart lawyer wife and would never dream
of moving to the holy city so long as the ultra-Orthodox have such influence
there. He laughed as he pointed out a kibbutz where pigs are raised, and I
am sure was not above eating the occasional 'white steak' himself.
He stood respectfully to one side as a party of nuns took turns to kiss the
stone at the spot where Christ's crucifix is supposed to have stood and was
assiduous in his pursuit of other Christian shrines. But it was in the
border areas - by the fence at Metulla where soldiers slept in the sun after
night patrol in Lebanon, or driving past the minefields and deserted
barracks of the Golan Heights - that he really came alive.
We scrambled over a bunker, now a tourist showpiece, from where the Syrians
used to lob mortar shells into the kibbutz below. Why, I asked him, were
women and children allowed to live within range of the Syrian artillery, or
of the Katyusha rockets from Lebanon, or of the PLO guerrillas who crept
through the perimeter fence at night to cut their throats?
'This is our land,' he replied. 'Should we not be allowed to live on it?'
He exhibited a characteristic Israeli chauvinism, not necessarily or
primarily anti-Arab, in which everything built or planted since 1948 was due
to 'us.' 'Here you see an Arab village,' he would say, 'but up here we are
building a Jewish village. One day it will be a big town.' Or: 'Here we have
planted eucalyptus trees; there we are growing new kinds of tropical fruit.'
Even the migrant storks that flocked over the fields became 'our storks.'
Israelis are still reluctant to visit Arab east Jerusalem after dark or to
shop in the Old City, even though the Arab uprising in the occupied
territories, the intifada, has subsided and the peace talks have been
revived by Labour's win against the hardliners of the Likud party in the
recent general election.
Provided they are reasonably careful, however, tourists need not feel too
inhibited. Israelis will discourage them from venturing into the Arab towns
of the West Bank (where the reality of the occupation is on show), but most
difficulties can be overcome by simply hiring a Palestinian taxi with West
Bank licence plates.
There, on the Jericho road or along the Jordan valley, tourists will find
enough to satisfy the hungriest appetite for Biblical tableaux: flocks of
sheep and goats driven by children, peasant farmers in their smallholdings,
wayside encampments of bedouin.
But even more compelling for me is the evidence of the present: the remains
of Israel's bloody birth, the aggressive, intense yet self-critical
behaviour of its people, the continuing conflict between ancient claims and
modern democratic sensibilities. It is that which makes Israel so intriguing
and exasperating.
