FT  03 NOV 92 / International Company News: Profits warning at Bayer
reflects struggle in sector
PROFITS at Bayer, one of Germany's big three chemicals companies, will be
considerably down this year, the company's chief executive has warned.
Mr Manfred Schneider, Bayer's chief executive since April, said that the
recent appreciation of the D-Mark had had a noticeable impact on the
company's business.
The strengthening of the D-Mark had damaged the competitiveness of the
entire, export orientated German chemicals sector, he said, exacerbating the
problems caused by intense pressure on prices and a downturn in the world
chemicals industry.
Conditions have deteriorated sharply over a matter of months. When in August
Bayer reported half-year profits down nearly 10 per cent, it predicted that
the full year result would be 'satisfactory'.
This was defined as being marginally down on the pre-tax profit of DM3.2bn
(Dollars 2bn) reported for 1991, a fall of 5 per cent on the previous year.
Mr Schneider said the company has to battle with a 'strong and growing
headwind'.
Bayer plans to shed 4,000 employees by the end of the current year, some 2.5
per cent of the 140,000 workforce worldwide. He hinted that further
reductions would be necessary next year too.
His comments provide a graphic illustration of the impact of the D-Mark's
appreciation on German industry. The currency has risen by 8 per cent
against all currencies since the beginning of the year, but by far more
against sterling and the lira.
They come several weeks before Bayer, together with its large German rivals
Hoechst and BASF, report their figures for the first nine months of the
year, providing an indication of the bad news to come from the German
chemicals sector as a whole.
Bayer's shares - which have outperformed the German market by 7 per cent in
the last three months - dropped yesterday from DM263 to DM254.5, a fall of
more than 3 per cent.
The areas most severely affected by the worldwide slowdown were its
industrial, organic and polymers chemicals businesses, Mr Schneider said.
These products are used by construction, automobile, textile and other
sectors currently feeling the brunt of the world recession.
Mr Schneider said that the conditions in the pharmaceuticals sector - which
accounts for a larger share of business than at the other two large German
chemicals companies - were considerably better than in chemicals. But he
qualified his optimism to say that the environment here had also become
rougher, reflecting hard international competition, high research and
development costs as well as governmental interference in the drug industry.
Lex, Page 20
