FT  08 JUN 92 / Maastricht in the Balance: Threat to D-Mark touches a raw
nerve - Aachen, Germany
IT WAS someone's birthday and the pils and kolsch were going down at full
throttle. A dozen Aacheners in a town centre bar were alternately mourning
and laughing themselves half to death over the topics of the day.
Faces lengthened briefly at the news that Steffi Graf had just lost the
French Open tennis championship to Monica Seles. And, inexplicably, one of
the party had not heard of the death of Benny Hill. 'A great artist. We
needed clowns like him,' he said.
Gitta, the birthday girl, about 65 with cyclamen-carrot hair, stepped into
the breach: 'What we need is more asparagus and more sex for senior
citizens. There's thousands of things to do with asparagus. . .'
'Oh aye, and the city can't tax you on it]'
There was plenty to laugh at and nothing was sacrosanct; the revered 'king
of vegetables' (approaching its seasonal peak), the British royal family
(close to its nadir), plans to house asylum-seekers in converted rail and
road containers, and the 'Genscher peso'.
The proposed single European currency has already found its own local
identity in Aachen in an expression of gentle mockery for the recently
retired foreign minister, Mr Hans-Dietrich Genscher, combined with something
close to contempt for the gall of those who think a half-baked amalgam of
lesser European currencies can replace the D-Mark.
'The Ecu. What kind of a currency is that? What about Genscher pennies?' How
they roared. No disrespect, Bert explained later. It was a quirk in
pronunciation that made the joke such a hit. The tone of the badinage was
back to asparagus and pensioners' rights.
But seriously, said Bert, he had no objections to the single currency. He
blithely cited the endless assurances from Bonn and the Bundesbank that,
whatever it was called, it would have all the stability and value of the
D-Mark.
Aacheners have so far managed well enough with everything the European
Community has offered. It was in their town, in the late 1970s, that the
German model for the European monetary system was adopted. And it was just
30km down the road in Maastricht that the treaties designed to bind European
political and monetary union were signed.
They live in a border community, a self-proclaimed 'Euregio Maas-Rhein'
encompassing the people, cultures and currencies of Germany, the Netherlands
and Belgium. The local newspaper costs DM1.50, BFr25 or Fl 11.75 depending
on what you have in your pocket. As almost everywhere else in western
Germany, the 12-starred Community banner is part of the civic fixtures and
retailers' fittings.
Bert claims to speak for his friends: the Danes 'do things as they want' and
that is fine. He does not want a referendum on the Maastricht treaties, and
he does not believe last week's TV and radio phone-in polls, which suggested
more than 80 per cent of Germans would vote No if they were asked.
If pressed, he is more worried about Russian-built nuclear weapons all over
eastern Europe, instability beyond the Community's eastern borders, and how
much of his pay packet goes to east Germany. 'The political classes have got
many big jobs to do, and we should ask ourselves if they are big enough to
do them.'
A straw poll of a dozen Maas-Rheinlanders too pleased at the prospect of the
long Whitsun weekend to worry much about subsidiarity suggests that the sole
implication of the Maastricht treaties which has impinged on local
consciousness is the loss of the D-Mark - and it is resented. But Europe is
Europe, with or without the Danes or, in the end, the D-Mark.
Rudi, a local visiting from his new home in Dusseldorf, worries that 'even
I, a businessman who understands the treaties,' cannot properly envision the
outcome when they come fully into effect. The politicians who signed them,
he says, have been irresponsible; too preoccupied with scoring party
political points at home.
'Some people say the Danes did not properly understand Maastricht. If that
is true it must also be true here. We Germans are not so clever.'
There are signs that the 'political classes' are waking up to the reality of
an information gap. Mr Friedrich Bohl, minister in the chancellor's office,
made a ponderous effort at clarification after the Danish referendum shock
last week. Without the union, he said, there would be no European
environmental policy and markets would be lost.
Acknowledging popular concerns, he added there would be no way of stopping
the flow of refugees and Germany would be defenceless against organised
international crime.
The Foreign Ministry, meanwhile, has sponsored a computer quiz game - On the
road to Europe - intended to deepen appreciation of the Community
neighbourhood. It was launched at the Europafest yesterday. Questions
include: Is the French national anthem called La Bouillabaisse? Who or what
is the Iron Lady? and How do Danes decorate their Christmas trees?
Editorial Comment, Page 14
