FT  12 OCT 92 / Sense on sterling
Over a decade ago I published How to End the Monetarist Controversy, which
resolved the issue to my satisfaction if not of the economics industry. I
will now attempt a similar service for the exchange rate controversy . This
is therefore a theoretical article.
Is the exchange rate just a market price like that of tomatoes, or should it
be the anchor for policy against inflation? The tomato analogy cannot bear
too much weight. For the exchange rate is a link between the national price
level and that of the rest of the world. If the price of tomatoes falls by
half, there need be no sizeable effect on inflation. If sterling falls by 50
per cent a large number of UK prices will eventually double. This is most
obvious with goods and services which face competition in international and
domestic markets; but the effects will spread more slowly towards the
sheltered sectors.
What then is the case for flexible exchange rates? I have tried to
illustrate it in the accompanying chart in terms of a hypothetical path for
the sterling/D-Mark rate over the 1990s. The argument for flexibility is
that there are various shocks which can be absorbed by a movable exchange
rate, so long as Germany remains committed to price stability and the
depreciation of sterling in the early 1990s is offset by a later
appreciation.
Letting sterling sag against the D-Mark imparts a deflationary shock to
Germany to counter the inflationary strains of unification, but one which
can be allowed to ease off as time goes on. It also allows a temporary
easing of British monetary policy so long as output and employment in the UK
are lower than necessary to 'bear down on inflation'. The UK can also offset
the effect of a weak dollar on its overseas competitiveness by allowing
sterling to fall as well and then tightening policy as the dollar recovers.
These are but topical examples. The line marked 'ideal scenario' exhibits
short-term flexibility combined with long-term stability in the
sterling/D-Mark exchange rate.
The same arguments can be applied to the regions of a country. Northern
Ireland or eastern Germany could have their own currencies which could be
temporarily allowed to depreciate without much permanent inflationary effect
so long as the depreciation eventually comes to an end.
What then is the snag in a multiplicity of fluctuating currencies? There are
transactions and nuisance costs. More important is that that no one knows
the true position of the floating rate paths I have glibly sketched.
Unpredictable exchange rate variations make it particularly difficult for
business to treat the whole area covered by all currencies as a single
market.
But most important of all is the extreme difficulty of ensuring that
sterling does return to the upper line on the chart rather than move into a
vicious, if slow-motion, circle of inflation and depreciation. The danger
might be less for another country with a better inflationary record. A
specific danger of the UK Treasury strategy of 'taking sterling into
account' without a specific target is that a series of policy judgments,
each defensible in itself, eventually takes sterling along the 'sinking
pound' line, as indeed happened in the mid-1980s when such a policy was in
force.
The fixed exchange option rate is shown in the 'return to ERM' line at, say,
DM2.6. In exchange for the loss of flexibility it does ensure the
achievement and maintenance of German-type rate of inflation, which has no
adverse effect on growth and jobs once people have become accustomed to it.
There is nothing to prevent a compromise such as going back to the original
ERM idea of occasional modest parity changes, leaving the depreciating
country with the onus of keeping to the recovery path. But the compromise
does require more thought about the mechanics of adjustment, without
insisting that only Britain is in step.
