FT  13 APR 92 / Mitterrand launches drive for Maastricht ratification
PRESIDENT Francois Mitterrand last night launched his campaign for the
ratification of the Maastricht Treaty of European Union, which he described
as 'a great undertaking for the prosperity of France'.
In an hour-long television interview, the president passionately defended
his commitment to the European Community, which he claimed was essential for
France's future.
'France is our motherland and Europe is our future,' he said. He vigorously
rejected the idea that the project for European Monetary Union would deprive
France of its monetary independence: 'Do you think we have it now?' he
asked.
The president made clear that the Maastricht Treaty would have to be
ratified as it stood, and could be neither modified nor postponed.
Ratification would have to be completed in time for the treaty to come into
force on January 1 1993, and he hoped that it would be complete by the
summer.
He indicated his clear preference for ratification of the Maastricht Treaty
by a purely parliamentary procedure in a joint session of the National
Assembly and the Senate. However, he held out the possibility of a popular
referendum if the joint session looked likely to fall short of the necessary
three-fifths majority.
Mr Mitterrand's television appearance follows hard on last Thursday's report
by the Constitutional Council, which identified three features of the
Maastricht Treaty which would require changes in the French constitution
before the treaty could be ratified. These three issues all related to
different forms of the loss of national sovereignty.
First, the extension of voting rights in local elections to residents from
other EC member states: the problem is that municipal authorities contribute
to the electoral colleges of local notables which elect the Senate members,
and thus play an indirect role in the exercise of national sovereignty.
Second, the Community's declared objective of monetary union.
Third, the Community's policy on the visas required by foreign travellers,
which would be decided by majority voting as from 1996.
In theory, President Mitterrand ought to be able to push through these
constitutional reforms without great difficulty, despite the opposition of
the Communist party and the National Front.
On the other hand, all political calculations in France have become more
delicate as a result of his administration's humiliating defeat in last
month's regional elections.
The president can certainly count on the support of virtually all the
Socialist party, apart from a small nationalist faction led by Mr
Jean-Pierre Chevenement, the former defence minister. In addition, he can
expect the support of the centre-right UDF grouping.
However, the right-wing Gaullist RPR party has already indicated opposition
to local voting rights for foreigners, and a single European currency. It
seems unlikely that the Gaullists will oppose the Maastricht Treaty as a
whole.
A majority of the French public would like a referendum on the Maastrict
Treaty on European union, according to an IPSOS opinion poll published in
yesterday's Journal de Dimanche, reports Alice Rawsthorn in Paris.
In the poll, 66 per cent favoured a referendum, with 24 per cent voting
against. Almost half, 48 per cent, said they would endorse the Maastricht
summit.
