FT  18 JAN 92 / How To Spend It: A lot of new crafty ideas
WHILE most of us associate auction rooms with things old, rare and precious
by artists and craftsmen long dead and buried, Bonhams, the auction house
based at Knightsbridge, west London, has seen that there is another sort of
saleroom market - for things utterly contemporary.
Not that Bonhams has been alone in trying to develop this market. Sotheby's
and Christie's each has dipped a toe into it - and then withdrawn hurriedly
when profits failed to match expectations. But Bonhams, having developed the
market for contemporary ceramics so successfully, has decided to persevere
but to re-think its strategy.
It has decided that the auction formula, although highly successful when
selling established names and reputations, does not work so well with
contemporary furniture and other applied arts; the public, it seems, needs
more time to look, ponder and decide. Instead, Bonhams will on Monday open a
two-week selling exhibition, Decorative Arts Today, at its rooms in
Montpelier Street, Knightsbridge.
Those interested will be able to see (and, of course, buy) work designed and
made by 150 different British contemporary designers and artists. Everything
will be hot from kiln, workshop or studio. The full gamut of arts and crafts
disciplines will be on view - jewellery, furniture, ceramics, floor
coverings, glass, jewellery, lettering, bookbinding, lighting, metalwork,
musical instruments, silver, stained and decorative glass, wall hangings and
wood.
Many of the designers - such as Floris van den Broecke, Senior/Carmichael
(who have made a Pounds 28,000 walnut table for which there is an interested
buyer already), Ron Arad, Fred Baier and Richard La Trobe Bateman - are very
well-known in their fields. Most have produced pieces specially for the
exhibition.
Peta Levi (its curator) has encouraged the designers to produce items that
are practical as well as beautiful - things like beds (there is a
marvellous, austere four-poster by Paul Neil Rathkey for Pounds 5,700),
bedside tables, dining tables, library steps and so on. It is undoubtedly a
unique chance to see the finest contemporary work and, perhaps, a chance to
begin a small collection of your own.
Everything on view is for sale and every piece is a one-off. Although some
of the very fine pieces - such as a silver tea service by Robert McEwan and
the larger pieces of furniture - are expensive, there is plenty to buy at
less than Pounds 1,000. Spalted beech bowls and vessels by Bert Marsh start
at Pounds 15 as does jewellery by Jane Adam, while Maurice Long's two-candle
wall sconce is Pounds 90 and some beautiful curving ash hanging shelves by
Trannon Furniture (David Colwell and Roy Tam) are Pounds 98.
Styles range from simple, almost Shaker-like simplicity (the hanging
shelves) to the wild, Memphis-like joie-de-vivre of Sarah Greaves Stewart's
furniture. As Peta Levi puts it: 'After all the bleak sales, how cheering to
see such a wealth of innovative but practical design and such superb
craftsmanship.'
The exhibition is open every day from January 20-29; 10 am to 5 pm weekdays
and 11-4 on the Saturday and Sunday.
