FT  01 DEC 92 / Fears over 'chaos' at Ukrainian N-reactor
AUTOMATIC safety systems have been switched off at a Ukrainian nuclear
reactor three times over the past year in violations similar to the mistake
which led to the disastrous 1986 nuclear accident at Chernobyl, safety
officials in Kiev said yesterday.
The most recent shutdown was discovered on November 11 by Mr Anatoli
Demianenko, deputy head of the Ukranian Atomic Energy Inspection Agency, who
made a surprise visit to the Pivdennoukrainsk nuclear reactor, 150
kilometres north of Odessa.
'There is such chaos at that reactor that they themselves could not explain
why the systems were shut down,' Mr Demianenko said.
Mr Volodymyr Yavorivsky, chairman of the parliamentary commission on
Chernobyl described the shutdown as 'the most serious and criminal violation
possible at a nuclear reactor'. He said: 'This is very similar to the events
which led up to the Chernobyl nuclear tragedy.'
According to Mr Yavorivksy, the safety systems were shut down in order to
boost power production.
Mr Yavorivsky said that, in light of the most recent violations, Ukraine
needed seriously to reconsider its reliance on atomic energy, which accounts
for 25 per cent of the republic's energy consumption. Although popular
sentiment against nuclear power is very strong in Ukraine, the republic's
break with Russia has precipitated an energy crisis which has made the
government reluctant to close down its reactors.
One of Chernobyl's four reactors was restarted last month after six months
of repair work and, together with Ukraine's four other plants, has been
reconnected to Ukraine's power grid.
Last week, the Atomic Energy Inspection Agency submitted a letter to the
cabinet requesting that Mr Volodymyr Fuks, director of the Pivdennoukrainsk,
be sacked.
However, Ukrainian officials said that the cabinet had not yet taken its
decision on the directors future.
According to insiders, Ukraine's powerful anti-nuclear lobby has a
longstanding grudge against Mr Fuks, who is a stalwart of the Ukranian
nuclear industry.
