FT  15 JUL 92 / Foreign Affairs: Europe bares its claws - Although a defence
structure is developing, the relationship with Nato remains unresolved
In a strange, crabwise fashion, Europe's 'defence identity' continues to
develop. Last December, in Maastricht, the nine member states of the Western
European Union (WEU) declared their intention of developing that body 'as
the defence component of the European Union and as a means to strengthen the
European pillar of the Atlantic Alliance'.
This week WEU is holding two meetings in Rome: one to open negotiations on
the enlargement of its membership, which was also agreed in principle at
Maastricht; the other to organise the naval operations, aimed at enforcing
UN sanctions against Serbia, which were agreed in Helsinki last week.
The Maastricht decision on enlargement concerns essentially Greece and
Turkey. The former, as a member of the EC, and putatively therefore of the
future European Union, is invited to 'accede to WEU';the latter, as a
European member of Nato outside the EC, is invited to become an 'associate
member' of WEU with 'the possibility of participating fully' in its
activities.
The distinction is important to those, especially the French, who are
determined that the EC must eventually evolve into a full political union
with its own defence, separate from - even though still allied to - the US.
Whereas for those (notably the British) to whom Nato remains the
indispensable and irreplaceable framework of European defence, it was vital
that European members of Nato such as Turkey should not be debarred from
helping to 'strengthen the European pillar'.
Associate membership was a compromise solution. The trouble with it is that
WEU is a mutual defence pact, whose members are obliged by treaty to go to
each other's assistance if attacked. As a mere associate member, Turkey will
not benefit from this guarantee, but will have to remain content with the
slightly weaker guarantee in the Atlantic treaty, which says merely that an
attack against any of the signatories, in Europe or the North Atlantic, will
be considered an attack against all. So Turkey is being offered the dubious
privilege of being invited to participate in WEU's activities, without
obtaining the extra security that WEU membership should provide.
Even on those terms Britain and some others were unhappy about Greek
membership, fearing that it would drag them into a Greek-Turkish conflict on
the Greek side. That has now been avoided by last month's Petersberg
Declaration, which specifies that the mutual assistance clause will not
apply to conflicts between allies: a rather extraordinary statement, since
it implies a licence for allies to attack each other with impunity. Since
Greece traditionally regards Turkey as the most serious potential threat to
its security, it would not be surprising if it decided that WEU membership
on those terms was not worth having.
Meanwhile, the Adriatic mission is the first operation entrusted to WEU
within Europe. Until now, Nato enthusiasts have suggested that WEU should
only act outside the Nato area, so as not to get in the way of the really
important business. That position has proved untenable: how can an
organisation purporting to express a 'European defence identity' be debarred
from taking any direct part in the defence of Europe?
But the relationship between WEU and Nato is still far from satisfactorily
defined. The two appear to be in competition in offering their services to
the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe for peacekeeping
duties. In the Adriatic operation (which is notionally enforcement, not
peacekeeping) they are supposed to be co-operating. Does this mean that WEU
members will contribute to the WEU force, while others contribute to the
Nato force? That might seem logical, but Britain is going to oppose it at
the Rome meeting. British officials do not like the idea of a Nato force
composed of 'the US and the also rans'. They think, apparently, that WEU
members should contribute some ships to the WEU force and some to the Nato
force.
One can only hope that these Byzantine discussions do not reach the ears of
the hapless Bosnians, in whose interests the operation is supposedly being
conducted. In fact, of course, it has very little to do with their
interests. The Dutch defence minister, among others, has admitted quite
openly that sending forces to the Adriatic is 'a political gesture' which
will not prevent any strategic goods from reaching Serbia. The force does
not have power to arrest ships, and in any case supplies are said to be
reaching Serbia via the Danube rather than the Adriatic.
Neither Nato nor the WEU has any intention or expectation of rescuing Bosnia
by military means (although the moment for rescuing it by any other means,
if there ever was one, is long past). Bosnia is simply the laboratory in
which formulae for future European defence are being tested.
The British government is pleased with itself for having got other WEU
members, including France, to accept the principle of strengthening Nato's
'European pillar'. Yet it refuses to accept the logical consequence, which
would be to canalise the European contribution to Nato through WEU.
It is true that this is made more difficult by the fact that France does not
belong to Nato's integrated command structure. Nato commanders are
understandably bothered by the fact that the new Franco-German corps, now
baptised 'Eurocorps', will include some troops that are answerable to them
and others that are not. Besides, it is questionable whether there is any
military logic, in post-cold war Europe, in setting up a new main defence
force composed largely of conscripts, when the strategic requirement is
clearly for professional forces, flexible and highly mobile, able to
undertake a variety of assignments at short notice.
But Britain's obsession with the supposed danger to Nato from the Eurocorps
is such that Whitehall bridles even when a non-governmental US think tank,
the Johns Hopkins Foreign Policy Institute, dares to suggest* that the US
should take a more relaxed attitude on the matter. Yet the ostensible
objection to the Eurocorps is that it will antagonise the Americans. Not for
the first time, London seems determined to be more royalist than the king,
or rather more Atlanticist than Washington.
Britain's desire to reintegrate France into the common defence of Europe is,
if sincere, entirely laudable. But to keep insisting on French reintegration
into the present structures of Nato is self-defeating.
On this point even the strongly Europeanist critique of British defence
policy produced last week by the Institute for Public Policy Research** has
missed the point. The French do not want a Europeanised Nato, even under a
European supreme commander. They want a genuine two-pillar alliance, with
Europe's contribution mediated through a single structure, namely the WEU. I
must be very obtuse, but I cannot see why that is such a bad idea, or why it
is assumed that the US will be against it.
*The Franco-German Corps and the Future of European Security. Policy
Consensus Reports, June 1992
**Biting the Bullet, by Malcolm Chalmers. IPPR, Pounds 9.95
