FT  21 AUG 92 / Can-do Texas finds doing it much harder: Bush will see
little there for comfort
IF President George Bush was hoping for a shot of adrenalin from his adopted
home town this week, he must have left disappointed.
Houston is by no means as depressed as parts of New England or southern
California, but it shares with the nation a sense of diminished economic
expectations. As Republican speakers in the Astrodome tried to drum up
enthusiasm for a second Bush term, the business mood outside seemed as flat
as stale beer. The legendary Texan 'can do' spirit that Mr Bush doubtless
recalls from his own days in oil exploration is greatly subdued.
'Everybody is sitting anxiously waiting for the national economy to pick
up,' says Mr Bob Greer, chairman of Tanglewood Bank, a small local bank that
has prospered despite the state's financial crash of the mid-1980s.
The outlook is for 'continued tough times', says Mr Bill Gilmer, a senior
economist at the Houston branch of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. 'The
mood is very cautious and concerned.'
Local businessmen are disappointed that Mr Bush has done little to help
either the energy industry or real estate - two sectors which nearly sank
the region's economy during the 1980s. 'Mr Bush must address economic
problems in Texas if he is to carry the state in November,' says Mr Ray
Perryman, a Texas economic consultant.
Like much of the nation, Houston saw fitful signs of recovery earlier this
year. Retail sales rose 6 per cent in the first five months against the same
period last year. Car and truck sales also rose modestly. But the momentum
of recovery seems to be ebbing and few analysts expect any dynamism in
coming months. Announcements of big layoffs at local oil companies have
shaken consumer confidence.
For a while Houston hoped it might escape the national recession that began
in July 1990. The region continued to create jobs until July last year,
rekindling the myth that the Texas Gulf coast is immune to national trends.
That myth arose because many US downturns have been accompanied by higher
oil prices that worked, locally, to offset the drag from national
recessions.
After Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, oil prices soared to Dollars 35 a barrel,
giving Houston a lift despite the diversification away from energy during
the 1980s. But oil prices swiftly retreated, leaving the local economy
exposed to adverse national trends and yet another energy sector shake-out.
Job growth has turned negative in the past year and the unemployment rate,
at 7.9 per cent in June, is a shade above the national rate.
The number of US drilling rigs fell below 600 in July, a 52-year low. This
compares with about 4,500 during the boom of the early 1980s. The depression
in domestic drilling reflects unexpectedly weak natural gas prices, the
removal of tax subsidies in 1986 (which makes Texas much less fiscally
privileged than Britain's North Sea) and a shift of exploration effort
overseas, partly as a result of tougher US environmental controls.
Mr Gilmer says the banking industry has stabilised after a 'central bankers'
nightmare' in the late 1980s when nine out of 10 big Texan banks failed as a
result of sour energy and real estate loans. Bank profitability is steadily
improving but, ominously, bankers are still reluctant to lend. Indeed, as of
the first quarter, the total of outstanding loans in the south-west was
shrinking.
Small businesses - the fount of job creation according to Republicans at the
convention - are having particular difficulty obtaining loans, partly
because of tighter federal regulatory standards. If you have lost money in
the past it is almost impossible to get a loan, says Mr Greer. The chairman
of the board of the Houston branch of the Fed, who ran a business renting
machinery, was among those recently bankrupted when his bank refused to
renew a loan.
In the longer term there are grounds for cautious optimism. Mr Skip Kasdorf,
head of research at the Greater Houston Partnership (an expanded chamber of
commerce) points out that 40 per cent of Houston's economic base is now
independent of energy, compared with 16 per cent a decade ago. This means
Houston should never again experience a recession as severe as that of the
mid-1980s when 13 per cent of local jobs disappeared.
Unable to compete with financial and distribution centres such as Atlanta
and Dallas, Houston plans to carve a niche in engineering and applied
technology. The federally funded Johnson Space Centre (which operates the
Space Shuttle) is a magnet for high-tech companies.
And although Mr Bush is criticised locally for failing to help the oil
sector, he came to Houston bearing one gift: the North American free trade
agreement. With 40 per cent of goods sold to Mexico produced in Texas (and
70 per cent transported through the state), the pact offers a promise of
better times ahead.
