FT  17 OCT 92 / Markets: Traders prepare for Clintonomics - Wall Street
TWO broad factors will be driving the sentiment of equity investors on Wall
Street over the next fortnight - the tenor of third quarter results from
corporate America and increasing speculation about which stocks are likely
to benefit or suffer from a Clinton presidency.
The stock market has, with a few exceptions, been in a generally bearish
mood since the start of October, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average
having lost about 100 points over the two week period.
The past week opened on Columbus Day, a semi-holiday on which trading was
very light, but the Dow Jones index showed a healthy improvement anyway. The
index continued to rise on Tuesday as the first trickle of third quarter
results suggested companies might meet or in some cases exceed market
expectations.
These gains early in the week, in part a reaction to the sharp drop over the
previous week's trading, were given back by yesterday. Thursday proved an
especially difficult day as the market was dragged down by news from IBM and
Philip Morris, two of the 30 stocks that make up the Dow Jones Industrial
Average. These companies were hit by a worse than expected loss and a drop
in cigarette shipments respectively. It should be noted, however, that the
Standard &amp; Poor's index, a broader market measure, was somewhat less
affected than the weighted Dow average.
IBM's Dollars 2.78bn third quarter loss was particularly unnerving and the
company's share price was marked Dollars 5 1/8 lower on the day, sinking to
the lowest level in a decade and contributing to the 20.80 point drop in the
DJIA. Yesterday morning the IBM price continued to slump, this time by
Dollars 3 5/8 to Dollars 69 1/4 at lunch-time. That made for a stunning
cumulative drop of more than 30 per cent from IBM's high this year, recorded
last July.
Philip Morris meanwhile declined by Dollars 4 1/4 , or 5 per cent, on
Thursday, to Dollars 79 3/4 . The company's share price was still falling
yesterday morning, down by Dollars 4 1/8 to Dollars 75 5/8 in heavy trading.
Next week a variety of bank results will be announced. In common with a
number of manufacturing companies they are expected to produce respectable
third quarter results. If third quarter figures prove to be not too bad,
however, it will be a reflection of cost cutting programmes, asset disposals
and other rationalisation measures rather than an improving macro-economic
picture. And that is precisely where the issue of Clintonomics comes into
play.
For two years US economists and supposed market pundits have been claiming
that recovery was just around the corner. The short-term American mind-set
of these forecasters has created misleading expectations and has contributed
to an overvaluation of the equity market which reached its least rational
peak at the start of 1992.
As the reality of a painfully weak recovery has become apparent, the Dow
Jones index is running at a level more than 200 points below the average of
nearly 3,400 achieved in late July. As it should be.
Clinton has meanwhile successfully hammered the Bush Administration's
absentee-landlord approach to the US economy while at the same time offering
his proposals for a kick-start during the first 100 days of his (likely)
presidency. Largely Republican Wall Street, for its part, has become
increasingly used to the prospect of a Clinton Administration.
What might this portend for the equity markets? There is an agnostic view as
far as the deficit is concerned, with few believing Clinton will be able to
chop it in half in just one four-year term. But when it comes to his public
spending plans, there is reason to look more closely at specific industrial
sectors.
Put simply, Clinton's likely fiscal stimuli, aimed in part at job creation,
should benefit companies involved in infrastructural works. That could mean
a plus for construction and telecommunication stocks. The Democrat's
expected focus on public spending in education and health care could also
hoist stock prices in the textbook publishing and hospital administration
sectors. Ditto for environmental stocks.
The downside is that defence stocks and some pharmaceuticals could suffer
from lower government expenditure and tighter price controls respectively.
While equity investors may profit from a carefully selective review of those
sectors likely to benefit from a Clinton presidency, the bond market could
turn increasingly bearish if it thinks the fiscal stimuli would prove overly
inflationary or would send interest rates higher again.
 -----------------------------------
Monday        3174.41  +  37.83
Tuesday       3201.42  +  27.01
Wednesday     3195.48  +  05.94
Thursday      3174.68  +  20.80
Friday        3174.41  +  0.27
 -----------------------------------
