FT  02 JUL 92 / Political Notebook: The return of Tina
It is Europe that is causing the noise in the Conservative party at the
moment. It is the economy that threatens the real damage.
There is no shortage of risk over Maastricht. Mr John Major's efforts to
keep Britain on the European train might yet be derailed by the wrecking
tactics of Tory Euro-sceptics.
One or two of the irreconcilables have begun to whisper darkly (and
unrealistically) of a direct attack on the prime minister's leadership.
Across the channel, the Danes, or the French for that matter, might kill the
treaties on monetary and political union.
Mr Major, though, is not condemned to inaction. The EC presidency gives him
the opportunity to demonstrate again his talents for striking bargains that
satisfy his European partners and appease his party.
It is the economy that holds the more dangerous 'if'.
Most Conservative MPs believed their pre-election claims that victory would
provide the final ingredient for economic recovery. Three months on, they
have become bemused and uneasy about the stubbornness of the recession.
The anecdotal evidence in their constituencies - from bankruptcies,
unemployment and house prices - confirms the aggregate indicators that have
prompted the Treasury to scrap its forecast that the economy will grow this
year.
Ministers as well as backbenchers suspect that, come the autumn, Mr Norman
Lamont's Budget forecast of a 1 per cent rise in national income in 1992
will be replaced by an embarrassing acknowledgement that output is at best
flat.
Suggestions that recession might yet turn into slump are no longer dismissed
with quite such breezy confidence.
The concern is shared in the highest reaches of the government. 'Pretty
awful' and 'dangerous' are just two of the grisly descriptions of the
short-term economic outlook offered during the past few days by cabinet
members.
In that, Mr Major is impotent. It is not possible to negotiate an end to the
recession.
Anything but the smallest cut in interest rates would jeopardise sterling's
place in the Exchange Rate Mechanism. Nor, with the public-sector deficit
heading towards 5 per cent of national income, can he afford to relax fiscal
policy.
Mr Michael Portillo, the chief secretary, has warned his colleagues that
political tranquillity cannot this year be bought with still more public
money.
Nor is there much inclination elsewhere in the cabinet to cut and run by
slashing interest rates and effectively ditching the ERM. It may well be
that Mr Lamont and one or two others were never great enthusiasts for fixed
exchange rates, but the chancellor is strapped to the ERM mast as tightly as
anyone.
So is the prime minister. For all the recent speculation that another rift
is opening up between the Downing Street neighbours, Mr Major is fully
committed to the policy. The prime minister and chancellor will never be
soulmates but neither can afford to lose his nerve.
To devalue now, they judge, would be to throw away the sacrifices of the
last two years. The opportunity to realign the economic and political cycles
would be lost. To recall a phrase, There Is No Alternative.
There is a positive side to the coin. Mr Major has time on his side. He has
also a medium-term political perspective. For him, the raison d'etre of the
ERM is not that it will bring down inflation but it will then keep it down.
The prize is to be a permanent one, the end of boom to bust.
The message, though, is not getting through to the back benches. Tory MPs
instinctively are unsettled by inaction. Mr Lamont is widely criticised for
not reassuring them.
They cannot understand that stamp duty is to be reimposed on a dead housing
market. The prospect of a bloody public spending round does not help.
The greatest danger for Mr Major lies in the elision between the depth of
the recession and his alleged pro-Europeanism. As Baroness Thatcher and some
others would have it, her successor has gone soft on Europe and the ERM is
stifling the recovery.
As yet, the link has only limited resonance. But Europe and the economy have
proved an explosive mixture. Tina never was a comfortable companion.
