FT  16 NOV 92 / Russia told to get its reform act together: US denies that
west has failed to keep its promises over financial help for Moscow
THE US administration is growing increasingly irritated by complaints that
the west has failed to keep promises to help Russia, and wants President
Boris Yeltsin's government to follow through on the economic reforms it must
put in place before more money can be provided.
'The issue is one of Russian reform, not of the extent to which the west has
been responsive. The ball lies primarily in their court,' said a senior US
Treasury official.
US and other western officials have been piqued by criticism voiced mostly
by economic advisers to the Russian government such as Professor Jeffrey
Sachs of Harvard University and Professor Anders Aslund of the Stockholm
Institute of East European Economics. The latter last week accused the west
of hypocrisy and indecision in failing to provide funds to support Mr
Yeltsin's economic reform programme, and said western nations suffered from
a 'prejudice that Russia can only be ruled by a Stalin in the Kremlin'.
Reflecting divergent opinion in Washington about aid for Russia in the light
of the slow pace of reforms, Senator Sam Nunn last night warned that without
urgent support the democratic experiment in the former Soviet Union would be
short-lived.
Senator Nunn, the chairman of the Senate armed services committee who has
been mentioned as a possible secretary of state or defence secretary in
President-elect Bill Clinton's administration, attacked the west for failing
to pour as much aid into Russia as possible. 'The west gave more assistance
to (Mikhail) Gorbachev's communist regime than we have to Yeltsin's
democratic regime,' he said.
US Treasury officials, however, say the west has lived up to the Dollars
24bn aid programme announced in April by President George Bush and
Chancellor Helmut Kohl in partnership with other leading industrial nations
in the Group of Seven.
Around Dollars 11bn of the G7 package was to come from bilateral aid;
finance ministry officials say they are on course to meet that goal by the
end of the year. The US is also pushing hard for the rapid completion of a
debt rescheduling to strengthen Mr Yeltsin's hand before the Russian
congress convenes for a new session on December 1. If accomplished, this
debt package would go further than the Dollars 2.5bn of relief originally
projected.
The only parts of the Dollars 24bn package which have not yet materialised
are funds from multilateral institutions. The biggest portion, some Dollars
4bn, was to have come from the International Monetary Fund, but Russia has
so far received only a preliminary credit tranche of Dollars 1bn. Western
financial officials, blame Russia for not only failing to produce an
economic programme to support a full IMF standby agreement, but for missing
even the economic targets set as conditions for the first credit tranche.
Government spending has not been brought under control, and new credits to
state-controlled enterprises in the third quarter alone exceeded the target
set for the second half of this year. 'The multilateral financing is
contingent not on what the west does but on what Russia must first do,' a
senior US official said.
