FT  09 NOV 92 / US Money and Credit: Investors wait for 'Clintonomics'
NEWS of Governor Clinton's impending presidency had a decidedly muted effect
on bond markets last week. In fact, it would be tempting to conclude that
the regular monthly employment figures had more impact overall than did the
outcome of the presidential election. After all, Friday's revelation that
the national unemployment rate had fallen from 7.5 per cent to 7.4 per cent
caused the benchmark 30-year long bond to lose  3/4 of a point and the yield
to rise 7.76 per cent. By contrast, Tuesday night's election results left
the long bond unchanged in the following day's trading.
But in large part, the lack of reaction on Wednesday simply reflected lack
of surprise. The presidential election result was so well signalled in
advance, that it would have been astonishing if the market had not
discounted a Clinton victory. After all, in mid-September - when the
hullabaloo from the two party conventions had died away and the serious race
was starting, the long bond yield stood at around 7.3 per cent. By the time
the polls closed, it had already risen to 7.65 per cent.
The more interesting issue is where the market moves now. For the immediate
future, a heightened nervousness seems likely, but with little underlying
sense of direction. That was already evident on Friday, when the market
reacted negatively to some fairly ambiguous jobs figures. On the plus side,
the October data did suggest the nation's unemployment rate had dipped for a
fourth consecutive month. The figures were also released in the wake of some
moderately encouraging news from other parts of the economy - the store
sales results for October, for example.
Nevertheless, Friday's data also revealed that payroll jobs, although rising
by a modest 27,000 overall last month, were still declining in the
'productive' sector. Factory jobs, for example, tumbled by 56,000 last
month, following a 38,000 drop in September. The overall rise, then, came
through growth in health-related jobs, business services, and construction -
which, in turn, reflected the rebuilding efforts in Florida following
Hurricane Andrew.
Nevertheless, the market, with its increased wariness. seemed more inclined
to react to the headline unemployment number than to the finer details of
the jobs data. By the time trading ended on Friday, the long bond yield was
at its highest level since June.
So what will determine where the market goes in the longer-term? One key
issue is the personalities selected by Mr Clinton to run the economy. While
the shape of the Cabinet overall is plainly crucial, the markets will focus
first on the new treasury secretary. There has been some speculation that Mr
Paul Volcker might be a candidate for the post, a move which the markets
would plainly welcome. But, at the very least, the investment community
generally is looking for 'one of its own' - an individual who has long
experience of dealing with the financial markets, rather than, say, a
liberal economist or academic.
A second issue is how 'Clintonomics' shapes up in practice - something which
analysts acknowledge will be hard to assess for several months. At present,
some commentators are relatively sanguine, arguing that the programme, as
already indicated, has more to do with redistributing federal expenditures
than delivering a full-scale fiscal stimulus to the economy. In this
respect, the very tentative signs of improvement in the US economy - the
falling unemployment rate, the pick-up in store sales - may be no bad thing.
A slow revival, it is argued, might remove some of the political pressures
on the Clinton White House.
That said, everyone is anxious to hedge their bets - a policy which brought
action to the municipal bond market last week. Prices of tax-free muni-bonds
and notes started to rise sharply on Monday, and the rally snowballed
thereafter. If the President-Elect follows through on plans to increase
taxes on high-earners, runs the reasoning, tax-exempt munis look to be a
winner.
