FT  07 OCT 92 / Letter: Clinton in position to balance US budget and lift
recession
Sir, Your editorial, 'Time to assess Mr Clinton' (September 25), correctly
points out that Governor Clinton, like Harry Truman and John Kennedy before
him, should not be considered to be at a disadvantage with respect to
foreign affairs. He is quick to study and has surrounded himself with a
number of key foreign policy advisers from various points on the political
spectrum.
More importantly, he has shown a keen understanding of the need to inject
some economic realism into foreign policy. This may be the reason you
expressed doubt over his approach to trade, referring to 'disturbing
protectionist undertones'. In the cold-war era, trade and economic policy
took a back seat to American foreign and security policy considerations.
This is changing, and Governor Clinton is right to respond accordingly. But
this should not be mistaken for creeping protectionism.
You also point out that those who wish to see the US budget deficit reduced
have reason to fear a Clinton presidency. The opposite is more likely to be
true. In much the same way that it took a Republican like Richard Nixon to
go to China, it will probably take a moderate Democrat like Bill Clinton to
begin in earnest the process of balancing the budget.
Presumably he will have a Democratic Congress to work with and the full
support of the American people. If he can take advantage of both of these
opportunities in a timely fashion, there is hope that the US could finally
tame its runaway budget deficit.
At the same time, he will likely shift spending priorities toward helping US
industry and creating economic growth. Bill Clinton will not be afraid to
have the government work with the American business community to make it
more competitive. This is not a question of picking winners or losers. It is
a question of the US government forming a working relationship with business
and industry.
In fact when adding things up, Bill Clinton is in the best position both to
balance the budget and to lift America out of its recession by creating new
economic growth.
William C Danvers,
110 S Buchanan Street,
Arlington, Virginia 22204,
US
