FT  10 JUN 92 / Leading Article: Time to review the regulators
THE CUSTOMERS of UK utilities are almost daily assailed by headlines
alleging profiteering and poor service. Electricity generator PowerGen's
profits are up 30 per cent in the depths of a recession. Complaints about
the behaviour of the water companies have doubled. British Gas stands
accused of 'ripping off' the customer by failing to cut gas bills fast
enough as inflation falls. Are Britain's regulators doing enough to protect
the hapless consumer from the predations of monopolistic, privately owned
public utilities?
The shareholders of these utilities probably see things rather differently.
Millions of Sids who bought British Gas shares find the pricing formula
enforced with unforeseen ferocity. BT faces the third tightening of its
price cap since privatisation with ever more services subject to control.
Dividends paid to water shareholders could be restricted under proposals
that the companies should finance a higher proportion of investment through
debt. Are Britain's regulators running amok, tearing up the prospectuses
published when the utilities were privatised?
The truth lies somewhere between: Britain's regulatory system is evolving.
Experience has shown that simple 'RPI - X' price caps, which limit price
rises to X per cent below the rate of inflation, have often required
refinement to curb monopoly profits. The 'X' factor has needed to be
increased in some cases (from 3 per cent to 7.5 per cent in the case of BT).
The basket of prices encompassed by the formula has grown fuller. Quality
criteria have been added, and regulators now enforce service standards.
Social requirements
Other public policy issues have arisen. The regulator may attempt to promote
investment in infrastructure like fibre optical cabling, for example. In the
utilities which provide basic necessities, there are social requirements to
offer special services to the old and the disabled. Water prices are being
increased by more than the rate of inflation to invest in much higher levels
of water purity.
Finally, most of the regulators are rightly required to work towards their
own abolition by creating the conditions for more competitors to thrive.
Ofgas has pressed British Gas to open up more opportunities for competing
suppliers. BT is constrained in its ability to compete with cable TV
companies. The big two electricity generators face restraints on their
ability to dominate regional supply markets.
All of these are legitimate objectives for regulation, though their import
may not have been fully understood by managers or shareholders when the
companies were privatised. Equally, those involved in creating the
regulatory process may have underestimated the difficulties in applying
light touch regulation to complex industries. That is why the picture is
shifting, and why the regulators have at times appeared to move in different
directions or at different paces. While all have held on to price caps,
reflections on justifiable rates of return on capital have begun to feature.
Such evolution is desirable, and the existence of several industry-specific
regulators encourages diversity and experiment.
Little scrutiny
However, all of this can be bemusing to the ordinary consumer or investor.
There is astonishingly little scrutiny of the processes which have become so
important to household budgets and industrial competitiveness. Much more of
the information regulators use to make their decisions could be placed in
the public domain without threatening commercial confidentiality. And
parliamentary select committees could hold public examinations of the
regulators after the publication of their annual reports. The appointment of
regulators might also be subject to confirmation by these committees.
More fundamental scrutiny of each regulated utility is also needed from time
to time, with the Monopolies and Mergers Commission well-placed to carry
this out. However, the regulatory process itself also requires periodic
scrutiny to establish how it is evolving and whether it is as effective as
it can be.
The government should ask the Office of Fair Trading to review utility
regulation. Its report, rich in research and analysis, would then provide an
excellent basis for public scrutiny by a parliamentary committee. This is
the right way to build on the success of utility privatisation.
