FT  15 JUL 92 / EC launches second PVC cartel probe
THE European Commission is again investigating an alleged cartel in the
European PVC industry, less than four years after fining 14 plastics
manufacturers for price-fixing.
Commission officials confirmed yesterday that some of the same companies
were implicated in the new investigation, which began last week with two
days of dawn raids across the Community.
The groups raided include Norsk Hydro, EVC, a joint venture between ICI and
Enichem, Elf-Atochem, Shell, Wacker Chimie, Huls and LVM. Officials said
this was 'a separate inquiry covering a separate period'.
The PVC market, like much of the commodity plastics sector, is highly
unprofitable at the moment. The industry supplies the depressed vehicle and
construction sectors and prices have declined steadily over the last 12
months. Manufacturing is a continuous process and stocks have been building
up throughout Europe.
The groups have been seeking ways of increasing margins and have taken every
opportunity to raise prices, although they have had difficulty avoiding
discounting. All deny collusion.
The first investigation began in January 1987 and ended in 1988 with the
Commission imposing fines of Ecu24m (Pounds 17m) on the 14 PVC-makers.
The chemicals companies given the largest fines were Solvay of Belgium
(Ecu3.5m), Elf-Atochem of France (Ecu3.2m), Enichem of Italy and Britain's
ICI (Ecu2.5m each), and Huls of Germany (Ecu2.2m).
The legality of those fines is still in question, however, following a
landmark ruling by the EC's lower judicial body in February. The Court of
First Instance annulled the fines on the grounds that the Commission had
broken its own internal rules.
Brussels is to appeal against the CFI ruling. Officials denied yesterday
that the new investigation was a reaction to the court's decision.
The European Commission has also opened an in-depth inquiry into the
proposed steel piping link-up between Mannesmannrohren-Werke and Hoesch of
Germany, in spite of the German cartel office's request to examine the deal
itself. It is the third time that Brussels' competition authorities have
overruled such a request from the Bundeskartellamt since new merger rules
came into force in 1990.
But the Berlin-based cartel office said yesterday it was happy that the
four-month inquiry had been opened and agreed that the Commission's merger
task force was better placed to assess the Community-wide impact of the
deal.
