FT  09 DEC 92 / Survey of Global Custody (11): Jigsaw of different systems -
Richard Waters explores the dream of a global electronic link
THE DREAM: global electronic links between institutional investors, brokers
and custodians which will reduce the costs of securities dealing and shorten
settlement times.
The reality: a complicated jigsaw of different systems in which not all of
the pieces fit together, contributing to higher costs and risks for the
securities industry.
That, at least, is the present position. But to judge by two initiatives
launched in the past year, the dream may be getting much nearer.
The ETC (Electronic Trade Confirmation) project in Europe and ISITC
(Industry Standardisation for Institutional Trade Communications) in the US
are both co-operative ventures to promote common standards in the way trades
are confirmed and settled. Finding a way for these two separate ventures to
co-operate will be the next challenge in developing a single international
network.
'A lot of banks and institutions have spent a lot of money on systems - and
good systems at that,' says Mr Alistair Reid of Morgan Grenfell. 'The weak
point is when they try to transfer information outside their own
organisations. The next level of efficiency is to get systems that speak to
each other.'
ISITC was formed by a group of investors and custodian banks in the US to
promote common standards for communications between the two groups. For the
custodians, this marks a considerable shift in strategy.
Most have invested heavily in proprietary systems in recent years, enabling
investors to communicate with them directly. These links have helped to tie
investors to particular custodians, protecting the custodians' income.
Common standards could undermine these proprietary systems, forcing banks to
write off their investments while at the same time making it easier for
investors to shop around to reduce the fees they are paying.
Custodians admit that there has been a lot of soul-searching over this
development. However, they seem to have decided to make the best of it -
perhaps out of a desire not to repeat the rearguard action fought to keep
fund managers out of Swift, the international financial messaging sytem,
until recently.
Also, the development of common standards may have only a limited impact on
custodians' business, at least in its early years.
Investors with links to a small number of custodians are likely to maintain
those connections, since there is no advantage to them changing, says Mr
Sean Quinn, client technical services manager of Chase Manhattan in London.
He adds that investors which use a larger number of custodians are generally
communicating by facsimile or telex, so common standards for electronic
systems could help both sides by making communication more efficient.
Also, existing bank systems can be adapted to fit the new standards being
developed by the ISITC working group and will not have to be scrapped.
Europe's own industry-wide electronic trade confirmation project has also
raised questions about the future relationship between different groups of
intermediaries in the securities markets. ETC is designed to link investors
and brokers, making it possible for them to confirm trades automatically.
Potentially, though, it could provide the basis for an order-matching system
on which institutions could trade directly with each other.
While the ISITC project is aimed only at developing common standards, ETC
has led to the selection of three commercial vendors to provide systems
which meet standards selected by a representative group of users: the London
Stock Exchange, the International Securities Market Association and Thomson
Financial Networks. The intention: for links to be built between the three,
making it possible for an institution which uses one of the systems to
confirm a trade with a broker who uses another.
For now, the backers of ETC say they have more important things on their
plate than extending their project to take in trade confirmation.
'Order-matching is not a current intention,' says Mr Reid of Morgan
Grenfell. 'It's still a back office project.'
The development of this common infrastructure to support back office
operations has not always run smoothly. The Stock Exchange, for instance,
has recently appeared to cool to the idea of linking its Sequal trade
confirmation system to Isma's Trax and Thomson's Oasys. Pressure from users
appears now to have changed its mind.
There is also the danger that the ETC and ISITC developments will tread on
each others' toes. Backers of the US project have begun talks for a similar
venture in Europe. The supporters of ETC are not enamoured: Mr Chris Smith
of Fidelity, one of the instigators of ETC, believes the two projects should
be developed by the same group of users.
'I really am concerned it (the separate ISITC development) will get in the
way,' he says. He would rather it was developed by the same industry user
group which has promoted ETC.
Supporters of ISITC agree there is a danger of duplication. 'Too many people
are setting up to be standards bodies,' says Mr Quinn of Chase. He adds,
though, that the ETC group already has its hands full at the moment.
The initial rivalry is likely to give way to closer co-operation in future.
Formal talks between institutions involved on each project are already
planned, with a view to promoting electronic links between investors and
their custodians in Europe.
Unscrambling the jumble of systems in this way should help to bring
settlement times down towards the three days envisaged by the G30. As yet,
though, it is still more of a dream than a reality.
