FT  29 AUG 92 / Finance and the Family: Counting the losses of with-profits
policies - John Authers considers a big problem for actuaries
YOU MIGHT think Norman Lamont, the chancellor, has difficulties reconciling
the demands of the currency markets and the UK economy. But the actuaries
who determine the bonuses payable on with-profits policies know exactly how
he feels.
The with-profits policy has been the staple product of the life insurance
industry. The beauty of the product was the combination of a guaranteed sum,
with stock market growth on top. Delivering those rewards was simple while
share prices were rising. Now that markets appear to be locked into lower
performance, those guarantees grow much more expensive.
Actuaries are hemmed in on both sides - both past performance, and
projections for the future, put pay-outs under extreme pressure. None of
this is good news for the UK's mortgage-holders, as the bulk of mortgages
are backed by with-profits endowments.
This week, Guardian Royal Exchange rang alarms by announcing it would stop
selling conventional with-profits policies. Instead, it will sell policies
which require lower capital reserves when first established. This follows
the move of Standard Life, which last November stopped offering conventional
with-profits policies for supporting mortgages (although contracts are still
available for other purposes).
GRE went on to claim that the bonuses paid by other life offices could not
be sustained. James Morley, finance director, said it was possible that, in
the industry as a whole, some policies might not pay enough to cover
mortgages. He added: 'Membership of the ERM means low inflation and low
returns from equities. Paying out bonuses requires a high rate of return. If
you are getting a low rate of return from your assets, you have a mismatch
which can be addressed only by reducing bonus rates.'
This echoes arguments from Norwich Union, which last year cut bonuses and
switched out of equities to take a 16 per cent holding in bonds - having
held no bonds a year earlier.
A GRE spokesman said: 'We believe that the returns being declared by other
companies simply cannot be sustained. The historical returns we got in the
1980s cannot be maintained in the 1990s.'
These arguments may sound abstruse, but they are important. Most people in
the UK hold a with-profits investment. Many in the industry agree with GRE's
line.
Whether with-profits policies will fail to pay off the mortgage is dubious,
but they look a much less exciting investment than they did. Many people
will not even regard a with-profits policy as an 'investment' at all as it
comes with 'guarantees.' But that is changing. The recession has forced life
insurers to confront difficulties which had been masked by the complex bonus
system used to distribute investment profits.
When you invest in a with-profits fund, some of your money goes into bonds
and property but most goes into the stock market, as in a unit-linked fund.
The core of the with-profits system is two forms of bonus:
Reversionary bonuses, which are added annually and cannot be taken away if a
policy is held to maturity. These are expressed as a percentage of an
underlying 'sum assured.' If you have an endowment policy and die during its
term, your relatives will receive the sum assured plus all the accrued
reversionary bonuses. They will not, however, receive:
Terminal bonuses, which are added to the value of a policy only when it
matures. These give the fund managers scope to profit from strong equity
market performance.
They are meant to reflect performance over the last few years of the policy,
but should also take some account of earlier performance which has not been
passed on to investors adequately through reversionary bonuses. Terminal
bonuses can be cut from one year to the next if the markets require it.
If you keep the policy for its duration - for a mortgage, this will almost
always be 25 years - the 'maturity value' you receive will be the sum
assured plus all reversionary bonuses plus the terminal bonus. Note,
therefore, that the sum assured - all that you are technically guaranteed at
the beginning of the contract - is a tiny proportion of what you might hope
to get in a pay-out.
The attraction of the bonus system is that it allows the peaks and troughs
of the market to be smoothed. Actuaries can award a healthy bonus in a bad
year, if they forecast good performance in the future, and need not pass on
all the gain from a good year if it is obviously exceptional.
Since 1987, though, the UK market has had a succession of poor years.
Actuaries have assumed repeatedly that better returns will come along, and
have awarded bonuses accordingly. Now, according to Angela Cooper, of
actuary Noble Lowndes, 'realism must creep back into calculations.'
Any reductions will be smoothed, to an extent, but returns still seem
certain to administer an uncomfortable jolt. Charles Cannon, actuary with
Mercer Fraser, says: 'Looking at the past five years, it is clear that the
bonuses being paid out by some companies are greater than could have been
earned by the funds over those five years.'
After reserves have been used for a few years, an office's freedom of action
is impeded. The law obliges them to keep a certain proportion of their funds
in relatively risk-free assets. So offices can find themselves required to
forego some of the gains that might be available in equities.
Nick Dumbreck, actuary with R. Watson, put it this way: 'We've seen a number
of offices switching out of equities and into fixed interest, not
necessarily because they believe fixed interest is going to perform better
but because they need it to maintain cover for their solvency margins.'
Preliminary evidence (see below) from the returns filed by life companies to
the department of trade and industry indicate that free assets are under
stress, although this is a complicated area and there is room for argument.
Companies with low ratios, such as Norwich Union and Scottish Equitable,
have made well-publicised switches to bonds.
Then there is the impact of past business. It is not difficult to pay out
large bonuses if relatively few people bought policies 25 years ago or hefty
amounts of new money are being attracted. But when many policies mature
together, life could get more awkward.
Business in 10-year policies was strong in 1984 because tax relief on
premiums was removed that year. Paying for these policies when they mature
in 1994 will cost money. Later on, the 25-year policies taken out in the
mid-1980s' peak of the property market will also exert a strain.
None of this is good news. Rosy expectations of hefty payments should
perhaps be abandoned. For those unencumbered by an endowment these
developments strengthen the case for keeping it that way.
