FT  20 FEB 92 / Temperature rises over NHS reforms: The statistical war will
carry on
Mr Robin Cook, Labour's health spokesman, today relaunches his party's
attack on the government's reforms of the National Health Service. He will
repeat the charge that the reforms are privatising health care. And he will
promise that a Labour government would sweep away the internal market at the
heart of the reforms.
Labour regards the NHS as its trump card: it has only to play it to win the
trick. That certainly has been the experience until now. The card has been
played to devastating effect in a series of by-elections, with the
Conservatives losing once-safe seats such as Monmouth under attack over
alleged threats to the NHS.
Every glitch in the implementation of the reforms has been gleefully
publicised by the opposition. With widespread mistrust of the government's
intentions, ministers' protestations that the NHS is safe in their hands
have tended to produce adverse results in the opinion polls.
Yet there is growing confidence among Conservatives that the health service
need not be a no-go area. Ministers feel that the reforms are beginning to
yield tangible benefits - and will claim as much in the election campaign.
Of course, it is far too soon to establish the effect of the reforms -
whether beneficial or damaging. Introduced only last April, they are being
gradually phased in to avoid undue disruption.
Nonetheless, Mr William Waldegrave, the health secretary, felt sufficiently
upbeat to call a press conference last month proclaiming that the first six
months had been an unmitigated success. He presented a glossy brochure
setting out the achievements:
A 3.7 per cent increase in patients treated in hospitals over the previous
year.
'Significant inroads' in reducing the time patients have to wait for
treatment, on target for meeting the pledge in the Patient's Charter to
eliminate waiting times of longer than two years by April 1.
Record levels of child immunisation - about 90 per cent of children are now
inoculated against diptheria, tetanus, polio, whooping cough and measles.
Other good news followed. A survey of eight of the new self-governing trust
hospitals showed that almost half the 900 patients who had visited them
before and after they became trusts thought that the service had improved.
And a study of GP fundholders, carried out by Professor Howard Glennerster
of the London School of Economics, found that fundholding had improved the
quality of service for patients.
Above all, the winter months have been largely free of reports of ward
closures and hospital budget problems for the first time in many years.
The best that Labour has been able to do by way of demonstrating that the
NHS is in crisis was a document leaked in January which showed that 86
hospitals were reporting current deficits of more than Pounds 100,000. Mr
Waldegrave was quick to point out that the total deficit was Pounds 15m,
less than 0.1 per cent of the NHS budget. And with only 29 hospitals
expected to be in the red by the end of the financial year, any deficits are
likely to be matched by surpluses elsewhere.
There is more than meets the eye in the good news stories. The absence of
ward closures, for example, can be attributed to a Pounds 200m slush fund
held back by the government to bail out importunate hospitals.
This is no more than prudent planning given the upheaval of the reforms. But
it hardly fits in with the idea of an internal market where purchasers and
producers must behave like rational profit-maximisers.
As for the drop in waiting lists of longer than a year, there is evidence
that this has been achieved at the expense of people who have been waiting
for less than a year - for whom waiting times have risen slightly.
And the 3.7 per cent increase in turnover of hospital patients is scarcely
more than the trend figure over the previous 10 years.
Moreover, the real problems may only be about to emerge. The internal market
is being phased in, with this year's provisions largely drawn up on a
'steady state' basis: the new arrangements largely mirror what was happening
in the year before the reforms were brought in. Steady state will give way
to a somewhat freer market from April 1, and it would be surprising if this
did not lead to some embarrassing problems for large hospitals.
At the very worst, however, the government can claim that no great harm has
been done by the introduction of the reforms. And there are some signs of
modest improvements.
Ministers can also point to the adoption of similar market-based reforms in
health care in countries such as the Netherlands and Germany. Even where the
private sector plays a more important role, the purchaser/provider split at
the heart of the internal market is being used to allocate scarce resources
and curb escalating costs.
And Labour's promises to abolish the internal market should be taken with a
pinch of salt. Today's announcement may include plans to scrap GP
fundholding and reincorporate the trust hospitals into the districts. But
the purchaser/provider split is likely to survive in some form, if only
because it is a principle that Labour has endorsed in other public services
such as local government.
Yet it may still be premature for the Conservatives to assume that the
health service reforms can be added to the litany of successes in their
election campaign. Opinion polls continue to show a high level of scepticism
about the government's commitment to the NHS. And Labour retains its
overwhelming advantage in the polls as the party viewed as best able to run
the NHS.
But as the parties scrabble to a fingertip lead over each other, the battle
of the NHS statistics looks set to run and run.
