FT  24 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Heseltine attacks plans for credit controls
THE CONSERVATIVES yes-terday seized on remarks made by Mr Neil Kinnock about
the operation of credit controls under a Labour government to question the
opposition's economic competence and inject life into their campaign.
Mr Michael Heseltine, environment secretary, said the introduction of
controls would produce 'queues' for mortgages. 'We have always said from the
beginning of this campaign that mortgages under Labour would be more
expensive. Now you are going to have to queue for them as well.'
Mr Heseltine predicted that monthly mortgage payments would rise by an
average of between Pounds 40 and Pounds 50 under Labour because of higher
interest rates that would be needed to protect the value of the pound.
His attack sprang from the Labour leader's comments on the party's plans to
use credit controls in addition to interest rates to staunch price rises.
Housebuyers would rather wait 'a month or two' for loans than pay penal
interest rates, Mr Kinnock suggested. He said he would use temporary
controls based on banks' reserve:asset ratios if borrowing looked set to
rise unacceptably.
Mr Heseltine lambasted Mr Kinnock's 'economic illiteracy', saying it was
'utterly incredible that a delay of a month or two' could affect the level
of interest rates.
'How does he prevent foreign companies lending money across the exchanges
unless Labour is also threatening to reintroduce exchange controls?' he
asked.
His remarks came after weekend polls indicated that Mr John Smith, shadow
chancellor, had increased his lead in the popularity stakes over Mr Norman
Lamont, his opposite number, and that Labour's ratings for economic
competence were picking up.
Turning to the Conservatives' policies, Mr Heseltine promised a nationwide
rents-to-mortgages scheme which would enable 1.5m local authority tenants to
convert their present rent into a mortgage payment.
The scheme would not be open to the estimated 2.5m tenants who receive
benefit payments, however, and would therefore not amount to the phasing out
of the publicly-owned rental sector.
Mr Heseltine warned that Labour was 'committed to preventing' former council
tenants who purchased their homes under the 'right-to-buy' scheme from
selling at the best price on the open market.
He suggested that before any former tenant sold, he would 'have to get
permission from his local authority'.
