FT  01 FEB 92 / Books: The Jeremiahs of megapolitics
THE GREAT RECKONING by James Dale Davidson and William Rees-Mogg Sidgwick &amp;
Jackson Pounds 20, 531 pages
'If you enjoyed reading this book, you may enjoy reading Strategic
Investment, the private financial advisory service edited by James Dale
Davidson and Lord Rees-Mogg.'
If? If you enjoy reading this book, you ought to see a psychiatrist. It is
not a bad book, but it is hard to see how any sane or sensitive reader could
enjoy it. After all, the authors claim a high rate of verification for their
previous oracles, and here they forecast some perfectly appalling events,
whose realisation would leave few of us unhurt.
The message is that our present decade is, and will be, dominated by a
Depression. Not a Recession: a Depression. The Great Reckoning is with Debt,
which is here monstered into a global Babylonian Captivity. But the book's
compass collects enough social observations to deject even those readers
with no great investments at stake. If the authors were a couple of marginal
quack seers cashing in on some fin de siecle doom, those observations might
be comfortably ignored: but when it is the former editor of The Times
telling us that the media are worthless for understanding world events; when
it is the current Chairman of the Broadcasting Standards Council pointing
out that television distributes violence into society, then it is serious.
Generally, the message makes sense. Its principal thrust - that America's
power is waning, and Japan's ascendant - was rehearsed by Oswald Spengler.
(The main difference is that what used to be known as the 'yellow peril' is
now known as 'Pacific hegemony'.) We know that Islam has supplanted Marxism
as the terror of the West. We can imagine that the lesson of the Gulf War,
for the losing side, is to persevere with terrorism and aim to possess
nuclear weapons. And most of us must be able to testify to an increased
impingement of violence upon our lives. So there is nothing grossly new
here: but give world analysis a new name ('megapolitics') and put it in the
hands of two lively writers, and you have a powerful synthesis.
Apart from prudent hedging in the markets - the book closes with some terse
financial advice - how are we supposed to respond?
British readers may take some consolation. The socio-political upholstery of
the book is mostly American, and America is not an invariable prototype of
Britain. Moreover, the logic of gloomy statistics is not always sound. The
homicide figures for some parts of the US seem horrifyingly high: but when
you consider that in some parts of the US buying a gun is as easy as buying
a pound of butter (some shops sell both), you might argue that the homicide
figures are surprisingly low.
Some of the evidence for American decline is very impressionistic (eg the
anecdotal 'fact' that Lord Rees-Mogg was kept waiting for his tea at the
Waldorf Hotel in New York) and the referencing of American decline to the
decline of the Roman Empire (also done recently by Alistair Cooke) fails to
make a completely cogent metaphor. After all, as Gibbon himself saw, the
'fall' of the Roman Empire is intricately tangled with the 'rise' of
Christianity. Without some positive force for change, it is hard to see how
Attila the Creditor or Attila the Crack-Dealer can single-handedly ruin a
country as resourceful as the US.
There is an enviable range in the authors' historical models, and the
arrangement of arguments within a farrago of sub-headings works well.
Academic jargon is liberally used, accompanied by steady sniping at academic
targets, particularly modern historians. On one page there is a 'glut' of
historians; on another, historians have 'emptied their classrooms' by
abandoning 'the old-fashioned notion that history has lessons'. Lord
Rees-Mogg's great-grandfather (1815-1908) is reckoned to have lived in
stable times: we are told that 'if anyone was entitled to believe in
continuity, he was'. Perhaps; but some of his contemporaries (eg Matthew
Arnold) were deeply convinced of decline.
And there, I suppose, is a possible key to response. If history is a branch
of rhetoric, calculating the future on the basis of historical patterns is
an extension of that rhetoric. The rhetoric of pessimism is here displayed
as well as I have ever seen it, complete with epigraph from Jeremiah: it
would be a fine extended sermon if it did not so candidly eschew any kind of
morality other than profit equals good and loss equals bad.
How seriously you take the predictions then depends on how far you share the
authors' view of human nature. Their grim citations of ghetto rap 'lyrics'
combine with stockbroking bullishness ('The ultimate law is the law of the
jungle') to test a philanthropic spirit. It is worth remembering that their
previous book was entitled Blood in the Streets. A text peppered with
oracular substantives ('Armageddon', 'Time-Bomb', etc.) either demeans those
terms, or else seeks to shock. It may be that, like the Fat Boy in Pickwick,
Davidson and Rees-Mogg simply want to make our flesh creep. I, like others,
would want to replace Jeremiah 8:20 ('The harvest is past, the summer is
ended, and we are not saved') with Jeremiah 32:15 ('. . . Houses and fields
and vineyards shall be possessed again in this land'). But pain and terror
and cruelty have visited the 20th century too often for anyone to shrug
their shoulders at a book like this.
