FT  27 JUN 92 / Minding Your Own Business: Pin-stripe acupuncturist -
Heather Farmbrough meets a private-sector physiotherapist
IN HIS pin-striped trousers, plain shirt and tie, Tony Monkcom looks more
like a City dealer than an acupuncturist or physiotherapist.
He and his wife Alison (also a chartered physiotherapist) own and run the
Kingston Clinic of Physiotherapy and Complementary Therapies, offering both
conventional and 'alternative' therapies. In spite of their keen interest in
complementary medicine, making a profit matters as much as making people
better.
Indeed, the clinic has made a profit each year since it opened - but it has
been six years of careful saving and late-night book-keeping sessions. Like
many physios, Tony supplemented his income by treating a few patients
privately after he qualified as a chartered physiotherapist in 1980. Using
his fees, he spent Pounds 600 on an ultrasound machine - then a rarity in
many NHS hospitals - to treat soft tissue injuries to muscles, ligaments and
tendons.
While working in hospitals in Windsor and Ascot, he became interested in
acupuncture after observing that some problems, such as acute low back and
neck pain, migraine headaches, sinusitis and certain forms of arthritis, did
not respond to conventional treatments. After a two year part-time training
course, he qualified as an acupuncturist in 1987.
He had continued to treat private patients in the evenings. But the local
council refused him permission to use his home as a surgery on the grounds
that car parking would be a problem.
So Tony moved to Kingston, where he bought an Edwardian three-bedroomed
semi-detached house with a large reception room he could use as a treatment
room. In a new area he had to start building a reputation all over again.
He visited all the local businesses and shops, and wrote to all the local
GPs and dentists. But it was only after he had visited a number of general
practice managers that local doctors started to refer patients to him for
physiotherapy.
Tony meticulously followed up every patient's first consultation with a
letter to their GP, whether or not they had been referred. 'I had to build
up a reputation quickly,' he says. 'I knew I had to get people better fast.'
To compete with other private practitioners, he needed good, up-to-date
medical equipment. But he had to buy it gradually, and has always, except
for the mortgage on his house, refused to borrow. His most expensive items
have been a Pounds 3,000 interferential therapy machine (treatment with this
feels like pins and needles, and transmits an electronic frequency to
relieve problems with joints, low back pain, or tennis elbow), and an Pounds
2,500 laser machine (which treats damaged tissues with a concentrated light
beam). Altogether, he has spent nearly Pounds 22,050 on medical equipment,
furniture and word processing software and hardware.
After a couple of years he wanted to expand his client base and began to
offer acupuncture, and then complex homeopathy, which combines a number of
low potency homeopathic and herbal remedies.
'I send a lot of people to the Kingston clinic because Tony Monkcom is a
good clinician in his own right and can offer a wide range of therapies,'
says a local GP. 'I don't see it as an alternative to the NHS because the
NHS can't offer that range of treatments."
In 1987, Alison moved in and became the practice manager, and Tony took on
two part-time physiotherapists. A podiatrist - a chiropodist who specialises
in lower limb and foot problems - runs a clinic one afternoon a week. This
has increased the number of clients - and clinic revenue - but it has
created other pressures, too.
'The headaches start when you employ other people,' says Tony. 'When you
treat people yourself, it's important to be a good practitioner. When you
employ others, you have to be a good manager as well.'
Some 60 per cent of clients come through referrals from GPs and consultants;
a similar proportion use private health insurance schemes to pay for
acupuncture and physiotherapy. The waiting time for appointments is usually
a week, sometimes 10 days; at local hospitals the waiting time for
non-emergency treatments can vary from two to 12 weeks.
There are currently some 2,000 to 3,000 patients on the books. This May,
Tony took out a five-year lease and moved the clinic to a 750 square foot
bungalow at Ham Common which now houses just the practice. This has allowed
him to add a couple of treatment and to separate home from work. He intends
to start marketing the clinic with a series of talks for local GPs and
consultants: the goal is to build a network of practices.
The Monkcoms are conscious that private patients expect good service. They
try not to let patients wait more than five minutes for appointments. and
patients are never called by their first names. Medications are dispatched
speedily.
By staying away from the more extreme fringes of alternative medicine, the
clinic has avoided a 'crank' reputation and stayed on good terms with local
doctors. What counts, ultimately, is the ability to make patients better.
The Kingston clinic certainly cured my tennis elbow last summer.
Kingston Clinic of Physiotherapy and Complementary Therapies, 39 Ham Common,
Ham, Surrey TW10 7JG 081 332 2946
