FT  11 DEC 92 / US comes to grips with Somali clans: Little hope of a quick
solution
THE US plunged into the labyrinthine and unstable world of Somali politics
yesterday when it brokered meetings between two of Somalia's rival warlords.
Since it embarked on intervention in Somalia, Washington has said it is
mounting a purely humanitarian operation and will avoid playing a political
role. But now, the US State Department has grasped the reality that a
political solution is fundamental to ending starvation in the conflict-torn
country.
It may, however, be a move it will come to regret.
Complicated and bitter clan rivalries and a fiercely individualistic culture
have fuelled the civil war.
The four main clans, which themselves divide into sub-clans, have set up
militias and formed shifting alliances with the warlords.
The face-to-face meetings between Gen Mohammed Farar Aideed and Ali Mahdi
Mohammed, who control different parts of Mogadishu, will start today at the
gutted US embassy and will be attended by Mr Robert Oakley, US
ambassador-at-large.
The US will guarantee the security of today's talks and act as broker to a
settlement that has eluded the best efforts of the United Nations for more
than a year.
Somali political experts agree that reconciling Gen Aideed and Mr Mahdi  -
who claim allegiance from two different sub-clans of the Hawiye clan, the
Habir Gidir and the Abgal - is the critical first step to a wider national
reconciliation.
Both men claim to be the genuine legitimate leaders of the United Somali
Congress (USC), the politico-military movement which forced former dictator
President Mohammed Siad Barre out of power in January 1991.
Once the split in the USC is repaired, it will be possible to try to heal
the internal divisions in other loose clan-based political movements before
moving forward to a national conference to pave the way to an interim
government followed by elections.
But the first step will be difficult.
The conflict between Gen Aideed and Mr Mahdi is largely a personal power
struggle supported by their two sub-clans.
Many Somalis believe a solution will unfold only when the two warlords have
withdrawn from centre-stage - a move unlikely to be considered by either.
The clans have no fund-amental political, ideological, religious, ethnic or
ling-uistic differences. But there have been clan disputes through Somalia's
history, often over water holes and pastures, scarce resources in a harsh,
drought-plagued land.
A political solution will have to be based on movements representing the
interests of the four leading clans - the Hawiye, Darod, Raheweyne and Isak.
'Clan divisions will never vanish. They are the nuts and bolts of Somali
society. Therefore the world must work on that basis,' says Dr Osman Guled,
a visiting Canadian political scientist.
He says inclusion of powerful Somali merchants will be vital for a
successful political process, as will working out a plan for equitable
distribution of resources and territorial authority for each clan.
Confidence-building, establishing transparent, impartial and objective
institutions of civil society, and getting reconstruction and development
under way will also be vital.
The process is bound to take a long time and tax the patience and resources
of Washington, which is eager for a quick solution.
