FT  03 FEB 92 / Labour steps up campaign against 'dirty tricks'
LABOUR'S aggressive media handling of the revelations about meetings between
senior party figures and Soviet diplomats went into overdrive yesterday as
frontbenchers queued up to denounce the claims as 'a typical old red smear'
and a further sign that the Tories were in difficulties.
The Sunday Times gave extracts of reports from Mr Victor Popov, the Soviet
ambassador, and his colleagues of discussions with prominent Labour members
between 1979 and 1984.
The opposition's pre-emptive weekend strike against the report marks a
distinct change of strategy from previous political campaigning. Labour
believes that its vigorous attack prompted The Sunday Times to tone down its
story.
Like the pursuit by Mr Roy Hattersley, the party's deputy leader, of Sir
David English, the editor of the Daily Mail, the approach is aimed at
ensuring that the broadcast media have to report such stories in the context
of Labour allegations of 'dirty tricks'.
Ironically, it was Mr Chris Patten, the Tory party chairman, who highlighted
the mundane and unstartling nature of the Soviet reports.
Referring to the account of Mr Popov's meeting in July 1984 with Mr Neil
Kinnock, the Labour leader, at the House of Commons, Mr Patten said: 'It
would not be surprising if Mr Kinnock said those things to the ambassador
because he said them in public, in the Commons and in the country.' Mr Popov
reported that Mr Kinnock believed that people 'were ready to fight, to
defend their rights and to speak out against Tory pressure on the left and
progressive forces'.
When Mr Popov complained that Sir Geoffrey Howe, then foreign secretary, had
simply repeated US and Nato positions in discussions with the Soviet
leadership, Mr Kinnock said that Labour was ready to develop a 'concrete
dialogue' with the Soviet Union, and criticised the Tories for continuing to
deploy US nuclear weapons in Britain.
The story divided traditionally Tory Sunday newspapers.
The Sunday Express ran the story with a headline: 'Kinnock, KGB and
Kremlin,' but the Mail on Sunday said that the Soviet files were based on
'inaccurate' notes, and carried an editorial condemning the 'outrageous
slur' on Mr Kinnock's patriotism. The Sunday Telegraph quoted Mr Oleg
Gordievsky, a former KGB agent, saying that there was no implication that Mr
Kinnock had been disloyal in any way.
