FT  22 SEP 92 / Crisis in the UK Economy: Uncertain future for pay
bargaining
from about 9 per cent to just over 4 per cent  - and unit labour cost
increases in manufacturing industry have fallen to 2 per cent.
Most analysts attribute that primarily to falling inflation and recession
but some, including many union officials, argue that the speed of the fall
would not have been attainable without British membership of the exchange
rate mechanism.
With no prospect of employers being bailed out by devaluation, and with low
inflation locked in, pay bargainers were beginning to shake off an
'inflation-plus' mentality and were even comparing pay rises more directly
with similar groups in other ERM member countries.
Will Britain's withdrawal from the ERM undermine the discipline of the last
two years? The short answer is that nobody knows, but as withdrawal is
almost certain to lead to higher inflation and greater uncertainty, union
bargainers will be pushing harder to compensate their members.
In the short term they will not necessarily succeed. Britain has withdrawn
from the ERM at the end of a wage round in which large groups of workers  -
such as the 900,000 local government manual workers  - have settled for a
rise of about 4 per cent on the understanding that inflation was heading
down, not up.
If inflation does now rise, those workers will suffer a cut in real pay.
With unemployment set to rise for another two years at least, they may not
be in a strong position to claw that back next year. Indeed, an analysis of
the relationship between wages and prices over the past 10 years by Mr Chris
Trinder, of the Public Finance Foundation, found that the lowest growth in
real wages came in 1989 and 1990 when inflation took off, briefly, catching
many bargainers by surprise. Conversely, the strongest real earnings growth
came in the mid 1980s, when inflation was relatively low.
Seeking lessons from previous devaluations  - such as 1967 or 1976  - is
difficult. On both these occasions incomes policies, at least temporarily,
prevented a wages catch-up.
Also, as the Confederation of British Industry points out, the bargaining
system is now far more flexible. For example about 20 national pay
agreements, which usually provided an inflation-covering floor for plant
bargainers, have been phased out since the 1970s, and pay in the current
recession has been far more sensitive to the performance of different
sectors than in previous years.
It is not necessary to agree with the CBI that the link with the retail
prices index has been broken to accept that wage rises in the private sector
are now more closely linked to company performance.
That means that pay trends are likely to follow the pattern of corporate
winners and losers from the present devaluation  - with employees in
exporting companies benefiting most.
The story may be different in the public sector. Although the Civil Service
unions have just settled for modest rises, the pay review bodies  - which
cover nearly a third of public-sector workers  - are just starting to hear
evidence.
The government's case for a low rise in its submission to the pay review
body for teachers is based on the argument that inflation is defeated
because 'within the discipline of the ERM there is no prospect of employers
being bailed out by a lower exchange rate'.
That argument has now been overtaken by events, and without another one to
put in its place the government might well have to reject the findings of
some of the pay review bodies if it intends to hold down public-sector pay.
In the longer run, leaving the ERM will probably mean losing some of the
benefits to rational bargaining of permanently low inflation and
international comparisons with related groups in Europe. The extent of the
loss depends on how much progress had already been made in absorbing ERM
disciplines, and that would not have become clear until the new attitudes
had been tested in an upturn.
