FT  03 OCT 92 / Sugar says he may take Amstrad private after losses
MR ALAN SUGAR, chairman and founder of Amstrad, confirmed that he was
considering taking his personal computers and consumer electronics company
private again as it reported a full-year loss for the first time and passed
the final dividend.
Amstrad reported a pre-tax loss of Pounds 70.95m, compared with a previous
profit of Pounds 20.16m as it struggled against savage price cutting in the
PC market and shrinking margins in its satellite business.
The results for the year to June 30, which were worse than expected, show
how the Amstrad story, once a stock market sensation, has turned sour.
Mr Sugar has not stated reasons for wanting to re-privatise, but the
consensus in the City is that at the current level the shares look
undervalued. With an estimated 19p of net cash per share, 'the most
compelling reason is that it looks to be a very good deal', one analyst
said.
Taking the company private would also facilitate any further restructuring
and deal-making Mr Sugar might be considering.
Mr Sugar, who is considering an offer to buy, at 30p a share, the shares he
does not already own in the company, was not available for comment
yesterday.
This offer is less than one-seventh the 233p value the shares peaked at in
1988. Yesterday the shares closed up 1p at 25p.
Turnover tumbled more than 30 per cent to Pounds 356.58m from Pounds 528.41m
and the operating loss before exceptional items came to Pounds 39.09m,
compared with an operating profit of Pounds 40.56m.
The PC market, from which it derives about 40 per cent of its revenues, has
become a savage battleground where the industry's leading companies are
engaged in an unprecedented price war and the shelf life of products is now
extremely short.
Satellite sales have also slipped to Pounds 106m from Pounds 147m and the
company has been unable to deliver the innovative mass-market hits which
underpinned its success in the mid-1980s.
Amstrad has not been able to shift products quickly and has been forced to
dispose of outdated merchandise in order to maintain cash liquidity. The
resulting inventory provisions and restructuring costs led to an exceptional
charge of Pounds 31.86m.
