FT  10 JUL 92 / Clinton names Gore as running mate
GOVERNOR Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the presumptive Democratic presidential
candidate, yesterday named Senator Albert Gore from the neighbouring state
of Tennessee to be his vice-presidential running mate.
Mr Clinton had considered several other leading Democratic congressmen,
including Senators Harris Wofford of Pennsylvania, Bob Kerrey of Nebraska,
Bob Graham of Florida and Jay Rockefeller of West Virginia, and
Representative Lee Hamilton of Indiana.
In the end, he picked another Southern moderate who closely resembles him
both in his youth and in his marked penchant for policy detail.
Mr Jesse Jackson, who has often complained that no one takes his
vice-presidential credentials seriously and who has found little to please
him in Mr Clinton, criticised the Clinton-Gore partnership as 'a fairly
narrow ticket'.
'It takes two wings to fly and here you have two of the same wing,' he said
yesterday.
But the selection of a running mate with a broadly similar political
philosophy to his own may in fact offer Mr Clinton a better opportunity to
present a coherent candidacy than the traditional choice of someone from a
different region or political camp.
In fact, Senator Gore does balance Mr Clinton in a number of significant
respects.
As a Vietnam veteran, and one of the few Democrats to have given strong
support to the Gulf war, Mr Gore could offset the questions raised over
whether Mr Clinton dodged the Vietnam draft.
As the Senate's most prominent spokesman on ecological issues, he could
underpin Mr Clinton's environmental platform, where Republican campaign
managers believe his record as governor of Arkansas leaves him vulnerable.
As a second-term senator who can boast that he actively influenced US
nuclear missile policy in the 1980s, Mr Gore also balances Mr Clinton's
relative inexperience in foreign affairs.
Perhaps most important, Mr Gore succeeded in inhaling when he smoked
marijuana in college.
Analysts differ, however, on whether Mr Gore will repair his partner's
perceived weaknesses or merely underline them.
Political strategists are also rethinking the strengths and weaknesses of an
all-Southern ticket in the November election, when Mr Clinton is likely to
face not just President George Bush but also Mr Ross Perot, the irascible
Texas billionaire who seems all but certain to run as an independent
candidate.
An NBC-Wall Street Journal poll published yesterday showed the three men in
a statistical dead heat: Mr Perot stood slightly ahead with 33 per cent, Mr
Bush second at 31 per cent and Mr Clinton third at 28 per cent, but 60 per
cent of those questioned indicated only weak support for their favoured
candidate.
At 44, Mr Gore is two years younger than Mr Clinton, but he has a long
political pedigree. Son of a senator, he first ran for Congress in 1976, and
in 1988 made a bid for the Democratic presidential nomination. Although he
won six Southern states in the Super Tuesday primaries, he lost Florida and
Texas to Governor Michael Dukakis, the eventual Democratic nominee, and his
campaign collapsed after a flop in New York.
He decided against a second try in 1992, citing his wish to spend more time
with his family, especially his young son, who was severely injured in a car
accident three years ago.
Supporters say that in 1988 he started campaigning too late, and he has
unquestionably gained in national stature since then - principally by his
stand on the environment - yet doubts remain about his ability as a
campaigner.
His speeches are often soporific, yet his undoubted brains and command of
detail should present a formidable challenge to Vice President Dan Quayle in
the one televised debate between the two vice-presidential candidates.
