FT  18 MAR 92 / US, UK and France agree Libya sanctions resolution
THE US, Britain and France have agreed on a draft United Nations resolution
imposing sanctions on Libya, including a ban on all air links with the
country, for its alleged part in the bombing of civil airliners over
Scotland and Niger.
The draft text calls on all UN countries to deny all civil flights to and
from Libya, to halt the supply of arms and related materials to the country
and to downgrade the status and reduce the size of Libyan diplomatic
missions.
The resolution would also ban sales of aircraft or avionic spare parts to
Libya and all new insurance for Libyan civil airliners. It would prevent the
operations of Libyan Arab airline offices overseas.
The UK foreign office yesterday advised 5,500 Britons registered as resident
in Libya that they should 'consider carefully' leaving the country in view
of the possible flight ban.
The draft resolution was circulated yesterday among other Security Council
members.
Diplomats in New York suggested Russia would probably support the present
text, but China, Zimbabwe and Morocco could resist it. But officials from
the three drafting powers say they are reasonably confident the resolution
will pass.
If so, the sanctions would take effect within 24 hours of the vote.
The Security Council in January unanimously ordered Libya to surrender two
agents accused of masterminding the bombing of Pan Am flight 103 over
Lockerbie in 1988 in which 270 people died. The French have also sought four
suspects thought to be behind the bombing of a UTA flight over Niger in 1989
in which 171 were killed.
In a sign that Col Muammer Gadaffi, the Libyan leader, is feeling under
pressure from western demands, Libya made a series of offers to resolve the
confrontation with Britain, the US and France after talks with a UN envoy in
Tripoli earlier this month. But these were considered by the three countries
to be confused and inadequate.
Col Gadaffi has separately opened an action against the US and Britain at
the World Court in The Hague, accusing them of breaking international law by
failing to hand over to Libya the evidence allegedly pointing to Libyan
complicity in the bombings. The Court is due to hold a preliminary hearing
on the action on March 26.
The US TV network ABC yesterday appealed to the High Court in London against
a police demand for all material relating to ABC interviews with the two
Libyan suspects in the Lockerbie bombing. Judgment was reserved.
