FT  14 FEB 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Chile angers its fruit
exporters
FRUIT EXPORTERS in Chile are up in arms over government plans to allow
Argentine rivals to ship their produce through Chilean ports.
As the world's leading suppliers of fresh fruit during the northern
hemisphere's winter months, Chilean producers fear they will lose hard-won
markets in Japan and elsewhere in Asia if Argentina gains access to a
Pacific outlet for its fruit exports. They also fear that the transit of
fresh Argentine produce through Chile might bring pests such as the
Mediterranean fruit fly, despite promises of stringent sanitary controls.
'We cannot understand why the government is willing to put our exports at
risk,' Mr Ricardo Ariztia, president of Fedefruta, the fruit producers
federation, said this week. 'We are strongly urging the authorities to
reconsider this decision.'
The opening of nine Chilean ports to Argentine trade by 1993 forms part of
an economic integration accord signed between both nations in 1990. Mr Ivan
Nazif, the deputy minister of agriculture, said yesterday that there were
economic benefits for Chile in the accord, including charges for port
services. He said Argentine fruit would have to be pest-free before crossing
the Andes.
But fruit producers are not convinced by the official guarantees. They are
particularly worried about the transit of Argentine fruit through the
northern Copiapo valley, an oasis of orchards reclaimed from the Atacama
desert. Copiapo produces the first grapes of the season, which fetch the
best prices in the US and Japan. Chilean producers do not want competition
from northern Argentina, which harvests in the same months.
The proposed measures could not come at a worse time for the Chilean fruit
trade. The US recession has depressed demand and prices. The Americans are
complaining about the quality of Chilean fruit this year, which was hampered
by frosts and heavy rains in October. A revaluation of the Chilean peso last
month is also squeezing profit margins.
Fresh fruit exports earned Dollars 948m last year, a 35 per cent increase
over 1990. But the exponential growth of the past decade is unlikely to be
repeated in the 1990s.
