FT  16 MAR 92 / Bad news for Britain: A hung parliament would be the worst
outcome of the election
There is a fashionable idea around in Britain that a hung parliament will
somehow be good for us. It is often coupled with the view that
constitutional reform is an elixir for future British achievement. Let
parliament be hung, and reform will follow.
Such thinking is romantic escapism. In the first place, a hung parliament -
by definition - would give a disproportionate role to MPs from Northern
Ireland. There will continue to be 17 of them, whatever happens to voting
patterns elsewhere. They have one characteristic in common: their primary
interest is in Northern Ireland. Thus, their votes on other matters will be
up for grabs, according to what they can get out of it for their own region.
Far more important than that, constitutional reform is perhaps the one
subject on which all MPs - perhaps with some justification - regard
themselves as experts. Indeed, there is by now a well-documented paradox:
the only way to achieve constitutional reform in Britain is through
parliament, yet parliament is incapable of delivering.
In the late 1960s, the House of Commons spent two years debating the reform
of the House of Lords. It failed because of a cross-party alliance of
maverick MPs. In the late 1970s, it spent more than two years debating
devolution for Scotland and Wales.
Again, it failed to deliver satisfactorily because back-bench MPs could
stick down any amendments they liked. The final legislation took not only an
absurd amount of time; it failed to meet the original objective of giving a
measure of devolution to the Scots.
Just over 10 years later, the question is back on the agenda as though the
earlier debates had never been.
Today a central issue is said to be proportional representation. Let us
leave aside the merits of the argument as such, and concentrate on the
practicalities. PR is a very complicated subject: it comes in many forms.
Ask parliament to legislate for it, and almost every MP will have a
different view. If they do not have views at the start, they will find it
necessary to invent them, for constitutional reform is a game for which you
make the rules as you go along. Anyone can play, especially MPs.
There is another game much played in Britain. It consists of inventing new
reasons every few years to explain the country's relatively poor performance
compared to that of other European countries. It used to be the stagnant
society - the lack of harmony between the two sides of industry. Then it was
the failure to enter Europe at the proper time. After that, it was calls for
more science-based industry and picking winners. The search for a social
contract was followed by the crusade to curb the power of the trade unions.
All of those rationalisations had an element of truth: without an attempt to
act on them, we might be even worse off than we are today. Demands for
constitutional reform, however, contain an element of intellectual luxury.
As it happens, we are being constitutionally reformed by the week, simply by
our membership of the European Community. Yet few people stopped to read the
Treaty of Rome and all its subsequent developments. Instead, there is a fond
idea that by tinkering with - or even root-and-branching - our own system,
we may be able better to compete.
There is no overwhelming evidence that I know of that our failings lie in
our constitution, or lack of it. In England we have what amounts to a 2 1/2
party system. The function of the third or half party is occasionally to
deliver the two bigger parties a kick in the pants: for instance, by winning
seats in by-elections, coming up with a more attractive leader and even the
odd idea. Yet I have never come across an idea in the Liberal party, the old
Alliance or the Liberal Democrats that could not have been found somewhere
in one or other, and sometimes both, of the two big parties. Labour and the
Tories are already coalitions: we do not need any more.
Lest I appear reactionary, I should add that there are some constitutional
reforms that I would welcome. One would be fixed-term parliaments; not
because this would reduce the possibility of governments' seeking to bribe
the electorate before the election.
They could still do that, but they would be unable to play silly
guessing-games about election timing. At least one British government that
deserved to stay in office threw power away by going to the country at the
wrong time. That was Mr Heath's in 1974. Mr Major may have done the same by
waiting too long.
Two other reforms are a smaller parliament and less legislation, but you
will not get either out of a parliament that is hung. If it comes, you will
be bored by it well before the game is over.
And if you want a different electoral system, look at the French, who will
be voting next Sunday. Their system of 'first-past-two-posts' was much
favoured by that old Tory leader, Lord Home. He was also not averse to
Scottish devolution. Reform is a slow process.
