FT  16 MAR 92 / Flood of refugees feared as Burmese army threatens rebel
base
THE BURMESE army redoubled its attacks against ethnic minorities on the
country's borders at the weekend, threatening the rebel base of Manerplaw on
the Thai frontier and prompting further concern in the region over an exodus
of refugees, writes Victor Mallet in Bangkok.
According to Karen rebels and Thai army officers, Burmese troops loyal to
the ruling military junta captured the strategic Sleeping Dog Hill near
Manerplaw on Saturday.
Fierce fighting was continuing in eastern Burma yesterday, but if government
forces hold the hill they will be able to subject Manerplaw, long controlled
by the Karen National Union, to a sustained artillery bombardment. Opponents
of the junta say the Burmese army has been ordered to capture Manerplaw in
time for Armed Forces Day in Burma on March 27.
Manerplaw has taken on an added significance for the opposition and for the
junta because the Karen rebels have been joined there by monks and students,
and by politicians from Rangoon who won the 1990 elections but were deprived
of power by the military officers of the State Law and Order Restoration
Council.
On Burma's western flank, Moslem refugees from Arakan have been pouring into
Bangladesh in increasing numbers, with tales of killing, rape, forced labour
and other atrocities committed by Burmese troops. Burma says the Moslems,
known as Rohingyas, are illegal immigrants, but the regime's opponents
believe it is trying to curry favour with the Buddhist majority and distract
their attention from the country's domestic problems.
Mrs Khaleda Zia, the Bangladeshi prime minister, is due in the US this week
for talks with President Bush and with Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN
Secretary General, and the official Bangladeshi news agency said the refugee
issue would figure prominently in her discussions. Bangladeshi officials
said more than 4,000 refugees arrived from Burma on Saturday alone, bringing
the estimated total to more than 200,000.
The ferocity of the latest Burmese offensives against ethnic minorities has
begun to arouse anxiety about regional stability among even the most
pragmatic members of the Association of South East Asian Nations, which
accounts for many of Burma's contacts with the outside world.
Malaysia and Indonesia, with their large Moslem populations, have recently
expressed concern about the plight of Burmese Moslems. Thailand, whose
military officers have enjoyed lucrative logging concessions in Burma, is
engaged in border skirmishes with Burmese troops trying to attack Karen
rebels from behind by crossing the frontier.
Even Singapore, which sells weapons to Burma and acts as a broker for other
arms manufacturers, including North Korea, has been obliged to admit that
the situation in Burma has created 'a potential area of instability for the
region and human suffering'.
Burma, Thailand and Laos - the three 'Golden Triangle' states - agreed at
the weekend to increase co-operation on restricting drugs production and
trafficking.
A joint declaration issued after a ministerial meeting in Thailand also
called for greater international efforts to curb demand for drugs.
No details were released on what the three countries intended to do,
however, and sceptics pointed out that the ruling Burmese junta is said to
have struck deals with opium warlords. The US says Burma is the world's
largest source of illicit opium and heroin. Mr Ohn Gyaw, Burma's foreign
minister, denied this.
