FT  03 JUN 92 / International Company News: Thomson-CSF answers security
fears
THOMSON-CSF of France believes it can allay US national security concerns
over its bid for LTV's missile unit. However, it fears US Congress may
torpedo it, Reuter reports.
State-controlled Thomson-CSF, the world's second largest defence electronics
company, in April agreed to pay Dollars 300m for the missile unit of US
defence and steel company LTV.
'It is what we fear more,' said Mr Jean-Paul Perrier, the head of
Thomson-CSF's missile division. 'We don't have so many concerns about the
security issue.'
According to analysts, the deal would be the largest foreign acquisition of
a US defence company. It has raised hackles in Congress, where legislation
has been introduced to block it.
LTV was the 17th-largest US defence contractor for the US fiscal year ended
September 30 1991. Thomson-CSF, 58 per cent-owned by the French state, is
negotiating with the US Defence Department (DOD) to meet its concerns that
the deal might compromise US national security.
At the same time, Thomson-CSF is answering detailed queries from the US
government's committee on foreign investment in the United States (CFIUS)
about the proposed deal.
Under the Exon-Florio amendment to the 1988 US Omnibus Trade Act, the
committee screens mergers affecting US national security, recommending to
the president whether to approve them.
'We think we will reach a solution acceptable to the US and in line with
Thomson-CSF's basic business objectives of obtaining a fair return on its
investment,' Mr Perrier said.
In late April, the US deputy secretary of defence, Mr Donald Atwood, said
such an acquisition would be approved only if the foreign buyer had 'passive
ownership'. What this means is still being discussed.
US officials said Thomson-CSF's chairman, Mr Alain Gomez, met Mr Atwood at
the weekend to discuss LTV.
Thomson-CSF officials said the French company was working to address the
DOD's security concerns and had put forward new measures to satisfy it.
Analysts have said Thomson-CSF might be obliged to manage LTV through an
intermediary board, denying the company access to classified technology and
denying it operational control.
