FT  14 NOV 92 / Sport: Amateurs who learnt how to mutiny - Sailing
THEY CALL it port-rot. Too much time alongside the harbour wall rots men and
ships, say the old salts. The 10 yachts of the British Steel challenge leave
Rio tomorrow on the next leg of their round-the-world race. For most of the
140 sailors it cannot come too soon.
Seven weeks ago the fleet sailed out of the Solent, crewed by enthusiastic
amateurs. After 5,000 miles of racing these doctors, managers and firemen
now hang around the waterfront bars with the authentic mien of deep-sea boat
bums. All agree they have changed as people.
At Easter this year I visited the newly launched Heath Insured, sponsored by
the eponymous City brokerage. Snug in Brixham marina the crew were strangers
to one another; the voyage ahead of them merely words in Chay Blyth's
brochure. All they had in common was a willingness to spend Pounds 15,000
and the courage to walk away from ordinary life for nearly a year.
This week, sail-testing in the shadow of Sugar Loaf mountain, Heath's crew
had more about them than just deep suntans. Coming third in a highly
competitive leg had hardened them up and made them realise they had signed
on for a race rather than just a physically challenging round-the-world
cruise.
'A lot of the crew's personalities were not the same after a few weeks at
sea,' said Lisa-Marie Wood, in normal life a superintendent of a Cambridge
nursing home. 'We weren't as caring of one another. We shouted, and Pleases
and Thank Yous disappeared.
'I lost my temper and flew at someone for the first time in 14 years. I
couldn't bring myself to say sorry the next morning. It wasn't until we got
to sea that I felt how much everyone on board, especially our skipper,
wanted to win this thing.'
Blyth is himself surprised at how intense the competitive ethos has become.
'We thought we were putting together a round-the-world adventure, within the
structure of a race,' he observed in the Yacht Club Rio de Janeiro. 'With
hindsight we might have put in a few more controls to keep the pressure,
both from sponsors and internally, at bay.'
Adrian Donovan, skipper of Heath Insured, is experienced both in the charter
and racing world. He is accustomed to having paying guests aboard; surprised
at what happens when they start wanting to win.
'They could all sail to a greater or lesser extent when we started this
leg,' said Donovan. 'What they've acquired is the focus to race hard with
total concentration for weeks on end. I probably didn't steer for a total of
five hours out of the five weeks at sea.
'One of our crew, Bill Vincent, is the most placid man you could meet. But
when another yacht would look like catching us he would glare at it with
total hatred for minutes at a time. The Vincent Glare is now a legend on the
boat; we summon it up like voodoo.'
The sub-plot running along the Rio waterfront this week has been the 7,000
miles of sailing between here and Hobart. Every crewman will tell you he
knows dozens of others who are deeply apprehensive about facing nearly eight
weeks in the freezing cold and rough seas of the Southern Ocean.
As far as Cape Horn the leg is likely to be a gentle broad reach, with the
yachts able to fly their new asymmetric spinnakers. Once they turn to the
west the average wind speeds will creep towards 35 knots, with steady
oncoming 60 ft rollers. On deck it will be cold and nasty; down below far
worse. One briefing for the crews described it thus:
'Imagine standing outdoors for four hours in a thunder storm on a very cold
day. Rain is sheeting down. Every 30 seconds someone throws a bucket of
water over you. Even in oilskins and wellies you are going to get very wet
indeed.
'After four hours on watch you will be allowed to rest in the coldest room
in a small cramped building nearby, and then back outside for another four
hours of wetness. Oh, and it will be dark for much of the time.'
Perhaps surprisingly the dropout rate after one leg has been tiny. The
heaviest casualties have been among the 10 skippers; all professionals hired
by Blyth to lead from the front. In the past eight weeks one has been fired
and two quit for 'personal reasons'. It has begun to resemble a nautical
Agatha Christie novel.
'We'd prefer to have had 10 skippers start and the same 10 finish,' admitted
Blyth. 'Perhaps we should have had them in place even earlier. It's our
mistake as organisers if things do go wrong in that area.
'However, the fact that we've only had one crew member quit is amazing.
Remember these aren't yachties; they've got stuff back at the ranch; wives,
families, businesses.'
Blyth mentioned one crew-member, self-employed as many of them are, with a
business in possible terminal trouble back in the UK. 'He's agonising about
whether to go back or keep on with the race,' he said.
The most recent skipper to arrive is Devon yachtsman Peter Phillips, charged
with the task of gingering up a demoralised Rhone-Poulenc crew who have had
two skippers in just over a month. 'They're about to learn that this isn't a
nice game,' said Phillips. 'If anyone gets off this boat in Hobart it isn't
going to be me.'
Meanwhile, aboard the calm and well-scrubbed Heath Insured, Adrian Donovan
was about to take some sponsor's guests - Peruvian insurance executives -
for a sail around Copacabana Bay. 'I look at some of these boats and wonder
if they've got it in them to battle on,' he mused.
Chay Blyth designed the Challenge as 10 identical boats racing around the
world. Already the immutable facts of human nature are showing that, as
Orwell wrote, some are more equal than others.
