FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Southern Water hit by recession
SOUTHERN WATER, the water and sewerage company for much of the English south
coast, yesterday announced a small fall in interim pre-tax profits because
the previous figure was boosted by exceptional gains.
Profits before exceptionals, however, rose 8.3 per cent - helped by gains
from 'non-core' or unregulated businesses.
The pre-tax line fell from Pounds 61.4m, including a Pounds 6m exceptional
gain on the sale of investments in three statutory water companies, to
Pounds 60m in the six months to end-September.
Mr William Courtney, chairman, said he was pleased with the results, which
were affected by recession. Mr Martyn Webster, group finance director, said
recession cost the company about Pounds 2m because of lower metered water
usage from companies.
Southern also sharply increased its provisions against bad debts. Provisions
were expected to reach Pounds 15m by the financial year end compared to
Pounds 10m in April.
Turnover increased 10 per cent to Pounds 160.2m, helped by average price
rises of 9 per cent, while operating costs increased 9.6 per cent to Pounds
100.5m.
Southern's non-core activities, which include engineering, mineral water and
environmental businesses, increased operating profits 7 per cent to Pounds
4.5m and remained self-financing, Mr Webster said.
Capital expenditure fell from Pounds 80m to Pounds 63m after four coastal
schemes were held up by planning consent delays. Net cash holdings improved
from Pounds 1.7m to Pounds 13.4m, partly because of the delays.
Earnings amounted to 34.4p (35.3p). The interim dividend is lifted to 7.1p
(6.5p).
COMMENT
These results were as expected and the 2p rise to 455p owed more to a strong
sector. Profits, while respectable, were flattered by the hold-ups in
capital spending, which should delay the switch from net cash to net
borrowings until next year. Nevertheless, the non-core performance was
promising, especially since - unlike some other water companies - the
division is profitable after, as well as before, interest costs. Full year
forecasts of Pounds 118m put the shares on a p/e of 7, with a yield of just
over 6 per cent. While Southern's 'safety first' image will never win it a
premium rating, it provides a pleasant backwater for the cautious.
