FT  04 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Recruitment decline hits Hays
HAYS, the business services group, said it could see no clear measurable
sign of any improvement in the economy and forecast that recovery might be
delayed until the beginning of next year.
Strong performances by the group's commercial and distribution divisions
helped offset a plunge in profits from its personnel business, which
specialises in accountancy staff.
Pre-tax profits dipped from Pounds 27.5m to Pounds 26.8m in the six months
to December 31, although this was partly because of the ending of income
from an interest-capping policy, which last year contributed Pounds 1.8m.
Turnover was flat at Pounds 341m (Pounds 342m).
Stripping out the effects of the interest-capping policy, Hays said
operating profit after normal interest payments had risen by nearly 5 per
cent to Pounds 26.9m (Pounds 25.7m).
Operating profits at the personnel division fell from Pounds 6.7m to Pounds
2.5m, which Hays said reflected the depth of the recession and its
particularly harsh impact on the recruitment industry.
Mr Ronnie Frost, chairman and chief executive, said employee numbers in the
division had been cut from 1,500 to 850 over the last two years and 18
offices had been 'mothballed'. However, there had been no further
retrenchment in the half-year to December, and turnover levels now seemed to
have stabilised.
The distribution division's operating profits rose by 15 per cent to Pounds
16.2m, aided by an increase in the volume of goods distributed for both
Waitrose and Tesco.
Mr Frost said the recession had affected the performance of its wine and
spirits distribution and home delivery services, but chemical distribution
had traded well.
The commercial division's operating profits grew by 33 per cent, from Pounds
6.9m to Pounds 9.2m, although some Pounds 900,000 of that increase came from
three recently acquired companies.
Earnings per share were unchanged at 4.7p, but the group said its strong
balance sheet and cash flow enabled it to maintain its policy of increasing
dividends by 15 per cent, giving an interim of 1.5p (1.3p).
COMMENT
Mr Frost can reasonably claim that his 'three-legged stool philosophy' is
proving its worth, with the strength of the distribution and commercial
businesses providing much needed support for the personnel side. The
recruitment businesses provide the group's strongest claim to be a recovery
play and Hays claims that swift cost-cutting means that 75 per cent of any
new turnover will drop straight through to profits. The catch is that Mr
Frost seems to have written off hopes of much recovery in 1992 and Hays
shares have already outperformed the market by more than 40 per cent over
the last year. Forecast full-year profits of about Pounds 58m put the shares
on a multiple of over 18. That is not unreasonable for a company with Hays'
track record, but buyers at this level should be willing to wait for
long-term growth.
