FT  29 MAY 92 / Ghosts of the decade past: The Japanese banking system is
under strain from doubtful property loans and a sliding stock market
In Japan we have a saying that if you keep talking about ghosts in a dark
room, the ghosts get bigger and bigger and more fearsome.' That, says Mr
Yoshimasa Nishimura, deputy head of the banking bureau of Japan's Ministry
of Finance, is just the way foreigners are scaring themselves about the
health of the Japanese banks.
His former colleague Mr Toyoo Gyohten, now at the Bank of Tokyo, is even
more emphatic: 'There is absolutely no concern about a systemic problem of
the banking industry here,' he says.
Not everyone shares his view. Japanese bank shares have lost nearly 40 per
cent of their value since the beginning of the year, in anticipation of the
falling profits and rising bad-debt provisions which the top 11 commercial
banks reported yesterday. Western bankers have been asking their Tokyo
offices for urgent reassessments of the credit status of the Japanese banks
with which they do business. Do they know something about ghosts that the
ministry does not?
For part of the answer, talk to Mr Tatsunari Ushimaru of Teikoku Databank, a
Japanese credit-data service. As Japan's economy has slowed over the past
year, bankruptcies have risen, he says, but the debts of the average
bankrupt company have risen far faster, threefold in three years.
Mr Ushimaru calls these 'bubble bankruptcies', after the surge in asset
values that drove Tokyo land and share prices to unsustainable heights in
the late 1980s. Shares have since halved and property values have dropped by
a third - and speculators are paying the price. So are their banks.
The Ministry of Finance says the 21 big Japanese banks have non-performing
loans worth perhaps Y7,000-Y8,000bn, some 2-2 1/4 per cent of total assets
of Y350,000bn. Bankers in Tokyo estimate that loans worth Y56,000bn may
eventually run into problems; some economic analysts put the figures higher
still. Even if loans turn sour, however, most of the money lent may be
recoverable in time. The question for the banks is how much - and how long
it will take.
A Bank of Japan official says the bad debt problem is 'serious but not
lethal'; Mr Makoto Utsumi, special adviser to the finance minister, talks of
'a few years in a very hot tub' for the banks.
The exact temperature of the water is still unclear. Japanese banks
recognise loans as non-performing only when no interest has been paid for
six months. The close ties between lender and borrower often lead the banks
to cut interest rates for a troubled debtor - a concession that keeps the
loan out of the non-performing category. Bad-debt provisions are thus
traditionally low: yesterday, the 11 big commercial banks announced a
fivefold rise in provisions, but the combined figure was still only Y344bn.
One feature of the bubble years adds to the lack of clarity. The banks lent
Y80,000bn to non-bank finance companies, which then lent much of the money
on to property developers. 'When non-banks borrowed from a bank they would
not have to put up collateral,' says Mr Tokio Inoue, senior managing
director of Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank, 'but the bank would want to see that they
had adequate collateral for their own lending. Major banks typically lend up
to 70 per cent of the value of collateral, but in recent years non-banks
made loans of 100 per cent of the value of real estate.'
This means, he says, that the proportion of money recoverable is lower than
before, 'but time will solve the problem'. His confidence is shared. Mr
Kazuhiko Kasai, senior managing director of Fuji Bank, says: 'Even at the
current market price our troubled loans are fully covered by collateral.'
Up to a point. There is no real secondary market for buildings in Japan, so
the market price is an estimate rather than one derived from actual
transactions; it may not be very accurate at the moment.
Still, as Japanese bankers point out, there are very few 'transparent'
(unlet) buildings in Tokyo. 'We don't have as serious a situation in the
real estate market as in the City of London, New York, or Melbourne,' says
Mr Yoh Kurosawa, president of the Industrial Bank of Japan. 'The problem
will be over in one to two years.'
Bad loans are only one of the banks' problems, however. Just as important is
the way the sliding stock market affects the capital adequacy standards of
the Bank for International Settlements, which are due to take effect next
year. These standards require international banks to have capital equivalent
to 8 per cent of assets. Half that capital must be 'tier 1', shareholders'
equity; the other half is 'tier 2', such as subordinated debt.
Ten years ago, when the capital standard was first proposed, Japanese banks
had tier 1 ratios of about 2 1/2 per cent. They had one advantage, however:
they could count 45 per cent of unrealised gains on their equity portfolios
as tier 2 capital. As stocks soared in the late 1980s, the banks' share
portfolios soared in value, boosting tier 2 capital; and they were able to
issue large amounts of equity, boosting tier 1.
Now that process has gone into reverse, as the stock market has fallen.
Unrealised gains for the 21 big banks have dropped by two-thirds, to
Y17,000bn in March 1992; and the window for raising equity has slammed shut.
Achieving BIS standards next March depends critically on the stock market.
With the Nikkei below 17,000 - as it was in April - many big Japanese banks
would not meet the new standard. Above 18,000, the level seen for much of
May, most of them do. Yesterday, the Nikkei closed at 17,931.25.
What if the stock market falls again? One fear, heard in Europe or the US
rather than in Tokyo, is of a downward spiral: to shore up capital, banks
liquidate part of their equity portfolios, but that pushes the market down
further, forcing the banks into more share sales, leading to a further
market decline, and so on down to disaster.
The big banks did sell some of their share portfolios in March, says the
Bank of Japan. But a full-scale liquidation is unlikely. Those equity
shareholdings represent important links in the web of cross-holdings
characterising Japanese industry.
'We have 1 per cent of Japan Inc in our portfolio, says Mr Reese Harasawa of
Mitsubishi Bank. 'I don't think we'll be changing that.' Sales of the banks'
core equity holdings would totally change banking relationships, he says.
The bank has tried to find shares to sell, such as those of unprofitable
customers. 'To our regret, the number of shares we could identify in this
category was very small.'
Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank's Mr Inoue cites other possible changes. For example,
when a Japanese bank makes a loan, the borrower must usually re-deposit a
chunk of the money with the bank. Such 'compensating balances' make up 10-20
per cent of the big banks' total deposits, he says. Eliminating these and
the corresponding borrowing would lower the banks' assets and stretch
capital further. 'I hope we do not have to do this,' says Mr Inoue, 'because
it might jeopardise customer relationships. But it may be a final resort.'
By such means, the banks are likely to squeak by the BIS ratios next March
even if the stock market weakens again. More generally, the Ministry of
Finance has guided the Japanese banking system so skilfully over the years
that it must be given the benefit of the doubt. No Japanese bank, large or
small, has failed since the 1930s.
None the less, the Japanese financial system is undergoing profound changes.
Some, under way in the mid-1980s but muffled by the bubble years, are
reasserting themselves.
One is a tug of war over the banks' profitability. As Japanese interest
rates are deregulated, the banks' cost of funds is rising; at the same time,
they will have to write off some of their 1980s lending. Both these will
reduce profitability. There are also forces pulling in the other direction,
however. Because the rates at which banks lend have been deregulated before
those they pay to retail depositors, they have been able to widen margins
sharply as the overall level of interest rates has fallen in the past year.
In the short run, underlying profitability is rising - yesterday the 11
biggest banks reported that 'net business profits', a measure of lending
profitability, rose 32 per cent last year. In the long run, the banks, like
other Japanese industries, are likely to place greater emphasis on profit,
less on volume.
This change stems in part from the second trend at work: a sharply higher
cost of capital for all Japanese businesses, not just the banks. In the
1980s, as soaring share prices allowed companies to issue large amounts of
stock, Japanese firms' cost of equity was about 4 percentage points points
lower than in the US, says a study by J P Morgan; now it is 1 percentage
point higher.
At the same time, banks must cope with the difficulties of slower growth. In
the late 1980s, Japanese bank assets grew at more than 12 per cent a year in
real terms. No other group of banks achieved even half that growth rate;
British banks grew at at 2 1/2 per cent, US banks at less than 2 per cent.
Last year Japanese banks' lending grew by only a nominal 2.9 per cent; at
Sakura Bank, loans actually fell.
The strains in the Japanese banking system have big implications for the
rest of the world. Japanese banks have been cutting back sharply on
low-yielding assets, especially overseas interbank lending. This has not
represented a net drain of capital to the world, however, because Japanese
banks have run down their overseas liabilities even faster than their
foreign assets.
As the Japanese pull back, there has been a marked impact on competition in
international banking markets, where margins are widening across the board.
This may be a lasting trend. Japanese banks clearly believe they were too
ambitious in their international activities in the late 1980s. Mr Nishimura,
of the finance ministry, says: 'Judging from results, probably the
international activities of Japanese banks were above the capabilities they
had at that time.' And Mr Ken-ichi Suematsu, president of Sakura Bank, one
of Japan's biggest, goes further: 'Most if not all of Japanese banks'
international activities, I feel, were a failure.'
'Japanese banks lacked due caution in doing business. They tried to get
involved in lending to big international projects without paying due
attention to profitability and local practices.' In ways like these,
Japanese bank managers will have to live with the ghosts of the 1980s for
years to come.
