FT  19 MAY 92 / The Week In Luxembourg: Greek car taxes are ruled to be
illegal - European Court
Greek rules for the calculation of a consumption tax on cars, which vary
depending on whether the cars are imported or domestically produced, are in
breach of EC Treaty rules against discriminatory internal taxes, the
European Court of Justice ruled last week.
The Treaty rules prohibit member state from imposing internal taxation on
products imported from other Community countries in excess of the tax
imposed on similar domestic products.
Greece first introduced legislation for a consumption tax on cars in 1976.
The legislation, which was added to in 1979 and 1986, calculated the base
price on which imported cars were taxed by taking the wholesale price of the
car in its country of production, together with the price of optional
extras. These prices were increased by 21 per cent for cars purchased
directly from the foreign car producer and by 23.2 per cent for cars
purchased from a foreign distributor.
These prices were further increased by 7 per cent to take insurance and
import costs into account. By contrast, cars made in Greece were taxed
simply on the base of their ex-factory price.
The Greek government argued that, in Greece, the car industry was not very
developed and that car producers there were used to selling their products
directly to the consumer without using distributors or agents. Because of
this, the producer's 'wholesale' prices included marketing costs which were
normally included at the retail sales level.
In order to create a level playing field between domestic and imported cars,
it was necessary to increase the base price on which the tax would be paid
to take account of the marketing costs which would be incurred by the
importer.
The Greek government also explained that the system was aimed at limiting
the possibilities for the deliberate and fraudulent under-valuation of
imported cars.
The ECJ reiterated its earlier jurisprudence, stating that the Treaty
provisions were breached if there was any disparity in the method by which
the tax was calculated for imported and domestic products, even if this only
led to a higher tax being imposed on the imported product in a minority of
cases.
To be compatible with the Rome Treaty, the measures in question had to
exclude all risk of discrimination. The burden of showing that the
legislation had no discriminatory effect lay on the Greek government.
The Rome Treaty's ban on discriminatory internal taxation has been applied
by the Court to car tax systems in several member states and many other
economic areas. Companies doing business in other Community countries should
always check that they were not victims of similar discrimination under
national indirect taxation regimes.
Commission of the European Communities v Greece, Case C-327/90, FC, 12 May
1992.
Opinions and Oral Hearings
The Court did not hand down any other judgments despite a busy week. Nine
opinions from the Court's six Advocates-General were delivered and the Court
held 10 oral hearings.
One important opinion delivered last week concerned the equal treatment of
men and women in the UK in national insurance contributions. The
Advocate-General considered that the fact that men in the UK have to pay
national insurance contributions for longer than women was not contrary to
EC law.
Given the anxiety in the pension industry following recent judgments from
the ECJ, notably the Barber case, the judgment in the present case will be
eagerly awaited.
Case C-9/91 The Queen ex parte The Equal Opportunities Commission v
Secretary of State for Social Security, 12 May 1992.
(The role of an Advocate-General of the ECJ is best described by stating
what it is not. The Advocate-General is neither a first instance judge nor
an amicus curiae and the opinion delivered by the Advocate-General is not a
preliminary ruling.
The Rome Treaty provides that the duty of the Advocate-General is to act
with complete impartiality and independence in making reasoned submissions
in open court, in order to assist the Court in reaching its judgments.
The Advocates-General, who enjoy equal status to the judges of the Court,
are not bound by the collegiate approach of the Court. Their opinions can be
wide-ranging and generally contain a summary of the facts of the particular
case, the relevant law, the parties' submissions and an opinion on the legal
issues raised.
Before he delivers his opinion, the Advocate-General will have listened to,
and may have questioned the parties at the oral hearing. The opinion is not
binding on the Court, but is frequently followed.)
The Court recently held an oral hearing which may require it to decide a
dispute between the UK government and the government of Gibraltar as to
whether Gibraltar has power to bring proceedings in the ECJ.
The case is concerned with whether Gibraltar is excluded from the 1989
Council Directive on inter-regional air services.
The hearing concerned the admissibility of Gibraltar's application. The case
has important implications for the UK and Spanish governments.
Case C-298/89 Government of Gibraltar v Council of the European Communities,
6 May 1992.
BRICK COURT CHAMBERS, BRUSSELS.
FT Law Reports
Following the introduction of the European Court column, FT law reports now
appear on Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays. Next week, the European Court
column will appear on Wednesday May 27 because of the UK bank holiday.
