FT  26 JUN 92 / A Wellcome on the doormat: Paul Abrahams examines the issue
of shares in the UK pharmaceuticals group
Mr John Robb, chief executive of Wellcome, the pharmaceuticals company, will
pack his bags today and head for his native Scotland. Edinburgh will be his
first stop on a round-the-world road show, taking in more than 16 cities
from San Francisco to Osaka. On his travels he aims to promote the sale of
at least 330m shares worth about Pounds 3bn.
Mr Lawrence Banks, head of corporate finance at Robert Fleming, the adviser
to Wellcome Trust, the charity which currently holds 73.5 per cent of
Wellcome, was optimistic about the offer yesterday. 'We have been pleased
with the level of interest both in the UK and internationally in this
first-rate pharmaceuticals company,' he said.
In spite of Mr Banks's rhetoric, the issue's success hangs in the balance.
Following last week's aborted flotation of GPA, the aircraft-leasing group,
the outlook for new issues has clouded over. The prospects for
pharmaceuticals groups are uncertain. Between 1985 and 1990 the world drugs
market grew on average by 13 per cent a year; industry forecasts put the
1990-95 figure at 9 per cent; the five years after that could see as little
as 5 per cent average growth.
Last autumn, when preparations for Wellcome's offer began, Mr Robb's sales
task appeared easier. Pharmaceuticals shares were star performers on global
markets. Between January 1990 and December 1991, British healthcare stocks,
driven by American buying, outperformed the UK market by 65 per cent. Over
the same period, American drugs stocks outstripped the US market by 55 per
cent.
The reasons were clear. Ageing populations in developed countries ensured
that demand for drugs continued to grow even during recession. That
guaranteed earnings growth far in excess of that experienced by other
sectors.
But drugs stocks have now fallen from grace. Since January, US
pharmaceuticals shares have underperformed the market by nearly 20 per cent.
American investors, noting the apparent upturn in the US economy, have
switched from recession-proof stocks into those that perform better during
recovery. Wellcome has seen a similar shift in the UK. Its shares have
fallen from Pounds 11.26 before the issue was announced on March 2 to 914p
yesterday.
Investors' enthusiasm has also been dampened by the increasingly hostile
environment for drugs companies. Costs associated with the research,
development and marketing of drugs are rising fast because drugs must go
through expensive licensing procedures in individual countries at the same
time. Meanwhile revenues are threatened by worldwide downward pressure on
drugs prices as governments struggle to contain ever-growing health
expenditure.
Pharmaceuticals earnings have started to suffer. Some US groups had
disappointing first-quarter results this year. Shares in Bristol-Myers
Squibb, the world's third-largest drugs company, fell 10 per cent on June 2
after it warned that sales growth for the second quarter would be less than
5 per cent.
Against this difficult background Mr Robb must set out his case. First, he
must convince doubting audiences that he has adopted the right strategy for
Wellcome to escape the twin pressures of rising costs and falling prices;
and he must answer misgivings about any perceived company weaknesses.
The most crucial part of his tour will start next Friday when Mr Robb starts
his US campaign. At least 80m shares, worth at present about Dollars 1.3bn,
have been slated for American investors. Morgan Stanley, the US investment
bank advising Wellcome, will be charged with the successful selling of such
a large volume.
Although the issue is only half of the US's largest public stock offer last
month, when General Motors raised Dollars 2.14bn, the British company is not
widely known in north America. Only 2 per cent of its stock is owned in the
US, compared with about 26 per cent of Glaxo, the UK pharmaceuticals group,
and about 32 per cent of SmithKline Beecham, the Anglo-American company.
Another problem for Mr Robb's US campaign is that Wellcome's price-earnings
ratio is slightly higher than that of Merck, the world's largest drug
company and last year one of US investors' favourite stocks.
Mr Steve Plag, pharmaceuticals analyst at County Natwest, the only important
UK broker not directly involved in the issue, explained: 'On my calculations
Wellcome is on a prospective price-earnings ratio of 22, whereas Merck is on
20 and Glaxo is on 18. The question is whether US investors will be willing
to buy a stock on a higher ratio than Merck.'
Nevertheless, Mr Robb can point to several factors in his company's favour.
Wellcome is the fastest-growing of the world's 20 largest pharmaceutical
companies. Over the past five years it has enjoyed the highest average
annual earnings-per-share growth rate of any big pharmaceutical company -
some 30.3 per cent compared with 17.6 per cent for Glaxo and 15.7 per cent
for SmithKline Beecham.
In the short term, in spite of difficult conditions, Wellcome's earnings
growth looks assured. S G Warburg, the company's broker, forecast in its
most recent circular that sales from continuing operations are set to grow
at 16 per cent a year over the next three years. Meanwhile operating profit
margins over the same period should increase from 24.6 per cent to 29 per
cent.
The strongest card in Mr Robb's hand is the company's ability to withstand
pricing pressures. During the past six months, sales increased 21 per cent
over the same period of 1991. But only 3 percentage points came from price
increases. The rest was generated by volume growth.
'There's little disagreement that Robb and his new management team have done
an excellent job and that earnings growth looks strong for the next two
years,' said Mr Plag. 'The problem is what happens beyond that. There is a
significant risk that earnings growth may start to decelerate.'
Mr Plag claimed that the two main motors for earnings growth - the company's
sales of less profitable subsidiaries, and Zovirax, the anti-viral treatment
 -will start running out of steam soon.
Unusually for such an 11-year-old product, Zovirax's sales are still growing
fast. But growth is likely to slow in the mid-1990s despite Wellcome's
acquisition of licences around the world for Zovirax to treat diseases such
as chicken-pox and shingles. The drug's patents expire in Germany in 1993,
followed by the UK in 1995 and the US - where 39 per cent of sales are made
 -in 1997.
The patent expiries could be significant because much of Wellcome's growth
derives from Zovirax. Mr Plag estimates the product could account for more
than 40 per cent of sales growth next year.
For long-term prosperity Wellcome is dependent upon the development of new
products to replace existing earners. The company's strong research base is
clearly crucial, and Mr Robb says R&amp;D investment will remain at about 14 per
cent of sales for the foreseeable future.
Since joining the company from Beecham, where he was consumer products
executive, in 1989, Mr Robb has tried to integrate R&amp;D more closely into the
marketing effort. Symbolically, the group marketing operations have been
moved to the Beckenham R&amp;D site, providing far closer co-operation between
the two divisions.
'Marketing is terribly important,' he said. 'We used to think if we got the
research and development right the products would sell themselves. We have
to market ourselves aggressively.'
Rather than building up expensive marketing networks, however, the group is
turning to co-marketing agreements with other companies. It has initialled
deals with Hoechst in Germany, Sigma Tau in Italy and Sumitomo in Japan to
help market Zovirax.
Last spring the company conducted the most thorough review of its R&amp;D
projects it had undertaken. Its aim was to avoid research on scientifically
interesting but commercially fruitless compounds. As a result, numerous
products were dropped, leaving resources for fewer but potentially more
lucrative drugs, such as Atovaquone, Wellcome's medicine for Aids-related
pneumonia.
Mr Robb has also moved to set up clinical trials simultaneously in Japan,
Europe and the US for Wellcome's new herpes treatment, known as 256.
Previously such trials were carried out consecutively, leading to long gaps
between approval in each market. Project teams have been established to
anticipate potential delays with the regulatory authorities. Mr Robb's hope
is that 256 could be rolled out into the world's three largest market's -
the US, Japan and Europe - within 72 months. It took 11 years to obtain all
Zovirax's licences.
In spite of Mr Robb's efforts, weaknesses remain. Wellcome's corporate tax
rate, for example, is relatively high because it has not moved parts of its
manufacturing base to countries such as Singapore and Puerto Rico, which
have liberal tax regimes. The group pays 36.5 per cent of its profits in
tax, in contrast to Glaxo's 28 per cent and Merck's 26 per cent. S G Warburg
said in its circular that it expects Wellcome's tax burden to increase by 1
percentage point this year.
Another concern is Retrovir, Wellcome's anti-HIV drug. Its patent is being
challenged by Barr Laboratories, a US generics group which is seeking to
market its own version of the drug.
'Wellcome's case is technically strong, but the case will be decided by a
North Carolina jury next year,' said Mr Plag at County Natwest. 'Both
Retrovir and Aids are emotive issues and the outcome is by no means certain.
If Wellcome loses, the group's earnings growth could fall significantly
after 1994.' Although the drug has a high name recognition, it represents
only 14 per cent of group sales.
Robert Fleming's Mr Banks will have to wait until July 24 when the offer
closes to see whether his optimism is justified. As Mr Robb jets round the
world his marketing skills are likely to be much in demand. Despite the
questions surrounding Wellcome's long-term growth, they are likely to ensure
the issue succeeds.
