FT  27 JUL 92 / Arts: A master of the material world - Architecture
'THE BASIS of engineering is the knowledge of the materials being used:
knowledge of what they are made of, how they are made, how they are shaped,
how they stand up to stress, how they break, how they catch fire, how they
react to all the agencies of ruin which are perpetually nibbling at them,
how in due course they fall down. This is the true basis of engineering.'
These words of a famous engineer, A. J. Harris, were written in a paper
called, 'Architectural Misconceptions of Engineering'. He went on to explain
why he thought that engineering was an art and not a science. He might have
been writing about the philosophy behind the work of Peter Rice, a very
distinguished engineer who has won this year's Royal Gold Medal for
Architecture.
It is very unusual but not inappropriate for an engineer to win this premier
award; of all the great practising engineers Peter Rice certainly deserves
it because a great deal of contemporary architecture would not exist without
him. There is an opportunity to see his work in London at the moment at an
exhibition at the Royal Institute of British Architects at 66, Portland
Place, London W1, which is on view during the dog days of summer until
August 25.
He has called his show 'Exploring Materials'. It is no dull display of
technical ephemera, but rather an insight into the creative processes of
engineering that lie behind many important new buildings. The Opera House in
Sydney, Australia; Lloyd's of London; the De Menil Collection in Houston,
Texas; La Villette and La Defense in Paris; the Pavilion of the Future in
Seville, Spain, and many more. Each one of these remarkable buildings
demonstrates that the process of conceiving a structure is in itself an art.
I think that this is true because the whole process of structural
engineering is not simply the product of deductive reasoning but is also the
response to an inspiration or an intuition. The question of whether it is
the architect or the engineer who is the true artist is more difficult to
settle. Did the inspiration for the dramatic concrete sails of the Sydney
Opera House come from Jorn Utzon, the architect, or from Peter Rice, the
engineer? When you look at the daring spans of bridges in the Alps by the
Swiss engineer Maillart, or the drama of engineering works by Isambard
Kingdom Brunel or Thomas Telford, there is no doubt that they are works of
artistic and scientific genius.
But the artistic inspiration is also a manifestation of the engineer's
search for truth. By examining materials for their reaction to torsion,
compression, tension or bending, man is engaged in the search for truth.
There is a diagram that can be drawn that explains the links between art,
science and technology in the conception, creation and building of a form.
Peter Rice's exhibition, and indeed his life's work, makes this process
clear to the layman.
Perhaps engineers do not receive the credit they deserve because they are so
often seen as collaborators, rather than creators. This is unfair because
there is no doubt that engineers play a fundamentally creative role in the
creation of original architecture. The reason for the dim public perception
of engineering is because there are so many easily visible new buildings
that are the result of neither architecture nor engineering - they are the
product of the catalogue of the international building industry. It is the
standardised mediocrity of so many building components that is the bane of
the life of any good and innovative engineer or architect. Why else do we
look at the Palm House in Kew Gardens or the glories of the roof of London's
Paddington Station and wonder why we seldom do things so well today?
Speed has a lot to answer for. Time is money, as we are always being told,
and that attitude takes its toll on the quality of both design and building.
What the experimental nature of the work of someone like Peter Rice shows is
that, in the excitement of analysing new ways of designing structures, he
has succeeded in breaking out of industrial monotony. His design efforts at
the Sydney Opera House, for instance, have resulted in a building that is as
innovative as an early Gothic cathedral. By breaking the moulds of
structural predictability Peter Rice is on the path of art.
One of the architects that is especially known for his collaborations with
Peter Rice is Renzo Piano, the Italian architect. He was responsible, with
Rice, for the brilliant design of the De Menil Art Gallery in Houston which
used revolutionary materials - ferro-cement and ductile iron - in a
revolutionary way.
There are two more Piano/Rice collaborations on the way. The great new
airport in Japan, the Kansai International Airport, which looks like a giant
bird or aircraft landing on a new artificial island, promises to be one of
the great new buildings of the world. In a very different vein, a church
dedicated to the stigmata saint Padre Pio in Puglia, in Italy, will be built
of stone and will probably be a great domed basilica that can withstand
earthquakes. There is a rare opportunity in the RIBA exhibition to see work
in progress at a very early stage.
Peter Rice's work demonstrates that engineering, art and architecture form a
unity and that contemporary building of any quality demands an understanding
of all three activities. He is the enemy of standardisation and on the side
of true creation.
