FT  25 SEP 92 / Conduct 'clearly not acceptable'
THE Department of Trade and Industry's report into Blue Arrow, published
yesterday, finds that the conduct of Mr Tony Berry 'was clearly not
acceptable conduct for someone in a position of authority in a public
company'.
The broad conclusion of the 'extraordinary corporate story' described in the
report is that Mr Berry was not sufficiently accountable to the board and
had an ambivalent attitude to non-executive directors. He also had
insufficient regard for his statutory obligations as a director and for
regulatory matters concerned with the company.
Much of the report is devoted to the circumstances of the transaction that
brought Blue Arrow into the public arena - a Pounds 25m loan by Blue Arrow
in 1988 to a company controlled by Mr Peter de Savary.
The loan was undertaken in the hope that it would provide enough profits to
defray the costs of the involvement of Blue Arrow Challenge, a subsidiary of
the company, in the America's Cup yacht race. But the terms of the loan,
which related to a property deal at Canvey Island in Essex, aroused
controversy because it appeared highly speculative. Moreover, the
transaction was entered into without the board's approval and without
disclosure to shareholders or the Stock Exchange.
The most serious criticisms levelled at Mr Berry concern breaches of
fiduciary duty to Blue Arrow, including: 'Deliberately making two misleading
statements to the board concerning the Canvey transaction.' The inspectors
conclude that Mr Berry's assertion that the investment was secured by a
guarantee from Mr de Savary was deliberately misleading. They say he misled
board members by failing to tell them that Mr de Savary required exchange of
contracts within a few days.
Concluding the Canvey transaction 'despite the absence of board approval and
without authority'.
'Deliberately omitting to inform the board about the revision to the Blue
Arrow Challenge shareholders' agreement.' The inspectors conclude that Mr
Berry failed to tell the board that he had committed Blue Arrow to a further
Pounds 15m expenditure on the America's cup because it could affect the
response to the Canvey transaction.
'Not bringing to the board transactions in which he had an actual or
possible conflict of interest and duty.'
That criticism applied to a joint venture agreement to build a leisure
complex in Portugal, which involved a business associate of Mr Berry called
Mr Hobday who would have gained financially if the project had proceeded. Mr
Berry was relying on repayment of Pounds 500,000 from a personal joint
venture with Mr Hobday to allow him to increase his personal shareholding in
Tottenham Hotspur Football Club, where he was a director, says the report.'
The culmination of this corporate transaction could have assisted, in some
way at least, Mr Hobday's ability and/or willingness to pay the Pounds
500,000 due to Mr Berry,' the report concludes.
Possible conflict of interest was also said to have applied to a series of
transactions with Tottenham Hotspur, the report says. It concludes that Mr
Berry failed in his fiduciary duty by failing to bring these transactions to
the board's attention. It also finds that he attempted to use Blue Arrow as
a repository for disposing of shares in Spurs when financial difficulties
hindered him paying for them personally. Again, he did not take the matter
to the Blue Arrow board.
The inspectors were also concerned about certain dealings between Mr Berry
and Mr Michael Ashcroft, a long-standing friend and an entrepreneur. They
say they failed to get a satisfactory explanation from both Mr Berry and Mr
Ashcroft concerning the timing, amount and the prompt payment of an invoice
from Mr Ashcroft.
The inspectors conclude that, to an extent, Mr Berry was a victim of
circumstances. They note that he was under increasing personal and business
pressure involving events outside his control. The report concludes,
however, that although these factors partly explained Mr Berry's actions, it
did not excuse them.
Blue Arrow. HMSO. Pounds 55.
