FT  03 OCT 92 / Man in the News: Independent turn of mind - Sir Nigel
Broackes
Sir Nigel Broackes, chairman of Trafalgar House, was his charming self when
the Keswicks called by early Thursday afternoon to alert him that Hongkong
Land had bought just under 15 per cent of his company and was about to
tender for another 15 per cent.
As soon Sir Nigel had shown the Hong Kong property owners the door he
launched into a tirade against their move, which he yesterday described as
'trying to get effective control without paying a bid premium'.
A Trafalgar executive said: 'Sir Nigel has been around a very long time. He
knows everyone in the City and will call in favours if he needs to. The
Keswicks would be foolish to underestimate his capacity to fight.'
But the problem for the 58-year-old chairman is that it is by no means clear
to whom he can turn. Five of his 10 biggest institutional shareholders
yesterday warmly welcomed the move by Hongkong Land. If their comments are
to be believed, Mr Simon Keswick, chairman of Hongkong Land, and Mr Henry
Keswick, chairman of Jardine Matheson Holdings, are a good deal more popular
that Sir Nigel.
Several businessmen who know him regard him as somewhat pompous and
occasionally complacent. One, who could have been expected to provide moral
support, said Trafalgar's situation was sad but was partly the chairman's
own doing. 'He chose to establish all these property joint ventures which
have turned out to be such bad news for the company.'
Just over a year ago when Trafalgar was valued at more than Pounds 2bn,
compared with Pounds 600m today, Sir Nigel felt confident in rejecting an
offer of co-operation with another big company that he might welcome today.
Lord Hanson, chairman of the Anglo-US conglomerate, who has known Sir Nigel
for years, asked him at a lunch whether there was any way in which the two
companies could work together. Nothing specific was mentioned. Sir Nigel
replied that there was no scope for a relationship.
Although the Hanson approach may not have been to Sir Nigel's liking, he has
indicated that he would like to sell some of Trafalgar's assets. However,
Lord Sterling, a contemporary and chairman of Peninsular and Oriental Steam
Navigation, which was the subject of a failed bid by Trafalgar in the early
1980s, appears unlikely to come to his aid by buying, for example, the fleet
of ships that Trafalgar's chairman is so keen to sell. Lord Sterling,
nevertheless, attests to Sir Nigel's ability for original thinking. 'He has
a most interesting strategic turn of mind.'
A stockbroker who has known Sir Nigel for more than 20 year says he is still
'very much the fighter he always was', and will still be able to rely on the
help of his influential City advisers, Kleinwort Benson, Lazard Brothers,
Cazenove, and UBS Phillips &amp; Drew.
The broker added: 'You only have to read his autobiography, A Growing
Concern, to realise that Sir Nigel does not give up easily. He will be
determined to fight Hongkong Land tooth and nail.'
As an only child, as were both his parents, he has always been determined to
get his own way. His upbringing was relatively harsh. In his autobiography
he describes his father as 'an extremely tough man' who would beat him for
misdemeanors such as dismantling the HMV gramophone. He was just eight when
his father died. 'My small world disintegrated,' he wrote.
Educated at Stowe public school, where he never got on well with his
teachers, he soon realised he was ambitious and could get his own way. He
left at 16. He went on to lose almost all of a Pounds 30,000 inheritance by
the time he was 23, on bad property deals. But just when he desperately
needed a break, he injected his last remaining property asset, a block of
seven flats in London's Great Cumberland Place, into the fledgling
Trafalgar.
He went on to become Trafalgar's managing director at 24, was a millionaire
four years later and chairman of the company by 35. A tall, imposing man,
with a gravelly voice, Sir Nigel had little difficultly in making his
presence felt.
He was never a hands-on manager. Lord Matthews, who was managing director
and then chief executive of Trafalgar House in the late 1970s until he
retired in 1983, says:
'What did Sir Nigel do? Good question. He was always there and had opinions
on things. I was influenced by what he had to say. We were a team; I did the
work and he contemplated the future from his office. He has never been one
of the world's great workers.'
Sir Nigel believes Lord Matthews is 'slightly exaggerating'. From 1963 to
1969 he says he was 'very much a hands-on manager'.
Lord Matthews says he found it difficult to understand what Sir Nigel's
interests in life were, except for an enjoyment of the trappings of a rich
man. In his autobiography, Sir Nigel describes the importance of those
trappings, which include an Oliver Hill-designed house in Chelsea Square, a
weekend retreat in Oxfordshire, a mansion near Nice and a yacht anchored in
the Mediterranean. He said yesterday that as chairman of the Crafts Council
and director of the Maritime Museum, he also had many cultural interests.
It would be a mistake, says Lord Matthews, to underestimate him. 'He is a
shrewd man; he is not a chap to play poker with.'
Perhaps Sir Nigel's greatest test will be to ensure that Trafalgar's board
is seen to be united. It is an open secret that Sir Nigel has not always
seen eye to eye with Sir Eric Parker, chief executive. Lord Matthews says:
'I think Eric, who is a first-class accountant, is resentful of the fact
that he has to do all the work.'
Sir Eric yesterday confined his comments to the fact that over the 27 years
he has known Sir Nigel the two men have had vigorous 'discussions . . . but
the board is at one.'
Since Hongkong Land launched its dawn raid on Trafalgar, Sir Nigel has
chosen to stay out of the limelight. 'That,' said one of the group's
financial advisers, 'is confirmation that Sir Nigel has decided that the
best way to avoid reports of boardroom splits is let his chief executive do
the running. He will do anything to help Trafalgar remain independent.'
