FT  26 MAY 92 / Austria prepares for political fall-out after poll: The
presidential election which started with a whimper and ended with a bang
THE Austrian presidential elections started with a whimper and ended with a
bang.
A campaign devoid of controversy resulted in a political earthquake at the
weekend when Mr Thomas Klestil of the conservative People's party defeated
his Social Democratic opponent, Mr Rudolf Streicher, with the largest margin
ever.
Mr Klestil, a career diplomat, scored 56.85 per cent in the run-off against
43.15 per cent for Mr Streicher. Mr Klestil swept all nine federal states,
including the city of Vienna, a traditional socialist stronghold.
The outcome of the vote is a big setback for Chancellor Franz Vranitzky's
Social Democratic party, which had counted on an easy victory when it
nominated a hesitant Mr Streicher, the popular minister of transportation,
as its candidate for the largely ceremonial post.
Mr Streicher was still ahead of Mr Klestil by a narrow margin in the first
round of voting on April 26, but in the following weeks his campaign petered
out. In contrast to the Social Democrat's lacklustre performance, a spirited
Mr Klestil flourished on the campaign trail and managed to present himself
as the candidate who was above party ties.
The failure of Mr Streicher to mobilise the Social Democratic party base
points to structural problems in the leftist camp - the vote was largely a
triumph of image over traditional party loyalties. According to surveys,
voters believed that Mr Klestil, a former ambassador to the United Nations
and US, would be best suited to repair Austria's relations with many western
countries following the damage of Mr Kurt Waldheim's six-year term in
office.
Mr Waldheim had been shunned by the US and many EC countries following
allegations that he lied about his activities as a German officer during the
Second World War. Mr Klestil is planning a sweep through all leading western
capitals to improve Austria's image and boost its chances for EC membership.
The election result is not likely to have an immediate effect on the grand
coalition between the Social Democrats and the People's party, but the
long-term fall-out could be substantial. Mr Klestil's victory has given a
much-needed boost to the People's party, which had suffered a string of
embarrassing losses at the hands of the right-wing Freedom party and its
populist leader, Mr Jorg Haider.
Mr Haider gave a qualified endorsement to Mr Klestil after his own candidate
was placed a distant third in the first round, fuelling speculation after
the poll that the election could lay the ground for a coalition between the
two conservative parties.
Erhard Busek, chairman of the People's party, remains a stalwart supporter
of a grand coalition. His hand has been strengthened by the performance of
his candidate.
