FT  03 DEC 92 / Engineers divert river in race to shore up weakened dam:
Kerin Hope watches as Montenegro tackles an environmental hazard
ENGINEERS have held off the threatened collapse of a dam holding back
millions of tonnes of toxic mining waste by diverting a river in the
mountains of the Yugoslav republic of Montenegro.
But United Nations advisers have warned that a 150-metre length of the
600-metre dam is still in danger of crumbling.
'It's against all theory that this part should still be standing,' said Mr
Thomas Dolder, a Swiss civil engineer. 'It has to be filled at once,
otherwise even heavy rain could be disastrous.'
The weakening of the dam has turned into a major environmental hazard for
the Danube river system. Environmentalists have warned that if the dam
collapses, the mountain of toxic sludge it has been holding back will poison
the Tara river and eventually the Danube.
The 12-metre high dam, made of compacted sand and gravel, rises in a
mountainous gorge at Mojkovac in Montenegro, a republic which along with
Serbia makes up what remains of the old federation of Yugoslavia.
The dam was damaged by two flash floods on October 6 and 17, when surging
water swept away concrete slabs at its base.
But now the fast-flowing river Tara has been channelled to the other side of
the rocky gorge.
At the same time a temporary breakwater is preventing the dam from further
erosion, while workers race against time to build an access ramp to start
replacing 5,000 cubic metres of lost filling.
At the moment only a thin wall of gravel backed with plastic sheeting is
stopping some 3.5m tonnes of sludge containing lead, cadmium and cyanide
from slipping into the river.
It would be carried down the Tara into the Drina river and then the Danube,
poisoning aquatic life and drinking water.
The Tara, a Unesco-protected water flowing between two national parks, is
one of Montenegro's main tourist attractions.
The protests of people living at Mojkovac were ignored in 1976 when the
government decided to re-open an abandoned lead and zinc mine and when an
East German company built an ore processing plant just outside the town.
The mine was eventually shut down last year - after its toxic waste had
built up to the present proportions.
The waste pipes from the plant cover a 20-hectare area. A hard crust two
metres thick covers sludge 'with the consistency of pudding', Mr Dolder
said.
The sludge now appears to be slowly moving forward and adding to the
pressure on the weak dam, he said.
Despite efforts by local officials and the UN disaster relief organisations
to keep the dam repair programme on track, the slow pace of work is causing
anxiety.
The UN last week flew in 1,600 sealed cages, which will be filled with rock
and used as a core for three permanent breakwaters directing the river away
from the dam.
But the Montenegrin public works ministry, in charge of rebuilding the dam,
has had trouble finding local contractors who can provide bulldozers and
other earth-moving equipment.
'We are in the process of moving from state control to a private system in
the building industry and there is a lot of confusion,' said one official.
The United Nations lifted trade sanctions against Montenegro (which has been
allied with Serbia in the bitter fighting between Yugoslav ethnic groups) in
order to send in equipment for repairing the dam.
The operation is being hampered by a severe shortage of petrol, one of the
main results of the embargo against the rump state of Yugoslavia.
More requests for exemption from the UN embargo will have to be made so as
to procure additional equipment needed to complete the rebuilding work.
Drilling machinery and explosives, for instance, are in short supply at the
quarry, where hundreds of huge boulders will have to be extracted to shore
up the dam.
