FT  21 JUL 92 / Malaysia dam dispute opens floodgates of hostility: Claims
for compensation and revenue have held up a multi-million-dollar
hydro-electric project
A POLITICAL and economic battle over a multi-million-dollar dam project is
being fought in Malaysia's jungle. The adversaries are the federal
government, led by Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the combative prime minister, and
the local government controlled by the strongly Moslem Parti Islam
sa-Malaysia (PAS) in the eastern state of Kelantan.
Balfour Beatty, the British engineering company, is in the crossfire. It has
been awarded a substantial slice of the contractual work on the MDollars
1.5bn (Dollars 600m) Pergau hydro-electric dam project, backed by loans and
guarantees from UK and foreign banks, the Export Credits Guarantee
Department, and the Overseas Development Agency.
The fight centres on Kelantan's insistence that it is entitled to
substantial compensation and revenues associated with the dam project, which
will use water from the state's Pergau river. The compensation payment
sought by the state, one of Malaysia's poorest, is reported to be MDollars
90m, and more than MDollars 300m is wanted for water rights over the next 50
years from Tenaga Nasional, Malaysia's partially privatised electricity
utility.
Negotiations had been going on for several months but were broken off last
week when the Kelantan authorities blocked several roads leading to the dam
work site. All work stopped and more than 2,000 labourers were laid off.
The federal government said Kelantan's financial claims were unreasonable
and could set a precedent for a number of big development projects in other
states. But then, after talks between the Kelantan authorities and Tenaga
Nasional, an agreement was worked out and the barricades were taken down.
The federal government was not satisfied, however.
'Until we get assurances from the Kelantan government that there will be no
more disruption at Pergau, there will be no resumption of work,' said Dr
Mahathir. He refused to rule out the possibility of the project being moved
elsewhere.
In mid-1989 the Pergau dam contract was awarded to a consortium of Balfour
Beatty Cementation and the local Kerjaya Binaan group. At the time
opposition politicians and environmentalists questioned both the size of the
project and its environmental impact.
Tenaga Nasional says the 600MW dam is a vital component in its plan to
double Malaysia's generating capacity over the next decade and provide for
the needs of an economy growing by more than 8 per cent a year.
But the main battle has been between Kelantan and the federal government.
The PAS gained control of Kelantan from Dr Mahathir's United Malays National
Organisation in elections in late 1990. Although more than half Malaysia's
18.5m population is Moslem and Islam is the official religion, the country
is not an Islamic state. Freedom of religion is guaranteed under the federal
constitution.
Kelantan is mainly Moslem and earlier this year the authorities there
announced plans to implement hukum hudud, the traditional Islamic penal code
which can mean the stoning of adulterers and amputation of the hands of
thieves.
While implementation of such a measure would need a constitutional amendment
and would be unlikely to win the necessary two-thirds majority approval in
the federal parliament, the government has accused PAS of stirring racial
tensions and of frightening away foreign investors.
Mrs Rafidah Aziz, Malaysia's minister for international trade and industry,
says that while other states in Malaysia are attracting millions of dollars
of investment from abroad, investment in Kelantan is drying up. 'The
foreigners are worried about the proposed laws. They are no longer
interested in investing in Kelantan since it was taken over by PAS,' she
says.
Meanwhile the Kelantan state authorities accuse Dr Mahathir's government of
withholding federal funds from the state and intentionally discouraging
investment as punishment for voting in to power an opposition party.
Arguing for compensation for the Pergau dam project is one way Kelantan can
fight the federal authorities. Mr Nik Aziz Nik Mat, the state's chief
minister, says the federal government's unwillingness to pay compensation is
the equivalent of someone repeatedly going to a coffee shop, but refusing to
pay.
'It is not a question of barricading the roads, but it is our land that is
involved and we have the right to it,' he says.
