FT  16 JAN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Officials aware of uses for Iraqi
gun, MPs told - Trade and industry committee
BRITISH and US officials were told about the military uses of the Iraqi
supergun project before parts were delivered to Saddam Hussein's regime, the
project manager told MPs yesterday.
Dr Christopher Cowley said in written evidence to the Commons trade and
industry committee that Dr Gerald Bull, the inventor of the 'supergun', had
told British intelligence contacts about his work with Iraq in 1988.
He also claimed that in the same year Space Research Corporation, Dr Bull's
company, informed the US State Department about the project, which included
the design of a 210mm self-propelled gun, 'ballistic programmes', and the
supergun known as Project Babylon.
Mr Gordon Brown, shadow trade and industry secretary, said the claims
appeared to be at variance with previous official statements made to the
committee by the Department of Trade and Industry.
Mr Brown said last night: 'I am writing to the prime minister to demand an
urgent statement which makes clear exactly who knew what and when in
government about the export of supergun parts to Iraq, and whether, despite
an arms embargo and all previous statements to the contrary, the government
did indeed know that British exports were building up Saddam Hussein's
military machine.'
There was no response yesterday from Downing Street or the US State
Department.
The DTI said it had no comment but was willing to answer any further
questions from the committee.
In written evidence to the committee, Dr Cowley said that Dr Bull had openly
discussed his security contacts within International Military Services, a
government defence sales company, Rothschilds Bank, and the defence sales
department of Midland Bank.
He told the committee that he had been at a dinner in Baghdad with Dr Bull
and a senior official of Midland Bank in June 1988. Midland had secured most
of the British contracts with Iraq at that time, he said.
Midland said last night that it was a matter of record that the bank had led
a number of ECGD-backed credits to Iraq for the supply of goods and services
and pharmaceuticals.
It also denied financing any of the supergun contracts.
Dr Cowley, who was at one point arrested by UK customs officials and accused
of illegal arms exports - charges that were subsequently dropped - told the
committee that it had been Downing Street that decided that he should be
detained in jail after his arrest, although previously UK customs had
indicated to him that he was free to leave.
He admitted being aware that SRC had deceived Sheffield Forgemasters, the
company that made the barrels for the supergun, when it said that the
sections of the pipe were for the petrochemical industry.
He insisted that the Supergun programme itself was for launching a satellite
and had no military aims, An Iraqi official, he said, had negotiated with
Saudi Arabia for test projectiles to land in its territory.
But, he said, after he left SRC in May 1989 a subsequent order for a 350mm
gun barrel had gone from Iraq to Walter Somers, of Halesowen, one of the
British contractors involved. That, he said, had been for military use.
The committee was believed to be considering recalling company and DTI
officials.
