FT  11 MAR 92 / The Budget (Government Statements): Traders will face
reduced penalties - VAT Fines
FURTHER substantial reductions in VAT penalties were announced by the
chancellor. He also announced the publication of a consultation paper on
possible further, longer term reform of Serious Misdeclaration Penalty.
From March 11 1992 he proposes to reduce the rate of Serious Misdeclaration
Penalty, the penalty affecting traders who make errors in their VAT returns,
from 20 per cent to 15 per cent.
Also from March 11, when liability to a penalty is established, Customs will
not normally impose one unless the net tax underdeclared or overclaimed
exceeds Pounds 2,000 in a prescribed accounting period.
The cost of the changes to Serious Misdeclaration Penalty is estimated at
Pounds 25m in 1992-93. About 75 per cent of penalties currently assessed are
for misdeclarations below Pounds 2,000.
The chancellor also proposes to reduce the maximum rate of Default Surcharge
to 20 per cent. Default Surcharge applies to businesses which are late in
rendering returns and paying tax due, thus incurring a default. The new
maximum rate will apply to defaults incurred on or after April 1 1992.
Tax appeals
The chancellor proposes to give the Special Commissioners powers to award
costs where either party has acted wholly unreasonably in pursuing a tax
appeal. The Special Commissioners will also be given powers to publish their
decisions. Procedural rules for the hearing of tax appeals by the General
and the Special Commissioners will also be introduced. These changes are
planned to come into effect in April 1993.
The rules will aim to preserve the present informality of appeal hearings
before the General Commissioners, who hear the majority of tax appeals.
Hearings before the Special Commissioners, who normally hear only larger and
more complex appeals, are generally more formal and this will be reflected
in the rules.
The rules will give the Special Commissioners powers to award costs where
either party has acted wholly unreasonably in making, pursuing or resisting
an appeal. But as before, costs will not be awarded in hearings before the
General Commissioners. This will allow taxpayers to have their appeal heard
by the General Commissioners with no risk that costs may be awarded against
them.
Taxpayers will be able to choose to have their appeal heard by the Special
Commissioners, and to apply for costs if they win. The Special Commissioners
could also award costs against a taxpayer.
