FT  14 SEP 92 / Sobriety returns for Mideast talks: Roger Matthews sees the
euphoria subsiding ahead of today's negotiations
MIDDLE EAST peace negotiations should settle back into a more sober mood
today after the public, long-distance diplomacy of the past week. As the
five teams representing Israel, Syria, the Palestinians, Jordan and Lebanon
return after a 10-day recess to the State Department in Washington they will
be well aware that it will be impossible to maintain international
expectations at the levels encouraged by some of their political masters in
the past few days.
The underlying cause for celebration during the sixth round of negotiations
which opened on August 23 has been the defeat of the Likud government in
Israel in June. The Labour victory transformed the atmosphere at the talks
and opened a door that had been slammed shut on substantive issues involving
a trade of land for peace as demanded by UN Resolutions 242 and 338.
At one level this has led Mr Yossi Gal, the Israeli spokesman, to refer,
beamingly, to 'our Palestinian friends' and to admit to no more than 'slight
frustration' after a fruitless day at the negotiating table. At a less
visible level, it has led to the formal exchange of negotiating documents
for the first time since the process opened in Madrid last October. Both
developments are encouraging, but have to be seen against the sterility of
the last five rounds rather than as a guarantee of future progress.
Onlookers will increasingly have to be aware of at least three sets of
negotiations and the extent to which public utterances are tailored for
particular audiences. First, there are the Washington negotiations; next,
the public statements designed to influence domestic and international
public opinion; third, and most important, are the direct discussions
between government leaders such as the recent private dinner between
President George Bush and King Hussein of Jordan.
The past week has been dominated by public statements, primarily by Israeli
leaders in apparently euphoric mood about signs of Syrian flexibility over
the issue of the Golan Heights. Syria's position is now more evident: return
all of the Golan, every last square centimetre, and in return there can be a
peace treaty like that between Egypt and Israel in 1979. Senior US officials
do not doubt such a deal is possible.
The question in their minds is less whether Syrian President Assad would
sign on those terms but whether Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime minister,
will go beyond his stated readiness for 'territorial compromise' and can
carry the majority of public opinion sufficiently to offset the backlash
from settlers and his extreme right-wing opponents.
Talking up the prospects of a deal with Syria has another useful purpose for
Mr Rabin: it helps to unsettle the Palestinians, who always fear Syria, like
Egypt under President Sadat, could abandon them by signing a separate deal.
The problem is exacerbated because the Palestinian-Israeli talks are far
more complex and do not address the final status of the territories occupied
by Israel in 1967. The purpose of the negotiations is to agree only on a
five-year interim self-governing authority for the West Bank and Gaza. After
the first three years of that period negotiations will begin on the final
status of the territories.
The Palestinians are adamant that an elected self-governing authority cannot
be only the administrative arm of an occupying army: it must have some
legislative role and a start has to be made in checking the procedures
through which Israel is completing another 11,000 homes, which will push the
Jewish population to over 150,000.
Israel refuses to contemplate any legislative function for the Palestinians,
saying this would give them the taste of statehood, which is not on offer.
The first concrete step towards bridging that divide needs to be taken
before the sixth round ends on September 24 if a negotiating momentum is to
be achieved.
It is likely to come through agreement by the two sides on an agenda, which,
though in part a procedural document, also has political substance.
The signing of the first-ever agreed document by Israelis and Palestinians
would, say the optimists, make subsequent deals that much easier. 'I am not
an optimist,' said an Arab diplomat close to the Washington negotiations. 'I
am not a pessimist. I am a fatalist. When you look around at everything that
has happened in the world in the last few years it is obvious that these
people have to make peace. Everyone else wants them to. It's their fate. And
that's what we need to cling to when the going gets really rough.'
