FT  17 OCT 92 / UK Company News: Retailers must save themselves - John
Thornhill reports on Geoff Mulcahy's view of future trends
NEXT MONTH Mr Geoff Mulcahy will celebrate the tenth anniversary of his
leadership of the Kingfisher retailing group.
During his time at the top, Mr Mulcahy has steadily steered the group
through the 'feeding frenzy' of consumer spending that broke out in the late
1980s and the frantic frugality that has followed. In the process, he has
created one of the UK's biggest and most resilient retailers.
Born out of the 1982 buy-out of the UK arm of the Woolworths variety store
chain, the company has successfully expanded by squeezing its existing
assets and bolting on the B&amp;Q, Superdrug and Comet chains. Its market value
has grown from Pounds 150m to Pounds 2.7bn in that time.
But speaking at a Financial Times conference last month, Mr Mulcahy painted
a bleak picture of the future, warning of the strains likely to continue to
afflict the retailing sector even after the recession had subsided. His
bearish rhetoric was matched by his actions as he recently exercised his
options to sell Kingfisher shares, pocketing Pounds 1m.
In his conference speech and in a separate interview, Mr Mulcahy claimed
there had been a 'fundamental change in the dynamics of the so-called
consumer society'. The industry's obsession with continually asking when the
consumer upturn would arrive had blinded it to the underlying changes that
were taking place, he said.
'The ship's gone down and they're all clinging to the wreckage waiting for
the big white ocean liner called Recovery to come along, toss out the
lifeboats and sweep them all to safety,' he said. 'But instead of floating
about aimlessly waiting to be rescued from the shipwreck of recession, we
should be learning to live with the present conditions.'
This outburst of colourful rhetoric comes as something of a surprise from a
businessman who has built up a reputation for being laconic - even going so
far as to name his boat No Comment.
Dubbed Mogadon Mulcahy by one analyst for his dull delivery and famed for
his unnerving habit of mutilating paper clips during conversations, he
recoils from promoting his personality as was the habit of so many flashy
retailers of the previous decade.
But in many respects Mr Mulcahy now appears the man of the moment. The
retail heroes of the 1980s have all been forced to flee the scene. The
anti-hero is in the ascendant. At times, he gives the impression of quite
liking the recession; it presents him with a greater cerebral challenge.
Maybe it was because he came to the retailing industry relatively late in
his business life that he does not share the outlook of those almost born
into the trade. 'When we took over Woolworths we discovered a staff leaflet
saying that any employee sweeping the floors could rise to become chairman
We thought that was great until we realised that they viewed it not just as
an incentive but as a necessary qualification,' he says.
After a career working for Esso, Norton (the US industrial group), and
British Sugar, Mr Mulcahy has come to believe that retailing offers similar
challenges to any other business and ones that can be overcome by rational
analysis rather than instinctive responses. He believes the key determinant
of success in any industry is the ability to manage change.
In Mr Mulcahy's analysis, the rate of growth of consumer spending will be
far lower in the current decade while the challenges and costs will surely
increase. 'The demands of our customers for more convenience, wider ranges
and improved service - all at lower prices - mean one thing: lower gross
margins. Many analysts and fund managers have yet to come to terms with
this, but I firmly believe that the days of high gross margins have long
gone.'
He predicts there will only be a gradual increase in total consumer spending
over the course of the decade. While consumer credit exploded from Pounds
15.5bn in 1982 to Pounds 52bn by the end of the decade, he believes it will
grow far more slowly to about Pounds 70bn by the year 2000.
But changes in consumer lifestyles and attitudes will make customers far
more demanding, imposing additional costs on retailers. A higher percentage
of women will be employed full-time and have far less time to shop adding to
pressures for longer opening hours. The ageing population will lead to a
shift in cultural values with more discriminating worldly-wise shoppers: by
1996 the number of 35-59 year-olds in the UK will outnumber 16-24 year-olds.
The growth of 'green' consumerism will increase pressures on retailers to
scrutinise the environmental impact of their products and practices.
For retailers, Mr Mulcahy believes these strains will lead to a continuing
polarisation between the weak and the strong. Successful companies will have
to create virtuous profit circles by cutting gross margins, winning market
share, lifting levels of productivity and driving increased sales volumes
over the same space, or less - a tricky series of tasks in a sector still
suffering from over-capacity.
To succeed, he believes retailers will have to focus more rigorously on
narrowly-defined but growing markets seeking to establish market dominance.
He suggests that the focusing of the disparate Woolworths chain over the
last decade provides a template for what has to be achieved in the rest of
the Kingfisher group. 'It will be more about selling a lot of a little
rather than a little of a lot,' he suggests.
But Mr Mulcahy warns that retailers which fail to increase sales volumes to
offset the decline of gross margins will be be stuck in a 'doom loop' of
continuous contraction and cost-cutting from which it will be difficult to
escape.
City commentators suggest that Mr Mulcahy's analysis is likely to apply more
to mass consumer markets - such as DIY, electrical goods and toiletries in
which Kingfisher operates - than to specialist niche areas of the high
street which are more likely to be able to maintain high margins.
But Mr Mulcahy's remarks sound strangely reminiscent of an earlier era when
retailers - like Woolworths - derived great economies of scale from 'piling
it high and selling it cheap'. The future of retailing, it seems, lies in
the reversion to past practices - only, thanks to the wonders of information
technology, the execution of those principles can be startlingly more
efficient.
