FT  21 NOV 92 / Sweden EMS rebuff before flotation
SWEDEN was given a final rebuff in its efforts to link the krona to the
European Monetary System last Monday, just three days before a wave of
speculation forced the central bank to abandon its policy of pegging the
krona to the European currency unit.
The rebuff was delivered by the European Monetary Committee, the 26-strong
committee grouping senior EC treasury and central bank officials, which lies
at the heart of EC economic and monetary policy, senior officials in
Brussels and Stockholm said yesterday.
The rejection was a blow for Mr Carl Bildt, the Swedish prime minister, who
pushed for associate membership of the EMS to form links with a more stable
exchange rate framework ahead of Sweden's planned EC membership in 1995.
The disclosure that the EC appeared to have turned its back on the country
may spark controversy in Sweden, where opposition to Community membership
recently broke the 50 per cent level.
Mr Helmut Schlesinger, president of the German Bundesbank, yesterday
criticised as 'mistaken' Sweden's policy of trying to peg the krona to the
European currency unit.
The Bundesbank maintains that the Ecu is the wrong unit on which to base
either the European monetary system or economic and monetary union.
At a banking conference in Frankfurt, he said Sweden's decision to float the
krona could help correct 'misconceptions' about the fixity of European
exchange rates.
Mr Schlesinger called the Ecu 'a currency which doesn't really exist'.
Although he did not specify the D-Mark, he recommended a 'natural currency'
as the best yardstick for a currency like the krona.
Sweden's request for a more formal exchange rate link with the EMS dates
back to its decision in June 1991 to link the krona to the Ecu. Both Norway
and Finland prospective EC members, expressed interest in associate
membership of the EMS.
A Swedish official said the Swedish request for associate membership of the
EMS was not new, but last Monday 'the door was closed'.
