FT  30 MAY 92 / Compass poised to take lead in contract catering
COMPASS GROUP is poised to become the UK's biggest provider of meals in
staff canteens through the Pounds 500m-plus purchase of its bigger rival
Gardner Merchant from Forte, the hotels and restaurants group.
Its partner in the deal, paying between Pounds 50m and Pounds 100m, is ARA
Services, a private US company whose food services interests range from
provision of the traditional hot-dogs at US ballparks to official caterer
for the Barcelona Olympics.
It is expected to take Gardner's US business and enough of the UK corporate
catering contracts to fend off potential difficulties with the Monopolies
and Mergers Commission.
Mr Francis Mackay, Compass's chief executive, estimated recently that about
half the UK's Pounds 1.5bn corporate catering market is contracted out.
Gardner is the leader and its client list has included Cadbury Schweppes,
Barclays Bank and Pilkington. It is also the biggest catering contractor in
UK hospitals and schools, a market estimated at Pounds 3.3bn but where only
5 per cent has so far been contracted out.
Compass's biggest corporate customer is BT, with a catering turnover of
about Pounds 50m a year.
Mr Mackay reckoned that Compass and Gardner together took about 50 per cent
of the outside catering contracts, involving thousands of companies. The
threshold for arousing Office of Fair Trading interest in a deal is 25 per
cent for one company, and this could lead to a referral to the MMC. It is
understood that Compass has had talks with the OFT.
Compass will pay roughly Pounds 450m for the bulk of Gardner Merchant, which
last year made Pounds 47m operating profit on sales of Pounds 1.13bn. About
Pounds 220m of this was overseas and Mr Mackay stressed the advantages of
taking Compass on to the continent.
A rights issue to raise nearly Pounds 200m to help fund the purchase is
expected; the rest would be funded by debt. With its shares suspended at 492
1/2 p yesterday, Compass's market value was nearly Pounds 330m. Its annual
turnover in the year to September was Pounds 321m, on which it made an
operating profit of Pounds 38.1m and Pounds 32m before tax.
Forte will use the money to expand its brands internationally, including
motorway catering and the Travelodge and Posthouse hotel chains. Mr Rocco
Forte, chief executive, said the immediate effect would be to cut Forte's
debt-equity gearing from 43 per cent to 23 per cent.
The business being acquired by Compass includes airline catering and outdoor
events. Its Town and County subsidiary covers the Wimbledon tennis
tournament.
