FT  24 NOV 92 / European Market: Commission's powers upheld in telecoms
sector
The European Commission's powers under the Rome Treaty to ensure that EC
competition rules are applied to regulated industries throughout the
Community have been upheld by the European Court in an important series of
cases.
The cases, brought by Spain, Belgium and Italy, dealt with the Commission's
measures in the telecommunication services sector which were designed to
open up access to the market by abolishing all special or exclusive rights
relating to the supply of telecommunication services other than voice
telephony.
Among other things the measures also allowed users to terminate long-term
supply contracts once the special rights had been abolished.
The Court ruled that the Commission's powers were not limited to simply
surveilling rules already in existence but that it had a general right under
the Rome Treaty to implement new measures such as those under attack. The
fact that such a measure could have been implemented by the Council of
Ministers did not affect the Commission's competence to act.
The Court thus held that the Commission's measures were lawful and that the
exclusive rights of establishment and exploitation of telecommunications
services given to organisations by EC countries could therefore be
abolished.
However, the abolition of special rights was not lawful in that the
Commission had failed to define them precisely. The right to terminate
long-term supply contracts was also overruled on the ground that other Rome
Treaty provisions should have been used.
Joined Cases C-271/90, 281/90 and 289/90: Spain, Belgium and Italy v
Commission, ECJ FC, 17 November, 1992.
UK fishing licence conditions
overturned
UK FISHING legislation which places nationality and residence conditions on
fishing vessels operating from the UK has been overturned by the Court.
Under UK law, the granting of fishing licences was subject to certain
conditions, one of which was that at least 75 per cent of the crew of the
vessel seeking a licence had to be British citizens or EC nationals
ordinarily resident in the UK, excluding Spanish and Portuguese nationals
until January 1, 1993.
The Court said the exclusion of the Spanish and Portuguese nationals was
contrary to the Rome Treaty provisions on the free movement of workers, the
right of establishment and the freedom to provide services throughout the
Community. The residence requirement was also contrary to the same
provisions.
C-279/89: Commission v UK, ECJ FC, 17 November, 1992.)
Dutch old-age pension rules not discriminatory
THE COURT has upheld Dutch old-age pension rules, in spite of the fact that
their effect benefited men more than women. Dutch legislation provided that
individuals were entitled to an old-age pensions when they reached 65. This
pension could be increased if the pensioner had a dependent spouse who had
not yet reached 65 years. However, the amount of the increase was dependent
of the spouses's own earnings.
A Dutch man whose pension was reduced by virtue of the fact that his wife
was receiving certain state benefits, brought an action in the Dutch courts,
contesting the decision to reduce his pension and arguing that the national
rules were contrary to Community law, in that they benefited men more than
women and were thus discriminatory and unlawful.
The European Court held that men benefited more from the rules in question
than women, by virtue of the fact that husbands were generally older than
their wives and that therefore the rules were per se discriminatory.
However, the Court went on to find the rules were nevertheless objectively
justified in that, among other things, they formed part of the social policy
of the Netherlands and a certain margin of discretion was allowed in the
application of such rules.
C-226/91: Jan Molenbroek v Bestuur van de Sociaise Verzekeringsbank, ECJ
2CH, 19 November, 1992.
