FT  27 OCT 92 / Survey of Sri Lanka (10): Tackling poverty - Janasaviya
programme
MR Susil Sirivardana, commissioner of the Janasaviya (Poverty Alleviation)
Programme, laughed at the suggestion that he was a frustrated revolutionary.
After two hours discussing the plight of Sri Lanka's poor and the inequities
of its elite, this was a rare moment of light relief.
The Janasaviya programme, with a 1992 budget of SLRs4.9bn, was developed by
government in response to the 1987-89 People's Liberation Front (JVP)
left-wing insurgency. 'The JVP comes from the frustrated, polarised,
educated, rural youth,' explains Mr Sirivardana, who says that 15 years of
liberal economic policy has 'produced a polarisation of society and a
decline in human development'.
In the 1988 election, President Ranasinghe Premadasa ran on a platform of
poverty alleviation which promised to 'put people first, especially the poor
and the poorest of the poor'.
Janasaviya is the fulfilment of that promise and in Mr Sirivardana - who
participated and was jailed for his part in a JVP-inspired insurrection in
1971 - Mr Premadasa has chosen an emotionally committed administrator.
'With Janasaviya we told the poor 'This is not the old politicised, corrupt,
crooked, deal you are revolting against. If you are revolting against social
injustice, here you can create justice',' says Mr Sirivardana.
The programme involves almost 350,000 families and provides two forms of
government support. The families receive a a monthly entitlement of
SLRs1,458 with which to purchase specified consumer goods, such as food and
clothing, from co-operatives. In return, each family is asked to put in 20
days of community-related work.
Then, after two years on the programme, families become entitled to a
SLRs25,000 Janasaviya Entitlement Certificate. While this is not available
as cash, it pays interest of SLRs250 a month and can be pledged to a bank as
collateral for a loan.
In 1989, its first year of operation, the programme attracted the ire of the
World Bank. In its latest Sri Lanka report, the bank said Janasaviya
initially suffered 'two major shortcomings. . . First, it was not well
targeted to the poor. . . Second, the supposed production-orientation of the
programme was missing'.
Janasaviya has since been restructured. The screening process for deserving
families has been improved and the Janasaviya Trust, funded by donors
including the World Bank, has been set up to identify civil works projects.
These range from crop cultivation to local infrastructure projects.
According to the bank's report, the trust should ensure that 'those refusing
to participate in a productive activity would be dropped from the programme
immediately'. Mr Sirivardana recognises that the World Bank views some of
the programme's components as welfare and subsidy. 'It's not that for us',
he says.
He argues that Sri Lanka has suffered adverse domestic effects - a worsening
incidence of poverty and a deterioration in health and education services -
in its effort to become internationally competitive. 'I see it definitely as
a policy failure and preventable,' he says.
The criticism,which is not new of World Bank-sponsored economic adjustment
programmes, is supported by the facts. Between 1981 and 1985, the share of
national household income of the poorest third of the population dropped
from 15 per cent to 11 per cent, while the richest third grew from 52 per
cent to 62 per cent.
In the same period, economists estimate the purchasing power of the poorest
third of the population declined by about 10 per cent. In terms of minimum
calory requirements, a quarter of Sri Lanka's population remains below the
poverty line.
This is despite Sri Lanka's notable achievements in the sectors of health
and education. The nation retains probably the highest literacy rate of all
developing countries, with about 90 per cent of the population above the age
of 10 years officially literate.
Sri Lanka also has an impressive health record with an infant mortality rate
of just 19 in 1,000 live births. Almost 90 per cent of children receive
standard immunisation.
In part, this is the legacy of the 1950-70 period when, for example,
government expenditure on education averaged 5 per cent of gross domestic
product (GDP). By the early 1980s it had dropped to 2.3 per cent of GDP.
During the last JVP insurgency, the universities were closed for two years
and schools and hospitals were severely disrupted. Mr M. D. Pieris,
secretary of the Ministry of Health, explains: 'The JVP could, just by
rumour or anonymous letter, shut down whole institutions'.
The government has since taken steps to reverse the decline and the
education budget is currently 3 per cent of GDP. Mr Pieris says the
government would spend more if the continuing Tamil conflict were solved and
the defence budget reduced. But the most important element of the
government's social initiative is the Janasaviya programme, providing a
safety net for the country's most disadvantaged.
Janasaviya officials query, however, whether the programme is a short-term
holding effort - a political response to the JVP exigency - or if it can
become a comprehensive effort to, in Mr Sirivardana's words, 'change the
social order; empower the poor'. Despite his energy and conviction, Mr
Sirivardana concedes that the future for Sri Lanka's poor remains dim. He
reluctantly accepts that 'investment by the poor in itself is insufficient
to take them out of the poverty trap.
'You've got to have an active support system' including an effective
agricultural extension service, he says. This, he notes, is not in place.
The World Bank's assessment in its report is blunt: 'No matter how much
emphasis the government puts. . . in its Janasaviya programme and other
policy areas, it will not be possible to eradicate poverty altogether'.
The Janasaviya programme, Mr Sirivardana insists, has had important benefits
by 'generating a great deal of hope among the poor and those who care for
them'.
But the question he asks - 'Are we as a country prepared to live with so
many poor?' - remains unanswered.
