FT  21 JUL 92 / Technology: Fresh water in the gene pool / Exploring the
role which genetic drugs will play in curing diseases at their source
An entirely new generation of drugs that acts directly on human genes is
likely to transform the pharmaceutical industry over the next two decades.
Genetic drug sales could be worth tens of billions of dollars a year within
20 years.
Almost every drug today acts on proteins, the chemicals that do the work in
all living creatures from viruses to people.
But the rapid expansion of genetic knowledge has made it possible to target
drugs at the original cause of trouble, the genes that tell cells exactly
which proteins to make. Already scientists know the sequence and function of
thousands of genes in humans and other animals, plants and micro-organisms,
and they expect within 15 years to have discovered all of the estimated
100,000 genes which provide the blueprint for every human being.
Genetic drugs can be aimed either at defective genes in the patient's own
cells or at infectious organisms such as viruses. They promise cures for
diseases that are hard to treat with existing medicines. And their
'exquisite specificity', to use a favourite phrase of biotechnologists, will
avoid the side-effects of today's protein-based drugs.
There are two broad categories of genetic drug, both just beginning clinical
trials:
Gene therapy involves inserting new genes into cells to produce therapeutic
proteins in the body.
Anti-sense therapy or code blocking is the opposite process - switching off
genes so that they stop making harmful proteins.
A common view in the biotechnology industry last year was that anti-sense
had more commercial potential than gene therapy, at least for the medium
term, because it is in principle a simpler process.
A specific gene can be switched off by a molecule small enough to be made by
orthodox chemical synthesis. Gene therapy, on the other hand, requires a
whole new gene - thousands of times larger than an anti-sense drug - which
has to be made by biotechnology. There also appeared to be immense problems
in delivering new genes to the cells where they are needed and getting them
to work there.
Over the last few months anti- sense research has continued to make
progress. Isis Pharmaceuticals of California has started clinical trials of
an anti-sense drug to treat human papilloma virus (which causes genital
warts and cervical cancer), and several other US companies specialising in
anti-sense technology - including Genta, Gilead, Hybridon and TargeTech -
are developing drugs aimed at a wide variety of diseases. Their targets
include: viral infections such as hepatitis B, Aids and herpes; leukaemia
and other cancers; and inflammatory disorders.
But gene therapy is moving forward even faster, on both the scientific and
the commercial fronts, and the view emerging in the pharmaceutical industry
is that it will eventually be more important than anti-sense technology.
Researchers at the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) carried out the
first human gene therapy trial in September 1990 on a four-year-old girl,
who had to be kept apart from other children because one defective gene in
her immune system meant that she had no natural protection against
infection. Every month since then she has received a transfusion of about a
billion of her own blood cells to which copies of the correct gene had been
added (the treatment has to be repeated because the genetically engineered
cells gradually die). Her immune defences are now strong enough for her to
attend school normally.
That success had led to a flood of proposals for gene therapy experiments in
the US, where the clinical development of genetic medicine is well ahead of
Europe and Japan. The American regulators have already approved about 20
clinical trials and, as with anti-sense, start-up companies are rushing to
exploit the technology.
Therapy Inc (GTI), based in Maryland near NIH and enjoying a close
relationship with the pioneering gene therapy researchers there. Others
include Somatix Therapy, Viagene, Targeted Genetics, Trans-karyotic
Therapies and Vical.
The range of treatments proposed for gene therapy is even wider than for
anti-sense. They fall into two main categories:
Replacing faulty or missing human genes. Candidates for treatment in the
near future include inherited single-gene disorders such as cystic fibrosis
and haemophilia. Eventually it may be possible to treat combinations of
genetic faults - with heart disease and degenerative brain disease the most
valuable targets.
Giving the patient's own cells the ability to produce a therapeutic protein
that is not normally present in the body. This has potential for treating
many forms of cancer.
Even after the rapid progress of the last few years, however, researchers
still have to overcome several technical problems if gene therapy and
anti-sense are to become mass market treatments. Most important of all is to
develop better ways of enabling the genetic therapeutics to reach the cells
where they are needed.
The first generation of anti-sense drugs is not designed to reach difficult
sites inside the body. Genta is applying them to bone marrow cells removed
temporarily from the body (to switch off a cancer-causing gene in
leukaemia), and Isis is targeting viral genes in herpes or papilloma
infections on or near the skin.
All the early gene therapy trials use genetically engineered viruses to
insert new genes into the patient's cells. Although the virus is disabled to
prevent it causing any harm, researchers cannot rule out the slight risk
that it might stimulate a latent infection or even trigger cancer.
But new delivery systems are in prospect for both categories of genetic
treatment. Anti-sense drugs are being linked to other chemicals which make
them permeate cells more effectively, and non-viral vectors are being
developed for gene therapy.
Until recently the established pharmaceutical giants had left gene-based
medicine to academic scientists and biotechnology start-ups. They are now
scrambling to catch up, by starting research in-house and forming alliances
with the specialist biotech companies.
Isis, for example, has partnerships with Ciba-Geigy of Switzerland, Eisai of
Japan and Rhone-Poulenc of France. Gilead, its competitor, has a
collaborative research agreement with Glaxo of the UK. GTI is working with
Sandoz of Switzerland - which has shown more interest in gene therapy than
any other large pharmaceutical company.
Researchers talk of total sales of genetic drugs running into tens of
billion of dollars within 20 years, though such estimates are highly
speculative. Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co, Californian investment analysts, say
the US gene therapy market for just three cancers (renal, ovarian and
melanoma) is potentially worth Dollars 1.2bn a year - based on a cost of
Dollars 15,000 per patient. That seems expensive but it may be an acceptable
price for a treatment which saves not only the patient's life but also tens
of thousands of dollars in hospital fees.
