FT  14 MAY 92 / Havel tries to keep the family together: Ariane Genillard
and Anthony Robinson set the scene for the Czechoslovak election
THE FUTURE of Czechoslovakia's economic reforms and the fate of the Czech
and Slovak federal state will be the main issues of debate in a hard fought
general election campaign involving more than 40 political parties which
began yesterday.
The opening shot was fired by Mr Vaclav Havel, president of the Czech and
Slovak Federal Republic. Addressing the nation from Bratislava, the Slovak
capital, he warned against 'unconsidered and dangerous attempts' to break up
the country's fragile federation.
Moves to break up the union and reconstitute it as 'a vague dualist union'
would lead to 'a chaotic break-up of the state which would exact as high a
price as similar break-ups in Yugoslavia or the former Soviet Union'.
The presidential warning was directed mainly at nationalists striving for
greater autonomy for the Slovak republic, which holds a third of the
country's 16m population.
Mr Vladimir Meciar, whose Movement for a Democratic Slovakia is expected to
re-emerge as the largest party in Slovakia after the June 5 elections, has
promised, however, that he would adopt a new constitution and declare Slovak
sovereignty if his party wins.
Polls place Mr Meciar well above other Slovak politicians, with 34 per cent
cent support. The remaining votes are likely to be split between a plethora
of parties including the governing Christian Democrats led by Mr Jan
Czarnogorsky, the former Communists, now re-named the Party of the
Democratic Left, and a new Social Democrat party. This is led by Mr
Alexander Dubcek, hero and then victim of the 1968 'Prague Spring' attempt
to create 'socialism with a human face' which was then crushed by Soviet
tanks.
Last week an attempt to establish a new Slovak constitution failed to
achieve the required 60 per cent majority in the Slovak parliament. But the
strength of nationalist feeling was shown by the over 50 per cent vote in
favour of a move which, had it succeeded, would have violated the federal
constitution.
Most parties in the more prosperous Czech republic have voiced support for
the federation. Here the most popular party is the Civic Democratic Party
led by Mr Vaclav Klaus, the federal finance minister, which the polls
calculate now attracts 20 per cent of the vote in the Czech lands.
His right-wing, free market party, whose privatisation and other economic
policies are modelled closely on those first introduced by Mrs Margaret
Thatcher, former leader of Britain's Conservatives, is one of the few to be
represented in both the Czech lands and Slovakia.
As in Poland, however, no party is expected to win an overall majority. The
combination of proportional representation and many contesting parties, is
expected to produce fragmented parliaments at both republican and federal
levels and could lead to complex negotiations to put together coalition
governments.
Mr Klaus, who already dominates economic policy-making also has strong ideas
about the future constitutional shape of the country.
He proposes that a new federal system should be devised after the elections
to devolve greater powers to the republics. The federal government would be
reduced to the core functions of finance, defence and foreign affairs.
This creates the possibility of a compromise which would satisfy both
moderate Slovak nationalists and those in both republics who chafe at the
unnecessary expense and duplication under the present Communist-imposed
system of republican and federal governments.
Increasingly, however, some Czech politicians, too, have spoken about the
possibility of a divorce. But, as President Havel repeated in his latest
speech, this could only be achieved by means of a referendum. and according
to opinion polls, the majority of Czech and Slovaks still prefer to live in
a common state.
