FT  21 MAY 92 / Standard Chartered makes Pounds 50m provision: UK-based bank
suffers high losses in India
STANDARD CHARTERED, the UK based international bank, is being forced to make
a provision of Pounds 50m to cover losses by its Bombay branch from
securities deals.
It is therefore likely to emerge as one of the two biggest losers - with the
Australian-owned ANZ Grindlays - in India's worst financial scandal.
Standard said last night that a senior team of bank executives, recently
sent over to India from London, is 'investigating the possibility that
losses may have been incurred in its Bombay branch as a result of
transactions in breach of the group's established control procedures entered
into to finance stock exchange dealings'.
Its total exposure to this form of stock exchange finance is Pounds 100m.
Although it could not quantify how much the eventual loss will be precisely,
it was making a Pounds 50m provision against possible losses, it said.
According to bankers, Grindlays is also likely to face significant losses.
Nine state-owned Indian institutions including State Bank of India, Canara
Bank, United Bank of Calcutta, Karad Bank and National Housing Bank are also
vulnerable to substantial losses.
Yesterday, representatives of several banks spent a second day at a
round-table conference in Bombay seeking to reconcile their accounts in the
interbank securities market.
As banks embarked on what is the massive task of reconciling the backlog of
securities transactions, the Reserve Bank of India, the central bank,
announced that it had suspended four of the employees from the office which
has responsibility for registering transfers of government securities.
The bank took the unusual step because of what it called 'procedural
irregularities in the upkeep of the register'. Until now the register has
been maintained by hand.
Standard Chartered said it had brought a six-man team to India to verify the
daily records of its securities department over the past six months. The
bank does not exclude fraud. 'We cannot rule it out,' it said.
Mr S. Venkitaramanan, the governor of the Reserve Bank, has supporters who
point to his role in bringing to light the abuses in the securities market.
But there are also many bankers who hold the central bank governor
ultimately morally responsible for inadequate supervision of a market that
has grown explosively.
Mr Harshad Mehta, a Bombay broker who has been suspended by the Bombay Stock
Exchange authority, was questioned by the Central Bureau of Investigation
for the first time yesterday. While the authorities are pursuing him, they
also seem to be opening the door to a settlement that would allow him to
meet at least part of his outstanding obligations through transferring
shares.
US court ruling, Page 28
