FT  23 JUL 92 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals (5): Companies focus on new drugs
and more research - Japan's drugs industry
MOUNTING worries over international expansion by Japan's pharmaceutical
industry - following their counterparts in the vehicle and electronics
industries - have been calmed by slower-than-expected results by the
overseas operations of the drugs groups.
However, the Japanese pharmaceuticals industry is at a turning point, as
companies are shifting focus towards production of new and effective drugs
and boosting research and development.
Compared to their western counterparts, Japanese drugs companies have
operated on a smaller scale, focusing on the domestic market, the
second-largest in the world with annual sales of Y6,000bn. The companies
traditionally relied on small-step innovations of existing drugs, mainly
lower-value antibiotics and vitamins.
However, a decline in profitability of domestic operations, brought about by
recent reforms by the Ministry of Health and Welfare, has forced companies
to shift emphasis on R&amp;D in order to create world-beating innovatory
products.
Until recently, Japanese drug companies have been complacent about R&amp;D
because of the government's drug-pricing policy, where all new drugs were
awarded premium prices whether or not they were dramatic improvements.
Companies, lacking the incentive to develop innovative drugs, chose only to
make small changes to existing drugs rather than spend big sums on product
development. Companies also relied on profit margins from the distribution
of drugs supplied by foreign companies under licence for the Japanese
market.
The push by the government for new and effective drugs has been prompted by
a change in pricing rules. From this fiscal year, the only drugs to be
allowed premium prices will be those which represent a new concept, are more
effective than existing drugs and which make a noticeable contribution to
treatment.
Profits at companies lacking new products have been squeezed by the
government's official price cuts implemented every two years from 1981 and
averaging from 10 to 15 per cent. The cuts are applying pressure on
companies to produce new drugs because the impact on the profit margins of
new drugs is less severe.
In addition, foreign drug companies have started to terminate distribution
tie-ups as they establish their own networks in Japan, reducing commissions
for the former Japanese partners.
As companies increase R&amp;D and capital investment spending, the need to
establish a worldwide presence in order to recoup costs has increased
sharply. Japanese companies also say that market share in Japan has hit a
ceiling. 'Profits have reached upward limits,' says Fujisawa Pharmaceutical,
Japan's third-largest with sales of Y227bn.
R&amp;D expenditure has doubled during the past 10 years while net sales
increased by only 50 per cent during the same period.
The percentage of R&amp;D expenses to net sales rose to 11.1 per cent in the
last fiscal year from 7.2 per cent in fiscal 1982.
Because a typical drug takes 10 years and Y10bn to develop, only those
companies large enough to absorb costs will be able to survive in the long
run.
'Companies without strong R&amp;D pipelines and new innovative products will
drift sideways,' says Mr John Wilson, analyst at James Capel in Tokyo.
Yamanouchi Pharmaceutical, one of the most aggressive in international
expansion, admits that it will take another 10 years before the company
becomes truly global.
Fujisawa is also increasing production and marketing capacity in the US and
Europe ahead of the launch of FK-506, an immune system suppressor used to
prevent transplant patients rejecting new organs.
Japanese drugs makers are currently boosting efforts to build comprehensive
and independent operations in R&amp;D, production and marketing.
However, compared with the large-scale mergers and acquisitions in the US
and Europe, the purchases and joint ventures have been modest in size.
Mr Thomas Hofstaetter, executive managing director at Hoechst Japan, says
there is a lack of candidates for acquisitions by Japanese companies.
'The targets are often expensive and it is not economical,' he explains.
Meanwhile, the sharp decline in asset values in Japan, bought on by the
slump in the stock and property markets, have made small and medium-sized
Japanese drugs companies ideal targets for global pharmaceutical groups
looking to expand in Japan.
The country's market holds substantial potential for further growth as the
population ages rapidly and consumers become increasingly health-conscious.
Corporate financiers point out that the smaller companies, unable to survive
through the industry's consolidation due to the lack of financial and R&amp;D
resources, are receptive to cross-border mergers and acquisitions.
Pfizer, the US drugs and chemicals group, announced plans to buy Koshin
Medical, a privately-owned medical equipment distributor earlier this year.
Last year, Monsanto of the US acquired 12 per cent of Hokuriku
Pharmaceuticals for Y14.5bn.
Mergers and acquisitions among Japanese companies, including rescues of
smaller companies, are also expected to increase. But Mr John Wilson at
James Capel predicts that alliances between industry leaders to create
larger pharmaceuticals groups would be unlikely due to lingering negative
attitudes towards M&amp;A among Japanese companies.
