FT  16 SEP 92 / Survey of Wales (11): Reform plans are well-advanced - The
changing shape of local government
TOMORROW MORNING, councillors and officials representing the district and
country councils in Wales sit down in London with Mr David Hunt, the Welsh
secretary, to discuss the future shape of local government in the country
for the last time before Mr Hunt produces his white paper on the subject
later this autumn.
It will be the councillors' final chance to influence the shape of local
government in the next century. Wales is well ahead of England in this
process and if the government's timetable is met the new shadow councils
should be in place by May 1994, and operating from the spring of the
following year.
Some decisions are already known. Wales will be governed by unitary
authorities. The present two-tier system of county and district councils
will be replaced by single-purpose, unitary authorities.
It is also clear that Mr Hunt does not intend to accede to any of the calls
for an elected assembly for Wales. Other matters are, however, still to be
resolved, including the number of councils.
Two recent consultation papers, on education and community councils, suggest
Mr Hunt has settled on 23. When he produced his first proposals for a review
of local government in June 1991 he offered three options - 13, 20 or 24
unitary authorities to replace the eight existing counties and 37 districts.
His preferred option was 20.
By now opting for the higher end, Mr Hunt has gone a long way towards
meeting the demands of the districts, who once they had seen that reform was
going to be introduced, with or without their acquiescence, agreed that to
argue for the protection of the present 37 councils was not a viable option.
This decision, reached just over a year ago, was crucial, since it allowed
the districts to outflank the eight counties which, until a late stage,
continued to press for their existing number and their members to be the
basis of reform.
Not that the districts willingly, at first, agreed to ditching any of their
members. It was only after a lot of banging of heads, and then reluctantly,
that the districts agreed some should go to the wall. Eventually, the
Council of Welsh Districts suggested between 25 and 30 with a preferred
option of 27.
'The key to the whole reform must be to relate local activities to the
people,' say Mr Geraint Price-Thomas, under secretary (Wales) of the
Association of District Councils. 'This means making them acceptable to the
people.'
The counties do not disagree. Mr Hugh Thomas, secretary of the Assembly of
Welsh Counties and chief executive of Mid Glamorgan County Council, says:
'We are concerned at delivering a service to the community that should be
efficient and cost effective.'
After their initial exercise in digging in heels by advocating their number
 -eight - should be retained the counties have shifted, rather late in the
day, to suggesting there should be 16.
The eight chief executives have, however, been sufficiently concerned at the
way the whole issue of reform has been going to publish a paper expressing,
independently of the elected members, their own deep concern.
'The case for change must rest on whether any proposed change will secure
sufficiently worthwhile improvements,' they say.
In a strongly worded attack, they complain that 'the proposals emerging
indicate a lack of integrated consideration of local government's purpose,
functions, financing, internal management and structure. Democratic
accountability will be undermined, be administratively unwieldy and be less
understood by local people than at present.'
They conclude that if the concept of unitary authority is to be implemented
in accordance with the government's principles - democratic accountability;
responsive to local needs; clearly understood; strengthened community
loyalties; efficient services - the solution lies with larger unitary
authorities than Mr Hunt has proposed.
This might seem like special pleading from a body of men and women that
stand to lose most by the proposed reforms - except that it has been backed
by the business community. The Confederation of British Industry has
expressed 'serious misgivings' about the proposal to have over 20 councils.
Accepting the government's position that reform should be cost-neutral the
CBI claims the handling of strategic issues could be fragmented if the
number of authorities were to be too large and that the small Welsh
authorities 'may also be at a disadvantage compared to the English
counties.'
The calls for an elected assembly come mainly from Labour, the dominant
political force in Wales. It controls 27 of the country's 38 parliamentary
seats. It also controls five of the eight counties and 18 of the 37
districts.
Not that a unified approach would be easy, anyway, since it is the policy of
Plaid Cymru, the Welsh nationalists, to bypass an assembly and go directly
for an independent Wales within the European community.
Since the nationalists are a minority force in their own country, despite
winning a fourth seat at last April's general election, polling slightly
under 10 per cent of the popular vote and trailing not just Labour and the
Conservatives but also the Liberal Democrats, this policy is as much dead in
the water at the moment as an elected assembly.
That leaves Mr Hunt, born in Wales but brought up in Liverpool and
representing an English constituency, calling all the shots despite having
just six Conservative seats in the principality.
Mr Hunt smiles a lot and gets on well with his political opponents. But
behind the bonhomie is a steely resolve. He will get what he wants for
Wales, which is why this autumn's white paper is awaited so keenly.
