FT  30 JAN 92 / Survey of Saudi Arabia (7): Changing attitudes - Foreign
policy
IRAQ'S invasion of Kuwait posed immediate foreign policy choices for Saudi
Arabia which it had always sought to avoid. None of the western defence
experts who watched Saudi Arabia's military response to the armoured threat
poised on its border in August 1990 doubt that the correct political
decisions were made, despite the continuing discomfort felt by the country's
rulers.
Had Iraqi President Saddam Hussein chosen to make a substantially larger
gamble by invading Saudi Arabia, the forces which could have been quickly
assembled to challenge a thrust into the eastern province would almost
certainly have been unequal to the task.
Indeed, during the first two weeks of the crisis and probably for much
longer than any generals would care to admit, it is debatable whether Riyadh
could have been successfully defended.
Many Saudis have expressed their pride at the manner in which particularly
their air force and National Guard subsequently performed, but little
appears to have happened to dispel the anxiety that was generated over the
reactions and determination of the country's main armoured units.
The consequence was one that US military planners had long prepared for: a
massive military deployment to secure the industrialised world's oil
supplies in Saudi Arabia, followed by the reduction of the external military
threat. So effectively was the Iraqi threat dealt with that, against most
predictions, US and other allied forces were able to begin withdrawing
immediately after the liberation of Kuwait and the conclusion of
hostilities.
The reaction of the rest of the world, and especially the Arab nations, to
the fall of Kuwait has done much to shape and change Saudi attitudes. A
natural member of the moderate and conservative majority within the Arab
League, Saudi Arabia's previous diplomatic initiatives had been mainly
confined to searching for and sometimes financing compromises between
disputing members. With the occupation of Kuwait, it found itself for the
first time in the front line and the key player in the crisis.
The Gulf Co-Operation Council (GCC), which links Saudi Arabia with Kuwait,
Oman, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Bahrain, had been formed a decade
before, in response to the war between Iraq and Iran. Although the GCC's
public purpose was to create a loose economic grouping, there had even then
been voices on the edge of the inaugural conference warning that the
eventual winner of the Iran-Iraq war would be unlikely to return its troops
immediately to barracks. It was also apparent that the best the GCC members
could ever do militarily would be to deter a threat long enough for their
western friends to come to the rescue.
For once, events in the Middle East unfolded according to character. Arab
governments, especially those most closely involved with Iraq, sought to
find a solution within the Arab League and failed.
Saddam Hussein's most implacable enemy, Syria, offered its forces to help
punish him. Egypt remained firmly alongside the US, the Palestine Liberation
Organisation headed off in the opposite and wrong direction, while Iran's
desire to see Iraq crushed was qualified by the build-up of US forces in the
Gulf.
Like most inter-Arab disputes, divisions are rectified either by time or by
the emergence of a greater common threat. Saudi Arabia's initial sense of
betrayal was most sharply directed at Yemen - whose workers were told to
leave the kingdom, at King Hussein of Jordan, and PLO chief Yassir Arafat.
Individual members of the royal family still refer to King Hussein in the
most bitter terms, although relations between the two governments are slowly
improving. Some economic assistance has been resumed to Jordan and there is
considerable common ground between the two countries in their support for US
efforts to build on the slight progress towards a Middle East peace
settlement.
Saudi Arabia should also have drawn its own conclusions from the level of
popular support that Saddam Hussein's aggression initially attracted in
North Africa and among the Palestinians. In those economically deprived
areas, there was little hint of sympathy for the people of Kuwait and, as
the first round of voting in the aborted Algerian elections demonstrated,
there is enthusiasm for those campaigning under the banner of Islam.
The enthusiasm with which Iran has backed the politicisation of Islam in
North Africa could yet threaten its rapprochement with Saudi Arabia, which
has seen the resumption of diplomatic relations and is awaiting an official
visit to the kingdom by President Hashemi Rafsanjani. The competition in
Tehran between the advocates of a consistently militant foreign policy and
those who wish to lay greater emphasis on pragmatic economic co-operation
makes future relations between Iran and its closest neighbours even more
difficult to predict.
For Saudi Arabia, and more especially for Turkey, a new dimension has
recently been added by the emergence of six new Islamic republics in what
was the Soviet Union. Iranian delegations have been busy in all six
republics, and it has plans to open embassies in three of them. Saudi Arabia
is moving along similar lines and the US is being spurred to take a greater
interest because of the substantial nuclear arsenal sited in Kazakhstan.
Initial indications are that the five predominantly Sunni Moslem republics
are most likely to adopt secular, free market policies oriented to the west.
Iran, however, may feel it has a particular advantage in Tajikistan where
the language is closer to Farsi.
The common interest of the six GCC countries, Egypt and Syria in rolling
back the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and now in seeking to counter the use of
Islam as a political tool has not, however, produced many more practical
results.
The Damascus agreement on regional security, signed by the eight nations in
March, seems unlikely to be taken much further. Saudi Arabia believes it
paid generously for the involvement of Egyptian and Syrian battalions in the
Gulf war, but officials say that there was never any possibility of them
being stationed for any length of time in the kingdom. Explanations for this
range from doubts about their military efficiency to the tensions that might
arise over the vastly superior pay rates of the Saudi forces.
Hazardous though it is to draw broad conclusions too soon after momentous
events, the challenge of Saddam Hussein does appear to have confirmed two
trends. First, those countries sheltering under the protection of the US
have more emphatically reaffirmed that choice, rather than seeking a broader
Arab consensus. Officials in Riyadh speak of their country as America's main
strategic ally in the region and further substantial military expenditure in
the years ahead is designed to underline that status.
Second, Islam seems certain to be used increasingly as the rallying point
for the politically and economically deprived and in opposition to US allies
in the Middle East. Saudi Arabia's reluctance last September for its bases
to be used to exert further US military pressure on Iraq emphasised that,
despite its strategic choice of a defensive partner, it would again prefer
American troops to remain out of sight.
The virtual withdrawal of the Soviet Union as an influential player in the
Middle East should provide Washington with a unique opportunity to work for
a more durable political order, or just as easily the excuse to turn its
attention to other issues.
US President George Bush and Mr James Baker, the secretary of state, have
shown a desire to satisfy some of the Palestinians' political aspirations
and are supported in this by Saudi Arabia. But if the US backs away from the
issue in the face of determined Israeli opposition, the rulers of Saudi
Arabia may be made ever more aware of the hard choices forced on them by the
aggression of Saddam Hussein.
