FT  06 OCT 92 / DTI chosen for deep funding cuts: Conservative conference to
open today amid ministerial struggle over public spending Euro rebels meet
to plan strategy
CABINET ministers are set to order deep cuts in the research and development
budget for next year as Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary,
becomes the latest victim of the harsh negotiatons over public spending.
The latest cuts highlight the enormous difficulty faced by the Treasury as
it attempts to curb spending.
Last night two former Tory cabinet ministers predicted that the current
crisis might force the government to increase taxes even if it succeeds in
meeting its public expenditures targets for the next financial year.
Speaking on BBC1's Panorama programme, Lord Tebbit, former trade and
industry secretary, said Britain's 'excessivly large' public sector
borrowing requirement meant that tax increases 'could come' if it were
necessary to convince the markets that the government meant what it said
about controlling inflation and borrowing.
'It would seem to me that we need at the very least a tight control of
public spending - perhaps actual reductions of planned public expenditure,'
he said.
Lord Howe, former chancellor and foreign secretary, said getting a grip on
public sector borrowing 'may involve raising taxes' although cutting
non-investment expenditure would be a preferable option.
The Department of Trade and Industry has been told that its already modest
bid for R&amp;D spending will have to be trimmed still further.
Ministers on the 'EDX' public spending committee of the cabinet yesterday
continued to review how department budgets can be cut to allow for the
unforeseen costs of the recession within, or below, the pre-agreed Pounds
244.5bn planning total for the 1993-94 financial year. Drastic measures,
such as a freeze in public sector pay, are being actively considered.
Formal negotiations will be suspended during this week's Conservative party
conference. But Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, has cleared time in his
diary on every day next week, except the Monday for possible EDX meetings.
Sir Norman Fowler, Tory party chairman, last night said the conference would
back government policy of keeping a tight control on public spending because
such a pledge had been a significant element of the manifesto for April's
general election.
Ironically, cuts are being forced on Mr Heseltine even though he is a member
of the EDX committee. He was included because the DTI budget is regarded as
small-scale in Whitehall, arguably making him more objective.
DTI insiders say that because officials recognised there would have to be
tough spending decisions and wanted to co-operate, the department had
originally bid for less than it would have liked for R&amp;D in 1993-94. DTI
spending on civil R&amp;D is about Pounds 133.5m in the current year.
