FT  10 MAR 92 / Struggle to ease plight of South Africa's poor whites:
Poverty is not confined to blacks
ON ANY weekday, there is a queue of the dejected and hopeless, the hungry
and frightened, at Werk en Oorleef (Work and Survive), a small charity shop
in a suburb of the South African capital, Pretoria.
Werk en Oorleef feeds 5,000 families every day on meagre rations of maize
meal and soup powder: every one of the recipients is white.
They sit or stand, pick listlessly through the shop's collection of scuffed
children's shoes and stained Babygros, and suffer the shame of the poor
white in a nation where poverty has been largely a black affair.
Indeed, apartheid was designed to save the Afrikaner from this indignity:
blacks were barred from competing for white jobs, hundreds of thousands of
whites were employed by the state, large sums were spent on white education
to uplift the Afrikaner.
But these are the people who fell through apartheid's net: some 80,000 to
100,000 of them are fed every day by Operation Hunger, a charity which also
provides food for 1.7m blacks. They are the victims of South Africa's
economic recession, itself partly the result of politically inspired
sanctions.
'They give everything to the native. They give everything to Mandela. We get
nothing,' says Mr Emmanuel Roux, a 59-year-old supplicant.
He knows how to vote in next week's whites-only referendum on apartheid. He
will vote against the government, which repealed laws reserving jobs for
whites; he will vote against ending apartheid; he will vote against the rise
of a black government, which he is certain would be neither able nor willing
to improve his lot.
Mr Roux and his wife Magda are scarcely typical of the Werk en Oorleef
queue. He has a bright eye and an easy chuckle, and proudly displays his
pregnant wife, 33 years his junior, who will soon bear him his fifth child.
Magda may be a picture of poverty, in her shapeless dress and heavy black
ankle boots, her womb swollen with another young burden. But her face is
unmarked by worrying about the high blood pressure which keeps her husband
from work and the ordeal of living in a house with no electricity or running
water, feeding her children on 2kg soup powder, 12.5kg maize meal, 1kg sugar
and a tin of jam per month.
The face of Caroline Ellis, 26, tells a different story: her eyelids droop
under the weight of cheap makeup and dejection. Hers is the story of a
broken marriage and a child lost to the welfare authorities. Her common-law
husband, Eddie Joubert, 22, earns just R500 (about Pounds 100) a month. The
rent of their flat is R450.
Kobus van Staden, 24, and his young wife Cathy, 22, are far worse off. He
glowers at the world, more out of pain than anger. He was a shift boss in
the Free State Goldfields, earning R3,000 a month, but, just before
Christmas, he was made redundant, like tens of thousands of other miners,
white and black. The Van Stadens lost their home and had to sell all of
their furniture except their bed. They live 'somewhere in the bush', in an
outside room on a remote farm. Candles are their only light; they cook on a
primus stove. Cathy weeps as she tells of how she lost their only child
during pregnancy.
Mrs Kleintjie Pereira, the shop's distraught director, says she can no
longer cope with the influx of poor whites, victims of a recession which has
also left half the black population unemployed or underemployed. 'Our people
are very proud,' she says. 'They don't want to beg for food.
But, for most of her clients, the shop is their only lifeline. They come to
her for jobs; she places them in jobs vacated by blacks who participate in
political stayaways, or in odd jobs - what used to be known as 'kaffir
work'.
Mrs Pereira fears that, whichever way the ballot goes, few of her patrons
will be able to escape from the cycle which traps them: 'We've got to stand
together and help these people. Otherwise the kids will fall into the same
old cycle. They'll leave school early. They don't get enough to eat, so they
can't study. They won't develop. If we don't do something, we're going to
have a dumb South Africa.'
