FT  14 OCT 92 / DTI knew of Iraqi deal, court is told
OFFICIALS in the Department of Trade and Industry were prepared to 'close
their eyes' when granting an export licence for Matrix Churchill, the
Coventry-based machine tool maker, to sell machinery with a military purpose
to Iraq, an Old Bailey jury heard yesterday.
Mr Paul Henderson, a former managing director of Matrix Churchill, made the
claim when first interviewed by Customs and Excise investigators over the
Iraqi-owned company's alleged breach of export regulations, the court was
told by Mr Alan Moses QC, prosecuting.
Mr Henderson, Mr Trevor Abraham, a former commercial director with the
company, and Mr Peter Allen, a former sales director, all deny four counts
of breaching export controls prohibiting sales of military equipment to
Iraq. The prosecution alleges that the three men deceived the DTI by
pretending the machine tools and associated computer software were for
civilian, not military, use.
Mr Henderson also told his interviewers that Mr Alan Clark, the former trade
minister, had advised machine tool exporters to stress the peaceful
applications of their products when seeking export licences from the DTI, Mr
Moses said.
The advice had been given when Mr Clark met representatives of the Machine
Tool Trade Association, including Mr Henderson, who had expressed concern
that their products might have both civilian and military applications. Mr
Moses said that Mr Henderson had told Customs that Mr Clark had not been
suggesting companies break the law in making applications.
Mr Henderson had also said that when the DTI was considering the
applications from Matrix Churchill, officials there were fully aware of the
activities of Industrias Cardoen, the Chilean intermediary in the
transaction.
When Customs investigators interviewed Mr Allen, he said the DTI had been
aware that the machine tools had a military end use.
Mr Abraham told Customs he had been concerned when he first learned the
equipment was for military use but decided to 'turn a blind eye'. It was one
of the difficulties of working for an Iraqi-owned company such as
Matrix-Churchill, he had said.
Earlier, the court heard that to obtain export credit guarantees for the
transaction, Matrix Churchill was supported by a letter of credit from the
Banca Nazionale de Lavoro in Atlanta, US.
The trial continues today.
