FT  01 MAY 92 / Survey of Building For Asia's Future (4): Demand for air
travel outstrips capacity - Airports
SOME of the world's biggest airport construction contracts are expected to
be awarded in Asia during the next 10 years.
Demand for air travel in the region, which houses some of the world's
fastest-growing economies, is already outstripping capacity. Countries need
to increase runway and terminal facilities if they are to avoid the kind of
congestion seen recently in Europe.
According to the International Air Transport Association (Iata), Asian
Pacific Rim countries will by the year 2010 account for 51 per cent of world
air passenger traffic.
The number of passengers travelling by air in north-east Asia is forecast to
rise at an average annual rate of 9.7 per cent between 1991 and 1995. This
represents almost twice the average annual growth rate of 5.6 per cent
forecast for the world as a whole. In south-east Asia, air traffic is
expected to grow at 9.2 per cent a year.
Preliminary studies, design work, and some construction, is already under
way on at least three large new international airports, each of which will
cost several billion dollars to build. These are:
The world's biggest airport project at Chek Lap Kok, adjacent to Lantau
Island, Hong Kong. The total cost including associated infrastructure will
be almost HKDollars 100bn. Work must be completed by 1997 when Hong Kong
ceases to be a British colony.
A number of large contracts for the project have already been put out to
tender and will be let shortly. Maunsell and Mott MacDonald, two British
consulting engineers, have been involved in providing designs and
engineering studies for a large part of the project.
Kansai International Airport at Osaka in Japan which is under construction
on a man-made island in the sea. The airport, which rivals Chek Lap kok in
scale, is needed to alleviate congestion at the existing Osaka airport and
at Narita airport in Tokyo.
Construction of Kansai began in 1987 but is not due to be completed until
the mid-1990s. It is expected to cost more than USDollars 7bn to build.
Malaysia has identified a 10,000 hectare site for a new international
airport near Sepang, about 50km south of Kuala Lumpur, the capital. In
February, it awarded a contract to provide a master-plan for the airport's
development to an Anglo-Japanese consortium of the BICC engineering group;
Trafalgar House, the construction, property, hotels and shipping group; GEC
Marconi, the electronics group; and Marubeni, the large Japanese
conglomerate. Plans must include road and rail links to Kuala Lumpur.
Other airport projects are in the pipeline. Preliminary design work has
begun on a new airport, expected to cost about USDollars 1bn, at Macau.
Indonesia is expanding its Soekarno-Hatto International airport where a
USDollars 550m new terminal is being built.
In South Korea, Bechtel, the large US engineering group, is preparing
preliminary designs for a new international terminal at Yong Jong do Island
about 50km east of Seoul. The cost of the airport is expected to be about
USDollars 4bn.
Longer term, there are proposals for new airports in the north-east and
south-west of the country as part of plans to encourage greater economic
development away from Seoul and the south-east of the country. About a
quarter of the cost of Yong Jong do airport is expected to come from private
developers, from land sales and from the award of airport concessions.
Another quarter will be raised from international loans. Airports which
attract international clientele and currency may provide a more attractive
vehicle for private investors than road and rail schemes which rely mainly
on domestic traffic.
The Pakistan government recently sought tenders from developers wanting to
express an interest in privately financing building and operating two new
international airports at Lahore and Peshawar.
Development of regional airports is needed to encourage growth in
less-developed areas as well as to take the strain off existing
international airports which may be constrained by space and environmental
factors from expanding further. In Malaysia, Taylor Woodrow, the British
contractor, is upgrading a small airfield at Kuantan.
In Japan, there are now 11 regional airports offering international services
to more than 30 European, US and Asian cities. Even some of these regional
airports are starting to feel the strain.
Some of the developments now planned will not be completed until towards the
end of the century. Other schemes have still to be announced. Some may not
be built. Cancellations and postponements inevitably will occur as
countries' financial and economic priorities change. Nonetheless,
development of new airports and expansion of existing airports is likely to
increase as pressure on runways and terminals grows, providing opportunities
for international contractors and designers.
Orient Airlines Association predicts that aircraft movements in the region
will have increased by 87 per cent by the year 2000. By 1995, it says, 40
per cent of airports will have reached saturation.
Building an airport is expensive and highly technical. It therefore has a
much bigger export potential than many other types of construction such as
roads which can be easily handled by domestic companies. Asia is likely to
remain an exciting market for those companies which can provide skills and
technology not produced locally.
