FT  22 FEB 92 / Finance &amp; the Family: What is in the Budget box of tricks? -
As March 10 looms, Scheherazade Daneshkhu and Philip Coggan consider how you
can plan your financial strategy
Dealing with your tax
A BROWN envelope from the Inland Revenue demanding tax payable by April 5
may have already crossed your threshold. The tax planning season is on us
and it makes sense to think about settling your affairs now, writes
Scheherazade Daneshkhu.
The big uncertainty is the Budget on March 10. Casson &amp; Beckman, chartered
accountants, advise people to 'take advantage of the current law as it
stands before the Budget, to pre-empt any adverse changes, and then consider
any further action in the light of announcements.'
There are always routine measures which can be taken now. These include
making full use of your annual tax exemptions, personal allowance and, if
you are married, those of your spouse.
But be warned: you should not act with the sole aim of lessening your tax
bill. For example, fears of a Labour government coming to power and altering
inheritance tax should not prompt you to accelerate gifts, unless you really
wanted to. Capital Gains Tax: Try to use up the full allowance of Pounds
5,500 for the current tax year. This may involve 'bed-and-breakfasting'
shares that have made a gain by selling them on the market and repurchasing
them to bring gains up to the tax-free allowance. Your taxable gain next
time you sell will be lessened, since you will be starting off from a higher
base.
If you bought your shares between April 6 1982 and the present, you are
given an allowance for the effects of inflation on the value of your
holdings. This indexation allowance varies, depending on the month in which
you bought your shares. (See page VI for table and explanation).
'Bed-and-breakfasting' shares can also be done to establish a loss, if that
is more convenient, and indexation will increase the loss.
If you have reached your CGT threshold but your spouse has not, consider
transferring assets. These transfers can usually be made free of CGT.
Remember that the sale of assets such as paintings, silverware and jewellery
worth Pounds 6,000 individually are CGT-exempt.
Pensions: If you can afford it, try to pay the maximum pensionable
contribution to your scheme in order to take advantage of higher rate
relief. Also top up additional voluntary contributions to the maximum limit
for the year (15 per cent of your salary).
If you have a personal pension plan, the maximum payable varies with your
age, from 17.5 per cent of your earnings until the age of 35, up to 40 per
cent if you are between 61-74.
Binder Hamlyn reminds those paying retirement annuity premiums in 1991-92
who intend to set these against income for 1990-91, to do so as soon as
possible.
Banks and building societies: Under new Inland Revenue rules, you no longer
have to wait until the end of the tax year to claim repayment of tax
deducted from interest on savings or share dividends. There are about 8m
people eligible for repayment of tax. Home loan interest: Husband and wife
can choose which should receive tax relief on home loan interest, regardless
of who pays the mortgage. Casson &amp; Beckman says the election has to be made
within 12 months after the tax year in question, so if you have not already
lodged an election for 1990 - 91, do so before April 5.
Company cars: You need to have driven 2,500 business miles by the end of the
tax year to avoid paying 50 per cent more tax on the perk. Parental gifts:
You can give a gift totalling Pounds 3,000 as a lump sum or split between
your children in any tax year free of inheritance tax. Unused gift
allowances from last year can be carried forward only if you have used up
this year's Pounds 3,000 first. Only one year's exemption can be carried
forward - after that it is lost. Charities: Use the Gift Aid scheme to give
Pounds 600 or more to charity by the end of the tax year. If you are a 40
per cent taxpayer, you can claim relief of Pounds 120 on Pounds 600. So, it
will only cost you Pounds 480 net to give Pounds 800 because the charity can
claim a further Pounds 200 of tax.
Choices for
the Chancellor
FEBRUARY is the month for pre-Budget speculation. The Chancellor retreats
into purdah, and everyone tries to guess what he will announce, writes
Philip Coggan.
This year, if conventional wisdom is correct, a March 10 Budget will be
followed by an April 9 general election. In theory, that ought to mean a
simple Budget since there will be hardly any time to pass complex
legislation before Parliament is dissolved.
In practice, however, the Budget is likely to be a glorified manifesto for
the Conservatives' economic policies. And with the economy mired in the
longest recession since the Second World War, and the Conservatives behind
in some opinion polls, the pressure on the Chancellor is to make the Budget
package as attractive as possible.
A Cabinet meeting this week is believed to have given the go-ahead to an
expansionary Budget, involving a significant increase in public borrowing.
Some analysts are now looking for a Pounds 4bn boost to the economy, instead
of the Pounds 2bn earlier expected.
Much of the pre-Budget speculation has centred around two options. The
belief is that either Norman Lamont will raise personal allowances by more
than the rate of inflation, or cut basic rate income tax by 1p in the pound.
Often, however, Chancellors spring a surprise on the public. This grabs the
headlines and has the effect of making the Budget seem better than expected.
The game is to guess what the surprise might be.
Price Waterhouse, the accountancy group, suggests that the Chancellor might
introduce a new, lower band of income tax at 20 per cent. This seems an
astute suggestion: it would be of direct benefit to low earners, making it
difficult for the Labour party to oppose; and it would also meet (albeit, at
a pinch) one of the Conservatives' long term commitments. It would make
great headlines in the tabloid press.
The main snag is that it would clash with another Conservative long term
aim, that of simplifying the tax system. We would have three bands  - 20, 25
and 40 per cent - instead of two.
Another reform which Price Waterhouse thinks is likely, and which has been
hinted at by Tory politicians, is an increase in the inheritance tax
threshold, from Pounds 140,000 to perhaps Pounds 500,000. While this hardly
fits in with John Major's vision of a 'classless society', it would appeal
to some middle class voters. The housing boom of the 1980s has carried many
into the inheritance tax bracket.
On the other hand, it would not be difficult for Labour to paint such a
reform as an example of the government handing out tax privileges to the
better-off.
Other suggestions from PW are that stamp duty on residential property
purchases of up to Pounds 250,000 might be permanently abolished, and that
personal tax allowances are transferable between husband and wife.
Among Ernst &amp; Young's tips for the Budget are the possibility that stamp
duty on share deals will be immediately abolished and that the holding
period for TESSAs will be reduced.
However, the current pre-election limbo makes it doubly pointless for the
investor to take action to anticipate these changes. Not only might these
guesses prove inaccurate, but even if they were all correct, defeat for the
Tories at the polls would mean Lamont's plans would never come to fruition.
Peps, BES, and market hype
THERE IS always a marketing blitz at the end of the tax year. This year the
hype is more frantic, since financial services companies can raise the
spectre of a tax-increasing Labour government, writes Scheherazade
Daneshkhu.
Personal equity plans (Peps), which offer freedom from income and capital
gains tax, are the product of the moment. The Labour party's statement that
it has no plans to abolish them has been shrugged-off by the industry with
the implicit comment: 'You can't trust what these socialists say.'
The best argument for tax planning is that Labour proposes to raise the top
income tax rate to 50 per cent, and to impose a 9 per cent surcharge on
investment income of more than Pounds 3,000 earned by non-pensioners.
It cannot be emphasised too often that the tax benefits of Peps are fragile.
They can be wiped out easily by charges, especially if you are a basic-rate
taxpayer (and less likely to pay more tax under Labour). They can be wiped
out even more easily by a fall in the stock market - and a loss in a Pep
cannot be offset against gain elsewhere. Buy a Pep in haste and you can
repent at leisure.
That is not to say that Peps are not useful tools for those who are
long-term (ie, at least five years) investors or have substantial
portfolios. Something might be said for starting a Pep and holding the funds
in cash, which you are allowed to do if you intend eventually to invest the
funds in shares. You can move into shares once the election result is known.
But whichever Pep you choose, you should make sure that you know the
charges, have decided whether you are investing for income or capital
growth, and feel confident that you will sleep at night if your plan falls
in value suddenly.
The Pep rules are over-complicated. You can place Pounds 3,000 in a unit or
investment trust Pep, with two exceptions. If the trust has less than 50 per
cent of its assets in the European Community, the limit is Pounds 1,500; if
it is an investment trust new issue, the limit is Pounds 6,000.
Managed and self-select Peps, on offer from stockbrokers, also have a Pounds
6,000 limit. In the former, the broker selects the shares; in the latter,
the investor does. In addition to any of these Peps, you can put a further
Pounds 3,000 in a single company plan (see Page VI). All these limits apply
to a tax year.
Another tax shelter is the Business Expansion Scheme, a form of venture
capital. This, too, has been marketed hard as Labour has made clear it plans
BES reforms.
The great advantage of a BES is that the total value of your investment is
deducted from your total taxable income. If you are a 40 per cent taxpayer,
you will receive a rebate of 40 per cent of the amount you invested. So, you
part with only Pounds 24,000 to invest Pounds 40,000.
The maximum you can invest in BES companies during any tax year is Pounds
40,000, and you have to maintain that investment for five years to gain the
tax benefits.
When the scheme started, it was seen as a means of promoting investments in
young 'entrepreneurial' industries, but the emphasis of the scheme was
shifted in 1988 to residential property.
The least risky form of BES is the 'buy back' scheme where a BES company
buys accommodation on behalf of a third party - usually a college or a
housing association - and receives a covenant to buy back the property at a
fixed price after five years.
Provided the third party does not go bankrupt and can raise the money, risk
is minimised. However, it is thought that the government could abolish this
in the Budget because it is considered too generous a tax break for the
benefit it delivers.
If you are happy with risks involved in this form of investment, and have
not used up your full Pounds 40,000, you need to do so before the end of the
tax year and preferably before the Budget. There are a spate of new schemes
available (see Page IV) and many close by March 10. To invest, you must
submit a BES3 form (sent to you by the company) to the Inland Revenue.
