FT  23 JUN 92 / BMW plans South Carolina factory as US sales pick up
BMW is poised to become the first German luxury carmaker to build a
full-scale production plant in another country, following its choice of a
site in South Carolina from a shortlist of four possible US locations.
It will also be the only German car producer with a US plant since
Volkswagen closed its loss-making facility in Pennsylvania four years ago.
Like other German companies, BMW has suffered in recent years from falling
US sales as a result of the recession and the weak dollar. But its US
business has picked up sharply this year as the economy there has begun to
revive and it has introduced new models. In the first five months, BMW's
sales in the US rose by 24 per cent to nearly 25,000 cars.
BMW said Mr Eberhard von Kuenheim, the chief executive, would announce the
new plant at a press conference in Munich today, although it gave no
details. However, BMW's US subsidiary said it was holding a press conference
in the Greenville/Spartanburg area of South Carolina where the plant is
expected to be built.
The company confirmed in April that it had looked at sites in the US. The
plant will probably cost about DM1bn (Pounds 300m), with output likely to
start around 1996. South Carolina is believed to have put together a package
of incentives worth at least Dollars 35m (Pounds 19m). This would include
the purchase of the land to be leased to BMW for its 'greenfield' site and
road improvements.
BMW, which expects a further profit rise this year after the 12.5 per cent
increase in 1991 earnings to DM783m, is not the only German company to
consider a plant in the US, although its plans are the most advanced. Audi,
the up-market subsidiary of VW, has eyed sites in the US, Canada, and
Mexico. VW now serves the US mainly from its modernised low-cost Mexican
plant.
As well as recession in the US and the slide in the dollar since the
mid-1980s, German carmakers have had to contend with a new luxury tax on
products above Dollars 30,000. There has also been a rising volume of
Japanese models made in US 'transplant' sites.
Although BMW has no full production plant outside Germany, it builds engines
in Austria and sends parts in kit form for small-scale assembly in
south-east Asia and South America. Lean and mean, Page 18
