FT  24 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Brown spells out recovery plan
MR NEIL KINNOCK pressed home Labour's claim to be the party of exports and
industry by using a whistlestop visit to the Midlands to launch a
'manufacturing manifesto'.
The 'Made In Britain' presentation in Birmingham - Labour's first big
election news conference outside London - was timed to coincide with
publication of the latest trade figures, which showed that Britain recorded
a deficit of Pounds 750m last month.
In what is expected to be the party's last initiative on the economy before
a shift to its public services' agenda today, Mr Kinnock argued that tax
breaks for investment alongside training and employment schemes would
'stimulate activity and build confidence'.
Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow trade secretary, unveiled a modest three-point
programme of additional steps to flesh out Labour's Pounds 1.1bn industrial
recovery programme. The measures included grant aid for engineering
investment, an 'Inventions in Britain' project to help small companies bring
innovations to production, and regionally based export advice centres.
Mr Kinnock described the trade figures as 'quite dreadful . . . What is
really concerning about them is that we have got an economy which is at best
flat and possibly still slipping backwards. The government should have taken
action recommended by the Labour party a long time ago to get an
investment-led recovery.'
Earlier, asked how he would control inflation, Mr Kinnock said that
constraints imposed by membership of the ERM, supply-side measures and
credit controls would prove adequate to contain price rises. He rejected
suggestions that a minimum wage would lead to escalating pay claims.
Contrasting his policies with the Conservatives, Mr Kinnock said that a
Labour administration would make economic growth a higher priority than
achieving a zero inflation rate. Labour would be satisfied by a rate of
price rises paralleling the average of those prevalent in the European
Community.
