FT  11 DEC 92 / Survey of Ecuador (4): Survival of stocks a concern - The
rapid expansion of the fishing industry needs to be checked
THE threat to stocks caused by the unchecked growth of Ecuador's fishing
industry over the past 20 years is giving fishing authorities and the
government increasingly bad headaches.
Earlier this year 14 especially equipped boats - mainly Japanese and Korean
 -began fishing for squid off the coast of Ecuador. 'There had been no study
of this resource . . . we can't allow commercial exploitation without
finding out how this will affect the resource and other species,' said Mr
Gustavo Gonzalez, under secretary for fisheries. Squid fishing has been
stopped, pending the results of a study being carried out with Japanese
help.
Concerns focus on the survival sardine, mackerel, anchovy and other stocks.
'We're going to remodel fishing policy,' said Mr Gonzalez, 'aiming for a
sustainable use of resources, imposing closed season and restrictions.'
Independent experts agree that a revaluation of policy is long overdue but
doubt whether the government will be willing or able to enforce licences,
strict quotas and other measures required for effective management. Apart
from the lack of funds for field trips and resource studies, policing the
fishing force all along the Pacific coast would be virtually impossible.
Shrimp farming - a profitable business which has turned shrimps into
Ecuador's third export earner - is a case in point. Although the government
has banned the cutting of mangroves to make way for new ponds, shrimp
farmers who travel the winding channels of the Guayas estuary say that
deforestation continues, often in full view of the authorities. Sometimes an
outer band of mangroves is left as camouflage.
Ecuador's shrimp farms cover large areas of land with relatively low
investment in infrastructure. The country has over 120,000 hectares of
ponds, many of them extending over 10 hectares or more. Yields are low
compared with south-east Asia, where farming is much more intensive.
Land along the tidal flats is cheap and the climate perfectly suited for two
or more shrimp harvests a year. Earnings for 1991 reached Dollars 491m and,
in spite of a drop in international prices, this year's figure is running
close to the same level. Over two thirds of exports go to the US and most of
the remainder to Spain and France.
However, even shrimp farmers have problems: 'I wouldn't choose to invest in
shrimps if I were starting up now,' said Mr Fernando Felix, who has 30
hectares of ponds. 'Devaluation has benefited the exporters but not the
producers and our costs - pumps, seed, fuel - have gone up a lot. The profit
margin has dropped far below what it used to be.'
An outbreak of modern piracy in the Gulf of Guayaquil - once sailed by
British and Dutch pirate ships - has also unsettled producers, forcing many
boats set out for island shrimp farms with armed guards in the prow.
As nearly all the shrimp and fishing operations are in private hands,
privatisation will have little impact on this sector. The national fishing
company, EPNA, with assets worth about Dollars 1m, is to be liquidated,
according to Mr Gonzalez, while a new fishing law to allow the modernisation
of institutions and regulations is being drafted.
'We also need to do a second fisheries census to support political decisions
 -the first was 20 years ago and from 1972 there has been a big increase in
fishing.'
Over the past decade the total volume of fishery products exported has
barely changed, but there has been a big re-shuffle within the sector;
canned and fishmeal exports have dropped while frozen shrimps and fish have
taken their place.
In canning and fishmeal plants the average use of processing capacity is
under 25 per cent and catches are so poor that both have difficulty covering
operating costs. However, fishing exports (excluding shrimps) brought in
nearly Dollars 100m last year and experts believe there is still
considerable commercial potential in certain areas as long as controls are
applied.
Overall, fishing and shrimp farming provide a living for nearly 10 per cent
of the workforce. The artisanal sector, which has grown enormously over the
past 10 years, is particularly important in terms of employment and becoming
more so as jobless banana workers drift into the fishing villages. Here too
there is concern that coastal stocks are being overfished - although the
number of boats increased by a factor of six during the 1980s, the annual
harvest barely tripled and fishermen reported dwindling returns.
The government is helping artisanal fishermen by providing low priced fuel
and better marketing channels as well as new diversification programmes.
Conflicts between the artisanal sector and the shrimp trawling fleet reflect
the pressure on stocks with each blaming the other for reduced catches and
earnings. Although Ecuadorian law does not allow tuna boats to fish on
dolphins, large number of turtles have apparently been taken in shrimp
trawls and turtle exclusion devices are being tested.
Traditionally weak in influence, the fishing authorities are also - like
most of the bureaucracy subject to current austerity measures - starved of
funds and of personnel to ensure conservation measures are followed. Mr
Gonzalez believes that the only realistic way to implement controls is by
discussing them with fishermen and enlisting support for better management -
but this has not proved to be an effective strategy in the past.
