FT  10 JUL 92 / Parliament and Politics: Labour 'runners' line up
THE starting gun for Labour's shadow cabinet elections was formally fired
yesterday amid expectations that a record field of up to 60 candidates for
18 places might let several dark horses through to serve in Mr John Smith's
administration.
In fact, the race began almost as soon as the new parliament was sworn in,
as candidates jostled for support from the 271 Labour MPs, who form what was
once dubbed the world's 'most sophisticated electorate'.
With Mr Smith and Mrs Margaret Beckett now universally expected to win the
leadership and deputy leadership, two positions will automatically become
vacant. A further space comes from Mr Gerald Kaufman's decision not to run.
Many MPs also believe that Ms Jo Richardson, the veteran champion of women's
causes, is highly vulnerable, having come bottom in last year's poll with
107 votes.
Among those frequently cited as potential winners are Ms Harriet Harman, the
party's voice on health, Mr David Blunkett, local government spokesman, and
Ms Marjorie Mowlam, voice on City affairs.
Campaigners calculate that the larger number of candidates and MPs this year
means that between 95 and 105 votes should prove sufficient to guarantee a
place. As rules require that at least three votes must be cast for women,
there is some speculation that women's representation might rise from the
present four places to six or more.
Nominations opened yesterday and close next Thursday with the issue of
ballot papers. The election itself will be completed, however, only on July
23 - a full five days after the winners of the leadership and deputy
leadership are known.
Meanwhile, the race for the chairmanship of the parliamentary Labour party
looks set to be a photo-finish.
In the second round of the exhaustive ballot, Mr Doug Hoyle, widely deemed
the anti-establishment candidate, scored 93 votes against 72 for Mr Ernie
Ross.
Mr Allan Rogers and Mrs Gwyneth Dunwoody have been eliminated, leaving a
run-off next week. Another vacancy is in the Lords, where Lord Cledwyn of
Penrhos has announced he is stepping down from leadership of the Labour
group.
