FT  09 APR 92 / Election 1992: A campaign where the bland led the bland /
Review of the highs and lows of a performance that has thrilled but failed
to enlighten
IT WAS NOT the best of times, nor the worst of times. Often, it was almost
the blandest of times. Now, at the eleventh hour, it is a cliffhanger.
Elections, it seems, are now such delicate democratic organisms that they
must be swaddled in verbal cotton wool, coated in a flannel of
photo-opportunities and as slickly packaged as a weekend in Disneyworld.
Seldom can so much effort, film, tape and newsprint have been expended by so
many to enlighten so little.
Yet, as the broadcasting audience figures prove, the making and breaking of
prime ministers and parties is still a process that captures the public's
imagination.
This morning, as millions of voters wake to the buzzes and beeps of digital
clock-radios, the few thousand political activists who have actually
participated in the gruelling campaign will have to resist the temptation to
thump their snooze buttons and instead drag themselves to the breach.
For the 3,000-odd candidates - hopefuls and hopeless alike - every last
loud-hailer rallying call, every OAP chauffeured to the polling station
could tip the balance.
In the campaign itself, the parties fought themselves to a draw. The economy
and the National Health Service dominated the agenda. Education and Europe
fell off it. And so did the much-promised Dirty Tricks '92 election - a
figment of the press's wishful thinking. In spite of widespread billing as
the vilest election in history, the contest ended up with little more than
the occasional egg on its face.
Much of this can be blamed on Mr John Smith. His decision to come clean  -
well, cleanish - on his tax and spending plans with his shadow Budget at the
start of the campaign was the equivalent of bricking up a veritable Klondyke
of gaffe opportunities.
Mr John Major's efforts to conjure up a Nightmare on Kinnock Street was just
no substitute. What is more, the red menace charge carried no more
conviction than Tory sightings of the first economic upturns of spring or
Labour's pledge to reverse NHS underfunding at the toss of a billion-pound
coin.
Indeed, just to prove the Labour leader harmless, his minders took him
repeatedly to school-playgrounds where he showed the cameras that he could
sing nursery rhymes with the kids without swallowing so much as a baby.
As Mr Neil Kinnock went soft, Mr Major got tough on a barstool and Mr Paddy
Ashdown turned combatively moderate.
It was not until the now-celebrated War of Jennifer's Ear that anybody
actually lost their tempers. The great-grommet dispute is now best
remembered for its sound and fury rather than for its root causes. As a
diversion, nonetheless, it allowed righteous indignation a shortlived
opportunity to muscle the politicians' more run-of-the-mill hyperbole off
the stage.
For a while, too, the human story of one girl's wait for NHS treatment
seemed to inject a little everyday reality into the otherwise other-worldly
melange of borrowing requirements and pay differentials. But the true guts
of the health debate - how a government rations care with limited resources
 -was too complex an issue for anyone to unravel. The polls hiccoughed, then
returned to par.
For the most part, it was a battle between the Big-endians and the
Little-endians with the overstated cases of both parties, requiring - like
any other theatrical performance - the willing suspension of disbelief.
Mr Michael Ignatieff, the academic and broadcaster, was not alone in
remarking on the surrealism. 'My worst moment,' he recalled yesterday, 'was
finding myself kneeling on a motorway bridge in Carshalton with Paddy,
talking to a four-year-old about newts.'
There were plenty of other embarrassments. Mr Kinnock's spine-chilling
exhortation - 'Werrralllrighttt]]]' - at his Sheffield rally was one;
another was Mr Major's camp love affair with his soap box: 'Wherever I go
for the rest of this campaign, my soap box will go with me.'
Two other memorable moments of truth: when Mr Kinnock frankly explained that
the economy would be safe in his hands because he did not want to ruin his
chances of winning a a second term; the second, Mr Major's poignant plea to
voters not to have his home repossessed.
But in these blandest of times, it would be ungenerous to carp.
Middle-income, medium-powers like Britain should, perhaps, be grateful for
middling politicians nurtured, like the rest of us, on the National Health
Service and free school milk.
