FT  21 JAN 92 / Sweden seeks support deal for krona
SWEDEN is aiming to secure a special exchange rate support agreement with
other European countries to underpin the krona before negotiations for EC
membership begin, Mrs Anne Wibble, finance minister, said yesterday.
During a visit to London, Mrs Wibble said Mr Bengt Dennis, governor of the
Swedish central bank, had already discussed some form of 'intervention
arrangement' with other EC central banks participating in the exchange rate
mechanism of the European monetary system (EMS).
No deal had yet been concluded. 'It will be up to the other countries,' she
said.
Although she gave no details, such an arrangement could include provision
for EC central banks to make short-term credit lines available to their
Swedish counterpart to shore up the krona in case of exchange market
tensions. Such mutual support facilities are an integral part of the EMS.
Mrs Wibble, who yesterday met Mr Norman Lamont, the UK chancellor of the
exchequer, said she hoped an accord could be reached before negotiations on
accession to the EC began in the second half of this year, when Britain
takes over the EC presidency.
Mrs Wibble was confident Britain would support Sweden's aim to become a full
EC member by January 1 1995. She also voiced Sweden's wish to take part in
European monetary union from the earliest possible date.
According to treaty changes agreed at the Maastricht summit last month, Emu
could take place as soon as 1997.
Sweden's need for a more formal exchange rate stabilisation framework for
the krona arises from its decision last June to link the currency to the
Ecu.
Sweden has undertaken unilaterally to keep the krona within a 1.5 per cent
fluctuation band against the Ecu. In the event of pressure on the currency,
Sweden does not have the ability to fall back on support made available to
other EC members through the EMS's multilateral credit arrangements.
Last month the Swedish central bank was forced to raise its key lending rate
by 6 percentage points to 17.5 per cent, to counter massive capital outflows
sparked by speculation of a krona devaluation. The lending rate has since
come down to 12.5 per cent.
A total of SKr12bn (Pounds 1.1bn) of short-term capital had returned to the
country this year, following SKr25bn-SKr30bn last year after the December 5
interest rate rise, Mrs Wibble said.
Sweden's non-Socialist government appeared last night to be in disarray over
its economic policy after a senior figure in the cabinet, Liberal leader
Bengt Westerberg, cast doubt on the government's plan to cut taxes by
SKr10bn a year until the middle of the 1990s.
Mr Westerberg, who is social affairs minister, said in a television
interview he had changed his mind about the need to reduce Sweden's tax
burden. He did not think further government spending cuts were possible or
necessary.
