FT  22 AUG 92 / Major's deskful of difficulties: Problems are piling up in
the in-tray
Not so long ago it was a truism that government popularity rose in August.
The royal family replaced ministers of the crown as the favourite targets of
the tabloids.
The latest furore surrounding the Duchess of York confirms that some things
have not changed. But Mr John Major is learning the hard way that politics
and the foreign exchange markets are no longer respectful of the holiday
calendar.
When he returns from Spain tomorrow he will find that none of the problems
he left behind has gone away; and that several more have been added to a
crowded prime ministerial in-tray.
The Labour party, under the leadership of Mr John Smith, is promising to
emerge from its post-election shock to take full advantage of Mr Major's
discomfort.
In recent years August has become a month for international crises. In 1991
it was the abortive coup in the former Soviet Union; the year before, Iraq
invaded Kuwait. Now, it is the war in Bosnia and the threat of renewed
hostilities with Iraq.
The latest conflicts forced Mr Major to interrupt his break this week to
announce that RAF warplanes would be sent to protect Shia communities in
southern Iraq, and ground troops would escort UN aid convoys in Bosnia. Both
decisions raised as many dilemmas as they promised to solve.
At home, two years of economic recession have ensured that the voters are no
longer indifferent to the holiday plans of their political masters.
With house prices still crumbling and the dole queues lengthening, many
cannot afford to pay for the foreign holidays they took for granted in the
late 1980s boom years.
A renewed battering for sterling in the wake of the dollar's slide provided
an awkwark reminder that things may get worse before they get better.
So if Mr Major flicks through the past two weeks' newspapers, he will find
plenty of unwelcome headlines about the government's performance. Many have
been unfair. Unless one takes the view that politicians should never take
holidays, it is hard to substantiate claims that his government has lost its
sense of direction.
Criticisms of Britain's EC presidency after just seven weeks are premature.
Mr Major could hardly have been expected to persuade the French to bring
forward their referendum on Maastricht treaty or to have convinced the 12
that there was a neat and easy solution to the disintegration of the former
Yugoslavia.
But for a prime minister who only four months ago was celebrating a general
election victory, it has been an unusually difficult August. The storm
clouds over Bosnia and the Gulf have coincided with a darkening domestic
scene.
Announcements this week of the eighth consecutive quarterly fall in national
income, of another drop in retail sales, and of short-time working at Ford
motor plants, were only the latest in a series of gloomy economic
indicators.
The volume of public criticism from Tory MPs has been turned down but their
private unease has not dissipated. Critical motions on the agenda for the
Brighton party conference in October confirm the disquiet of constituency
activists.
Growing uncertainty over the outcome of the French referendum has bolstered
the confidence of the Tory Euro-sceptics. As the pound sinks to new lows
against the D-mark, they have linked the pain of the recession with the
prime minister's pro-European stance, including commitment to the exchange
rate mechanism.
The Euro-sceptics now hope that a 'no' vote in France on September 20 will
both wreck the treaties on European union and tear apart the ERM. The best
guess in Whitehall remains that the French are more likely to vote Yes. But
few will stake money on it.
Then there is the council tax. Many of the recent warnings that falling
house prices will result in unfairly high bills have owed more to political
mischief-making than to cool analysis. The average tax bill will be
determined by the level of council spending and the number of households
rather than by movements in property values.
But it is true that the burden of the tax will fall disproportionately on
the south-east: the area worst-hit by the recession and by a debt trap that
has left a million households with mortgages higher than the value of their
properties. So a widespread perception that the tax will be inherently
unfair could take hold.
The Treasury will be told to provide a substantial financial cushion to ease
in the new tax. But that in turn will make even harder the task of the
cabinet committee charged with overall control of public spending.
The new arrangements will inject a degree of political logic into the annual
share-out of resources. But when the committee meets for the first time next
month it will be unable to avoid harsh decisions on where the axe must fall.
Mr Major is aware that more must be done to give definition to his economic
strategy. Too many people, Tories among them, have been left with the
impression that his programme for the next five years consists of holding
the pound at DM2.95.
So a renewed effort to persuade people that the prize of permanently low
inflation is worth the pain can be expected. Ministers will seek to persuade
voters and their own supporters that price stability will provide the
backdrop for the tax cuts and higher-quality public services promised during
the election.
It will not be easy. Downing Street expects the pressure on sterling to
intensify as the French referendum approaches. Mr Norman Lamont, the
chancellor, will do all he can to avoid an interest rate rise, but if the
opinion polls point to a 'no' vote in France that may be impossible.
One of the prime minister's first tasks will be to sift through the options
for an emergency package of measures to accelerate recovery if the unease in
the Tory party over the economy and Europe threatens to turn into rebellion.
Establishing a grip on the EC presidency will be impossible until France
makes up its mind. Uncertainty leaves the sceptics with the initiative.
Alongside that lies the risks of military involvement in the Balkans and the
Gulf. Mr Major's sombre demeanour after his reluctant decision to send
ground troops to Bosnia underlined concern that British troops may become
entangled in the bloody conflict.
Few expect the Yugoslav peace conference, which Mr Major will co-chair in
London next week, to halt the fighting. The public opinion which demanded
action could quickly change if British soldiers begin to join the list of
casualties.
It all adds up to a formidable array of political challenges. There are
those who detect silver linings in many of the clouds.
The economy is showing signs at least of stirring. The inflation rate is
tumbling. The French could yet vote 'yes', easing pressure on the ERM and
paving the way for a small cut in interest rates and the beginning of more
visible recovery. The Euro-sceptics could then be isolated.
And the prime minister is a much tougher and resourceful politician than he
is given credit for. But for now Mr Major is returning to an in-tray
overflowing with distinctly uncomfortable uncertainties.
