FT  08 APR 92 / International Company News: AMD surges after court victory
the US semiconductor manufacturer which has been locked in battle with its
principal competitor, Intel, over rights to a best-selling chip design - has
returned dramatically higher first-quarter earnings.
The company's earnings rose to Dollars 84.9m, or 86 cents a share on a fully
diluted basis, compared with Dollars 4.2m, or 2 cents, for the same period
last year. Revenues advanced to Dollars 407.4m for the quarter, a 48.5 per
cent increase over the Dollars 274.3m recorded last year.
The results far exceeded market expectations, with the average of analysts'
predictions coming out at 69 cents a share.
Mr Jerry Sanders, AMD's chairman, said the company was now the world's
second-largest microprocessor maker, behind Intel, but ahead of Motorola and
National Semiconductor.
The company attributes the revival in its fortunes to its victory earlier
this year in a five-year court battle with Intel. AMD had been fighting for
the right to manufacture its version of an Intel microprocessor chip - the
80/386  - which is now used by the majority of personal computer
manufacturers world-wide.
Intel recorded record revenues and earnings earlier this year as a result of
buoyant sales of its 80/386 and 80/486 microprocessors.
AMD won not only the right to make its version of the 80/386 chip but also
Dollars 15.3m in damages against Intel which, the trial judge said, had
breached a 1982 technology sharing pact with AMD under which the companies
had agreed to swap microprocessor and other product designs.
It is conventional in the semiconductor industry for a company with a
successful product to license its manufacture to competitors with a view to
dispersing the technology more widely and providing customers with a second
source.
However, Intel - mindful that research, development and other expenses were
costing it between Dollars 1bn and Dollars 2bn a year - refused to license
its most profitable product.
During the first quarter, AMD said, sales of its Am386 device had exceeded
Dollars 180m, more than 44 per cent of total revenues.
The company said that it had detected some improvement in the state of the
computer business - the semiconductor industry's largest customer - with
orders for some components currently exceeding shipments.
