FT  21 JUL 92 / Chill winds on campaign trail: The fading US recovery has
serious political implications for the president and his challenger
Mr Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, delivers his biannual
Humphrey-Hawkins congressional testimony today in a uniquely charged
atmosphere.
As President George Bush and Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas square up for
what seems likely to be one of the most closely fought presidential races in
years, America's slowest economic recovery on record is again showing signs
of faltering. After a flurry of awful economic figures, there is talk of a
'triple dip' recession. The dollar is under renewed pressure in financial
markets following Germany's decision to tighten monetary policy again. The
Fed, meanwhile, has badly undershot its modest targets for monetary growth.
Mr Greenspan thus faces a potential mauling from Democrats on Capitol Hill,
many of whom believe US interest rates are too high, in spite of being at
their lowest level for a generation.
Mr Greenspan will unveil economic forecasts and monetary targets for 1993
and do his courteous best to justify the Fed's recent handling of monetary
policy. Having been markedly too optimistic on previous occasions (a year
ago he spoke of 'compelling signs' of recovery shortly before the economy
sagged into a second dip), he will be under pressure from congressmen not to
overstate the economy's strength a second time. He will also be acutely
aware of the need to preserve the Fed's reputation for political neutrality.
He cannot afford to provide ammunition for either the Republican or
Democratic campaigns.
The question on everybody's lips is whether the recovery will falter before
November. The past 10 days could hardly have been more worrying. The
employment figures for June - a loss of 117,000 non-farm jobs and a surge in
the unemployment rate to 7.8 per cent - sent shock waves through financial
markets. These were recession numbers pure and simple. Last week's figures
added to the gloom. The trade deficit widened in May for the third month
running, mainly because of weak exports. Disappointing retail sales in June
indicated a stalling of personal consumption in the second quarter.
Industrial production fell last month, with declines in every important
sector. Housing starts, meanwhile, dropped by more than 3 per cent. The
University of Michigan index of consumer confidence sank in early July, as
did car sales relative to late June.
This consistent picture of fading vitality in the real economy was matched
by unexpected weakness of money and credit. To Mr Greenspan's embarrassment,
M2, the Fed's favoured measure of broad money, has contracted in nominal
terms in the past three months, bringing it below his target of annual
growth of 2.5-6.5 per cent. Previously rapid growth of M1, a narrow measure
of money preferred by monetarists, has also levelled off. Some of the
monetary weakness undoubtedly reflects a shifting of liquidity into bond
funds and other instruments offering a higher return than bank deposits.
Even so, few analysts are confident that money is growing fast enough to
support a robust economic recovery. The historical link between M2 and
growth of the real economy is too close for comfort.
The good news for the Bush administration is that few economists yet predict
a return to outright recession. With personal consumption spending flat,
hardly anybody expects the growth rate of 2.7 per cent at an annual rate in
the first quarter to be sustained. Many forecasters have shaved their growth
forecasts to 1.5-2 per cent in the second and third quarters; some are more
pessimistic still. In Europe 2 per cent may not sound too bad. But in the
US, where growth rates of 5-6 per cent are regarded as normal in the
aftermath of recessions, it is little short of disastrous. With the labour
force still expanding, 2 per cent is regarded as the minimum politically
acceptable rate of growth, and even this may not be enough to prevent
unemployment edging higher.
Some economists are confident that employment figures for July, due early in
August, will give Mr Bush a lift ahead of the Republican convention in
Houston. They say the June data were distorted by the timing of that month's
survey, and predict a sharp rebound this month. But even if the unemployment
rate falls slightly, the pervasive feeling of economic malaise is likely to
persist.
Mr Bush's problem is that his economic record is noticeably worse than that
of any of his post-second world war predecessors. In the first three years
of his presidency, real gross domestic product grew at an annual rate of
only 1.1 per cent. That is significantly slower than under Eisenhower in the
late 1950s or Ford and Carter in the 1970s (see chart). Yet in all three
instances, the incumbent party lost control of the White House. Even if,
against the odds, growth rebounds in the next few months, voters will lack
that warm feeling of economic security that is the single best predictor of
electoral success.
How can Mr Bush defend his lacklustre record? The White House has already
attempted to shift blame on to Mr Greenspan, arguing that excessively tight
monetary policy helped push the economy into recession in 1990. But such
criticisms are hard to sustain. In an effort to restore growth, the Fed has
cut the discount rate (at which the Fed lends to banks) from 7.5 per cent to
3 per cent, a level lower than anybody imagined possible in the late 1980s.
While not ruling out further monetary easing if the economy stumbles, Mr
Greenspan is likely to argue that the Fed has fired most of its ammunition.
With the dollar already looking wobbly, he may try to focus attention, once
again, on the excessive budget deficit, arguing that this has stifled
recovery by preventing the requisite decline in long bond yields.
The depressing reality is that the Bush administration has lost control of
both sides of the federal budget. Conservative critics are dismayed not only
that Mr Bush broke his 1988 campaign pledge not to raise taxes but that he
has also acquiesced in the fastest growth of domestic federal spending since
the Camelot presidency of John F Kennedy in the early 1960s. Real domestic
spending has grown at an annual rate of more than 8 per cent, yet the cash
has mainly been dissipated in higher transfer payments (often to the rich
elderly as opposed to the genuinely needy) rather than channelled into the
productive investments demanded by Mr Clinton.
Financial markets, like voters, are now trying to assess the economic
implications of a possible Democratic victory in November. Mr Bush was
unlucky to reach the Oval Office just as the long economic upswing of the
1980s was drawing to a natural close. After frantic consumption and
borrowing during the Reagan years, no president could have avoided the need
for a prolonged period of adjustment as debts were paid down. In this sense
Mr Bush is a victim of circumstances.
It seems probable, however, that fortune will smile on America's next
president. Mr Nicholas Brady, the treasury secretary, says 1993 and 1994
will be 'banner years' for the US economy. This is perhaps an exaggeration
because there is still a risk that the economy will remain mired in
semi-recession next year, but growth at an annual rate close to 3 per cent
ought to be achievable. The new president, after all, will inherit moderate
inflation - the underlying rate could be as low as 3 per cent - and a
manufacturing sector that is extremely competitive in world markets.
In the past decade, US industry's relative competitiveness has been
transformed by three mutually reinforcing developments: a sharp decline in
the dollar, very slow growth of US wages and significant improvements in
productivity. Mr Larry Veit, a senior economist at the investment bank Brown
Brothers Harriman in New York, calculates that US unit labour costs are 4
per cent lower than in 1982. In dollar terms Japanese, German and British
unit labour costs have risen by 93 per cent, 74 per cent and 28 per cent
respectively. The US is thus poised to recapture market share overseas as
the world economy recovers in the mid-1990s.
If steady growth does indeed resume next year, the incoming president will
benefit from a natural cyclical decline in the budget deficit. The Fed,
meanwhile, would probably tighten monetary policy, resulting in a modest
rise in short-term interest rates and some firming of the dollar. If Mr Bush
is re-elected, that is the end of the story. He would probably try to curb
federal spending and push for minor tax cuts, such as a lower top rate of
capital gains tax. But with Democrats still controlling Congress, few
measures would be passed. The fiscal gridlock of the late 1980s would
continue.
For financial markets, a Clinton presidency is a far riskier prospect. The
core of Mr Clinton's economic programme is a planned Dollars 200bn increase
in public investment over the next four years, split evenly between
infrastructure and education and training. The case for such investment is
powerful; the doubts centre on the way it would be financed. With a
projected budget deficit of Dollars 350bn for this year, the only
responsible way to finance such investment is through higher taxes. Yet Mr
Clinton has pledged not to raise taxes on the majority of middle-income
Americans.
His hope of raising nearly Dollars 100bn from the top 2 per cent of earners
may prove unrealistic. The practicality - let alone desirability - of
raising large additional sums from foreign companies operating in the US is
also doubtful. The already rapidly declining defence budget, meanwhile, may
fail to yield the Dollars 50bn in extra savings pencilled in by the Clinton
team. There are many potential alternative sources of revenue: higher energy
and excise taxes, for example, or even a value-added tax along European
lines. But these would all hit the middle classes harder than the
well-to-do, and thus seemingly violate Mr Clinton's campaign pledges.
The right investments in education, skill training and infrastructure could
sharply improve America's long-run economic competitiveness. This is the
promise of a Clinton presidency. The troubling question, however, is whether
Mr Clinton, co-operating with a Democratic Congress, would resist the
temptation to pay for this investment with another surge in federal
borrowing. Unless the Democrats can allay this fear, financial markets are
likely to view the possibility of a Clinton victory in November with some
trepidation.
