FT  20 NOV 92 / Delay for Iranian lathes venture
A UK-IRANIAN joint venture potentially worth Pounds 150m in business to BSA
Tools, the Birmingham-based machine tool company, is being held up by delays
over export licences, it was claimed yesterday.
Mr Keith Bailey, the company chairman and a central figure in the Matrix
Churchill affair, is pushing the Department of Trade and Industry to approve
a licensing deal under which standard lathes would be produced in Iran.
Kits worth Pounds 150m could be supplied over the next five years for
assembly in Iran.
Mr Bailey said the BSA licence application has been with the DTI for months,
but the Iran project has been 'on the back burner' because of the Matrix
Churchill case, his own trial over alleged illegal exports to Iraq, and the
receivership this summer of Matrix Churchill.
Now, with charges against the three Matrix Churchill executives and Mr
Bailey's own case dropped, the BSA chief is keen to go ahead with the
project.
The DTI said yesterday that it could not comment on individual cases.
Last month, however, it introduced special licensing procedures for a list
of countries including Iran, to ensure that equipment such as machine tools
could not be used in the manufacture of weapons.
That meant that export licence applications for Iran were now taking longer,
the department said.
Mr Bailey's company Automation Investments bought Matrix Churchill from
Iraqi ownership two years ago, but the Coventry-based lathe and grinding
machine producer went into receivership after bank funding was withdrawn.
Last month, AI, which also owns BSA Tools, bought Matrix Churchill back from
the receivers, Price Waterhouse. The grinding business has been sold,
leaving Mr Bailey with the Churchill lathe range.
Customs and Excise commissioners agreed earlier this year to stay a
prosecution against Contractors 600 relating to the export of lathes to Iraq
on payment of Pounds 75,000, the government said yesterday.
The lathes were supplied by the Colchester Lathe Company. The proceedings
were in respect of the export of castings without the requisite licence, Sir
John Cope, paymaster-general, said in answer to a written question from Mr
George Foulkes, Labour defence spokesman.
