FT  31 JUL 92 / The Breakup of ICI: Pharmaceuticals division entering flat
period after decade of success
IF ICI Bioscience were demerged this year, it would account for 31 per cent
of the group's sales - and 70 per cent of its profits and research spending.
ICI Bio will take the fast-growing, science-based businesses that have
propped up ICI's fortunes during the recession of the last two years.
The international company closest in shape to ICI Bio is Ciba-Geigy of
Switzerland, which is also dominated by a large and profitable
pharmaceutical business and a large and less profitable agrochemical
business, with a scattering of smaller specialist chemical activities.
Monsanto of the US and Sandoz of Switzerland are other international
chemical groups with a biological orientation similar to ICI Bio.
The pharmaceutical division was ICI's most successful operation in the last
decade. It has not only shared in the general prosperity of the
international drugs industry but also contributed some best-sellers of its
own, particularly to treat heart disease and cancer.
However, most analysts believe the current, rapid growth of ICI
Pharmaceuticals is over. Indeed, the half-yearly results announced yesterday
show that drug sales and profits are up only marginally on 1991. The best
that Mr Ronnie Hampel, ICI chief operating officer, could say was: 'We
continue to expect pharmaceuticals to perform over the whole year at a level
approaching that of last year.'
Pharmaceutical sales are suffering from the expiry last year of US patent
protection on Tenormin, ICI's best-selling heart drug. Already 30 per cent
of Tenormin prescriptions have been replaced by its cheaper generic version,
atenolol.
ICI did at least expect to lose Tenormin revenues. This year's unexpected
blow was the withdrawal, because of side-effects, of Temafloxacin, the
antibiotic which the company licensed from Abbott of the US in order to fill
a gap in its product line.
On the positive side, sales of ICI's three newest drugs - Zestril (heart),
Zoladex (cancer) and Diprivan (anaesthetic) - are all up by more than a
third this year. And Dr Tom McKillop, technical director of ICI
Pharmaceuticals, says the company has 'a very strong portfolio' of drugs at
various stages of development, with about 10 in clinical trials. These could
give ICI Pharmaceuticals a new burst of growth in the late 1990s after a
relatively flat period.
However successful the new drugs are, ICI Bio may find it difficult to keep
the pharmaceuticals business running independently as a medium-sized player
in an increasingly competitive global industry.
ICI is only number 17 in the world league of drug companies in terms of
sales. Analysts predict it will have to link up with a competitor - through
merger, acquisition or a comprehensive global alliance - in order to
maintain strength in research, development and marketing. Last year there
was speculation about an ICI-Wellcome combination, which would make
strategic sense, and both the recent Wellcome share sale and proposed
demerger of ICI Bio would make this easier.
Although restructuring is on the agenda for the international pharmaceutical
business, it is a more urgent priority for the agrochemicals industry in
which ICI is the world's second largest player after Ciba-Geigy. Curbs on
agricultural production, especially in Europe, are reducing sales of farm
chemicals and leading to overcapacity. ICI Agrochemicals has a strong
scientific and marketing base but its prospects do not look bright.
ICI Seeds is still a much smaller business than agrochemicals but it has
better growth prospects. The company is developing a range of genetically
engineered seeds for crops ranging from non-squashy tomatoes to
herbicide-resistant corn.
Other promising ICI Bio businesses include Quorn, the fungal food, and
Biopol, a biodegradable plastic made by bacteria.
