FT  13 NOV 92 / Consumer durables up in spite of recession
HOUSEHOLD ownership of consumer durables continued to increase last year in
spite of the deepening recession, although there was growing evidence that
saturation point is approaching for some goods.
The sharpest rise was in ownership of video recorders, which increased from
61 per cent to 64.6 per cent of households over the previous year. This
compares with 36 per cent five years ago. More than four out of five
families with children own a video recorder.
If the rapid increase in ownership since the mid-1980s continues over the
next few years, the machines will become as commonplace as refrigerators and
televisions.
In contrast, the expected boom in home computers has failed to materialise.
Only 18 per cent of homes had one, compared with 17 per cent the previous
year and 15 per cent back in 1986.
The high proportion of homes with consumer durables such as fridges, washing
machines and telephones, and the impact of the recession, made the further
increase in ownership surprising.
Households owning refrigerators or fridge/freezers, the most popular of all
consumer durables, rose from 98.1 to 98.2 per cent, and the popularity of
telephones rose from 87.4 to 88 per cent, compared with 38 per cent 20 years
ago. Telephones were least predominant in the north of England, where just
over one in five homes was still without one.
Washing machines have become universally popular, with average ownership
around 87 per cent, although in greater London a surprising figure of only
77 per cent of homes had one.
The only year-on-year fall in ownership was for television sets, which
slipped a fraction from 98.1 per cent to 97.9 per cent of households. Wales
and the east Midlands were the most avid followers of cable television with
7 per cent ownership compared with a national average of 6 per cent.
More than 80 per cent of households now have full or partial central heating
compared with 60 per cent a decade ago and 32 per cent 20 years ago.
Regionally, Yorkshire and Humberside had the fewest homes with central
heating at 71 per cent, while the south-east and the east Midlands had the
most at 87 per cent and 86 per cent respectively.
There was a surprising jump in the number of second homes acquired last year
up from 2.9 per cent of households to 3.4 per cent.
In general, the lower a household's income the greater the percentage spent
on housing and fuel and the less on leisure goods and motoring. In the
higher income groups, motoring and fares accounted for more than 15 per cent
of total expenditure, in the poorest groups less than 5 per cent.
