FT  18 MAR 92 / Federal Express to cut 3,400 jobs in UK: US parcels delivery
service retreats from its loss-making European operations
FEDERAL Express, the US parcels delivery service, is cutting nearly 3,400
jobs in the UK in a restructuring of its loss-making European operations.
The Memphis-based group is closing 36 of its 39 sites in Britain as part of
a retrenchment that will cut 7,000 jobs, or 72 per cent of the European
workforce.
The move represents a significant retreat by Federal Express which devoted
the latter half of the 1980s to very aggressive international expansion, but
which has faced mounting losses from its international operations in recent
years. Like many other express package carriers, Federal Express had banked
on a rapid expansion of the European express package delivery market, partly
from '1992' harmonisation moves.
However, executives calculated yesterday that the intra-European express
package market remains at around 100,000 a day, compared with 2m-3m in the
US market.
Executives also admitted yesterday that there were problems integrating its
air-based intercontinental and US delivery systems with the predominantly
'ground-based' intra-European operations, and said it overestimated the cost
savings.
Federal Express has also faced tough competition from Brussels-based DHL
Worldwide Express, which is arguably better-known in Europe and more used to
dealing with European language and customs requirements.
Federal Express said it would discontinue all its intra-European express
services, and concentrate instead on providing a direct intercontinental
service between 16 European cities and the US. As part of the overhaul, the
US group will sell much of its remaining UK business to Securicor Omega
Express, Britain's largest independent carrier of overnight parcels.
Securicor Omega will increase its workforce by 400 as a result. It will also
act as a subcontractor for Federal's international package business, to and
from UK locations no longer served by the US carrier.
In a separate agreement, Federal Express said that it had arranged for TNT
Express Worldwide, the Australian delivery company, to provide a similar
sub-contractor service for inbound deliveries from the US to 10 other
European countries - mainly Scandinavia and the smaller Mediterranean
countries.
Financial details of the sale and subcontractor agreements were not
disclosed. Federal Express added that it expected to announce further
subcontractor arrangements for the French, German and Italian markets during
the 'next few days'. The 16 cities which it will continue to serve directly
include London, Paris, Brussels, Amsterdam, Zurich, and six in Germany.
The retrenchment will account for a large portion of a Dollars 254m (Pounds
144m) charge to operating expenses in its third quarter. Federal Express's
results showed a total operating loss (after this charge) of Dollars 250.6m
for the period, and an after-tax deficit of Dollars 193.4m.
The international division made an operating loss of Dollars 125.5m before
charges during the three months - up from Dollars 70.6m a year earlier - on
revenues of Dollars 602.1m. The company declined to say how much of this
related to the operations it will now cease operating.
Shares in Federal Express, which has been rumoured to be in talks with TNT
over its European operations for months, gained Dollars 2 to close at
Dollars 55 1/4 yesterday with analysts divided over whether Federal Express
had taken sufficient action to address its international problems.
TNT deal, Page 26
