FT  07 NOV 92 / Travel: St Helena - almost a lotus-isle - Mary Rose Beaumont
was much taken with the scene of Napoleon's exile
'WHERE exactly is it?' people would ask when I said I had been to St Helena.
'In the South Atlantic,' I would reply. 'Ah,' they said knowingly, 'near the
Falklands.'
WELL, NO, actually. It is about 4,000 miles from the Falkland Islands, bang
in the middle of the South Atlantic Ocean, nearly 1,000 miles south of the
equator, some 1,100 miles from Angola to the east and 1,800 miles from
Brazil to the west.
The nearest landfall is Ascension Island, 700 miles to the north, and St
Helena can only be reached by sea, two days' sail from Ascension and five
days from Cape Town. Its very remoteness and inaccessibility were the
principal reasons that it was chosen by the British government for
Napoleon's exile.
St Helena was discovered by the Portuguese admiral Juan de Nova Castella on
May 21 1502, the feast-day of Saint Helena, mother of the Emperor
Constantine. It continued in relative obscurity for another
century-and-a-half, though it became prosperous as a port of call for ships
trading with the East.
Situated in the south-east trade winds, it was a stopover for ships rounding
the Cape of Good Hope to revictual and take on fresh water. The British laid
claim to it in 1659 and the East India Company was granted a charter by
Charles II to administer it, until in 1834 it was brought under the direct
rule of the British crown. With the construction of the Suez Canal and the
invention of the steam ship, St Helena's importance declined, and the island
is now entirely dependent on the UK government.
The St Helena plies between Cardiff and Cape Town, calling at Tenerife and
Ascension Island before reaching St Helena some two weeks later. Once a year
she calls at Tristan da Cunha, the remotest and most sparsely populated of
all British territories. She is a jolly little ship to travel on, carrying
both passengers and cargo. She is the essential lifeline between St Helena
and Britain, carrying everything from food to cars to mail.
The ship also carries much longed-for fresh fruit on her return journey from
Cape Town. The passengers are divided between those who are having the trip
of a lifetime, often recently retired, those who are taking up posts on the
island, and St Helenians returning home. The St Helena is a very friendly
ship, the affable crew, partly British, partly St Helenian, making life on
board a riot of fun. There are deck games, films and bingo, as well as a
quiet lounge in which to read.
Approaching from Ascension Island, excitement mounts to fever pitch among
the home-bound St Helenians as the dot on the horizon is gradually revealed
as a cloud-capped volcanic rock rising sheer from the surrounding sea. How
Napoleon's heart must have sunk when he saw those formidable cliffs and
realised that this time there was to be no escape.
The port and capital of the island is Jamestown, named after King James II.
The actual landing process is hazardous: after clambering down the companion
way one is conveyed in a small motor boat from the ship to the slippery
wharf steps where one is obliged to hang on to a rope and jump when the
sailors say so. Failure to obey has been known to result in a ducking. Those
unable to negotiate this obstacle are put in a large container, lowered over
the side and landed like cargo.
Having negotiated the landing, and been through Customs, one walks through
an archway emblazoned with the coat of arms of the East India Company into
Jamestown proper. The capital (pop: 1,500) boasts just one street - Main
Street - with the castle, seat of government, police station, library,
courts of justice, Anglican church, museum, post office, two hotels and
shops and houses prettily painted in Portofino colours.
The Consulate hotel is an elegant, white-painted building with blue filigree
ironwork pillars and verandahs. It is here that le tout St Helena assembles
twice a day to drink and chat (except on Sundays, when everything closes
down). The hotel was originally built about 1780, but along with the other
buildings in Jamestown was ravaged by white ants which were inadvertently
and disastrously introduced on to the island in the broken-up timbers from a
captured Brazilian slave-ship. The hotel was rebuilt in 1863 in stone, iron
and teakwood, which is unpalatable to white ants. Mangoes and avocadoes grow
in the bougainvillaea-hung garden.
Out of Jamestown it is uphill all the way, whether on foot or by winding
narrow roads. Jacob's Ladder is a spectacular sheer ascent, 699 concrete
steps leading to the top of Ladder Hill, the shortest way to a coronary.
Winding up the single track road by car is more leisurely, although
expertise in reversing is required, since the rule of the road dictates that
the ascending car should give way to the descending.
Progress is therefore slow, but as few people are in a hurry it does not
matter. Drivers and passengers wave genially at each other. With a
population of only 6,000, it is not surprising that nearly every driver of
the perhaps 2,000 cars knows one another. (On my return to Britain, I
continued to wave to other drivers, but their reaction - incredulity to
outright hostility - caused me to desist).
Jamestown is the warmest and most humid part of the island. The temperature
can drop sharply as one ascends into 'the country.' There is a turn in the
road called Button-Up Corner where men on horseback supposedly buttoned up
their jackets against the cool breeze. The weather can change dramatically:
one moment bright sunshine, the next mist or driving rain.
St Helena, which is 10 miles long and six broad, has unsurpassed views: the
sea is almost always visible, glittering in the sun or storm-tossed. The
uplands alternate between bare volcanic rock and lush pastures. In the early
part of this century there was a massive planting scheme of New Zealand
flax, in an attempt to grow an exportable crop, but the invention of
synthetic fibres put paid to that; the huge spiky flax plants are gradually
being replaced by an afforestation scheme, principally of eucalyptus and
conifers, to help prevent soil erosion.
The plants and animals of St Helena are plentiful, though the wind militates
against all but the keenest domestic gardener. Mynah birds are everywhere,
chattering and gossiping, and little ring doves peck boldly at your feet.
Rarer are the brilliant red cardinals and yellow cape canaries. The
wirebird, an unlovely plover-like creature which scuttles rather than flies,
is an essential sighting for tourists, since it is found nowhere else but St
Helena.
The supreme place of pilgrimage is the house where Napoleon was
semi-incarcerated. The original document, dated May 1816, ordering his
detention as a prisoner of war, may be seen in the attorney-general's
archives. Napoleon lived at Longwood House in imperial state, with his
retinue, but his life was a misery, constantly spied upon and discourteously
treated by the governor. Finally he became seriously ill. He died in May
1821, aged 52, and was buried with full military honours.
The long melancholy walk down to the tomb is peopled by ghosts. After
Napoleon's death the house was abandoned, but it has since been restored to
its original state, and many artefacts have been returned or borrowed from
France to fill out the historical picture. The garden, too, under the
supervision of the French consul, who lives at Longwood, has been replanted,
and both house and garden are open to the public.
The tourist who leaves the ship for only a day will be conducted round St
Helena in a 1928 Cadillac, acquiring at least a superficial overview. Those
who leave the ship whilst it sails to Cape Town and back will have two weeks
to enjoy the sights and get to know the friendliest people on earth.
'Saints' are a racial mixture, reflecting St Helena's trade with the East,
so that there are discernible Chinese, Malaysian and Indian features, as
well as Portuguese and Dutch from the early traders. There is also a dash of
African blood from the slave ships which were intercepted en route to
America. English is spoken with a purity heard only in remote country
districts of Britain.
The sights for the day tripper will include Plantation House, the home of
the governor. It is an elegant 18th century country house whose grounds are
open to the public. The main attraction is Jonathan, a 162-year-old tortoise
the size and weight of a small tank, and his satellites Myrtle, David, Emma
and Fredrica, which browse on the lawn in front of the house and permit
their necks to be scratched.
A more extensive tour would be required to visit the ruins of High Knoll
fort, which stands on a peak overlooking the northern approach, built by the
British to defend the island against invaders. Two spectacular basalt
columns, quaintly named Lot and Lot's Wife, dominate the rocky volcanic
landscape from almost any viewpoint.
Probably the best way to get to know the island is on foot. There are peaks
to climb and cliffs to scale, as well as more gentle ascents for the less
athletic. One such is Flagstaff Hill, the breathtaking view from the top
being well worth the effort. From there one can see a huge hump-backed hill
called The Barn on the edge of which, to the eye of faith, can be discerned
the profile of Napoleon.
Two principal features of St Helena linger in the mind: the extraordinary
scenery, switching from pastoral to bleak and back again in minutes; and the
people, warm, friendly, dignified, courteous, honest and fiercely proud of
their island and its history. Its geographical remoteness, and the
difficulty of access to all but the most determined island lover, means that
it is untouched by so-called progress, mercifully free from television,
shopping malls and building blight. If lotuses were grown on St Helena they
would form the staple diet.
Mary Rose Beaumont travelled as a guest of Curnow Shipping, The Shipyard,
Porthleven, Helston, Cornwall TR13 9JA. Fares to St Helena start at Pounds
446 (four-berth cabin) and rise to Pounds 1,606 for sole use of a double
cabin, one way; return fares are double. A room at the Consulate Hotel with
private bath or shower is Pounds 35 per person per day, including meals.
