FT  15 AUG 92 / China's peasant traders shake off Mao's shadow: Tony Kelly
haggles with the market traders of Xingyi in south-west China
A THIN blue stream flows up the hill towards me. The tide grows stronger
until by 9am it has become a torrent. Looking closely I can make out the
different specks of blue which make up the flow. Some wear rush baskets on
their backs, holding potatoes or tiny babies. Others wheel bicycles whose
panniers overflow with produce. A few drag wooden carts, piled with
home-made furniture, by hand. Others arrive by horse or ox-cart.
The lucky ones get a lift in a bus or on an 'iron cow' tractor. The unlucky
trudge up the hill with 30ft trunks of bamboo resting on their shoulders, or
dance with bended bees as they struggle to keep their balance, weighed down
by the loads which hang from their wooden shoulder-poles. Many have already
been walking or cycling for three or four hours. Some even left their
village homes the previous day.
This is Xingyi, a small market town of 40,000 in Guizhou province,
south-west China. The town is surrounded by conical limestone mountains and
by fields of rice, wheat and rape dotted with stone cottages. For six days
in every week it goes quietly about its business, and the noisiest sound
comes from the hillside cemetery when firecrackers signal a funeral. But on
Sundays every inch of town is taken over by a noisy and colourful free
market. There are no arguments over Sunday trading here: Xingyi, at the
meeting-point of three provinces, has been a centre of trade since the Ming
dynasty.
I taught English at the teacher-training college for two years and hardly
missed a Sunday market. Outside the college gates, barbers set up shop with
their collections of rusty bowls and instruments, bars of soap and thermoses
of warm water spread out on a cloth. Old ladies squat behind piles of
coriander and cabbage arranged on plastic sheets, while carpenters lie back
in the wooden threshing-boxes which they have made and carried to market.
Second-hand Army clothing is sold from rickety trestle-tables and a
government worker gathers a crowd as he teaches the rudiments of
pig-breeding with the aid of a loudhailer and a poster display.
All traffic has to admit defeat at the hands of the mass of pedlars and
shoppers. Women sell eggs in the road from enormous baskets and cautious
customers hold them up to the sun for inspection; peasants are almost
obscured from view behind the mountains of dried red chillies which they are
selling; incense-makers and chopstick-carvers and stonemasons and
tea-sellers all ply a brisk trade.
At a street library, teenagers pay a mao - about a penny - to borrow a comic
and flick through it as they perch on a wooden stool, while up the road a
group of workers pay to stare in excitement through hand-held projectors at
pictures of the sights in Beijing that they will never be able to afford to
visit.
There is a man selling miniature orange trees, a cyclist with live frogs
tied to his handlebars, a group of Miao nationality women selling hundreds
of herbal remedies - bark, twigs, roots, leaves, bones - from tiny red
pouches. They will even administer treatment on the spot with their
grotesque and ancient instruments. You can visit a street chiropodist or,
worse still, a dentist who will extract your painful tooth using a drill
attached to his motorbike throttle.
And so it goes on, a giant medieval street fair, story-tellers, quacks and
all, with just the occasional incongruous intrusion of 20th-century life. In
a seedy back room off the main square, shoppers watch the latest government
video, a warning of the dangers of AIDS, advertised on the street by a
hand-painted hoarding of a barely-clad white woman lying back seductively
with a rose between her teeth. Road safety police play music and messages
from a tape recorder and display photographs of mangled bicycles and bloody
corpses.
More blood is on offer at the butchers' stalls where severed pigs' heads sit
on tables beside ears, feet, intestines and bowls of lard swarming with
flies. You can have a chicken slaughtered and plucked while you wait, eat
dog-meat straight from the cauldron or watch as your eels are slit open on a
wooden board. You may have your watch or your trousers repaired, buy fresh
lychees or watermelon, order a good luck message in calligraphy for your
front door. You can buy embroidered baby-carriers and bamboo water-pipes and
Taoist tracts and T-shirts and kittens and crucifixes and sugared peanuts
and rock hewn from the mountains and second-hand bicycles and bundles of
toilet roll sold by the kilo and weighed on hand-held scales.
It all seems so natural, yet ten or 15 years earlier it could not have
happened. Markets were condemned in China's Maoist years as an 'incorrect'
line in the incessant class struggle; the ownership of a duck or a potted
plant was a suspect sign of capitalist behaviour. Now the hawkers are back
and as you watch them peddling everything from piglets to plastic trinkets,
it is hard to believe that things were ever different.
Making money comes readily to the Chinese, as Hong Kong so forcibly
demonstrates. And in this era of economic reform, everyone - from the
shoeshine boys at railway stations to the 'model millionaires' who run
computer companies - has become an entrepreneur. After all, you never know
how long it will last. The freedom to become rich appears far more precious
to the Chinese than a political freedom which they have never known, not
even before Communism. Now they are allowed to do once more what they do
best.
At the end of the day the river flows back out towards the villages.
Peasants carry home the prizes - plastic buckets, posters of film stars -
which their week's labours have enabled them to afford. Buses are piled high
with chickens and geese, street-cleaners clear away the debris with their
long-handled brooms. Xingyi can rest in peace for another week until the
next onslaught of market forces.
