FT  13 AUG 92 / Arts: Mahler - London Promenade Concerts
LOTHAR Zagrosek conducted the BBC Symphony Orchestra for Tuesday's Prom, a
mainstream collation of Weber, Schumann and Mahler. Zagrosek's work with the
BBCSO when he was a principal guest conductor was largely devoted to
contemporary repertory; here, stretching himself back into the heart of the
19th century, he revealed a finely-tuned if rather cool sense of romantic
style.
The orchestra played alertly and securely enough for him, without ever
suggesting that the performances were on the point of spontaneous ignition.
Zagrosek began with the overture to Weber's Oberon and moved on to
Schumann's First Symphony. With a little contrivance, such a programme could
have been made profoundly thematic, for during his career as a conductor
Mahler worked at performing versions of both Weber and Schumann, preparing
scores of Weber's operas (a vocal one of Oberon) and 'improved'
orchestrations of all the Schumann symphonies.
Here the versions were the usual ones: never quite fleet-footed enough in
the overture, a little under-powered in the outer movements of the symphony.
The songs for Mahler's Des Knaben Wunderhorn settings which made up the
second half were shared between Yvonne Kenny and Wolfgang Schone - who had
been drafted as a late replacement for Thomas Hampson.
Ms Kenny was in sumptuous, resplendent voice; beautifully focused in all her
contributions, never over-stressed or under-characterised. Schone was less
convincing; his approach was brazenly operatic, and his dark baritone lent
an unexpected shade to some of the songs. * * * On Sunday, the annual visit
to the Proms of the National Youth Orchestra of Great Britain had also
focused on Mahler, adding the deeply Mahlerian Three Orchestral Pieces of
Berg as preface.
Conducted by Tadaaki Otaka and complemented by the Bach Choir and the BBC
Welsh Chorus, the NYO took on the Second Symphony. The match was a very fair
one; the orchestra routinely brings forces of well over a 100 to its
concerts and here there were 160 players to make the sonic splendour of the
occasion never in doubt. The standard of playing too was remarkably high,
with woodwind and brass solos in particular outstanding.
But the symphony lost some of its intensity under Otaka's brittle command,
which cut rhythms down to the bare bone, and rarely gave phrases the
opportunity to expand. Despite the weight of tone, the first movement seemed
neutral and underpowered, and the numinous sense was never to be recaptured.
Jean Rigby was a compelling mezzo-soloist, Lesley Garrett a vivid, slightly
pressured soprano one. In the end, the sheer commitment of the NYO rescued
the occasion; it could, though, all have added up to much more.
