FT  14 SEP 92 / Kinkel issues urgent plea for help on refugee crisis
MR Klaus Kinkel, the German foreign minister, yesterday issued an urgent
plea for help in dealing with the refugee crisis, warning that Germany's
political stability was at risk because of the flood of asylum-seekers from
Yugoslavia and eastern Europe, writes Lionel Barber.
Mr Kinkel said Germany was shouldering a disproportionate burden. Although
he avoided calling for quotas on refugees, the German foreign minister urged
greater understanding from EC countries. 'This is the principal problem for
Germany,' he said.
Amid continuing riots in the former east Germany and attacks on refugee
hostels, Mr Kinkel said Germany had so far taken in more than 220,000 asylum
seekers from Bosnia  - more than any other country apart from neighbouring
Croatia. Millions more potential economic refugees were sitting on their
suitcases in eastern Europe, he said.
EC foreign ministers expressed sympathy, but avoided a commitment to spread
the load by relaxing their own immigration controls. Instead, they agreed to
speed up Community efforts to reach a common approach  - required because of
the difference in laws. Germany's asylum laws are the most liberal in
western Europe.
Mr Douglas Hurd, British foreign secretary, reminded ministers that Britain
had faced an immigration crisis in the 1960s, as a result of the influx of
Asian and other members of Commonwealth countries.
This had led to the rise of the National Front and 'very considerable
agitation and commotion'. Britain had subsequently dealt with the problem,
'and we do not wish it to return', he said at the end of the weekend meeting
in Hatfield, Hertfordshire.
The EC is taking a two-track approach to the immigration problem, starting
with an emergency humanitarian effort in the new Yugoslavia aimed at
assuring food supplies and helping the refugees to stay as close to their
homes as possible. Improving the refugee camps in Bosnia and Croatia as the
winter approaches is vital, said one EC official.
The second aim is to identify the scope of the problem which ranges from the
threat of mass immigration from economically-depressed eastern Europe to the
migration pressures from North Africa.
Another concern is the impending impact of the single European market which
will provide for free movement of EC citizens from the end of the year.
This week, EC justice and interior ministers are to meet in Brussels for
talks on immigration. With racist pressures building up in France and
Germany, due to the increase in refugees, ministers agreed that immigration
is becoming one of the most pressing issues facing the Community.
Ministers agreed to improve the humanitarian aid effort to Somalia, which Mr
Hurd described as a 'unique tragedy' caused by famine and the complete
breakdown of law and order. Some 185,000 tonnes of food are being
dispatched, as well as some Ecu50m (Pounds 36.4m) of non-food aid.
The European Commission is to send observers to Somalia to improve aid
co-ordination. Mr Hurd is to hold talks with Mr Boutros Ghali, the UN
secretary-general, to work out plans for a political solution in the North
African state.
