FT  15 MAY 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Earth Summit casts shadow over
timber talks
A DECISION to ask producer nations to assess the resources needed to attain
sustainable management of their tropical forests drew fire from
environmentalists at the two-week meeting in Yaounde, Cameroon, of the
International Tropical Timber Organisation, which ended yesterday.
'It's like offering them a combination of a ransom note and a blank cheque,'
said Francis Sullivan of Worldwide Fund for Nature. 'The decision says
nothing about the opportunity to recover money to support sustainable
management from fees, taxes and other revenues, outlined in their own
consultants' report, which suggests that more than enough money is available
already.'
Brazil, the only country to have submitted such an assessment so far has
asked for Dollars 6bn to fight poverty, which it says is the root cause of
the non-sustainable use of forests. A British delegate scorned the Brazilian
demand as 'pie in the sky'.
This 12th session of ITTO also dealt with a budget crisis. The organisation
is heavily overspent, and has drawn on reserves of working capital to
finance its 1992 budget shortfall and to make possible the next meeting in
Yokohama in November, at which the renegotiation of a second tropical timber
agreement is to begin.
ITTO's critics say this has been a disappointing fortnight in which too
little has been achieved. This is not surprising as the meeting has ended
only two weeks away from the Earth Summit in Rio, where a Statement of
Forest Principles is to be agreed, hope of a Forest Convention now having
been abandoned.
The pall of Rio hung over this conference. Delegates admitted privately that
there were two reasons so little was accomplished. First, that consumer
nations were unwilling to risk upsetting producers so close to the Earth
Summit, where their co-operation would be essential to avoid disaster;
secondly, that Rio offered the possibility of an instrument that could lend
ITTO muscle (if not teeth) for the future, and that it would be wise to
wait.
But environmental non-governmental organisations (NGOs) at the meeting said
Rio was a smoke-screen to cloak the organisation's indecision and inaction.
They spoke of the lack of 'real action in tackling the tropical timber
trade's role in perpetuating deforestation, both by consumers and
producers'. A statement by the NGOs referred to huge disparities between the
objectives and priorities of the organisation and the actual progress being
made in achieving them.
The ITTO meets twice yearly in what has become a kind of square dance,
producers to the left, consumers to the right, and 'promenade', with the
NGOs on the sidelines calling the figures. But, like a dance, it goes round
and round and gets nowhere.
One delegate complained that the ITTO was too much occupied with projects
and not enough with policy. Since 1985, more than 100 research and
development projects have been approved, and more than Dollars 100m
allocated.
The NGOs charge that many of these projects are meretricious and that anyway
they bring ITTO members no closer to the original aims of the agreement, to
expand trade and foster conservation. What is more, they say, the project
cycle needs to be reformed. It is an exhaustive procedure, in which project
suggestions are prepared long before ITTO meetings, where they are
considered and then passed back to committees. The projects then become the
responsibility of the small and overstretched staff, who have to supervise
their implementation. The NGOs say this has led to corruption and
misappropriation of funds.
ITTO's defenders cite the adoption of guidelines for conservation and Target
2000 (in which members have agreed that all exports of tropical timber
should be from sustainable forests by the next century) as evidence of
progress. Mr Arthur Morell of the UK Timber Trade Federation, an adviser to
the UK delegation, says ITTO is the best safeguard of future supplies. He
attacks the critics: 'if a fire is not burning as brightly as you would
like, you build it up, not throw water on it'.
But Mr Julio Cesar Centeno, a Venezualan forestry expert, insists that the
organisation, after nine years, has achieved no change. 'Not one cubic metre
of tropical logs has been processed in any producing country due to ITTO,'
he declares, 'nor have any industries been modernised or new industries set
up.' He says the objective of fostering development has been ignored by
ITTO.
The International Tropical Timber Agreement also makes reference to fair
prices for timber products. 'Discussion on prices has been consistently
avoided in the deliberations of the organisation,' says Mr Centeno.
The NGOs' expressed scepticism about ITTO members' reliance on Rio to set
the organisation on its feet. 'If 47 countries cannot make progress in nine
years,' said one observer, 'what can 147 nations do in two weeks?'.
