FT  16 APR 92 / Technology: Bright ideas play a game of chance
This is the saga of an invention made 10 years ago in a medium-sized UK
metals company, sold on to a group of a investors in California, taken up
for a while by an international chemicals group - and now brought back to
the UK through venture capital funding.
The invention, Ebonex, is a black ceramic material that should have a vast
range of electrochemical applications, from batteries to biological
implants. It conducts electricity well and is chemically stable and
non-toxic.
Ebonex may at last be on the brink of profitable exploitation. Its story so
far illustrates the way in which the different attitudes of large and small
companies, investors, lawyers and regulators can facilitate or frustrate the
commercialisation of intellectual property.
Peter Hayfield, a scientist working at IMI, discovered the properties that
make Ebonex (a suboxide of titanium) such an excellent material for
electrodes. The first applica-tion he had in mind was to heat large
quantities of custard in institutional kitchens, by passing an electric
current through the custard between Ebonex electrodes.
Some IMI managers wanted to develop Ebonex within the company but the board
decided that, as a metals manufacturer, it should not devote resources to
developing a ceramic. So IMI sold the patent rights to a group of 75
investors in California who set up a new company, Ebonex Technologies Inc
(ETI), to exploit the material.
The Californian group found it difficult to raise the full purchase price
and brought in ICI, the UK-based chemicals group, as a partner at the end of
1986. ETI generated considerable interest in Ebonex during the following
three years.
However, the first application planned for Ebonex - chlorine generation for
swimming pools - was not a commercial success, and the company could not
develop any other revenue-earning applications before reaching the limit of
capital investment ICI had set for it.
So in 1990 ETI went out to raise investment from new sources. It negotiated
with several companies that were interested in buying Ebonex technology,
including Heraeus, a German materials group.
The ETI board came close to agreeing a deal with Ampersand, a US venture
capital group, but agreed to give the management team, headed by Robert
Clarke, time to put together a counter offer which would bring Ebonex back
to the UK. Clarke was keen to exploit Britain's low manufacturing costs and
strong technical skills.
Venture capitalists like to say how important personal contacts are in their
business. But these had nothing to do with the way ETI and its UK venture
partner, Korda &amp; Company, got together. Clarke simply got Korda's name from
the British Venture Capital Association directory and made a 'cold call' to
Korda's London office last July.
The ETI team liked Korda's flexibility and willingness to accept risk. 'Some
of the other people I saw had an overriding fear of failure,' says Clarke.
Korda was sufficiently excited by the innovative nature
potential of Ebonex to grapple with the complexities of seeking consent for
the financial restructuring from 75 individual Californian investors, as
well as ICI and a very demanding state Department of Corporations. Six
months of legal negotiations in California reinforced the view of Carolyn
Hayman, Korda's joint managing director, that the US legal culture is 'a
significant obstacle in building constructive business relationships'.
The legal fees ran over the Dollars 50,000 set aside for them, but
eventually last February the deal was completed. ETI has emerged with a new
name, Atraverda, and an initial Pounds 250,000 investment by Korda for 30
per cent of the business. Hayman expects to invest at least Pounds 750,000
more in the near future.
The challenges now include: bringing in revenues rapidly from selected
electrochemical applications of Ebonex; securing immediate supplies of the
material from a subcontract manufacturer in the US while setting up in-house
production facilities; strengthening patent protection; and identifying the
most promising future applications.
