FT  03 FEB 92 / Early Russian IMF entry urged: US financial aid for Yeltsin
hampered by domestic pressures
PRESIDENT George Bush gave his full backing to Russia's early entry to the
International Monetary Fund and World Bank after weekend talks with Mr Boris
Yeltsin, the Russian president.
The pledge reflects a growing sense of urgency within the administration for
supporting Mr Yeltsin's economic reform programme. It brings the US closer
to Britain, which is pressing for Russia to become a full IMF member by
April, a move which would speed efforts to create a fund to help to
stabilise the rouble.
Mr Bush's call for early membership also reflects his own domestic political
difficulties in overcoming congressional opposition to direct US financial
aid to Russia and other reformist republics.
During 3 1/2 hours of talks at Camp David on Saturday, Mr Yeltsin delivered
an impassioned appeal to Mr Bush - repeated later to Congressional leaders -
for western support. Failure to respond would mean a return to the Cold War
and the arms race, he said.
Mr Bush, who is facing the conflicting pressures of a Dollars 400bn (Pounds
220bn) budget deficit and calls to spend money at home to ease the effects
of recession, avoided a commitment to provide direct financial aid. Instead,
he stressed the provision of food and medical supplies.
This week congressional leaders will hold talks on Mr Yeltsin's request for
further humanitarian aid.
The US administration shifted its opposition to Russian membership of the
IMF late last year. The move stemmed from a growing realisation that the
Fund - a neutral body with substantial credit resources - was best placed to
deal with economic reform in the former Soviet republics.
But a senior US official expressed concern at 'bureaucratic delays' over
processing the Russian application for membership and dispensing advice to
reformers in Moscow. The British government is also chafing at talk that
Russia may not gain access to the Fund - and therefore credit - until the
autumn.
Mr Bush and Mr Yeltsin agreed to hold two summits this year. Mr Yeltsin will
make a state visit to Washington this spring, with Mr Bush going to Moscow
by December.
The two leaders also signed a joint declaration that the US and Russia 'do
not regard each other as potential adversaries'. From now on, the
relationship between both countries would be characterised by mutual trust
and respect and a common commitment to freedom, it stated.
Mr James Baker, US secretary of state, will visit Moscow in the middle of
this month to discuss the latest proposals to cut offensive long-range
nuclear missiles. Mr Yeltsin's proposal to work on a joint project for a
global space-shield against missile attack will also be discussed.
Mr Richard Cheney, US defence secretary, yesterday rejected Mr Yeltsin's
call for massive cuts in long-range nuclear weapons beyond those already
proposed by Mr Bush.
'There's a level . . . we want to hold at,' Mr Cheney said on Cable News
Network's weekly news programme.
On Friday night at the United Nations, Mr Yeltsin spoke in glowing tones
reminiscent of former US president Ronald Reagan of the prospects for a
'Star Wars' defence shield which would ultimately render nuclear weapons
obsolete.
Congressional leaders who spoke to Mr Yeltsin said he had urged them to
approve immediate new shipments of food and medicine in the next three
months to help Russia and the other republics through the winter. Asked for
specifics, Mr Yeltsin replied: 'Everything.'
