FT  07 MAR 92 / Bank of Japan spurns pleas on monetary policy
THE BANK of Japan yesterday dismissed calls to ease monetary policy after
its latest survey of business showed the weakest outlook in four years, with
profits and capital spending plans declining sharply. Mr Kiichi Miyazawa,
the prime minister, called for an early release of funds for public works
projects in an effort to stimulate the economy.
The central bank's quarterly survey of business, known as the Tankan, showed
a particularly depressed outlook for manufacturing industries. The index of
business conditions dropped 18 points from November to minus five in
February, the first dip below zero since November 1987 and the largest
quarterly decline since 1975.
It is open to question whether the bank is out of sync with the rest of the
country as the evidence that Japan's economy is rapidly weakening is piling
up. The sharp deterioration as shown by the Tankan has added fuel to calls
from political and business leaders for an early cut in interest rates. The
bank's official discount rate was cut by half a point to 4.5 per cent at the
end of December.
A Bank of Japan official said the bank saw no reason to alter its monetary
policy because of the survey, and had not revised its view on economic
growth. The effects of the last cut in rates were still not fully realised.
While the economic expansion rate was slowing, the underlying tone of the
economy remained firm.
The apparent denial of any need to cut interest rates is deceptive. This is
because a further cut in rates soon would be fully consistent with current
policy, which has been to loosen monetary conditions since last July by
three half-point cuts in the official discount rate (ODR).
It is doubtful whether lowering interest rates would do any more in Japan to
stimulate the economy than it has done in the US. 'The Tankan tells us an
ODR cut will do nothing to get the economy going,' said Mr Jesper Koll,
economist at SG Warburg in Tokyo. Instead, a fiscal stimulus of the sort
advocated by Mr Miyazawa was needed.
The Tankan shows a sharp slowdown in the economy, easing of prices, cuts in
capital spending, a slackening labour market, and an increase in inventories
of the sort that could eventually prove to be a real recession, rather than
just the slowdown already confirmed.
Profits in manufacturing industry, excluding oil refining, were expected to
fall 16.4 per cent in the fiscal year ending March 31. A further decline of
0.3 per cent is forecast for next year, with a 5.8 per cent increase
forecast for the second half of the fiscal year.
Non-manufacturing profits, excluding electricity and gas, are expected to
decline by 4.8 per cent in the current year, and grow by 2.1 per cent next
year.
The reason that easing of interest rates may not have a strong impact on the
economy is that spending is being cut and inventories are piling up, even as
companies report an easing of credit markets. The central bank has
repeatedly said corporate liquidity remains adequate and is not a constraint
on spending. Weak demand and falling profits are.
Similarly, labour market indices show a gradual easing, especially in
manufacturing industries, even though labour supply remains generally tight.
The survey showed a sharp easing of inflationary pressure in both input
prices and manufactured goods prices. The index reflecting excess
inventories has risen steadily from 6 a year ago to 31 in February, although
the bank argued that inventory levels would come down in the next quarter.
Perhaps the most disturbing figure in the report is the reported 11.8 per
cent cut in capital spending plans in the fiscal year starting in April,
including a 14.2 per cent decline in manufacturing industry. The fall in
capital spending, which accounts for more than 20 per cent of GNP, is
expected to speed up in the second half.
