FT  18 SEP 92 / Democratic challenger harried over his attitude to draft
issue
PRESIDENT George Bush's re-election campaign yesterday increased the
virulence of its attacks on Mr Bill Clinton, the Democratic candidate, for
having avoided the military draft 23 years ago.
Mr Bush's team, confronted by a fistful of polls showing the challenger
consolidating his lead, cited in evidence a document published in the very
conservative Washington Times newspaper yesterday and written by the former
commander of a reserve unit associated with the University of Arkansas.
Mr Clinton had communicated with the man in 1969 about his draft status.
In the document, dated ten days ago, Lt-Col Eugene Holmes wrote that he
believed Mr Clinton had 'purposely deceived me' by using the possibility of
joining the reserves 'as a ploy to work with the draft board and delay his
induction and get a new draft classification.'
Questioning the candidate's 'patriotism and integrity,' Lt-Col Holmes warned
of 'the imminent danger of a draft-dodger becoming US commander-in-chief.'
He concluded by saying that, because of ill-health, he would answer no more
questions on the matter.
Mr Marlin Fitzwater, White House spokesman, said the document - published in
a newspaper deeply opposed to Mr Clinton and, though the spokesman denied
it, possibly furnished by the Bush campaign - went to 'the heart of why Bill
Clinton should not be president of the United States.'
This week, the draft issue has been the principal focus of what has
sometimes seemed an increasingly desperate Bush re-election strategy. There
is little hard evidence yet that it is paying dividends. The latest national
poll, out yesterday, for the Wall Street Journal/NBC News, has Mr Clinton
ahead 51:41 per cent, little changed from its previous survey but a smaller
margin than in most other surveys this week.
It found that doubts about Mr Clinton's character, though higher than
reservations about Mr Bush's, have not increased at all recently. Only about
half those polled were satisfied with his explanations about the draft, but
a higher percentage was unhappy with Mr Bush's denial of involvement in the
Iran-contra scandals.
A New York Times poll of Florida, the fourth largest state, found Mr Clinton
six points ahead, contradicting another poll published on Wednesday and
giving Mr Bush a seven-point margin in what has long been a Republican
stronghold in presidential elections.
All the polls suggest that concerns about the economy transcend by far
interest in the draft question and in the Republican emphasis on traditional
family values.
This latter point has also placed Mr Bush on the spot. He was expected
yesterday to veto the recently passed 'family leave' bill, requiring
companies with more than 50 employees to allow absence from work on
compassionate and other personal grounds without penalty.
He will soften this opposition by proposing tax credits for companies to
achieve the same end.
