FT  14 NOV 92 / Finance and the Family: Still cautious over Clinton - Diary
of a Private Investor
LAST WEEK'S US presidential election result did not come as much of a
surprise to me. Last December, after a brief visit to New York and talking
with some 'average' Americans, I commented in an FT article: 'President Bush
appears to be more popular in Britain than at home,' and 'the Democrats
might win.'
However, I also mentioned that the Republicans could win if President Bush
stood down 'in favour of someone thought more likely by the voters to tackle
the problems of the economy and the country's rapidly decaying
infrastructure and educational system. This might result in a more
protectionist president which would have consequences for exporters in the
UK and elsewhere.'
It was these same domestic issues which resulted in a win for Bill Clinton.
It also appears likely that the US will adopt an increasingly protectionist
position in order to lower its unemployment rate, reduce foreign debt and
try to improve the economy and the average US citizen's standard of living.
It has been said that Bill Clinton and his supporters are 'a new type of
Democrat.' In my view, they are almost Republican. This could well be good
for America, but for other nations this could produce problems.
As a private investor, I am seeking ways of avoiding losses and trying to
make profits as a result of Bill Clinton and his team.
It is likely to be more difficult for non-US companies to take over American
firms. This could hit companies such as Hanson, unless it decided to split
itself into two and float off the US side as a separate US quoted company.
Reduced takeover activity could also affect the profits of merchant banks.
During the campaign there were allegations that non-US companies were not
paying their fair share of corporate taxes on their US activities. It could
be that some UK companies will be affected if the US tightens tax
regulations.
However, it is to be hoped the UK will not negotiate on such matters via the
EC bureaucracy but will come to an improved individual agreement with the
US. The UK could point out that US companies' activities in the UK gain
significant benefits from the UK's corporate taxation system - benefits
which are much better than can be obtained from many other countries.
In order to protect jobs in the US, Bill Clinton could well initiate 'buy
US' fiscal encouragements and provide extra incentives for US exporters.
This means that UK companies like Rolls Royce will not only face increasing
competition in the US market but also extra competition in other overseas
markets form incentivised US companies. Other UK companies, such as British
Airways, could also suffer.
Bill Clinton has said that the defence expenditure will be cut. This will
not help companies like British Aerospace which will face much greater
competition in overseas markets with those markets also showing a decline in
growth.
However, not everything is negative. The new administration will provide
extra opportunities for well-run UK companies which can market themselves
effectively in the US. For example, there are plans for an overhaul of the
health care service in the US to ensure universal coverage and value for
money. Perhaps UK companies operating within the National Health Service
could sell some of their expertise in the US.
The US education system is overdue for a shake-up. More money is likely to
be spent on education and US businesses will be required to increase their
training programmes. This should mean more money spent on schoolbooks and
training manuals and this could lead to increased opportunities for UK
publishers.
The new vice president, Al Gore, is a committed environmentalist. I think
this could have important implications for oil companies and, eventually,
there might be a new levy on petrol and increased import duties on oil from
overseas. However, there will also be opportunities for companies involved
in creating 'environmentally friendly' products and new techniques for
disposing of various waste material safely and efficiently.
As to the US stock market, I feel it is still too high. The average price
earnings ratio of the companies in the S&amp;P 500 Share Index is now around a
similar level to that seen just before the 1987 crash.
With increasing unrest in Russia, what would happen if president Yeltsin was
'removed' next month? Bill Clinton will not be inaugurated as president
until January 20. Until that time, any US response would have to come from
president Bush: how quickly could Bush and Clinton agree on a joint
response? It is this 'hiatus' period that most concerns me. It would be the
ideal time for unrest in trouble spots around the world.
A number of US banks look as if they will go the same way as many of the
savings and loan institutions: into administration. And is not now the best
time for a cathartic upheaval in the financial markets so that both the
outgoing and incoming presidents can disclaim responsibility for it?
Thus, although I like a number of US companies, such as Dole Food, I will
continue to avoid investing in the US market. I am also wary about prospects
for other stock markets after Clinton's inauguration. If, as expected, he
encourages Americans to invest even more in the US by providing tax
incentives, then will some of the US investment funds overseas be
repatriated to take advantage of those incentives? If so, it could cause a
drop in the share price of a number of non-US companies.
