FT  10 JUL 92 / Parliament and Politics: Field lists City names forhearings
MR FRANK FIELD, chairman of the Commons social security committee in the
last parliamentary session, yesterday issued a list of leading City figures
whom the committee would like to call to testify.
Mr Field said he had been contacted by an informant familiar with the
intimate workings of Robert Maxwell's private interests and had been
provided with information about them.
Mr Field said he believed that instructions for the movement of pension fund
assets were given to Maxwell's Liechtenstein-based trusts after his death,
although there was no suggestion that any of those he wished to call had
given instructions or even knew of them specifically.
Among those he is seeking to call is Mr Philip Morgenstern, senior partner
at Nicholson Graham and Jones, a City corporate law firm specialising in
pensions law.
The firm acted as solicitors to the Mirror Group Newspapers Pension Scheme.
The firm said that Nicholson Graham and Jones had acted for Maxwell's
private interests and that when it had done, Mr Morgenstern was typically
involved.
However, the spokesman said that neither Mr Morgenstern or the firm would be
likely to make any comment until a formal request to appear before the
committee was received.
Mr Field also said he would like to question Lord Spens, whose former
employer, the Henry Ansbacher merchant bank, handled the announcement of
US-based trust PH(US), an investment company which has been under
investigation for receiving money from Maxwell public companies and which is
outside the scope of the UK administrators.
Lord Spens was prosecuted in the Guinness affair last year, the prosecution
being halted after charges against his co-defendant, Mr Roger Seelig, were
dropped on health grounds.
Lord Spens was unavailable for comment last night but Mr David Lake, his
assistant, dismissed any connections with PH(US).
'As far as I'm aware, there is absolutely no connection (between Lord Spens
and PH(US)),' he said. 'Mr Field is running up a blind alley.'
He said he knew of no links between Lord Spens and the Maxwell business
empire.
