FT  21 SEP 92 / US probes Jordan embargo claims
THE Bush administration is investigating reports that Jordanian trading
companies are continuing to violate the United Nations embargo on Iraq by
shipping militarily useful goods across the Jordan-Iraq border to Baghdad.
Investigators in Washington say the Jordanian companies - including two
previously identified as part of Iraq's military procurement network - are
believed to be sending stocks of small arms ammunition, artillery rounds and
spare parts for the Iraqi military.
The goods are being bought in eastern Europe, shipped to Jordan and
transferred overland from Amman, according to one US official.
Included in the shipments are artillery rounds for a wide-range of mostly
Soviet-made howitzers, long-range guns, mortars and heavy anti-air guns.
Also being shipped, according to US intelligence reports, are small arms
ammunition in various calibres that can be used for machine guns,
anti-aircraft guns, sub-machine guns, side arms and rifles.
At least two US government agencies are also examining allegations that some
of the Jordanian trading companies may be financing the shipments with loans
from the Bahrain-based Gulf International Bank (GIB).
GIB, in which Iraq formerly held a 10 per cent equity stake, was a prime
commercial lender to Iraq before the August 1990 invasion of Kuwait by Mr
Saddam Hussein.
Since 1990 the bank, which is owned by the governments of Bahrain, Kuwait,
Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, has restructured its
capital and and distanced itself from Iraq.
The US investigators say they have no reason to suspect that GIB is aware
that its loans to Jordanian trading companies may be being used to violate
UN sanctions.
On Friday a GIB official said: 'To the best of GIB's knowledge it has had no
dealings with Jordanian-based companies with regard to any goods of military
value to Iraq.'
The US Department of Justice has taken the unusual step of making public a
letter from the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) that denies any
involvement by the CIA in the making of more than Dollars 5bn of illegal
Iraqi loans by the Atlanta, Georgia branch of Italy's Banca Nazionale del
Lavoro (BNL).
The release of the letter, a copy of which was sent to BNL prosecutors in
Atlanta last week, appears to be an attempt by the Bush administration to
deflect allegations that it hid information about the BNL case.
The CIA letter also seeks to counter a disclosure last week in Congress that
senior officials of BNL in Rome were aware of and approved the BNL
operations.
Lawyers for Mr Christopher Drogoul, the former BNL Atlanta branch manager,
last week asked a US court to allow them to withdraw Mr Drogoul's earlier
guilty plea and approve a full-scale trial, partly on the grounds that Mr
Drogoul was in contact with US intelligence officials and had in any case
been given approval for the Iraqi loans by BNL's head office in Rome.
BNL's Rome office has denied it was involved in the Atlanta scheme.
