FT  29 SEP 92 / Electricity regulator challenged: Power users seek judicial
review
MEMBERS OF Coffer, the group representing electricity interests, are to make
a legal challenge against Professor Stephen Littlechild, the electricity
regulator.
The group said yesterday that the majority of its members, which include
large industrial users of electricity, trade unions and coalfield
communities, had decided to apply for a judicial review.
This follows Prof Littlechild's rejection of charges by Coffer that he had
failed to ensure that electricity distribution companies were fulfilling
their obligation to buy the cheapest possible electricity.
The decision was taken at a meeting last Friday. However the Major Energy
Users Council, which represents some of the UK's largest industrial
companies, was not present and will not decide whether to back the move
until a meeting of its executive committee on October 13.
The council said last night that no implications should be read into the
delay.
Coffer maintains that new gas-fired stations being built by the electricity
companies to supply part of their needs do not produce the most economical
electricity.
Prof Littlechild told Coffer in a letter two weeks ago that he was already
reviewing the economic purchasing obligations, but Coffer said yesterday
that this reply was unsatisfactory.
Mr Roger Lyons, chairman of the Trades Union Congress energy committee,
said: 'The gas-fired power station programme will mean intolerable increases
in electricity prices for all electricity consumers - domestic, small
business and industry. What British industry really needs is the cheap
energy that is already being provided by our large, efficient coal-fired
plant using British deep-mined coal.'
Offer, the electricity regulation office, said: 'Our position remains as it
was in Prof Littlechild's letter.'
UK electricity consumers received better service from their electricity
companies last year, according to Offer.
In its latest report on the reliability of electricity distribution, Offer
gives figures for the number of supply interruptions and the time taken to
correct them for each of the 12 distribution companies in England and Wales
and the two power companies in Scotland.
These show that London Electricity had the lowest number of interruptions
per 100 customers, followed by Norweb. The poorest service was given by
South Wales Electricity, but Offer notes that this company was engaged in
major works which involved planned interruptions.
Observer, Page 25
