FT  01 SEP 92 / UK Company News: Knives come out in battle for Simpsons -
The City watches as allegations fly across the restaurant table
YOU smell Simpsons before you see it. At noon each day the aroma of grilled
meat wafts on to Cornhill, reminding City dealers lunch is being served -
much as it has been for the past 235 years.
The chop house, packed with pinstripes, dishes up traditional food. But the
owners, Simpsons of Cornhill, have found an unappetising item on their plate
 -the prospect of a battle for control of the board.
Internal strife at companies boasting only four outlets - in this case
Simpsons, the Jamaica Inn, Dell'Ugo and Palio - does not normally arouse
much interest in the City. But this fight has been given added spice by the
characters involved and the assets at stake.
On one side of the table, the board is being defended by Mr Roy Ackerman,
once deputy chairman of the Kennedy Brookes restaurant chain, and Mr Paul
Reece, a former director of Midsummer Leisure. Rattling their knives on the
other side, sits Mr Robert Klapp, former chairman of Select Appointments,
and Mr Alan Crompton-Batt, an existing director on the four-man Simpsons
board.
The protagonists are not fighting merely for two City taverns and a couple
of west London restaurants; they are competing for control of a group in
which they see enormous potential. Mr Ackerman, who turned the Kennedy
Brookes chain into a group consumed by Forte for Pounds 173m, intends to
repeat the performance with Simpsons. 'I hope to have the best group of
restaurants in the south east and London,' he said.
His optimism is shared by Mr Reece, who helped develop the Firkin pub group
which fetched Pounds 9.7m in 1990.
The two culinary executives floated Simpsons last August for Pounds 2m.
Their aim was to develop a group of restaurants linked by traditional
themes. They were backed by Mr Crompton-Batt, a former director of Wheelers
seafood restaurants and a one-time inspector for Egon Ronay guides.
Since then, according to Mr Crompton-Batt, the dream has gone sour. He
claims standards have slipped at Simpsons and the board has abandoned its
themed-restaurant strategy by opening two nouvelle restaurants - Dell'Ugo
and Palio.
The complaints prompted dissident shareholders to join forces in a bid to
influence the company. They were rebuffed, however, at an emergency general
meeting last week when the board refused to allow voting on a resolution to
elect Mr Klapp and City lawyer Mr David Offenbach as directors.
The rebel group, which claims to control 40 per cent of the shares, now
hopes to oust the board at a second EGM.
Mr Klapp has no illusions about Simpsons' prospects. 'This could be a very
important group, but this board is not fit to run it,' he said.
Criticism of the company has stung the board into a robust defence.
Dismissing the rebel campaign, Mr Ackerman claims they have no catering
experience and no institutional support. Mr Reece, meanwhile, has accused
the Klapp group of using offshore transactions to increase pressure on the
board.
The rebels have drawn most of their support from stakes held by overseas
companies. Mr Klapp's Spread Trustee company, registered in the Channel
Islands, acquired a 20 per cent stake from entrepreneur Mr David Rowland. Mr
Klapp sold on 10 per cent to Mountjoy, registered in the Turk and Caicos
Islands, and is relying on another 8.5 per cent recently acquired by Capital
Resources of Perth, Australia.
Mr Reece also suggested Mr Klapp, who stepped down from Select Appointments
after the company lost Pounds 2.4m in 1990, could not manage the business
successfully.
According to many regulars at Simpsons, however, both the board and the
dissident group have misjudged the attitude of shareholders.
Brokers and dealers have not bought shares as a speculative investment in a
growing company. Instead, they have taken a stake to preserve their
favourite watering holes.
Mr John Fouracre, a foreign exchange dealer who has lunched at Simpsons for
more than 30 years, said: 'This is an unlikely investment prospect. People
just want it to stay the same; if it's trading successfully through the
recession, then they're happy.'
In this year's trading, the company has seen turnover grow from around
Pounds 25,000 a week to more than Pounds 80,000. The share price has fallen
from a post-flotation peak of 54p to close at 31p at the weekend. . But Mr
Reece said: 'We are still within our bank facilities and there are no
significant lines of credit.'
The board denies it is being over-acquisitive or profligate. 'We are being
prudent. We have looked at dozens of projects but we will only buy at the
right time and the right price,' said Mr Ackerman.
He hopes his cautious approach will curry favour among shareholders at
Simpsons. Watching diners enjoying chump chop followed by jam roly-poly last
week, one member of staff commented: 'This lot likes things the way they
are. You'll never move them.'
