FT  25 SEP 92 / Arts: Subversive stitching - Craft
Two contemporary craft exhibitions in London set out to explode widely held
misconceptions. The cosy world of the embroidered tray cloth is rocked by
any number of examples of subversive stitching in the Craft Council's
avant-garde embroidery show, Out of the Frame.
Alice Kettle's 'Indian Summer - Man', for instance, soars more than three
metres high and features a life-size nude, richly textured with densely
machine-stitched metal, silk cotton and rayon threads. His puffy face,
partially padded, gradually emerges out of the gloom of the picture plane.
Stumpwork was never quite like this.
Rozanne Hawksley, now in her 60s, offers a mock reliquary arm in 'Libera me,
Domine, de morte aerterna' - a sombre confection of black taffeta, jet,
pearls and a gloved hand clasping a rosary and hand-mirror. The arm is
shrouded in black silk and enshrined in a glass-topped black box. In
contrast, Maddi Nicholson dazzles with fluorescent pinks and yellows.
Materials frequently are unexpected. Janet Ledsham's 'Canopy' incorporates
maple and aspen leaves, Michael Brennand-Wood has a nice line in Ladybird
books, pencils and paperback spines.
The show, which is of British work only, is witness to the various
revolutions which transformed the textile arts in the 1960s. Since then, it
has appeared that there is nothing that fabric, and the stitching techniques
traditionally associated with it, cannot be persuaded to do.
Surfaces are moulded, animated, distressed and encrusted using a wide
variety and media and techniques appropriated from the art school. It comes
as no surprise to discover that a number of makers here began their training
as painters, sculptors or ceramicists. We find textile vessels, and a
menagerie of fantastical animals that have precious little in common with
soft toys. Kate O'Toole's heart-shaped 'Valentine' cushion is nothing other
than a frilly 'construction', complete with absurd naked Action Man and a
mass of rubber creepy crawlies. Pure Jeff Koons kitsch on a domestic scale.
The relationship between fine art and embroidery often proves too close for
comfort. Painting by needle is rife. No doubt the organisers should be
commended for having no modernist axe to grind and showing an honest,
representative survey of contemporary embroidery. As a consequence, we find
Monet-style poppies, Nolde daisies, even shades of Glynn Boyd Harte.
Moreover, Eiran Short's technically brilliant evocation of a Helen Allingham
cottage garden succeeds in confirming all the old prejudices about
handicraft. The icing on this particular tea cake is a frame created out of
brown-beige 1970s curtain material, aluminium and silver braid, and lavished
with rows of pale pink sequins.
Far more impressive is Polly Binns' minimalist triptych of geometrically
ordered cuts into white cotton - despite a certain debt to Lucio Fontana.
Only rarely do painterly treatments succeed. Audrey Walker's long, random
stitches are used to great atmospheric effect in 'These Golden Days', its
texture akin to that of pastel.
Textures and subtle surface patterns are the delights of this show. Hannah
Frew Patterson shows great sensitivity in exploiting the intrinsic qualities
and beauty of specific materials. Her abstract 'Strome Slab' manipulates
hand-made silk felt and hand-dyed silk fabrics, some treated with gelatine,
others gathered, shredded and layered. Hazel Bruce chooses to burn, layer
and cut Habotai silks and cottons, and then to paint, print and stitch.
Setting this contemporary work in context is a selection of often
spectacular historic textiles on loan from the Embroiderers' Guild, plus a
group of Glasgow School and later 20th century pieces (all confusingly
jumbled together as only the Crafts Council Gallery knows how). They offer
valuable lessons in pattern-making that a number of contemporary makers
would do well to study. They also serve to remind us how traditional
techniques such as quilting, embroidery, white work and patchwork - and
utilitarian domestic artefacts - continue to be creatively, and often
joyously, reinterpreted.
Bound to Please] at the Royal Festival Hall (until October 4) offers a
glimpse at the ever-expanding boundaries of book board and slip case. There
is not a piece of red morocco in sight. Among those represented is Cathy
Robert, something of the Damien Hirst of bookbinding after her
aquarium-cum-cover for The Practical Encyclopaedia of Freshwater Tropical
Aquarium Fish. Here, the letters forming the august name of Appolinaire
cascade down the front of her binding of selected poems - and down the
patinated bronze of its sculptural stand. Are such bulky excrescences really
desired by bibliophiles?
Far more covetable are the books that appear not only user-friendly but
alluringly tactile. Romily Saumarez Smith employs soft pink goatskin,
overlaid with white calf for Plato's Symposium. Jen Lindsay chooses limp,
mottled vellum for Gerard Manley Hopkins. For a cover of a book of 7th
century Arabic poetry, John Pearson suggests great age and fortunate
survival by dyeing linen in tea, and throwing in a handful of small nails
during the drying process to produce smoky marks. The linen is dyed, dried,
waxed, flattened and folded, and finally fastened by calfskin ties.
It is tempting to suppose that even that curmudgeonly Old Devil Philip
Larkin may have approved of Jenni Grey's ingenious perspex, wood and brass
container for 'Required Writing'. From certain angles it appears to be
empty.
Out of the Frame continues at the Crafts Council Gallery, 44a Pentonville
Road, Islington N1, until November 1, and tours to Wakefield, Coventry and
Aberystwyth in 1993.
