FT  26 JUN 92 / Survey of Norway (5): Doubts about the EC - Foreign Affairs
THE Labour government is preparing itself for what looks like being a real
and protracted struggle to win over hostile public opinion to the idea of
the country joining the European Community. The case for Norwegian entry has
so far gone by default, leaving the anti-EC forces free to propagate their
opposition but this is about to change.
Mrs Brundtland and her cabinet colleagues intend to launch a united campaign
of persuasion with the Labour party as their organisational base which will
stress in particular the political case for Norwegian EC membership.
Ministers will argue that the country must join the EC to further the future
stability of Europe.
'I believe we have only a limited period of opportunity in which to achieve
an integrated European co-operation,' argues Mr Thorvald Stoltenburg,
Norway's experienced foreign minister. 'If we don"t achieve that now I fear
we could go back to the Europe of the 1930s. The issue is about the peace of
our continent.'
In his opinion the government has not been good in selling the concept of EC
membership. But he believes confidently that there will not be a no vote, as
in 1972, when Norway holds its referendum on the EC issue after the
completion of entry negotiations. 'I trust the Norwegians,' declares Mr
Stoltenburg. Certainly Norway has not been reluctant in the recent past to
play a full part in organisations that extend beyond the nation state.
Norway, unlike its Nordic neighbours to the east, has believed, at least
since its occupation by the Nazis in the Second World War, on the need for
collective security for its own defence. It was a founder member of Nato,
and it continues to recognise that its defence can only be guaranteed
through close co-operation with others.
This is why Norway is looking favourably on the idea of joining the Western
European Union perhaps to begin with as an associate member. But ministers
believe it would find no difficulty at all in playing a full part in the
development of any common foreign and defence policy that emerges inside the
EC. 'The dynamism of Europe is making it very risky for us to stay outside
the EC,' argues Mr Johan Jorgen Holst, Norway's defence minister for 5 1/2
years. 'Since the war the country's security has been assured by being in
Nato but this could be changing. Membership of the EC looks like becoming
all important for our own defence.'
This does not mean that Norwegian policy makers see any defence alternative
to Nato emerging in the foreseeable future inside the EC. Moreover Mr Holst
insists that his country needs an Atlantic framework for its defence and the
US will remain the only country that could provide that.
As the only Nato member with a land border with Russia, Norway is ever
conscious of its strategic position. The end of the Cold War between east
and west and collapse of the Soviet Union may have eased tensions in the
northern European security area but the Norwegian government is still
keeping a wary eye on its relations with Moscow. 'Russia is no longer the
single largest military power in central Europe but it is in the north,'
explains Mr Holst. The large naval and nuclear facilities remain in the
Murmansk region with access to the seas of the north.
Some policy makers in Oslo worry about some form of military takeover in
Moscow which could pave the way for the creation of an ultra-nationalistic
and authoritarian regime with territorial ambitions.
'The situation in Russia is clearly very volatile,' argues Mr Holst who
points out that the chauvinistic Mr Vladimar Zhirinovsky polled over 40 per
cent of the vote in the Soviet armed services dominated Kola peninsula in
last summer's Russian presidential election. 'The peace dividend is at the
level of political atmospherics rather than in a reduction in military
capacities,' he adds.
On the other hand, Mr Stoltenburg is confident that negotiations with Russia
over its territorial boundary line with Norway through the Barent Sea will
be completed shortly, after a long period of dispute that clouded relations
between the two countries even during the Gorbachov era.
Ministers hope that northern Europe will remain a quiet corner of the
continent but they are not taking it for granted. The level of Norway's
defence spending remains relatively high, though cut back by 1 per cent from
the 3 per cent annual growth achieved in real terms during the 1980s in
spite of the changes in the east and the pressures on government spending
due to the country's weak economy.
