FT  08 MAY 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: IEA confirms upturn in oil
consumption
SIGNS OF a pick-up in oil consumption were confirmed yesterday by the
International Energy Agency, the west's oil industry monitoring body, which,
in its April market report, highlighted a 2 per cent increase in first
quarter oil demand in members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development.
Renewed confidence amongst oil traders that world demand is beginning to
rise has supported the market in the past two weeks. But North Sea Brent
crude oil for June delivery eased 10 cents yesterday to Dollars 19.50 a
barrel.
The IEA revised North American demand upwards for the first quarter to 18.7m
barrels a day, an increase of 3 per cent over the same period last year amid
signs that the US economy is emerging from recession.
The IEA expects OECD oil demand to average 37m b/d in the second quarter, a
rise of 0.5 per cent from the same quarter in 1991.
A report by Kleinwort Benson, the UK merchant bank, forecasts a resumption
of robust growth in oil consumption in the next couple of years with world
demand up by 0.8 per cent or 500,000 b/d this year. It predicts an increase
in demand of 1.8 per cent next year and 2.4 per cent in 1994.
The IEA expects OECD oil demand to average 38.4m b/d over the year - an
increase of about 1 per cent from last year. However, growth in North
American oil demand is being offset by a slowdown in consumption in the
Pacific region as economic activity remains sluggish.
Oil production by members of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting
Countries remained steady in April at 23.5m b/d according to the IEA. Opec
reiterated its current production ceiling of just under 23m b/d at its last
meeting on April 24, stressing a commitment to ensure that all members cut
output to achieve that level.
The IEA pointed out that Iran's output dipped slightly in April to 3.3m b/d
from 3.4m b/d.
The decline in oil production in the CIS slowed in March, the IEA reported,
to 9.5m b/d from a level of 9.6m b/d in January and February. The agency
said that production for the whole of the first quarter was estimated to
have dropped 12 per cent against the same period last year to 9.55m b/d.
