FT  18 MAR 92 / Griffins and dragons: A merger of the Midland and Hongkong
banks to create an Pounds 8bn group would not be a marriage of equals
Midland Bank and HSBC Holdings, parent company of Hongkong and Shanghai
Banking Corporation, approach their impending union, announced yesterday,
with very different emotions.
Directors of Hongkong Bank can barely contain their excitement at the
prospect of carrying off a big European bank after more than 30 years of
courtship. 'We have been looking for an acquisition in the UK since the late
1950s,' said an executive.
For almost exactly the same length of time, Midland Bank has been in
decline. In the early 1950s it was the biggest bank in the world. But for
the past two years, it has been touch and go whether it made a pre-tax
profit.
However, in the past couple of months, Midland had begun to believe that it
had turned the corner under its new chairman, Sir Peter Walters, and new
chief executive, Mr Brian Pearse, who were appointed last spring. Although
its after-tax profits were wiped out in 1990 and 1991 by losses on loans to
UK companies and consumers, there were signs of progress: costs have been
kept under control and revenue from interest and commissions has been rising
strongly.
So Midland's directors are slightly disappointed to be deprived of the
challenge of steering the bank back to health as an independent entity. But
Mr William Purves, Hongkong Bank chairman, is ready to make them an offer
they cannot refuse.
If the deal goes through - and bankers were confident yesterday that it
would - it will create the world's first genuinely transcontinental bank,
with strong businesses in both the Far East and Europe, together with a
smaller presence in North America and the Middle East.
The two banks made only the tersest of public statements yesterday when they
posted the bans. They said they had agreed that a 'merger of the two groups
would now be in the best interests of both companies and their
shareholders'.
Until a formal offer from Hongkong Bank is on the table, the executives of
the two banks are constrained from making any further public statements
about the deal by the Takeover Panel and the Stock Exchange. If bankers make
statements which seem to put a value on the two businesses, the regulators
can insist that any merger terms are based on those implied values - which
Hongkong Bank or Midland might later regret.
Nonetheless an account of the gestation and aims of the deal can be
constructed from interviews with the bankers and their advisers.
Formal terms cannot be agreed until the banks have examined each other's
balance sheets and loan books and formed a view of the relative value of the
two businesses. This process of 'due diligence' should not take more than a
couple of weeks, since the organisations know each other well already.
Hongkong Bank should then ask Midland shareholders to swap their existing
shares in the bank for new shares in Hongkong Bank - analysts said yesterday
that Hongkong Bank would probably offer one of its shares for each Midland
share, valuing Midland at more than Pounds 2.5bn and the combined group at
about Pounds 8bn. Not only was the official statement from the two banks
short, but bankers make it clear that it was slightly economical with the
truth. This will not be a 'merger' or marriage of equals. If the
negotiations are successful, Hongkong Bank will make a takeover offer for
Midland and will emerge - under the chairmanship of Mr Purves - firmly in
control of the combined businesses.
However, a takeover cannot be completed without the formal approval or
behind-the-scenes blessing of a number of regulators and governments.
Hongkong Bank has sounded out the Chinese government which will take control
of Hong Kong in 1997, and is hopeful of winning its approval.
The attitude of the British government - whether Labour or Conservative -
would depend on foreign policy considerations and thus on an assessment of
China's stance. Neither the UK Department of Trade and Industry nor the EC
competition authority in Brussels is expected to block the deal - the
combined business is unlikely to be seen as having an unfair competitive
advantage, since Hongkong Bank's presence in Europe is relatively small at
the moment.
As for the Bank of England, it will examine any takeover proposals
carefully, although it is expected to give its approval. The Bank's primary
aim is to protect the interests of Midland's depositors. So it will seek
guarantees that Midland's deposits will not be used to make loans in the
colony - just in case there is an economic calamity in Hong Kong after 1997
when it reverts to Chinese rule.
There should be big advantages for both banks in combining their businesses.
Hongkong Bank should acquire a big source of earnings outside Hong Kong. It
points out that it is not turning its back on Hong Kong and would not expect
to reduce the scope of its operations there either before or after 1997. It
has made that clear because it does not want to alienate the Chinese
authorities.
But a deal with Midland provides it with extra insurance in the event -
which Hongkong Bank says is unlikely - of economic decline, panic in the
local banking market or nationalisation of assets in the colony after the
Chinese take over.
Last year, it took out a preliminary insurance policy by creating a holding
company, which became owner of all its operations and is domiciled in London
rather than Hong Kong. This makes it difficult for any Chinese government
more hostile to private enterprise than the current one to control the
group's assets outside the colony.
As for Midland, takeover would end years of uncertainty about its financial
strength and its future ownership. Putting aside the uncertainties relating
to the Hong Kong economy, which cannot be quantified, Hongkong Bank has a
very strong balance sheet.
Indeed, in the next few weeks it will reveal quite how strong it is, when it
discloses its secret 'inner reserves' - which analysts estimate at about
HKDollars 20bn (Pounds 1.5bn) and which have been tucked away for a rainy
day.
With the backing of Hongkong Bank's capital, Midland will have valuable
additional resources to expand its businesses. It will, for example, be able
to lend more to UK companies and individuals, rather than shrinking its
balance sheet, as it has been doing recently.
The margin between Midland's borrowing and lending rate should also improve.
IBCA, the leading European rating agency, said yesterday that it was likely
to upgrade the credit rating it gives to long-term deposits with Midland.
What this means is that Midland will be perceived as a stronger business
under Hongkong Bank's ownership, and should therefore have to pay less
interest to attract deposits.
Given that the two operate in separate markets with separate cultures,
integration will not be trouble-free. But it should be less difficult than
if it involved other banks from different countries for two reasons:
Hongkong Bank has a strong British tradition. It was founded in 1865 to
serve the local trading houses in Hong Kong and Shanghai and its senior
directors tend to be expatriate Scots.
It has been working closely with Midland since December 1987, when it took a
14.9 per cent stake in the British bank.
Hongkong Bank's pursuit of Midland falls into two distinct episodes. From
the end of 1987, the two banks started to learn about each other's
operations and to ascertain where they could work fruitfully together. In
the succeeding two years, they traded certain assets. Midland injected most
of its Far Eastern operations into Hongkong Bank and took control of
Hongkong Bank's fledgling continental European businesses.
The goal was a full merger - and at the outset, there was a hope within
Midland that it would be a marriage of equals. When Hongkong Bank bought its
stake, it gave a commitment that it would not increase it or dispose of it
for three years. This was regarded - both inside and outside the bank - as a
merger deadline.
But by the summer of 1990, both banks had begun to have cold feet. Hongkong
Bank's US and Australian operations were making losses running to hundreds
of millions of US dollars - sorting them out was clearly going to occupy
management.
Midland's difficulties were, if anything, even more serious. The onset of
the UK recession meant that it was facing the prospect of enormous losses on
UK loans. The magnitude of the problem was shown early in 1991, when it
became the first clearer to cut its dividend since the 1930s.
If the management of both banks faced serious problems running their own
organisations, they were perhaps going to face too much of a challenge in
managing the integration of their two organisations.
There was an additional obstacle. At the time, Chinese approval was in
doubt.
So on December 17 1990, the two banks issued a public statement that it was
not the 'right time' to consider a merger. This was interpreted by bankers
and the press as an attempt by Hongkong Bank to say in the politest way
possible that it had no intention of marrying Midland.
Sir Kit McMahon, Midland's chairman and chief executive at the time, was
disappointed, having been the leading proponent of the deal. He had never
based his strategy purely on the assumption that the merger would take
place, but he had allowed expectations to build up inside the bank and in
the City that a deal was likely.
Bankers in London say that he was probably also a little too slow to
reorganise the core UK banking operations, which had become relatively less
efficient than their main UK rivals. As a result, the Bank of England
encouraged Midland to replace Sir Kit. The Bank sponsored the appointment of
Mr Pearse and Sir Peter, which took place in March last year.
Nonetheless, Sir Kit had begun to cut costs and to ensure that Midland was
pricing its products in a profitable way. Mr Pearse encouraged this process.
By the end of the year, Mr Pearse and his colleagues began to be convinced
that Midland had a future as a successful independent bank.
But Hongkong Bank still had its 14.9 per cent stake and the Kuwait
Investment Office, the investment arm of the Kuwait government, has a
further 10 per cent, which it acquired in the 1980s as one of its strategic
holdings. 'We were aware that we were very vulnerable if Hongkong Bank
decided it was still interested in bidding,' said a Midland banker.
In the past year, Midland has had conversations with about 15 banks which
said they were interested in buying parts of the bank, of which a third
hinted they might be interested in a full-scale merger. But nothing could
happen until Hongkong Bank decided what to do with its shares.
At the end of last year, Midland became aware that Hongkong Bank was
becoming amorous again. Midland got its first hint in an interview with the
Hongkong Bank's deputy chairman, Mr John Gray, which was carried in the
South China Morning Post. 'We started to dust off our Hongkong merger
files,' said the Midland banker.
Hongkong Bank's confidence had returned, because the losses in Australia and
the US were diminishing and its profits from Hong Kong were at record
levels.
Then the day after Midland published its 1991 results on February 27, Mr
Purves became less coy. Midland started to work around the clock on the
details.
On March 5, he had his first conversation with Midland's chief executive and
chairman on the details of the takeover. Mr Pearse and Sir Peter now had no
illusions. Independence was no longer an option.
