FT  07 AUG 92 / London Stock Exchange: Equities shaken by corporate news
THE UK equity market yesterday survived highly negative reports from two of
Britain's largest companies to close in better shape than appeared possible
at the day's low point. The halving of British Petroleum's second-quarter
dividend dealt a harsh blow to a stock market already driven lower by a
sharp fall in interim profits at Barclays, whose chairman warned that the UK
economic recession might continue for a further two years.
However, a midsession fall of 32 Footsie points, taking the index to
2,360.7, was halved later as the market's battered confidence was helped by
the decision of the Bundesbank's policy council to leave interest rates
unchanged, and by an assurance from a UK Treasury secretary that the
domestic recession has already bottomed out.
The FT-SE Index ended the day 15.2 down at 2,377.6. London was helped at the
end of the session by a better performance from Wall Street than had been
feared in view of the impending trading reports from British Petroleum and
General Motors. The Dow Industrial Average was 11 points off when London
closed.
The UK trading session was heavily dominated by the day's batch of important
company news and special situations. Of the sharply increased Seaq trading
volume total of 497.3m shares, about one-quarter represented activity in
only three stocks: British Petroleum, Barclays and BET, where underwriters
had to take up the bulk of a Pounds 200m rights issue.
Wednesday's Seaq total of 383m shares incorporated a mere Pounds 798m in
genuine retail business in equities, a continuation of the unprofitable
levels of activity in the London market at present.
From the viewpoint of the London stock market, the Pounds 919m write-off and
reduced payout at BP measured up to the worst possible expectations; but the
impact was softened slightly by signs of US support for the shares when Wall
Street opened. The maintained dividend helped Barclays shares at first but
the market was depressed by the gloomy view on the economy expressed by Sir
John Quinton, the chairman.
Across the range of the equity market, the investment mood seemed little
changed in spite of yesterday's developments. Pharmaceutical shares remained
firm but domestically orientated issues, including consumer stocks and
builders, continued to give ground. BOC provided a firm feature, responding
to improved profits.
The absence of any move on rates by the Bundesbank left UK investors to
ponder the widespread calls for action to be taken by the UK government to
stimulate the domestic economy, possibly by easing base rates to spark
recovery in the housing sector. Any optimism on this score was restrained by
a sluggish trend in sterling, which moved narrowly against the D-Mark
yesterday after its recent fall.
However, many analysts sounded relieved by the market's performance in a
trading session which had been identified far ahead as potentially hazardous
for share prices. The fall in BP shares was responsible for nearly
one-quarter of the day's loss in the Footsie.
