FT  17 SEP 92 / Economic Viewpoint: Devaluation defeat - how '92 differs
Every experienced economic journalist who supports a government policy ought
to know that the likelihood is that the rug will be pulled from under him by
the government itself. So I was not surprised by the decision to suspend the
ERM parity, but was aghast at the follies which passed muster for the
defence of sterling.
As a veteran of many sterling crises, I am always astonished by the
astonishment of the official world at the size of each new run on sterling.
During the long period since the end of Bretton Woods, British ministers and
officials seemed to have forgotten about the art of operating a system of
semi-fixed exchange rates. The combination of German unification pressures,
the weak dollar, the hysterical atmosphere surrounding the French referendum
and the Bundesbank's ever more open advocacy of sterling devaluation have
been evident for a long time for those with eyes to see; and a crisis like
this week's has always been very much on the cards.
The government spent far too long waiting to raise interest rates and thus
paraded its reluctance to do so. An independent Bank of England would have
acted earlier, even if only by a few vital hours yesterday.
But the Bank itself is at fault in not doing more to push up the very
short-term rates covering the French referendum period. Yesterday afternoon
dealers were quoting 70 per cent for borrowing sterling until next Monday.
This compared with the overnight marginal lending rate of 500 per cent
imposed by the Swedish Riksbank for its overnight lending rates. In any case
it arrived too late.
There were also the usual piffling political mistakes, such as the prime
minister and chancellor expressing hopes for lower interest rates when the
only thing to have said was that they would go up as much as needed.
Another tactical mistake was to say too little about the resources available
to defend sterling, most of which were apparently still not used. There was
also a technical problem at the highest level, which should have been
resolved years ago.
This was the reluctance of the Bundesbank to fulfil its legal obligation to
give unlimited support to currencies at the bottom end of the parity grid.
The Bundesbank's passionate conviction was that such intervention involved
the creation of more D-Marks and was thus inflationary. This was in sharp
contrast to the attitude of the Fed and the Bank of England, which was that
sterilisation of these inflows was possible and almost automatic. It would
require a medieval scholastic to determine the issue. But the practical need
to establish a modus vivandi was neglected.
The next few days will determine whether the British defeat has been in a
battle or in a war - and not just for the Major goverment but for national
hopes of price stability and non-inflationary growth. It is not a good sign
that having raised MLR to 15 per cent in a panic, the government was not
prepared to stick it out for the few remaining days until the French
referendum result is known.
If the UK were to rejoin the ERM after a French Yes vote at a central rate
somewhere within the previous parity grid, there will be hope. But the
prospects are not promising, as the financial talking classes, the rightwing
xenophobes and the inflationist Left have all tasted blood and will exert
the maximum pressure, both on the government directly and on the foreign
exchange markets, to prevent this happening. The UK's partners will also
want some assurance that Britain's renewed membership is not going to
disrupt the system yet again. One question to be asked in a very necessary
post mortem is why France has been so much better able to withstand the same
pressures.
* * *
Many people have compared the currency pressures today with the events
leading up to the British devaluation of 1967. The two periods have much in
common: numerous passionate official denials of any intention to devalue, a
prime minster and chancellor staking their reputation on maintaining the
parity, and heavy losses in the defence of sterling.
There was, however, one big difference in policies between now and then.
When the Wilson government came to office in 1964 it was asked to choose
between restricting domestic demand and devaluing the pound. It chose
neither and tried to muddle through by overseas borrowing, incomes policies
and marginal industrial intervention. By contrast the Major government
thought it was committed - like the French Socialist government - to a
monetary and fiscal policy giving top priority to maintaining the ERM parity
rather than to 'growth' objectives. It was thrown off-course this time by a
combination of political and market events, having little to do with
fundamentals.
I was present at the fateful press conference at Number 10 Downing Street to
explain the 1967 devaluation, and was booed because the Downing Street
crowds thought that the departing journalists were Cabinet members. I may
well have deserved it. For I had been actively campaigning for devaluation
wherever I could find an outlet. This was rarely. For one difference between
the two periods is that in the 1960s nearly all publications had adopted
self-censorship and never mentioned the 'D' word. This time it became a
cliche - and common ground between left and right-wing critics of John
Major, never previously known to be interested.
Why have I changed my attitude? The main reason is in the realm of ideas. In
the 1960s I wanted governments to increase demand more quickly to stimulate
growth and employment. Devaluation, it was hoped, would remove the balance
of payments constraint against their doing so by making British goods more
competitive. Yet at almost the very same time Milton Friedman gave his
famous 1967 presidential address to the American Economic Association,
showing that there was no long-term choice between inflation and
unemployment. The implication was that the main impact of demand stimulation
was just on the price level: growth and employment were determined by the
labour and goods markets - the 'supply side'.
There might still be some short-term arguments about how quickly to reduce
inflation or whether the exchange rate was a useful buffer against outside
shocks. But these were all second-order questions and not the key to growth
and jobs. If this was so, financial policy might as well concentrate on
obtaining the very real gains from stable prices. I came to think that this
could be best achieved by aligning sterling against a currency with a good
record for staple prices, such as the D-Mark.
There was nothing in all this to suggest that stable prices would themselves
lead to rapid growth, as sound money advocates are caricatured by their
opponents as saying. The most that can be asserted is that low inflation is
a precondition for successful growth policies and that British - unlike, for
instance, Italian - business has not been very nimble at adjusting to high
inflation.
A devaluation is fool's gold. Once it has been forced, the foreign exchange
market expects another; and to insure sterling holders the UK needs a higher
level of interest rates.
Moreover, estimates of comparative purchasing power suggest that sterling
was not overvalued except against the dollar. The heart of the
devaluationists' case is embodied in John Muellbauer's suggestion in the
Financial Times of September 14 that relative UK competitiveness was some 20
per cent less than it was over the average of 1964-79, despite the
purchasing power estimates.
There are many dubious aspects of such a remote index number comparison. If
it was the whole story it would be difficult to understand why - as shown in
the second chart - the UK share of world trade was falling when sterling was
supposed to be very competitive, but has roughly stabilised since the early
1980s when sterling has been supposedly overvalued. This does not dispose of
the UK's high propensity to import; but it is difficult to demonstrate that
it is higher than other countries', especially if account is taken of the
implications of inward Japanese investment, which has already turned the UK
into a net exporter of television sets and is likely to eliminate the
deficit on cars by the mid-1990s.
More insight is obtained by looking at competitiveness against the US and
Germany separately. On the OECD unit labour costs index, Britain is just as
competitive against Germany as it was over 1965-79. The deterioration has
been against the US. This fits in with the complaints of British business
which have been against the low dollar rather than the D-Mark parity. But
this affects all European countries, and Japan cannot be met by unilateral
British action. As a matter of fact Britain looks more competitive against
Germany than it does against other members of the ERM - a fact which makes
me all the more sceptical of how useful the indices are for currency fine
tuning.
All this is shadow boxing. What really influences me now is the UK's long
history of repeated self-defeating currency depreciation, The first chart
shows that sterling has dropped from DM 11 to less than DM 2.8 since 1965.
Against the basket it has fallen by more than 50 per cent since 1970. Yet
the result has been either no improvement in competitiveness, or a
deterioration if Muellbauer's indices are right. Clearly the nominal
depreciation has been offset by inflation.
Even the most sophisticated devaluation advocates overlook the distinction
between a one-off adjustment and a succession of downward adjustments. The
latter become entrenched in the labour as well as the financial markets and
become just part of an ongoing inflationary process.
Periodic devaluations are rather like trying to get up earlier by shifting
the clock. On a one-off occasion it may work; but repeated many times over
it is self-defeating and worse.
