FT  16 SEP 92 / Survey of Wales (10): A dream comes true - Swansea's Pounds
16m barrage will lead to new riverbank projects
EIGHTEEN YEARS ago the city fathers and planners in Swansea had a dream.
They envisaged a city in which the Tawe, the city's river, would be
transformed by a barrage, offering the chance the develop the river banks
for work and housing.
Eighteen years on that dream has come true. At the end of July, a Pounds 16m
barrage was completed, and the river now has reasonably constant level of
water. Industry has been attracted, and there are plans to develop the
run-down eastern bank in a setting suitable for the 21st century.
Swansea's dream is being entertained, too, elsewhere in south Wales. Both
Cardiff and Newport want to put barrages at their entrances, in Cardiff
across the bay and in Newport across the Usk. But both have run into
opposition.
In Swansea, completion of the barrage has created the basis for a big
expansion along the riverbank. The area is already unrecognisable from the
run-down shabbinesss that characterised it for so long after the end of the
second world war. According to Mr Ken Jones, assistant city engineer, it now
has the potential to become one of the most exciting cities in Britain.
The magnitude of Swansea's problem was enormous, as it was in its two Welsh
neighbours. Like Cardiff and Newport, it had seen its dock trade, largely
based on coal and metals, all but disappear, with little coming to replace
it.
Swansea suffered doubly from the nature of its industrial past. In the 18th
century, it was the centre of the world's metal industry, housing hundreds
of copper, lead, zinc and silver smelting operations. When these industries
moved nearer their sources of supply a hundred years ago, they were replaced
by iron, steel, tinplate and chemicals.
These, too, eventually moved on and in 1945 the lower Swansea valley had
become Britain's largest single area of industrial dereliction.
Today, Swansea is a very different place. Its enterprise park has attracted
more than 400 companies and almost 8,000 workers; its marina, on the west
side of the barrage, is a thriving community, full of boats; the city centre
is being developed attractively.
What the barrage, the first to be completed in Britain, will do is to unlock
the development potential of the Tawe some two miles upstream as far as
Morriston. It will act as a dam, creating a reliable level of water. The
difference behind it between high and low water is now about 2ft: previously
it was 30ft on a high tide. The barrage will also operate a water-driven
turbine to generate electricity and allow pleasure craft to ply the river
through the lock system.
With Swansea nominated as European City of Literature for 1995 there are
plans, in conjunction with the Welsh Development Agency, which has backed
the barrage project in many ways, to create a publishing park. Other
investment has already been stimulated: a 40,000 sq ft office block for
instance, by Andrew Scott, of Port Talbot, the first in the city for years.
There are also plans for an archeological park to commemorate the city's
industrial past, a hotel and a tourist centre.
'The most important thing, though,' says Mr John Churchill, the city's
director of trade and industry, 'is to make sure that the river ends the
divide between the prosperous western side of the city and the run-down
eastern bank.'
Ambitious plans to develop the eastern side have been put forward by
Grosvenor Waterside, the property-development arm of Associated British
Ports, in conjunction with the city itself and British Rail.
Housing is to be linked to the existing marina across the river and there
will be the usual mix of leisure activities, commercial developments, open
spaces and offices designed to attract major national companies to the city.
Port Tawe, the name given to this development, 'will reflect the maritime
theme of Swansea,' says Grosvenor Waterside.
Although he does not admit it, Mr Geoffrey Inkin, chairman of Cardiff Bay
Development Corporation, must be envious of the way Swansea has got there
first. Despite massive support from the government, the passage of the
private Bill to allow the Pounds 150m Cardiff barrage to go ahead has been
bedevilled by a long-drawn-out parliamentary procedure.
The result has been to delay the start of work for at least two years,
though Mr Inkin, whose enthusiasm for the scheme remains undiminished
despite the problems, not just of parliamentary opposition but also of the
collapse of the British property market, says the period has not been wasted
 -'an enormous amount of preparatory work has gone ahead,' he says, 'and
when the Bill is passed we shall be ready to push the button from day one.'
WITH government support, it is thought likely the Bill will receive royal
assent some time early in the new year - 'then you'll see us move,' Mr Inkin
says. 'The interesting thing is that investor-interest in Cardiff has
remained very high despite our problems.'
That view is supported by Mr Freddie Watson, executive director of Grosvenor
Waterside in Cardiff - 'the property market may be flat elsewhere in Britain
but down here we are doing 100mph.'
Grosvenor has pre-let 250,000 sq ft of office space on its development
within Cardiff Bay even without the assurance of the barrage. Half of that
has gone to the Welsh Health Common Services Authority and the remainder to
NCM Credit Insurance, the Dutch company which late last year bought Export
Credits Guarantee Department's short-term insurance arm.
Newport is also facing a struggle to get its private Bill through
parliament. Its opposition is not so much from MPs but from outside
interests, especially fishing interests and the National Rivers Authority,
both of which fear a barrage across the Usk would affect fishing in one of
Britain's premier salmon rivers.
Mr Roger Davies, head of urban development at Newport, believes 'we have
designed the barrage in such a way that fish will continue to run the river.
There will be tidal intrusions on 60 per cent of tides for two to two and a
half hours a day. Like Swansea, we shall also have fish locks to allow
access into and out of the river.'
The proposed Pounds 72m barrage is part of a scheme not just to enhance the
development potential of a run-down part of the town but also of a southern
road link which will take pressure off the M4 motorway which runs across the
north of the town - 'although the scheme is publicly funded at the moment,'
says Mr Davies, 'several companies have expressed interest in jointly
funding it.'
The barrage could eventually create 5,000 jobs and 2,000 houses in a
neglected part of the town. Lovell, Wimpey, Tarmac, Regalian and Blue Circle
are among the companies that have all expressed interest in the area - 'we
need the barrage to regenerate the waterside,' says Mr Davies. It is a view
held equally forcefully by Swansea's Ken Jones and Cardiff's Geoffrey Inkin.
