FT  08 MAY 92 / EC threatens UK over border checks
THE European Commission is threatening Britain with legal action if the UK
does not remove border checks on travellers entering from other Community
states by next January.
The threat is contained in the Commission's latest report on the state of
progress towards abolition of all controls on goods, services, capital and
people crossing internal EC frontiers.
The EC executive says, in its report issued this week, that it is
'resolutely determined to use all the legal and political means at its
disposal' to ensure fulfilment of Article 8a of the 1986 Single European Act
(SEA), which defines the internal market as 'an area without internal
frontiers'.
The Commission's maximalist interpretation of Article 8a has been known for
some time, and its threat of legal action is by no means solely directed at
the UK. Eight of the Community's continental members have already committed
themselves to a free travel zone, through the 1990 Schengen Convention, and
Greece has associated itself to the Schengen group as an observer. But
Denmark and Ireland are also dragging their feet on plans to abolish border
checks on intra-EC travellers - the former because of its passport union
with Nordic countries, and the latter because of its passport union with the
UK.
Nonetheless, the chief target of the report - which the Commission delayed
publishing during the recent UK election campaign - is Britain.
The UK has always argued that the SEA's commitment to free movement of
people applies only to EC citizens, and that controlling non-EC citizens
coming into the UK inevitably requires checking the credentials of EC
passport holders too.
In addition, the UK government argues that the SEA's commitment to free
movement is qualified by the treaty's explicit permission for member states
to take action against crime, drugs and terrorism. 'Many other EC states
agree that we need to keep controls' for these purposes, a senior UK
official said yesterday.
Increasing pressure from the Commission may embarrass the UK during its
presidency of the EC Council. If the Commission takes the UK before the
European Court it appears confident of winning.
