FT  22 AUG 92 / Bush begins 'new crusade' as Clinton's poll lead is cut
PRESIDENT George Bush left Houston yesterday emboldened by a fighting and
partisan acceptance speech to the Republican convention and encouraged by
polls that show him narrowing the gap with Mr Bill Clinton, his Democratic
rival.
As the president travelled to Mississippi and Missouri to press home what he
called 'a new crusade' for American values and renewal at home and overseas,
an opinion poll released last night showed the two candidates running almost
neck-and-neck.
A CBS News-New York Times survey taken on Thursday night as Mr Bush made his
speech showed Mr Clinton would win 48 per cent of the vote, against 46 per
cent for the president.
Three polls taken ahead of Mr Bush's address showed Mr Clinton's lead cut to
the 9 to 12 percentage point range.
With his big advantage in the polls apparently diminishing, the Democratic
candidate began another bus tour through Ohio, Michigan and New York to
emphasise his message that what the country needs is 'jobs, jobs, jobs', as
Senator Al Gore, his running mate, put it.
The war of words between the two campaigns threatened to grow even beyond
the savage rhetoric and derision Mr Bush had directed at Mr Clinton and the
Democrats in Congress.
Mr Ron Brown, the Democratic party chairman, conceded that Mr Bush's speech
had been 'well rehearsed and well written', but said it was also 'cynical,
petty and totally dishonest'. The president 'makes no connection between a
campaign speech and the task of governing', he said.
Apart from a qualified commitment to cut taxes next year if matching
spending cuts are found, and half an apology for accepting higher taxes in
1990, Mr Bush offered no new economic policy initiatives.
Mr Clinton rejected Mr Bush's plan for across-the-board tax cuts as 'fool's
gold' in the face of a Dollars 400bn (Pounds 210bn) budget deficit. 'It is
read my lips time again,' he said, 'but this time you can read the record.'
The one new idea - that taxpayers should be allowed to earmark up to 10 per
cent of their taxes for debt reduction - was widely dismissed by economists
as a gimmick. 'It would have absolutely no impact on anything,' said Mr
David Wyss, chief economist at DRI/McGraw Hill, the economic consultancy.
Since Congress controlled the level of spending, the earmarking of taxes for
particular purposes would not affect the level of either spending or the
budget deficit, he said.
Mr William Brown, chief economist at J P Morgan, the New York bank, said
neither Mr Bush nor Mr Clinton had made concrete proposals for tackling
immediate economic problems.
Mr Bush's main purpose on Thursday was to attack his opponent as a man
'whose passion for big government knows no bounds', who 'enjoys tax
increases' and who dares to say the US 'is a nation in decline'.
The address certainly served to energise convention delegates whose doubts
that Mr Bush could win re-election had been freely expressed all week.
Initial reaction from the wider audience also began to suggest the president
was getting the 'bounce' in the polls normally derived from a convention and
which so benefited Mr Clinton last month.
Bush sups sweet cup of opportunity, Page 2
Houston: awakening of the president, Weekend Page I
