FT  15 APR 92 / Hongkong bids Pounds 3.1bn for Midland: City disappointed as
all-paper offer falls well below expected level of 400p a share
HONGKONG and Shanghai Bank yesterday offered Pounds 3.1bn in shares and
bonds for Midland, the UK's third-largest bank, when it announced terms of
its long-awaited bid.
The offer, which is being recommended to Midland's shareholders by the
bank's board, would make Midland one of the six main subsidiaries within an
enlarged Hongkong and Shanghai group, though it would retain its own board
and senior executives as well as its name.
In the City, where investors have been waiting since March 16 for news of
the offer by HSBC Holdings, parent of Hongkong Bank, there was
disappointment at the price of 378p for each Midland share. This was well
below the expected level of about 400p, the price understood to have been
offered by Lloyds Bank in an informal approach earlier this year to
Midland's board.
Midland's shares fell by 7p during the day to close at 365p. Before talks
between Midland and HSBC were announced in March, Midland shares were
trading at 253p. In Hong Kong, HSBC's share price ended 25 cents down at
HKDollars 39.25 (288p).
Mr Brian Pearse, Midland's chief executive, said he was sad the bank was
surrendering its independence, but had concluded that the deal with HSBC
would give Midland the extra capital strength it needed. Midland, the
weakest of the 'Big Four' UK clearing banks, made a slender profit of Pounds
36m in 1991.
Mr Pearse emphasised that if the takeover did not go through, Midland would
be strong enough to survive on its own.
A merger between HSBC and Midland has been on the cards since 1987 when HSBC
bought 14.9 per cent of Midland and the two banks began to merge some of
their international operations.
The takeover would make HSBC group the second-largest bank in the world
outside Japan, with total assets of Pounds 145bn and 3,300 offices in 68
countries. HSBC Holdings, the Hong Kong bank's parent, is already legally
based in London. It plans to move its management to London next January,
making the group resident in the UK for tax purposes.
HSBC will apply for a primary listing on the London Stock Exchange, making
it eligible for the FT-SE 100 index. It will retain its primary listing in
Hong Kong.
HSBC will issue 704m new shares and Pounds 704m in 10-year bonds to pay for
the purchase of Midland. Shareholders will be offered one share in the new
HSBC holding company and Pounds 1 in the HSBC bonds for each Midland share,
leaving them with about a third of the new group. Under Takeover Panel
rules, the offer document must be sent to shareholders within 28 days.
The advisers on the deal are Schroders for HSBC, and SG Warburg and Samuel
Montagu for Midland.
Lloyds was yesterday studying the offer for Midland before deciding on a
possible counterbid. It does not feel under any pressure to launch a bid
immediately, because of the timescale involved in the offer.
Midland turned down the bid by Lloyds because it was concerned that the UK
and European Community competition authorities would block any offer by
Lloyds. However, Lloyds believes it can present a good case to the
competition authorities.
Lloyds wants to buy Midland because it believes it can make huge cost
savings by combining the banks' branch networks, closing down hundreds of
branches and cutting the workforce by about 20,000.
The Chinese government yesterday indicated it would not hinder HSBC's
takeover of Midland, though it repeated its demand that the crown colony's
biggest bank continue to play a full role in its economy.
The statement made no comment on the terms of the proposed deal, but it was
the clearest sign yet that HSBC, which has kept the Chinese authorities
informed of its plans, would not run into opposition from Beijing.
