FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, the state of the union: Big problems, big changes,
in view - The City and the Single Market / Banking
With the Danes' rejection of the Maastricht treaty, the EC's future has been
thrown into uncertainty. Today Britain takes over as president of the
Community. Can John Major give it new direction? In a special four page
pull-out FT writers assess the prospects
THE LEGAL framework for a single market in banking was put in place in 1989
with the Second Banking Directive. British bankers long ago accepted the
idea of the single market in financial services and later a single currency.
Since then British bankers have concentrated on the practical problems of
making the single market work and ensuring the arrival of Emu.
Sir John Quinton, chairman of Barclays, the largest UK banking group,
speaking in Frankfurt in May warned that banks faced enormous changes in
their markets and systems.
He said banks should be thinking about a host of practical problems such as
changes to their computer systems needed for a single currency, to the
minting and distribution of coins and notes. And he singled out cross-border
payment, wholesale and retail, as one of the biggest problems for banks.
The Second Banking Consolidated Supervision Directive was approved in May
and should make BCCI-type scandals impossible. One member country may send
inspectors to another to check information.
'One still wonders how rigorously the rules will be enforced. How severely
will branches of undercapitalised banks in other member states be treated by
the Bank of England for example?' one banker asks in private.
Other bankers worry that new rules on credit reference agencies or codes of
conduct for credit card companies could mark a step backwards.
By and large however, the banking community bends with the European wind.
But one issue where the Commission is eager to press ahead, banks still find
it difficult to follow. A cheap cross-border retail payments system,
enabling people to send money from one country to another at costs
comparable to those of internal money transfers still seems some way off.
