FT  06 MAY 92 / EC agrees joint strategy for Rio Earth Summit
THE European Community yesterday agreed to commit itself to a near doubling
of development aid to the third world, but it still can not agree on the
timing.
Environment and development ministers of the 12 also agreed a joint strategy
to present to next month's Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. This would be fed
into the Convention on Climate Change and has included in it the possibility
of an energy tax to combat carbon dioxide emissions.
However, Mr Carlo Ripa di Meana, EC environment commissioner, denounced the
latest draft of the UN-sponsored compromise on the global warming convention
as 'a sell-out' designed to accommodate the US, which is reluctant to commit
itself to emission reduction targets.
The EC has agreed to stabilise CO emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000,
and the Commission is expected next week to approve a mixed carbon-energy
tax of up to the equivalent of Dollars 10 (Pounds 5.60) on a barrel of oil.
It hopes the 12 will back the tax in principle just before the Rio summit,
although it recognises that many member states would be unwilling to risk
damaging the competitive position of their industry unless the US and Japan
were willing to use similar instruments to reduce emissions.
The Commission also wants to swing the EC behind an Argentine and Brazilian
proposal for a global carbon tax equivalent to Dollars 1 per barrel of oil,
the proceeds of which would go to developing countries to help them install
energy-efficient and environmentally friendly technology.
Only France, the Netherlands, Denmark and Italy were yesterday prepared to
commit themselves to reaching the agreed aid target, of 0.7 per cent of
gross national product, by the year 2000, the emissions stabilisation target
date. The UK, Germany and Belgium wanted a less-binding 'as soon as
possible' target, while Spain, Ireland and Greece shied away even from this.
A joint position is expected to be agreed either by finance ministers on May
19, or when environment ministers next meet, on May 26.
World Bank figures for 1989 show average EC official development aid
totalling 0.43 per cent of GNP, against 0.32 per cent for Japan and 0.15 per
cent from the US. The UK's effort was 0.31 per cent of GNP.
Neither the US nor Japan are prepared to make specific commitments to
reaching the 0.7 per cent target - recommended more than a decade ago by the
UN - by 2000. The UN believes that if all industrialised countries adopt the
target, this will provide an extra Dollars 50bn for LDCs, in addition to the
Dollars 55bn official aid now received.
The aid issue is linked to the climate convention's chances of success. As
one UK official put it, the developing countries 'want their quid for our
quo,' money and a firm commitment by the industrialised countries to reduce
the more than three quarters of global CO emissions they are responsible
for.
Mr Ripa di Meana said the latest UN draft on the convention was 'so full of
loopholes' that it was 'completely unacceptable'. Asked whether flexibility
was not an acceptable price to get the US on board, he forecast that the
draft's enumeration of possible exemptions would 'lead to a bitter
North-South clash' at Rio.
