FT  06 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Book discounting policy helps Pentos
advance 7% to Pounds 15.2m
MR TERRY MAHER, chairman of Pentos, the book retailing and office equipment
group, yesterday announced a 7 per cent increase in pre-tax profits to
Pounds 15.2m for the year to end-December.
At the same time Mr Maher reopened his campaign against the net-book
agreement, the voluntary agreement which sets minimum prices for most books.
The Pentos chairman revealed the first results since last winter's campaign
against the net-book agreement, when the company offered discounts of 25 per
cent on some 20 books published outside the NBA by Reed International.
Mr Maher said that December sales at Dillons, the main Pentos chain, had
risen by 23.5 per cent compared with 3 per cent for booksellers as a whole.
When newly-opened Dillons stores were excluded and the comparison was
limited to existing shops year-on-year the increase was 8 per cent, compared
to 1 per cent for bookshops as a whole.
The controversial bookseller said that Dillons' share of Reed's turnover had
increased by more than 50 per cent.
Customers who bought discounted titles had bought an average of two other
books and secondary purchases had been worth Pounds 29, almost three times
Dillons' usual transaction value of Pounds 10.
'I believe we have shown as conclusively as possible that professional
marketing works in the book trade,' Mr Maher said.
He yesterday appealed to other publishers to join Reed in publishing books
outside the NBA so that they could be discounted.
So far no other publisher has joined Reed, and most booksellers are very
sceptical about the benefits of discounting.
The group's Pounds 15.2m profits were achieved on net sales of Pounds 204m -
an increase of 19 per cent.
Earnings per share at 9.1p were 2 per cent down, but a final dividend of
2.05p is recommended making a total for the year of 2.75p, a rise of 10 per
cent.
Total sales at Ryman were 3 per cent ahead, and sales in some shops equalled
the previous year.
Office furniture sales fell by 10 per cent and profit was cut by a third to
Pounds 3.7m.
'In the midst of the longest and deepest recession since the Second World
War a profit increase of 7 per cent represents a satisfactory outcome for
1991. In particular Dillons performance was outstanding,' said Mr Maher.
Dillons sales were 37 per cent ahead, or 23 per cent excluding Hatchards
which was included for only part of 1990, he added.
Pentos shares closed up 1p at 138p.
