FT  18 JUN 92 / Chancellor pledges to stand firm on tight economic policy
THE government pledged yesterday to stick to its economic policy of low
inflation and sound public finance enshrined in the Maastricht treaty, in
spite of the Danish rejection of European economic and monetary union.
Speaking shortly after the release of mildly encouraging industrial
production and retail sales data, Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, held out
the prospect of 'lower pay settlements leading to lower earnings growth'.
British industry was entering a 'virtuous circle of low inflation, rising
competitiveness and increasing market share', he said.
Talking to Surrey businessmen, the chancellor indicated that such
achievement could take some time. He drew a parallel between conditions in
the UK and France, which in 1983 embarked on a tough counter-inflationary
policy. France now has one of the industrial world's lowest inflation rates,
but an unemployment rate of close to 10 per cent.
In France, 'years of tight monetary and fiscal policy . . . are beginning to
pay off,' the chancellor said.
'It has been done the difficult way. But that is the only way. And there is
absolutely no reason why we in Britain cannot do the same.'
Mr Lamont did nothing to encourage recent speculation that the government
might be planning to cut UK bank base rates from their present 10 per cent.
Instead, he reaffirmed its determination to take sterling 'in due course'
into the narrow band of the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM), at a
rate of DM2.95.
While he was careful not to commit the UK to eventual membership of a single
European currency zone, he stressed Britain's commitment to the ERM and the
economic convergence criteria of the Maastricht treaty.
The 'conquest of inflation' was permanently at the centre of UK economic
policy, he said. The government was beginning to break the inflation-prone
mentality that had 'dogged Britain for decades', he added.
The chancellor admitted that the past 18 months had been 'extremely
difficult'.
However, Mr Lamont predicted that, 'in two or three years' time', people
would look back and see that the right decisions had been taken.
While emphasising that government policy was not determined by monthly
statistics, Mr Lamont nonetheless said he was encouraged by yesterday's news
that manufacturing output had risen in April for the third successive month
and that retail sales had increased slightly in May.
According to official figures from the Central Statistical Office,
manufacturing output showed a broadly based increase of 1 per cent in the
three months to April 30, compared with the previous three months,
indicating that this part of the economy might be pulling out of recession.
The news from the high street was less encouraging and provided further
proof that the Tory election victory had failed to trigger a spending boom.
Consumers were reluctant to spend in the face of rising unemployment and
depressed conditions on the housing market.
Compared with the previous three months, retail sales volumes were virtually
unchanged in the three months to May 31 and were down 0.3 per cent against
the same period a year ago.
Financial markets showed a mixed reaction to yesterday's news. Sterling
closed 1 pfennig higher at DM2.925 after the chancellor's reaffirmation that
the pound would enter the ERM narrow band.
However, Mr Lamont's hardline policy stance offset any comfort that the
equity market might have drawn from the manufacturing and sales figures. The
FT-SE 100 index of leading shares closed at 2,598.4, down 17.9 points.
Recovery signs, Page 10
Lex, Page 22
