FT  21 MAY 92 / International Capital Markets: Commercial Union joins
preference share issuers
COMMERCIAL UNION yesterday became the latest in a line of UK financial
sector companies to strengthen its balance sheet without resorting to a
rights offer by issuing preference shares.
Although the Pounds 100m issue is the first in recent years by a UK
insurance company, banks and building societies are increasingly turning to
preference shares for quasi-equity funding.
Until last year, preference share issues were very rare. Most companies
preferred to issue either straight equity or debt securities. Bank of
Scotland was the only issuer, tapping the market in 1988 and 1990.
However, last September National Westminster Bank raised Pounds 140m capital
from an issue of undated preference stock. In February, it was followed by
Bank of Ireland, which raised Pounds 110m.
Building societies have followed a similar route by issuing Permanent
Interest Bearing Shares (Pibs). Like preference shares, Pibs pay a fixed
dividend, have no redemption date and are deeply subordinated in the manner
of equity.
Preference shares are popular with financial sector borrowers because they
count as core capital for regulatory purposes. Financial institutions have
been able to improve balance sheet ratios without asking shareholders for
additional funds.
Commercial Union said that yesterday's issue would count as core capital
under both current UK government regulations and draft EC directives for the
insurance industry.
As a result, the company's solvency ratio - the ratio of premium income to
capital used by investors and regulators as a measure of balance sheet
strength - improved from 41 per cent to 44 per cent. In the late 1980s,
Commercial Union had a solvency ratio comfortably over 50 per cent.
Preference capital is more attractive because the cost has fallen steadily
in line with interest rates. Because preference shares pay a fixed rate of
interest, they are priced against UK government bonds.
For example, Commercial Union's preference shares pay a gross annual rate of
11.5 per cent, compared with 12 per cent on the National Westminster paper
issued last autumn.
In contrast, the cost of 'pure' equity capital has remained high. Corporate
financiers noted yesterday that equity investors had not scaled back
expectations of dividend growth substantially from the levels of the late
1980s.
Mr Peter Foster, general manager for finance at Commercial Union, said: 'We
had no urgent need for capital, but the issue gives us permanent additional
capital at a cheaper rate than equity over the long term.'
However, bankers are not predicting a rush of new preference issues. The
market for preference shares remains limited to UK institutional investors
with long-dated liabilities, such as pension funds and insurance companies.
Moreover, insurance companies are loathe to buy paper issued by their
competitors. Not all insurance companies with declining solvency ratios will
be able to tap the market.
