FT  18 SEP 92 / Survey of Pakistan (10): Frustrations of a land without
telephones - Private money is being mobilised to build up a modern
telecommunications system
WITH one of the lowest ratios of phones among developing nations, combined
with a burgeoning national debt, the Pakistan government plans to get
somebody else to fund an aggressive expansion programme.
In June 1990, there were only 843,000 lines for a population of 117m. The
government now hopes to have more than 2.3m lines in operation by March
1993.
But it is highly critical of the telecommunications management: by 1991 it
had built up a 70,000 connection back-log, with individuals waiting up to
five years for a phone.
Part of the solution is to encourage private operators to broaden the
service. But the entire Pakistan Telecommunications Corporation (PTC) is
also to be auctioned to the highest bidder, with no restrictions on
nationality.
Outside capital is being attracted under a scheme called Build Lease and
Transfer (BLT), whereby an outside party installs a set number of lines at a
fixed price.
Once the revenue from the lines pays off their cost, the system is returned
to PTC. It expects an eight-year pay-back, against a 20 year life for the
system. Alcatel, Ericsson and Siemens are to install 500,000 lines by the
end of 1993 under this BLT scheme, and other contracts are being negotiated.
Mobile telecommunications are also being offered to the private sector.
Cable &amp; Wireless and Millicom have both set up systems in a market they
believe should accommodate 35,000 subscribers, within five years of the 1991
launch.
The operators have had strong initial response, aided by the inadequacy of
the existing fixed line system - it could take three years to get a fixed
phone and only 24 hours to get a mobile unit.
But mobile communications is to become more competitive following the issue
of a third licence to a local group, which is holding discussions with
British Telecom and Hutchison Whampoa. It was issued despite an apparent
understanding that, to avoid excess competition, there only be two licences.
There have also been complaints over facilities to link the mobile system
with the fixed line network, with operators objecting to the level of rigid
bureaucracy at PTC.
However, even at PTC the pace of reform has been rapid. Bear Stearns have
been appointed to advise on its privatisation and the government is adamant
it will sell its entire stake in early 1993.
It seems likely to prove one of the more attractive Government offerings,
given the potential returns on assets achievable by phone companies. It has
already been launched as a government-owned corporate entity, to help speed
up the decision-making processes within the group.
There were initial doubts about the sell-off, due to concerns by the army at
possible bugging by a foreign operator, but these have been allayed and the
tendering procedure should start this month.
There is no argument about the inadequacy of the existing operation, which
has suffered from over-staffing and an excessively bureaucratic management.
It currently employs 54,000 people. Under the privatisation scheme,
employees will have a one year guaranteed contract with the new company, and
will then receive a golden hand-shake if forced into retirement.
Because of over-staffing in the public sector this could prove costly. But
the pace of expansion of PTC should limit the impact of lay-offs.
Privatisation has been a useful method of sucking capital from the
underground economy and a number of international telecommunications groups
could link up with Pakistani partners to bid for the system. AT&amp;T, British
Telecom, Cable and Wireless and Singapore Telecom are said to have shown
interest.
But the government will first have to still concerns that any future regime
might scrap foreign ownership of the phone network.
