FT  17 AUG 92 / UK Gilts: Auction targets domestic investors
TOMORROW, the Bank of England will announce the full details of its next
auction of gilt-edged stock, scheduled for August 26.
So far, the Bank has said the stock will be a conventional gilt with a
maturity of more than 15 years. Market participants are expecting the Bank
to auction Pounds 2.5bn of the 8 3/4 per cent gilt due 2017, although the 9
per cent gilt due 2008 is seen as a possible alternative.
Whichever is chosen, the fact remains that this is the third auction in a
row to be aimed at domestic - rather than foreign - investors.
Overseas investors tend to prefer 10-year or shorter-dated stocks, and the
Bank has successfully pitched some of its past gilt sales at foreigners by
selecting these maturities.
Indeed, foreigners were significant buyers of gilts last year and in the
early part of 1992. However, their interest in the gilt market showed clear
signs of waning in the second quarter with sales to overseas investors
dropping sharply in April and May.
Even though gilt purchases by overseas investors picked up again in June,
market-makers point out that North American and Far Eastern investors remain
apprehensive about the European government bond markets in general, ever
since the Danes voted against ratification of the Maastricht Treaty and put
a question-mark over the future of European economic and monetary union.
Domestic investors, on the other hand, have been eager buyers of gilts in
the second quarter and still appear to have a healthy appetite for gilts and
other fixed income investments.
The latest Smith New Court/Gallup survey of UK fund managers - which came
out last week - showed that 'managers remain more interested in increasing
their exposure to bonds as against equities . . . the balance of managers
planning to increase holdings of UK gilts was 30 per cent in August, only
slightly below July's level (32 per cent) which was the highest for two
years'.
For those fund managers reared on the cult of the equity in the 1980s, this
represents quite a change of tune. However, given the difficult economic
conditions in the UK and the feeling that it may be some time before matters
improve, fund managers are naturally worried about the prospects for
dividend growth in the UK.
At the same time, as inflation in the UK continues to fall, domestic
investors are being given the opportunity of locking into high-yielding
gilts.
The inflation figures released last week were particularly good: average
earnings - released on Thursday - showed a fall from 6.25 per cent in May to
6.0 per cent in June.
Friday's announcement, showing the annual rate of retail price inflation
fell to 3.7 per cent in July from 3.9 per cent in June, raised hopes that
inflation could fall to between 3.25 and 3.5 per cent by the end of 1992 and
to about 2 per cent by the end of next year.
While sterling's weakness against the D-Mark cast a black cloud over the
gilt market for most of last week, the release of such favourable RPI
figures - coinciding with good inflation data from Germany - helped to push
gilt prices up by over a point on Friday.
'The prospects for inflation do genuinely look good - so investors are being
given the chance to lock into irresistible (gilt) yields at a time of real
uncertainty over equities,' says one UK economist.
Since the government started borrowing in the gilt market again, UK
institutions have been keen to see an improvement in the liquidity of
certain long-dated gilts and some of them hinted to the Bank that they
wanted to see the creation of an 'extra-long' issue, thereby extending the
government debt maturity profile.
At the last two auctions, their wishes were granted. On April 29, the Bank
auctioned Pounds 2.5bn of the newly-created 8 3/4 per cent gilt due 2017,
the 'super-long' gilt: the bonds were taken up mainly by UK insurance
companies looking for long-dated paper to match their liabilities.
The following auction - on June 24 - of Pounds 2.75bn of the 9 per cent gilt
due 2012, was also dominated by domestic investors.
No doubt the Bank is hoping fund managers stick to their guns and increase
their gilt allocations at this month's auction too.
