FT  27 JUN 92 / SFO to question Kevin Maxwell
MR KEVIN MAXWELL and Mr Robert Bunn, former finance director of the Maxwell
private companies, have been summoned to interviews by the Serious Fraud
Office, the High Court was told yesterday.
Both have been served with notices under section 2 of the 1987 Criminal
Justice Act, the court heard. The section gives the SFO power to compel 'the
person under investigation' or 'any other person' believed to have 'relevant
information' to attend for questioning and to produce documents.
The SFO would not confirm or deny that the notices had been issued. Peters &amp;
Peters, Mr Kevin Maxwell's solicitors, refused to say if he had received a
notice.
Mr Bunn's solicitor, Mr Jeffrey Bayes, of Burton Copeland, confirmed that a
section 2 notice had been served on his client on Wednesday. 'It was done in
an extremely civilised manner,' Mr Bayes said.
He declined to say when Mr Bunn was required to go to the SFO's offices to
be interviewed, other than that it would be 'in the coming week'.
Service of the notices was mentioned when Mr Ian Maxwell applied
unsuccessfully for postponement of a pending High Court case against him.
Immediate judgment is to be sought against him and Mr Kevin Maxwell on
damages claims made against them over missing Maxwell pension funds by the
provisional liquidators of Bishopsgate Investment Management, from which
more than half the Pounds 886m pension money may have disappeared.
The liquidators, Robson Rhodes, will ask the court for summary judgment
against the brothers on the ground that they have no defence to the claims.
The hearing against Mr Kevin Maxwell will be on July 20, and that against Mr
Ian Maxwell three days later.
The liquidators issued a writ against Mr Kevin Maxwell in December claiming
Pounds 450m damages. Their writ against Mr Ian Maxwell, claiming unspecified
damages, was issued on May 8.
The writs accuse the brothers of breaches of their fiduciary duties and
duties of care as directors of BIM. Yesterday Mr Johnny Veeder QC, for Mr
Ian Maxwell, asked the High Court to postpone his case until September. He
said Mr Maxwell was 'fighting on too many fronts' and would not have time to
prepare for a hearing on July 23.
Mr Veeder said Mr Kevin Maxwell and Mr Bunn had also been served with
section 2 notices and it was 'inevitable' that a similar notice would be
served on Mr Ian Maxwell.
