FT  06 JUL 92 / (CORRECTED) International Company News: Nissan faces a hard
slog to lift profitability - The Japanese car manufacturer's change in
strategy
Correction (published 7th July 1992) appended to this article.
Nissan Motor's recently-inaugurated assembly plant in Japan's southern
Kyushu island, is, as the company likes to say, an engineer's dream - from
the flexible robots that can weld four different body models in succession,
to the computer controlled final assembly line, where vehicle chassis stop
precisely to allow robot installation of everything from engines to seats.
It is a vision of efficiency and competitiveness which, unfortunately, is
very much a goal for Nissan as a whole to achieve, rather than something to
sit back and enjoy. Nissan late last month installed a new board of
directors that will have to steer Japan's second largest car maker, fourth
largest in the world, through one of the most difficult periods in its
history.
Sales are sluggish, profits are plunging - down 71.8 per cent at the
operating level last year - and Nissan's debt is soaring, up to Y3,568bn
(Dollars 28.63), or 147 per cent of equity. The parent company operating
profit margin slipped to 0.08 per cent, and it was forced to sell securities
for a net gain of Y38.8bn to boost pre-tax profits.
As a result, Nissan is short of cash needed to fund investments for a badly
needed lift in productivity and, with its debt rating having been recently
lowered by Moody's, it will have to pay more for money it does raise in the
market.
Mr Tadashi Kume, who became chairman, made a hurculean effort to turn Nissan
round during his seven-year tenure as president. Nissan had been in decline
for years, with its 30 per cent share of the Japanese market gradually
slipping away to about 23 per cent. The company was often behind in both
style and technology and hampered by a difficult union relationships.
Mr Kume, however, managed to stop the rot. The settlement with the union
came mainly before he became president, but under his leadership Nissan
launched a design revolution in the Japanese car industry with a series of
cars that caught the public imagination.
'It is often said that Nissan is very bureaucratic, but I think we changed
this culture so that it it is more customer oriented and more open,' he
recently told the FT.
Nissan's domestic market share stabilised as a result, allowing the company
to participate fully in the rapid growth in the Japanese market at the end
of the past decade, although it failed to regain lost market share. The
company also never regained momentum in the US, where its product offerings
could not match the mass-market appeal of the Honda Accord or the Toyota
Camry, and sales there have been falling.
Mr Yoshifumi Tsuji, Mr Kume's successor, takes over at a difficult time
because the expensive effort to renew Nissan was only half complete when the
car industry slipped into recession last year.
Mr Kume spent money to develop new models, and while Nissan models on the
market grew from 39 in 1985 to 60 in 1991, average sales per model fell from
26,771 to 22,364.
It was late in the decade that Nissan began to renew production facilities,
and Nissan's capital spending tripled in three years until it reached
Y318.6bn in fiscal 1990. Nissan has opened three new assembly plants in the
past year - in Kyushu, in the US and the UK.
This surge in spending weighed heavily on Nissan's accounts last year in the
form of increased depreciation charges, which were Y134.4bn and expected to
rise this year.
In the middle of this difficult financial outlook, Mr Kume has been leading
a campaign to shift company strategy away from an all-out effort to increase
sales, to a renewed effort to improve profitability.
He says: 'In order to get higher profitability we have to place more
emphasis on features of the car or the qualities of the car, or good
service. In other words, the total management is more important and not just
the volume of sales.'
Mr Kume also believes Nissan needs to improve the quality of the sales
force, and, perhaps most important, reduce costs. 'We are not number one in
terms of labour productivity,' he admits.
Indeed, Mr Stephen Usher, analyst at Kleinwort Benson, calculates that
labour accounts for 8 per cent of operating costs at Nissan, compared with 5
per cent at Toyota. Closing the gap would bring Nissan huge financial gains.
Mr Tsuji, an engineer with extensive experience on the production side of
the business, will focus his efforts on squeezing costs on the factory
floor.
He said last Friday: 'We intend to thoroughly reduce the number of
components (used in a car) and also vigorously promote common use of parts
among different models. We intend to focus even greater emphasis on design
for manufacturability.'
With prospects for significant gains in the domestic market not encouraging,
Nissan is placing a lot of hopes overseas. Better performance mainly in
Europe last year helped boost Nissan consolidated pre-tax profits by 18.4
per cent to Y85.7bn.
Its Primera model, made in the UK, was a hit in continental Europe. Sales in
the UK should recover as the dealer network is re-established following the
break with its distributor last year.
Last month, the company began production of its Altima saloon in Tennessee.
Prospects for the car would be brighter if competition from established
models in the same sector by other makers were not so stiff.
Mr Tsuji is taking the reins of a company that is in far better shape than
it was for his predecessor. But between Nissan's huge debt, its low
profitability, and weak prospects for growth, the next year or two will be a
hard slog at best.
Correction (published 7th July 1992)
MR Tadashi Kume was yesterday incorrectly identified as chairman of Nissan
Motor. The Nissan chairman is Mr Yutaka Kume. Mr Tadashi Kume is former
president of Honda Motor.
