FT  29 JUL 92 / Business and the Environment: Hot air in Rio sows green seed
 -As the Earth Summit furore fades to a murmur, David Lascelles assesses the
several treaties' practical effects
Two months later, the Rio Summit is already becoming a distant memory,
confirming the cynics' view that it was largely a waste of time.
That is probably mistaken, though it is hard to argue the contrary because
virtually nothing has happened in the meantime to prove that it was
worthwhile.
Indeed, from the businessman's point of view, it is difficult to see what
relevance the summit has at all. Most of it consisted of wrangles about
environmental aid to the Third World and the ins and outs of bio-diversity,
something few people had even heard of before Rio.
Yet the presumption must be that Rio will have some sort of impact. There
were, after all, more than 100 heads of state or government there. They put
their names to several documents, two of which will become international
treaties with legal force. So what should the prudent business person
prepare for?
Broadly, Rio should give a higher prominence to environmental matters on the
political agenda, though that is hard to imagine at the moment. The
recessionary facts of life in most economies and the growing resistance to
regulation make environmental concerns something of a luxury. If one
assumes, however, that the industrial world will eventually emerge from
recession, the cost of Rio will begin to seem affordable. The resumption of
growth will also rekindle anxieties about pollution and waste. Eventually,
greenery may loom very large indeed.
The UK, in its role as president of the EC, is already trying to chivvy
other industrial countries into giving Rio decisions a 'prompt start' with
an eight-point action plan to ratify agreements and to organise further
implementation.
Rio may not have supplied many answers, but it certainly clarified the
questions. Policymakers, government officials, the green lobby and the media
are much better informed about the issues than only a year ago, and they
have become much more receptive to the case for international action. All
the signatories to the treaties implicitly yielded some sovereignty to the
rest of the world. That means that the UK may be forced by its treaty
obligations to introduce pollution controls or to grant aid to support the
global environmental cause.
Looking at the specific commitments made in Rio, many were merely
restatements of worthy goals, but several may have a business impact. Among
the more noteworthy are the following:
The polluter pays. This was recognised as the guiding principle in
allocating clean-up costs.
Countries committed themselves to discouraging or preventing the relocation
of environmentally hazardous activities to other countries.
The 'precautionary approach'. Lack of full scientific certainty should not
be a reason for delaying environmental action.
More information to be made available to the public about hazardous
materials and activities.
Closer integration of environmental considerations into government
decision-making.
Tighter controls on international traffic in hazardous wastes.
Promotion of environmentally sound waste disposal and re-use.
Promotion of scientific and technological work, and of codes of practice.
Potentially the most significant result from Rio is the international treaty
on climate change. That imposes an obligation on signatories to draw up
plans to limit emissions of greenhouse gases which are believed to damage
the climate.
Although it took a watered down form, the fact that a treaty was agreed at
all underlines the strength of global concern. The treaty may lead to much
tougher controls on energy use, carbon emissions and dirty industries. Its
potential impact concerns not only industry but the whole transport sector
and the home.
The effect is only potential because the treaty contains no deadlines or
targets. However, it has already prompted many countries, including all EC
members, to say in Rio that they intended to do much better than that. Being
a nitty gritty measure, its results should be easier to gauge.
The second treaty - on bio-diversity - is much more specialised. It is of
great interest to businesses such as pharmaceuticals or biotechnology, and
to the research industry as it contains legal measures to protect plant and
animal life, and it also lays down rights to commercial exploitation.
The Rio summit produced another much-bandied phrase: 'sustainable
development'. That is the principle whereby economic growth should not
impair the world's resources for future generations. In theory this sounds
very worthy, and if carried through to its logical conclusion it could have
a major effect on business. For example, it could lead to the introduction
of 'eco-accounting' and oblige companies to account for the full
environmental cost of their activities.
Sustainable development, however, may be a flawed concept, if not an actual
contradiction in terms, since economic growth has to consume resources., It
therefore seems highly unlikely that this will mean an early shift to
eco-accounting. Certainly none of the industrial countries at Rio was
proposing any of the legal moves that would be necessary precursors.
Few businesses will notice any immediate changes. The summit may make itself
felt over time. The regulatory screw will be steadily tightened, government
policy will acquire a greener tinge, and actions will begin to be taken for
global, rather than purely national, causes.
