FT  09 DEC 92 / International Company News: Fatigued carrier files details
of its new flight plan - After months of negotiations TWA hopes to be taken
off the critical list shortly
CARL ICAHN, one-time corporate raider and owner of Trans World Airlines, has
said he does not want to be remembered as the man who killed the carrier
which Howard Hughes built up.
On Monday, as he negotiated the final elements of a restructuring deal with
TWA's unions, creditors, and the US federal pensions agency, the New
York-born financier went some way to avoiding that epitaph.
The proposed reorganisation, which includes a short-term loan to the
airline, should take TWA off the critical list this winter.
Whether it moves the carrier - in bankruptcy since January and loss-making -
out of the casualty ward in the longer term, is more debatable.
TWA's problems pre-date Mr Icahn's involvement and throughout the early
1980s losses from its troubled domestic routes outweighed profitable
international operations.
Indeed, by 1986, when Mr Icahn entered upon the scene in share-punting style
and acquired a 47 per cent block of shares, TWA was already under takeover
threat.
At this point, however, the unions decided Mr Icahn was the best alternative
on offer, and offered him large wage concessions.
This encouraged the financier to negotiate his way to management control.
Mr Icahn's ownership was then cemented in 1988, when TWA was taken private
via a leveraged buy-out financed by Drexel Burnham Lambert, the now-defunct
investment bank.
From Mr Icahn's perspective, it was a masterly deal, giving him 90 per cent
of the airline's shares and Dollars 469m in cash - more than he paid for his
original equity stake. Unfortunately, the transaction also added hundreds of
millions of dollars of debt to TWA's balance sheet.
These heavy borrowings then compounded the difficult operating conditions in
the airline industry during the 1990s. TWA suffered an operating loss of
Dollars 162.3m in 1990 and another Dollars 353.5m deficit in 1991. Interest
charges consumed another Dollars 302.8m and Dollars 287m in the same years.
For a while, the carrier struggled on, thanks to asset sales. Most notably,
it sold off its London Heathrow routes to American Airlines in 1991. Asset
sale proceeds of Dollars 681.7m that year allowed it to post a small net
profit of Dollars 48.3m. But in early 1992, TWA finally filed for protection
from its creditors under Chapter 11 of the US Bankruptcy Code.
Since the bankruptcy filing, pragmatism has been the order of the day, with
all parties realising that the carrier could not survive with its existing
balance sheet.
Given TWA's ageing fleet and the current glut of aircraft internationally,
there was a strong incentive to restructure the carrier and hope the airline
industry revives, rather than simply liquidate remaining assets. Creditors,
unions and management have spent the past year negotiating with this aim in
mind.
The complicating factor has been TWA's pension plans. In the US, unlike the
UK, there is a federal agency, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation,
which guarantees payment of basic pension benefits.
The PBGC claims the TWA pension plans are underfunded by more than Dollars
1bn and it is not anxious to pick up the bill. Its bargaining counter has
been the notion of 'joint and several liability' - that is, that Mr Icahn's
level of ownership in TWA renders his other (more prosperous) private
business interests responsible for minimum funding contributions to the
plans.
This extremely important legal nuance seems to have surprised even the wily
Mr Icahn.
So who gets and who gives what in the reorganisation deal?
TWA's unions, thoroughly disenchanted with the Icahn management, have
offered a 15 per cent wage benefit concession package, estimated to be worth
Dollars 660m in savings over a three-year period. In return, they get a 45
per cent equity stake in the reorganised airline when it comes out of
bankruptcy.
Unsecured creditors abandon around Dollars 1bn of claims against the
carrier, but get the remaining 55 per cent of the shares. They also receive
no cash payments on any reorganisation securities for a three-year period.
Mr Icahn loses his equity interest in TWA, any management role, and abandons
all claims against the airline, thus cancelling another Dollars 175m of
unsecured claims. He, or one of the companies under his control, provides a
Dollars 185.3m, two-year loan to the airline, earning 1 per cent over prime
rate. This gives the airline the necessary funds to get through the dull
winter travel period. Mr Icahn also guarantees a minimum sales price of
Dollars 14.7m for Midcoast Aviation, a TWA subsidiary.
On the pension front, Mr Icahn will act as 'sponsor' to the frozen plans and
make annual payments - around Dollars 20m annually for four years - which
allow the plans to meet minimum ongoing funding requirements. Mr Icahn can
either find these sums from personal contributions or through better than
anticipated returns on the pension investments.
Finally, the PBGC gets some funding of the plans made up via a Dollars 300m
note issued by TWA, to be secured on its international routes/Kansas City
maintainence base.
This note bears interest at 11 per cent over a 15-year period. Mr Icahn then
chips in on top.
Does this mean that a viable airline has been created?
It is at least preferable to the carrier that went into bankruptcy.
First, the operational results should benefit from the labour concessions
and, perhaps, the change in top-level management. The former took effect in
October and were accompanied by a general downsizing at the airline.
TWA, for example, streamlined its domestic route structure, cutting out
services to about eight cities; it eliminated a handful of international
destinations; it reduced the number of operational aircraft; it pruned
several thousand jobs and so on.
Second, with lenders set to forgive about two-thirds of the Dollars 1.5bn
debt burden, the reorganised airline will carry a much-reduced financial
burden.
TWA will also retain a fair number of international routes, notably to
continental European destinations, plus its terminal and hub operation at
New York's JFK airport. Some analysts still see the international routes as
the more attractive side of the business, despite TWA's lack of domestic
feed.
On the minus side, the fleet is old, the airline's reputation with the
flying public sullied and the viability of the domestic operation has yet to
be proved.
'There's a big challenge out there,' says Avmark, the aviation consultancy -
a fair summary of the general ambivalence towards the carrier's long-term
prospects.
 ------------------------------------------
            TWA PROFITS (Dollars m)
 ------------------------------------------
Year           Operating          Net*
 ------------------------------------------
1988            259.3            249.7
1989             24.3           (298.5)
1990           (162.3)          (237.6)
1991           (353.5)            48.3
 ------------------------------------------
*after interest and asset sales
Source: company figures
 ------------------------------------------
