FT  12 FEB 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: US sued over Chilean fruit ban
CHILEAN FRUIT growers and exporters are suing the US government for Dollars
212m in compensation for the losses they suffered during a three-week trade
embargo against Chilean fruit in March 1989.
Mr Ronald Bown, president of the Chilean Exporters Association, said the
lawsuit would be lodged today in Philadelphia, the main US port of entry for
Chilean fruit.
The US Food and Drug Administration halted Chilean fruit imports three
years' ago after discovering two grapes laced with cyanide in a shipment
that had arrived in Philadelphia. The three-week ban, at the height of
Chile's fruit exporting season, dealt a severe blow to the industry. Chile
is the world's main supplier of fresh fruit during the northern hemisphere's
winter months and about 40 per cent of its produce is sold in the US.
Exporters believe they have scientific evidence to prove that the grapes
could not have been poisoned in Chile. Researchers at the University of
California and Chilean institutes concluded that the cyanide should have
spread to all the grapes in the box. The FDA was unable, however, to detect
even trace amounts of the deadly substance after analysing all the other
grapes in the bunch.
This has led Chilean exporters to believe that the poisoning must have taken
place accidentally at the laboratories of the FDA. The latter vigorously
denies that the grapes were mishandled.
Last year the Chilean fruit industry lodged an administrative tort claim
against the US Department of Health, which runs the FDA. The claim was
dismissed by the Department of Justice. This time round, the claimants -
3,000 fruit growers and more than 100 exporters - will seek compensation
through the US courts.
Mr Bown believes the lawsuit could involve legal fees of over Dollars 2m.
The cyanide scare exposed the fragility of Chile's highly-geared fruit
industry and its overdependence on the US market. Many fruit growers and
exporters went bankrupt. Although exports have recovered and totalled
Dollars 948m last year, the business is now considered a high-risk venture,
whereas before it was seen as a generator of certain profits.
