FT  14 NOV 92 / Arts: Tuned to erotic possession
A QUARTER-century ago, Pier Paolo Pasolini's Teorema ('Theorem') was not
only a film but a novel; and now, thanks to a commission from Henze for the
Munich Music-theatre Biennale, it is a 'musical parable' too. The composer
Giorgio Battistelli's version is for a silent cast 'of actors or dancers',
with the musical burden carried by a 22-strong orchestra - the Officina
Musicale Italiana, at Wednesday's performance in the Queen Elizabeth Hall.
Many filmgoers will recall Pasolini's story. A wealthy nuclear family, with
peasant maidservant, is descended upon in their Milanese suburb by an
attractive, vaguely Christ-like guest (originally Terence Stamp); each of
them, male and female, succumbs to him in turn. Then he departs abruptly;
whereupon they become variously exalted, depressed or demented, and the
fable ends with the father howling naked in a wilderness. Some mythic
significance is intended, though at ground level this is so plainly a piece
of stuff-the-bourgeoisie wish-fulfilment by a radical Left gay that one
might not feel the need to delve further.
Yet the action has a satisfying shape, and one which leaves sympathetic room
for exploring the facets of abject erotic possession. Some of us found
Pasolini's cinematic version risibly portentous: protracted, stagey images,
but the editing apparently done with a meat-axe and bathetic lapses - like
signalling a seduction with the camera tracking discarded garments from the
bedroom threshold down to the smalls at the bed-end.
Here, Lucy Bailey's staging was hypnotically slow but always fluid, often
beautiful. As lit in chiaroscuro by David Lawrence, Simon Vicenzi's
lofty-but-frail set was a visual pleasure in itself. Impeccable Euro-cast,
this being a European Arts Festival affair - British, Irish, Belgian and
French, but all of them would have passed muster with Visconti or Antonioni.
Lacking Stamp's laser gaze, Philippe Giraudeau mimed the Guest as a languid
upmarket gigolo, with detachable clothes and hints of tender, protective
wisdom while he accepted everybody's overtures. In slow stages he undressed
to his briefs, dressed again, and then stripped altogether for the final
seduction. That image seemed deeply British: a naked actor, decently
flaccid, in symbolic congress with another man in a suit. As for the saintly
maidservant, whom the film showed actually levitating at a great height,
Rena Vets here got more of a downer, being interred alive in a man-shaped
hole on the stage floor.
So far, so wistfully 1960s; but Battistelli's score infuses the proceedings
with non-vocal singing life. Each of the Guest's successive prey is twinned
with his or her instrumental Doppelganger: a violin or cello, a harp or a
bass clarinet, with their own expressively wrought cadenzas.
While their intricate flights are faithfully up-to-date, elusive and
a-rhythmic - real 'school-of-Henze', though reminiscent of Bartok's sexy
clarinet in The Miraculous Mandarin too - Battistelli sets them against
simpler brass fanfares, and broader percussion-rhythms: a sultry waltz-beat
through all the seductions, a lusty Latin-American pulse for the climactic
Expressionist throes. It is a clever, effective compromise. Much more than
just film-music, this score may inspire many more productions.
