FT  10 JUL 92 / Management (GEC at the Crossroads): The shape of things to
come - Part Five, Charles Leadbeater concludes his series with a look at
what the future holds for the group
An attractive 19th century country house in the village of Dunchurch just
outside Rugby in the Midlands was the setting this spring for an event
almost without precedent in General Electric Company's history.
On the evening of Sunday March 8 about 150 of the company's top managers
from around the world gathered in the oak-panelled dining room of GEC's
management college to discuss the group's future.
Usually the Stanhope Gate group, the small team of top executives from the
company's London headquarters, dreams up and discards ideas about how GEC
should develop, and managers of subsidiaries plan the future of their own
businesses. The only previous occasions when managers from operating units
had gathered to address the future of the group was during two brief
conferences in the 1970s.
Describing the Dunchurch gathering, Mr Murray Easton, managing director of
the Yarrow shipyard in Glasgow, says: 'It was the first time that many of
the people there had met and there were some businesses I did not know were
in GEC.'
The conference, entitled GEC In The '90s, began the following morning in the
lecture hall. Proceedings got off to a light-hearted start.
Lord Weinstock, the group's managing director, praised the way Lord Prior,
the chairman, had trailed around the world drumming up orders. Lord Prior
shot back: 'But Arnold, you always tell managers: 'Don't praise people
because they will just ask for more money.'' Lord Weinstock replied: 'From
now on you can get praise or money, but not both.' Thereafter the discussion
became very serious.
The group has rarely faced a set of challenges as great as those it faces
now. Lord Weinstock outlined how the group had to expand through joint
ventures in continental Europe and into new markets, if it was going to
offset the decline of traditional defence and public-sector markets in the
UK.
Mr David Grant, the recently appointed technical director, urged executives
to develop visionary plans to use new technology and open up markets, while
Mr David Newlands, finance director, described how GEC's financial controls
could be tightened further.
GEC executives are not the only ones thinking seriously about the company's
future. Earlier this year the Prudential, GEC's largest shareholder,
completed an exhaustive six-month study of the group.
The Prudential team gave GEC a clean bill of health. A senior executive at
the Pru explains: 'GEC's operating units are generally in good shape, run by
good managers. Not much more could be squeezed out from them than has been.
Our judgment is that GEC will now tick over quite nicely delivering earnings
growth of 7 per cent or 8 per cent a year, which for the 1990s with
inflation at about 4 per cent will be a good performance.'
The GEC-Alsthom joint-venture will make large sums of money. But this raises
a question that will haunt GEC through the 1990s. Can the group spend this
cash to generate growth in areas such as communications and services,
consumer and medical electronics which will compensate for the contraction
of its traditional UK public-sector markets? If it cannot, GEC could become
a shrunken shadow of the mighty industrial combine which it was designed to
be when it was created in the late 1960s.
And the answer to the question will not just affect the welfare of GEC's
employees and the wealth of its shareholders. GEC is more than simply a
private company; it is the industrial mirror of many of the strengths and
weaknesses of British society. Its performance has always been public
property because it is a reflection of public policy. For almost three
decades the group has struggled beneath a heavy burden of public expectation
that it could become Britain's national champion in electronics, an
instrument of manufacturing revival. The company has always straddled, and
sometimes been caught between, the public and private sector, business and
politics, industry and the City.
It has had a tangled, symbiotic relationship with the British state. In the
late-1960s, the Labour government sponsored its creation, through the
acquisition of Associated Electrical Industries and English Electric. That
merger in 1968 was supported by both the then Board of Trade and the
Industrial Reorganisation Corporation. Since then it has supplied successive
governments with everything from telephone exchanges to torpedoes, radar
systems to railway rolling stock. In the 1980s it was rudely shocked by the
Thatcher government's policies of privatisation and liberalisation which
ripped through its once cosy markets.
The high hopes which were invested in GEC have exposed it to great
disappointment. Over the past two decades accusations of short-termism,
insularity and complacency have accumulated at its door.
This welter of criticisms boils down to the allegation that GEC has lived
off some of the best assets inherited from Britain's industrial past,
without doing very much to secure its industrial future. In its very
creation it was supposed to help arrest industrial decline, instead it has
merely profited from it. Lord Weinstock, his critics allege, has made money
from the course of history when he should have tried to change it.
Most of the controversy about the group can be traced to the innocuous
four-page documents which Lord Weinstock first issued to his managers in the
late 1960s. It is the monthly financial report which the managing directors
of subsidiaries have to send back to him each month.
The report is disarmingly simple. About seven financial ratios compare such
items as sales, stocks, average pay, and capital employed against the
previous year and the budget for the coming year. On the final blank page
managers describe their plans for the business.
These monthly reports are the outer extremities of GEC's nervous system.
They are how the subsidiaries communicate with the brain at Stanhope Gate.
The financial details provide GEC headquarters with the common denominator
to assess the performance of its widely differing subsidiaries.
Mr Ron Turner, managing director of the New Jersey-based GEC-Marconi
Electronic Systems, which was acquired by GEC in 1990, explains: 'The
dialogue with GEC is mainly financial rather than about technology or
strategy.'
The company's finance officer gets two or three phone calls a day from GEC
headquarters; the technological exchange, which is partly constrained by US
Department of Defense regulations on technology transfer, is much less
frequent.
Lord Weinstock pores over the reports each month, often marking them in red
felt-tipped pen and scrawling criticisms on the back page. If he finds a
number he does not understand or an unwelcome development such as ballooning
stocks, he pushes a short code on his telephone which links him to his
manager and the interrogation begins.
Managers know that Lord Weinstock may call them at any moment to pounce upon
an aberrant number. As a result they are rarely far away from their ratios.
Most managers are like Mr Paul Barron, the manager of the Rushton Gas
Turbines factory in Lincoln, who keeps his ratios in the top drawer of his
desk, ready to be pulled out if the telephone rings. Mr Bill Korb, the
managing director of Gilbarco, the petrol-pump maker based in North
Carolina, goes one step further. He keeps duplicates in his office, at home
and in his car in case Lord Weinstock tracks him down when he is on the
move.
The climax of this financial ritual is the annual budget meeting. In the
early months of the year small knots of managers can often be seen waiting
nervously in the lobby at Stanhope Gate as they prepare to squeeze into one
of the small lifts which will take them to the upper floors for their annual
grilling. The intimidating team of interrogators usually includes Lord
Weinstock, his son Mr Simon Weinstock, Mr Newlands, Mr Malcolm Bates, deputy
managing director and Mr Grant.
Mr Carey Nolan, managing director of Picker, the Michigan-based maker of
medical scanners, takes about three months to prepare his plans before
flying to London. He says: 'No one tells me what ratios to aim for, what
profits I should earn. They expect me to come in with an aggressive budget.
It is my budget, my plan for the business.'
For the managers their annual audience with Lord Weinstock is nerve
wracking. One US executive explains: 'Once Lord Weinstock gets hold of
something he will not let go. You have to be prepared to be questioned on
any aspect of the business in the most minute and trivial detail.'
This simple set of disciplines is the source of GEC's enduring strength, its
financial security. It serves two main purposes.
First, it is the way the small team at GEC headquarters keeps a check on
what is going on in the subsidiaries, that reported profits reflect reality.
Mr Jeff Johnson, Gilbarco's finance director, explains: 'You could not
fiddle the figures when you are reporting this clutch of ratios because if
you tried to boost profits artificially it would soon show up somewhere else
in the numbers. Lord Weinstock would spot it in an instant.'
Second, the top management uses the ratios to drive the subsidiaries to
improve their performance. Mr Nolan says: 'It can be a pain but we are
constantly challenged on different aspects of the business. Lord Weinstock
is a terror about capital employed. I guess we would be more casual about
the management of our assets if the top-line profits kept growing, but
Arnold breathes down our neck.'
It is commonplace for GEC's financial controls to be described as rigorous.
However, they can be surprisingly lax in identifying problems in the
businesses.
Mr Maurice Dixon, who oversees GEC's metrology division - mainly Gilbarco,
Avery the weighing machine maker and GPSL, the semi-conductor manufacturer -
says: 'A business can seem all right through the numbers but it can be going
bad. Or the numbers can suggest a business is struggling while it is
actually getting better.'
A prime example of this was GPT, the telecommunications business. The
figures showed this was earning handsome profits from its core business
supplying British Telecom with large switches. But in reality by the
late-1980s it was seriously adrift, with little prospect of new business
growth to offset the impending decline in its BT business.
Mr Peter Gershon, GPT's managing director, explains: 'GPT was overmanned and
heading for serious problems in some areas. The management team was
introspective. It was not aware of the wider market outside BT and how
competition and technology were affecting its position. The traditional
sources of profit were falling and there was insufficient attention given to
how to create new sources of income, a lack of understanding of what was
needed to succeed in international markets. Business planning here used to
be a nightmare. The process was so complex it required an army of people.
The company was lost in a morass of plans. In the last 12 months we have
bitten the bullet. But it should have been done a lot earlier.'
GEC's financial controls are not as ruthless as those of Hanson, the
acquisitive conglomerate. But they are short-term. The horizon is next month
or next year.
Managers say this does not constrain their investment plans. Lord Weinstock
will approve investments if the short-term financial performance shows the
business is being well run. But the financial system produces its own
inhibitions. People censor themselves and hold back on proposals which they
know are unlikely to be approved.
The system can be good at identifying opportunities for cost savings within
an individual business, but it fails to identify cost savings that might
come from co-ordinating several businesses.
The most glaring example of this is the state of GEC's consumer-appliance
businesses, Hotpoint and Creda. Obvious opportunities to cut costs by
pooling their activities - joint purchasing of components, for instance -
were not taken because they reported their financial results separately.
Lord Weinstock, however, does not believe the financial system is the
company's life blood. He says that comes from the way its technology,
markets and management combine. These three elements are his yardsticks for
judging the company's strengths.
But has GEC got the right managers to develop the technology to exploit
growing, profitable markets?
GEC's approach to research, development and technology has been subject to
heavy criticism. It spends less on research and development and files many
fewer patents than most of its big international competitors.
The caricature of the group as technologically hollow, however, is highly
misleading. Its technical staff are of a high calibre. Marconi, its defence
arm, has very strong technology - laser guided weapons, satellite
environmental monitoring, sophisticated video telephones.
GEC is one of the largest software houses in Europe. Across the group it
spends about Pounds 400m a year on software which is becoming increasingly
important to all its products.
Nevertheless, Mr Grant recognises there is room for improvement. He wants a
more formal system of technology planning to run alongside the financial
planning so that managing directors are more aware which technologies are
critical to the future of their businesses.
Keen that GEC companies should work together more by sharing research, he
says: 'I can identify solutions from the centre, which people cannot see
from the subsidiaries.' GEC subsidiaries sometimes plough ahead on projects
in ignorance of the work that other companies within the group have already
done on the same topic.
However, Mr Grant's main worry is that GEC managers sometimes lack the
vision of how they might develop technology to meet emerging consumer
demands. His vision is for GEC to excel as an applier of technology to
products. It should not do any basic research, he believes.
On this view, GEC will not be driven by technological invention. Spending on
technology will be pulled by demand from GEC's markets. That means the
future of GEC as a high-technology company is inextricably linked to its
ability to open up new markets. This is its greatest problem.
GEC's approach to marketing is generally poor. It is good at selling its
existing products in familiar markets. Yet, apart from a few exceptions such
as the avionics division in Rochester, Kent, which has just won big orders
from Boeing, its attempt to open up new markets are feeble.
GEC is far more at home in slower-moving markets, where it has to deal with
a few large customers, than in open, fast-moving consumer markets where it
has to reach thousands of customers. This explains the failure of its
attempts to break into the US office equipment market through its
acquisition of AB Dick.
The limitations of the company are a reflection of the peculiarities of its
main customer, the British public sector. The classic example is in
telecommunications. Like other British manufacturers the company relied too
heavily on orders from the Post Office and the Commonwealth rather than
attempting to push its way into more internationally competitive markets.
The Post Office insisted on idiosyncratic and over-engineered products which
GEC has since found very hard to sell abroad.
GEC's technological shortcomings are partly a product of its insular
approach to markets, but also of the mind changing and short termism of its
British public-sector customers, whether over the System X telephone
exchange, the Nimrod radar or the nuclear power programme.
The quality of the managers who run GEC's operating units is mixed. But it
is generally as high as anything available in British industry. GEC has
strength in depth at its grass roots. Its subsidiaries are usually run by
long-serving executives who combine a background in engineering with a sharp
commercial sense and a strict financial discipline set from above.
The trouble is that these managers' horizons usually extend no further than
the boundaries of their own business. As a senior Stanhope Gate executive
puts it: 'This company is a collection of good small businesses run by good
small businessmen.'
GEC's main management weakness has been its missing middle. The subsidiaries
report financially direct to Stanhope Gate. The supervisory managers who
oversee groups of GEC businesses, such as electronic metrology, office
equipment and even Marconi, have traditionally had little power to bring
their charges together to pool activities and cut costs.
The justification for the missing middle is very powerful. In most companies
attempts at greater central direction have led to layers of unproductive
bureaucracy which inhibit change.
Travelling around GEC, however, examples abound of how subsidiaries could
learn from one another without incurring much cost. A prime example is in
manufacturing modernisation. The US businesses have taken great strides to
streamline manufacturing through total quality programmes. Picker's
de-unionised computer tomography factory on the outskirts of Cleveland,
Ohio, has cut its management layers from nine to three, reduced job
classifications from 188 to six and pared average product costs to 58 per
cent of what they were four years ago. It is making 270 scanners a year with
a staff of 82, working in self-directed teams, compared with the 120
scanners it used to make with 180 staff.
This has been the main force behind Picker's strong performance in the last
three years: return on capital employed has risen from 14.5 per cent to 20
per cent, sales growth has increased from 4.5 per cent a year to 10.5 per
cent and sales per employee are up to Dollars 200,000 a year, from Dollars
120,000 in 1989.
With such impressive examples of manufacturing efficiency available within
the company, one might expect staff at Stanhope Gate to instruct a stream of
British managers to visit the US. Yet there seems to be no concerted effort
to spread the best practice from these US plants around the group.
Outside Stanhope Gate change is afoot. Managers at Marconi, GPT and
GEC-Alsthom are all attempting to integrate the management of their
companies more, to drive them forward in a more concerted way. But at
headquarters the Stanhope Gate group has two main weaknesses. Its members
are good at operating like a merchant bank, dreaming up ideas for how the
group might develop through acquisitions. But they show no sign of being
able to galvanise the company and drive it forward in the way that Mr Jack
Welch has transformed GE of the US or Pierre Suard has pushed Alcatel into
the top ranks of the world's telecommunications companies.
The Stanhope Gate group also has an ad hoc approach to management
development which sometimes seems to amount to managers falling in and out
of favour with Lord Weinstock. And its biggest failing may yet turn out to
be an inability to secure an orderly succession to Lord Weinstock. As a
former senior Ministry of Defence official puts it: 'Apart from Weinstock
who has a view of how the whole business works? Who could take over? There
is no one.'
GEC is a well-run company by any standards. It has combined financial
stability with high technology, a rare mix for the UK. Its lasting
achievement will be the rationalisation which saved the British electrical
industry and enabled it to find a strong European home in alliance with
Alsthom. While it was far less active in the 1970s than it should have been
it came through the two recessions of the last decade in better shape than
British Steel or Imperial Chemical Industries. GEC has Pounds 876m of ready
cash, enough to buy British Aerospace, which only two years ago was boasting
of being Britain's largest manufacturing group. It has ridden the upheavals
which have struck the world electronics industry far better than many of its
competitors, such as Thomson, AEG and Philips, by steering clear of many of
the markets they have invested in.
But this means the company's growth outside the electrical industry is
patchy and haphazard. Last year its pre-tax profits of Pounds 829m were just
Pounds 100m higher than in 1985, barely any real growth at all in spite of
buying half of Plessey and a large chunk of Ferranti.
The company's subsidiaries are scattered and small. Their strengths are
rarely pulled together effectively. It is adept at saving money but
sometimes ill-judged at spending it; good at acquiring medium-sized niche
companies, less sure in making big acquisitions which could set it on a new
growth path. It is too often a follower rather a leader. It is strong where
its companies are large and used to facing stiff competition; weak where
they are small and used to protected markets. Even when there is an immense
amount of activity at GEC, there is little sense of momentum about the group
as a whole. If you take away Lord Weinstock, the top management seems
competent but not inspiring.
So could it have been different? Certainly it could have been a lot worse.
Alternative management methods were tried and failed at many of GEC's
British peers, some of which - Morphy Richards, Hawker Siddeley, STC - have
disappeared while others, such as Ferranti and Thorn, are a shadow of their
former selves.
And could it be different in the future? The next few years will be telling.
If Siemens of Germany pulls off its rationalisation of Siemens-Nixdorf and
its semi-conductor business, it could be the dominant European force in
computing as well as powerful in telecommunications and power engineering.
Alcatel will be a world leader in telecommunications and power engineering.
So what of GEC?
It is extremely unlikely that GEC will suffer any kind of financial crisis.
However, unless there is the right kind of management change at the top of
the group it could suffer a gentle decline, slowly shrinking, even though it
may be returning healthy profits. As things stand its most likely future is
as a financial holding company, at one remove from the management of a third
of its assets which are tied up in joint ventures. On a pessimistic view its
other activities could be a rag bag of niche businesses clustered around
Marconi which is struggling to come to terms with its uncertain future.
The far-flung resources of the group need to be pulled together more
effectively to capitalise on expertise in software, after-sales services and
in contracting. Around the group, managers thirst for its prudence to be
combined with ambition.
Lord Weinstock's management style was ideally suited to the task of
squeezing waste and eliminating duplication from traditional heavy
industries. The group now needs someone with marketing vision to pull
together and drive it forward into new markets.
It is not written in stone that there is only one way that GEC can or should
be run.
Travelling around the group - from 19th century factories in Lincoln which
used to make tractors to the very latest electronic warfare research
laboratories in Stanmore, from the huge turbines made in long halls at Rugby
to the printed circuit boards which come from Portsmouth, from the brutal
realism of GEC factory managers to the intellectual agility of staff at
Stanhope Gate - one cannot fail to have great admiration for Arnold
Weinstock's achievements.
Yet it is also hard to escape another conclusion. GEC has huge potential in
technology and management tucked away in its subsidiaries. That potential
will lie untapped if the company continues to be run in the same way.
The time has come for change, led from the top. That will require more than
a reshuffling of the pack. When Lord Weinstock created GEC he represented a
younger generation of managers with new ideas about how business should be
run. The time is nigh when another generation of managers should shape GEC's
future.
