FT  10 JAN 92 / Liberal Democrats launch Pounds 3.3bn job creation plan
THE Liberal Democrats opened their pre-election campaign yesterday with the
launch of a 'national recovery and regeneration' programme, including a
Pounds 3.3bn plan to get 400,000 jobless back to work within a year.
Their proposed measures, financed by public sector borrowing, would release
more money for Training and Enterprise Councils.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, said the party was not
offering 'quick fixes or slick solutions'. The Liberal Democrats are the
only party to commit themselves to such a specific outcome from their
economic remedies. Mr Ashdown promised 'positive politics' in contrast to
what he described as the beginning of a campaign by the other leading
parties 'characterised by insults and half-truths'.
The Tories kept up the attack over Labour's plans to remove the ceiling on
national insurance contributions, while Labour's economic team took the
opposition's campaign to the West Midlands.
At a series of meetings with colleagues in Downing Street, Mr John Major
began two days of discussion on the manifesto and campaign tactics in the
run-up to the election.
In Birmingham, Mr John Smith, the shadow chancellor, called on the prime
minister to use the meetings to produce a programme of action for taking
Britain out of recession.
Accusing ministers of complacency, he said that if the government ducked the
challenge of taking action it 'will have been exposed as unfit to carry the
responsibilities of government'.
The Liberal Democrats also used yesterday's launch to unveil a slogan 'My
vote - Liberal Democrat'.
Its aim is to get supporters to stand up and be counted, enabling the party
to overcome the barrier to its electoral prospects caused by sympathisers'
reluctance to vote for it, fearing the waste of a vote.
The theme will be followed up in a party political broadcast next week.
First steps proposed in the Liberal Democrats' paper include proportional
representation for parliamentary elections, a package - in some ways similar
to Labour's - to increase employment, and the granting of independence to
the Bank of England.
Mr Des Wilson, the party's campaign manager, said that in the forthcoming
electoral fight it would move constitutional reform up the political agenda.
The Tories will be the largest party in a hung parliament after the
election, according to a computer prediction of Gallup polls conducted over
the last quarter of 1991 published in the Daily Telegraph today. The
forecast puts the Conservatives (40.3 per cent) one point ahead of Labour
(39.3 per cent), with the Liberal Democrats on 15.2 per cent.
Tecs code urged, Page 6
