FT  18 SEP 92 / Survey of Urban Development (6): Brum bounces back
WHEN Birmingham succeeded in winning a slice of the 1992 City Challenge
funds, the UK's largest metropolitan authority had clearly learned from its
1991 failure.
The rejection of its earlier claim had been quite unexpected, and the city
had wasted bid-preparation time by arguing with the government over the
terms of its claim.
Having assumed that it would be granted funds, because Birmingham is always
granted funds, it came as a shock to be told by the government that it
should be co-operating more with other organisations to secure regeneration.
The 1992 City Challenge bid, however, showed that the city council had
backed away from a century of paternal tradition, and has perhaps finally
shed the notion that it always knows best.
Not only does the bid contain policies which, in Birmingham terms, are
radical indeed, for a devolution of its authority down to the local level as
far as the provision of its own services are concerned, but it was also
based on a massive consultation with local residents.
Newtown-South Aston, the focus of the 1992 bid, is on the north side of the
city centre. Forty-five per cent of the population is Afro-Caribbean or
Asian. Unemployment rates are double the city average, 91 per cent of the
dwellings are council-owned, and 60 per cent of employment is tied to
recession-ridden manufacturing.
The area exemplifies in the most striking fashion that increasingly serious
British urban problem: a district becoming separated from the economic
cycle.
The main spending elements of the plan for Newtown-South Aston are linked,
on one hand, to business development and training, and, on the other, to
housing. A training and education zone will be established, to harness in
partnership all the bodies involved in the sector. Business will be
stimulated, it is hoped, by the provision of new premises on the site of the
old Lucas industrial complex, on land owned by King Edward's Trust and at
the presently woe-begone Newtown shopping centre.
The city council will release its hold on the housing stock to create a
diversity of tenure, while the private sector and housing associations will
be financially primed to build new, and refurbish existing, homes with the
aim of creating a housing market.
This concentration of effort goes beyond the improvement of the physical
fabric of the area, and manifests another new approach by the city council -
an approach linked to its withdrawal from paternalism.
Much city council effort over the past decade has been devoted to the
constructional environment of Birmingham, to the provision of facilities
like the International Convention Centre, which will draw visitors to the
city. Critics, pointing to the under-spending of the education budget,
suggest that too little attention has been paid to the creation of an
educated and well-trained workforce.
In turning to social problems, the city council has become more dependent on
co-operation with other bodies such as the chamber of commerce and the
training and enterprise council.
Such devolution of power and willingness to co-operate has reached its
highest expression in Newtown-South Aston.
But this is just one part of the urban regeneration patchwork. The
establishment of the Birmingham Heartlands Development Corporation, to the
east of Newtown-South Aston, puts the city council, with half the members of
the board, into a new financial relationship with central government. The
negotiations for a Housing Action Trust, at the Castle Vale estate, force it
into a new relationship with both tenants and the private sector.
These two developments, with City Challenge, give Birmingham a trio of new
urban revival instruments, carrying total government funds in the order of
Pounds 200m over the next five years. The price for the city council has
been to drop its posturing as an independent fiefdom - though this might
have happened anyway, because the council is looking for friends after the
shock delivered to the controlling Labour group by the latest local election
results.
Birmingham's success in City Challenge brings to four the number of
successful bids, in 1991-92, from the Birmingham-Black Country conurbation.
Wolverhampton won in 1991. Sandwell and Walsall also won this year. The
conurbation is beginning to look like an urban regeneration laboratory.
