FT  28 AUG 92 / International Company News: Air Canada offers investment
deal to Continental Airlines
CONTINENTAL Airlines, the fifth largest US carrier but bankrupt since late
1990, yesterday received an investment proposal from Air Canada and a team
of Texan investors, which could give the bidders a majority stake in the
airline.
The new proposal - the third received by Continental in recent months - came
as the airline announced a breakthrough agreement with the Pension Benefit
Guaranty Corporation, the federal agency which underpins pension benefits.
The agency had been claiming that Continental was liable for Dollars 700m of
underfunding in the pension plans of Eastern Airlines, Continental's
now-defunct sister airline - a claim Continental disputed.
This wrangling was seen as a major obstacle to Continental's emergence from
bankruptcy. But, under yesterday's tentative agreement, the carrier said it
had agreed pay the agency Dollars 20m in cash and give the PGBC a Dollars
375m unsecured claim against its estate. There are various additional
concessions to the PGBC, plus a separate agreement with the Internal Revenue
Service.
The new investment interest comes from a consortium comprising Air Partners,
run by Texan investors, Mr David Bonderman and Mr James Coulter, and Air
Canada. It is offering to make a Dollars 400m cash investment in
Continental. In return, the investors would receive Dollars 100m in equity
securi ties and Dollars 300m in debt securities.
If the transaction went ahead as structured, Air Partners would get a 29 per
cent equity interest in the restructured Continental Airlines, but a 41 per
cent voting stake.
Air Canada, the nation's largest airline but heavily loss-making, would take
an initial 24 per cent voting interest and a 29 per cent equity interest.
The two partners would share the Dollars 400m investment equally, and be
allowed to appoint five members each to a 16-strong Continental board. Air
Canada, which has sizeable debts and lost CDollars 218m (USDollars 183.1m)
last year, said it had freed around CDollars 300m in cash recently, via a
variety of transactions.
Continental creditors would share in the remaining 42 per cent equity
interest, and 35 per cent of the voting rights.
Attempts to heave Continental out of bankruptcy have been gaining pace
recently. The bidding started when Maxxam, a conglomerate headed by Mr
Charles Hurwitz, a Houston financier, offered to invest Dollars 350m for a
72 per cent equity stake.
A second proposal, involving a Dollars 385m capital injection, was received
earlier this month from Mr Alfredo Brener, a Houston resident whose family
owns a sizeable stake in Mexicana Airlines.
Continental said the consortium was 'qualified to commence negotiations. .
.working towards an agreement which over-bid and superseded' the Maxxam
agreement.
Air Canada is lead by Mr Hollis Harris, Continental's former chief
executive. Yesterday, he claimed the deal would produce benefits in 'network
co-ordination, information systems and maintainence' and position the
carrier for 'further liberalisation of air travel in North America'.
