FT  08 FEB 92 / Ominous accord unites outlawed loyalist groups: The shadowy
connections of the paramilitaries
SHOPPERS stood in respectful silence on Belfast's republican Falls Road
yesterday by the funeral procession of one of the 10 victims of this week's
paramilitary attacks.
While families and friends mourn the deaths, nine of them claimed by the
outlawed Ulster Freedom Fighters (UFF), political leaders in Northern
Ireland have renewed calls for internment of terrorists and a ban on the
loyalist Ulster Defence Association (UDA).
Mr John Major, the prime minister, will be pressed on these issues when he
meets party leaders from Ulster on Tuesday.
Mr Seamus Mallon, justice spokesman for the nationalist Social Democratic
and Labour Party, said: 'We want to see the UDA proscribed. They are a flag
of convenience for one of the most ruthless murder gangs in Northern
Ireland.'
The UFF claimed responsibility for Wednesday's gun attack on a Belfast
betting shop which left five people dead and seven wounded, as well as an
attack on Tuesday against a Sinn Fein office on the Falls Road which left
three dead.
The UDA denies it has any direct links with the UFF, but a source close to
the organisation claims that 'the inner council of the UDA is the UFF
leadership - they have between 1,000 and 2,000 supporters and maybe 200 to
300 active paramilitaries'.
The history of the loyalist paramilitaries goes back to 1913, eight years
before the partition of Ireland. Protestants fearful that the British
government might bow to republican demands formed the Ulster Volunteer Force
(UVF) to wage a military campaign.
Today there are five main loyalist organisations which have direct or
indirect paramilitary links. They are the UVF, UDA, UFF, Red Hand Commandoes
and Ulster Resistance. All except the UVF have grown out of the 'troubles'
of the 1970s. The UVF, UFF and Red Hand are proscribed. The UDA and Ulster
Resistance are not, but the police say: 'It is a fact that members of these
organisations have committed terrorist offences; the facts speak for
themselves.'
The Provisional IRA remains the principal security concern of the police and
Army in Northern Ireland. But the UFF now poses a growing threat starkly
demonstrated by its recent attacks.
The police said the UFF had 'certainly acquired a substantial quantity of
arms from the international market, about two thirds of which have been
seized'. Unlike the IRA, the UFF appears not to have many explosives, but it
has used automatic weapons and anti-armour weapons.
The security forces have had greater success in seizing arms from the other
loyalist groups. But it is now thought that the UFF began sharing weapons
and intelligence with the other groups last year, and that all are in effect
merging into one organisation.
The UDA claimed to have as many as 40,000 members when it was formed as a
civil-defence and militia organisation at the height of the sectarian
conflict in the early 1970s. Infiltration by the security forces was
relatively easy, and contributed to the evolution of the UFF with a hard
core of activists organised in a tight cell structure. The UDA was presented
as its political front.
Suspicion among nationalists about collusion between loyalist paramilitary
groups and the security forces has never abated.
An inquiry in 1989 after many complaints reported that collusion was
'neither widespread nor institutionalised.'
It is believed that one adverse result of the subsequent clean-out has been
the loss of intelligence sources within the Loyalist paramilitary groups.
The conviction this week of Mr Brian Nelson, a former Army intelligence
operative, on conspiracy-to-murder and other terrorist charges, is an
indication of that.
Nationalist leaders continue to ask whether there is an 'inner circle' of
rogue security force officers collaborating with loyalist groups. The police
said yesterday: 'That is arrant nonsense.' Yet Tuesday's attack on the Sinn
Fein office, claimed by the UFF but carried out by a policeman who later
killed himself, has left doubts in Belfast about whether he acted on his
own.
Letters, Page 7
