FT  09 SEP 92 / The French Referendum: Mixed bag of voters say No to treaty
 -William Dawkins discusses the French campaign against the Maastricht
agreement and, right, profiles some leading lights
THERE is no single campaign against European monetary and political union in
France, rather a rag-bag of campaigns led by diverse and sometimes
conflicting special interest groups.
They stretch from extreme right to extreme left, to farmers, truckers, some
company directors, through the aristocracy to the bourgeois and working
class. They include most of the Communist party and the extreme right-wing
National Front, a majority of Gaullists, some of the UDF centre-right and a
small minority of the ruling Socialists.
Such fragmentation is both a strength and a weakness for the anti-Maastricht
lobby. It indicates that the No vote reaches many corners of society and so
could be hard to turn back. At the same time the No campaign sometimes looks
incoherent.
This impression is reinforced by prophecies that the treaty will create
horrors that cannot actually be traced to details of the text, like the
National Front's warnings that European union will unleash hordes of
immigrants to steal French jobs.
If there is a single thread linking the No protagonists, it is that many
represent constituencies or sectors that have suffered economically from
foreign competition, the decline of traditional industries or slow
development. For them, the Maastricht campaign is a catalyst for general
unhappiness about France.
Lately, it has looked as if the No campaigners may be succumbing to their
weaknesses, as the Yes vote revived to 54-59 per cent, but polls yesterday
showed the race was still close.
Broadly, the No campaign splits into the following camps.
The intellectually respectable campaigners, like Mr Philippe Seguin, the
Gaullist former minister, and his Gaullist colleague Mr Charles Pasqua, or
Mr Jean-Pierre Chevenement, the rebel former Socialist defence minister,
probably represent the core of the No vote.
They stick to actual consequences of Maastricht, such as the economic
rigours of monetary union, powers of a European central bank, and the risk
of French foreign policy being steamrollered by its European partners. They
have, on the whole, kept Mr Mitterrand's record out of their campaigns,
which could add to their moral respectability in voters' eyes.
Also in the intellectually respectable corner is an important minority of
the business lobby, such as Mr Jacques Calvet, chairman of Peugeot car
maker, and Mr Pierre Suard, chairman of Alcatel Alsthom, the
telecommunications and engineering group.
Then there is the populist section of the No camp, which plays on fears that
France is losing its importance in Europe - appealing more to general
nationalist sentiment than to the precise consequences of the Maastricht
project. The anti-immigrant Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen, National Front leader,
with his Wagnerian oratory is the prime example, although Mr Philippe de
Villiers, a rebel UDF member of parliament, has also made a vivid impression
on the hustings.
Outside party politics are the special interest groups. Anti-European
feeling was part of the truckers' summer demonstrations against tough new
driving regulations - which have nothing to do with the EC, let alone the
treaty - while hunting lobby groups have complained that Maastricht will
curb their right to shoot turtle doves.
The start of the official media campaign earlier this week could help to
focus electors' minds on the real issues. But a significant proportion of
the electorate may still be mulling over the wrong questions.
Tomorrow: the Yes campaign
