FT  25 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Regulator concerned about future of LBC
THE RADIO Authority is monitoring closely the state of Crown Communications,
the loss-making company that owns LBC, London's speech-based commercial
radio station.
On Monday Crown reported pre-tax losses of Pounds 5.58m in the six months to
March 31, a performance that compared with losses of Pounds 4.68m at the
interim stage last time and losses of Pounds 6.79m in the year to last
September.
The main concern of the Authority, the regulatory body for commercial radio,
is with the future of LBC, a station that has been increasing its share of
the audience and trading profitably.
The Authority, it is believed, has had preliminary discussions with
potential investors to try to safeguard the position of LBC if the financial
position of Crown were to deteriorate.
Two years ago Crown shares were trading at 250p, but by this week the price
had fallen to 8p.
In common with other media businesses the company has been hit by the
recession, but in Crown's case this has been exacerbated by losses from an
investment in RFM, a radio network with 89 stations in France.
Mr Christopher Chataway, Crown's chairman, said yesterday that the company
would be reducing its stake in French radio but maintaining a presence.
Partners were also being sought for other Crown businesses such as IRS, the
commercial radio sales house.
Mr Chataway has assured shareholders that the company still has the support
of its banks. Last month Price Waterhouse, Crown's auditors, said they
believed there were adequate financial resources for the foreseeable future
but some aspects of the accounts relating to the RFM investment had been
qualified.
LBC's licence comes up for renewal in March 1993.
It is clear that if LBC were to become embroiled in any way in the financial
problems of its parent there are investors ready to move in.
The general stance of the Radio Authority is to try to keep stations on the
air where possible.
Meanwhile in a separate development yesterday Lord Chalfont, chairman of the
Radio Authority, told the Association of Commercial Radio Companies they
were getting a bit too agitated about the re-franchising round starting in
the autumn.
'The Radio Authority has no predisposition to change for change's sake,'
Lord Chalfont said.
Later he added that the 'large majority of existing stations would get new
licences if they were performing successfully.'
