FT  15 OCT 92 / Survey of The Nuclear Industry (2): Producers take a bad
mauling - Ken Gooding investigates fuel supplies
URANIUM producers have been badly mauled by the present turmoil in the
nuclear industry. Mines recently closed down in Canada, the US, and some
countries in the former eastern bloc. Uranium prices in 1990 dropped to
Dollars 7.25 a lb, reckoned to be the lowest level ever seen, and even now
are still only about Dollars 8. Mining the material costs twice as much.
It has been worthwhile for some producers with long-term contracts at
reasonable prices to close mines and instead supply from the free market.
Prices peaked at Dollars 45 a lb in 1978 when it seemed oil prices were
going sky high and reflecting the fact that uranium has only one
application: for nuclear energy. Demand depends entirely on the nuclear
generating capacity in the 25 countries using that form of power.
The uranium market changed dramatically in the 1980s when brokers and other
intermediaries began to act for their own accounts. Over-optimistic
forecasts about future nuclear power demand contributed to the build-up of
nearly 80,000 tonnes of surplus uranium in stocks at power companies in
North America, western Europe and east Asia by that time. By selling from
these stocks, the brokers became an important new source of uranium supply.
More recently, brokers have also had access to the stockpiles in the
Commonwealth of Independent States, and this development is the main reason
the uranium price has, to coin a phrase, been bombed out. Nevertheless, the
industry continued to assume that stocks would not last for ever and would
be whittled away by the end of this decade. But now a new threat has
appeared - better relations between the world's superpowers means that
military stocks of uranium might be available to the over-supplied market.
Early estimates suggested 250,000 tonnes of natural uranium, or five years'
requirements, were available in the military stocks of China, France, India,
the UK and the US.
However, these estimates are wide of the mark, according to the Uranium
Institute, which draws together all sides of the industry. Estimates that
dismantling US and Russian nuclear weapons would provide 100,000 tonnes of
uranium were wrong, suggests the institute, and it is clear the two
superpowers will each release about 500 tonnes.
The two countries have initialled an agreement for the conversion of
highly-enriched uranium (HEU) from dismantled Russian nuclear weapons to
low-enriched uranium (LEU) for use as commercial nuclear fuel. The agreement
specifically mentions this 'will have no adverse impact on US consumers or
the mining and processing industries'.
The US and Russia have given themselves until next September to complete an
implementing contract which will provide for, among other things, the
conversion of at least 10 tonnes of highly-enriched uranium a year in the
first five years and 30 tonnes a year subsequently. Mr David Kay,
director-general of the Uranium Institute, says the US-Russian agreement
'ensures that not all the HEU will be entering the market at once but it
will be released over many years. This arrangement seems guaranteed to have
a zero impact on the market by ensuring that there is no vast new capacity.'
In 1991, producers supplied about 25,770 tonnes or only about 55 per cent of
the uranium requirements of the nuclear power industry outside the former
Communist bloc. The rest was supplied from stocks, from imports from the
CIS, other parts of eastern Europe, China, and by some recycled material.
This was bound to cause friction and the US uranium producers have filed an
anti-dumping petition against imports from the CIS which might lead to the
imposition of countervailing duties or 'voluntary' export restraints.
Mr Viktor Mikhailov, the Russian minister for nuclear energy, gave his
reaction in London last month. 'We believe efforts to limit or reduce our
exports are unfair and unfortunate,' he said. 'The world community must
realise the necessity of actively supporting the irreversible reforms in
Russia at this historic moment,' he added
He made an astonishing claim that Russia is exporting uranium at a profit.
Russia's present production allowed for the export of 3,500 tonnes of
uranium a year and an increase to 5,000 tonnes a year was possible. Mr
Mikhailov suggested some of Russia's 'substantial' uranium stockpile might
be moved to the west, partly to give assurance of supply to western
consumers and partly to be held as collateral for loans.
The Uranium Institute in its long-range projections assumes imports of about
6,000 tonnes a year from the CIS. It also assumes there will be a 15 per
cent increase of nuclear generating capacity worldwide from 1991 to 2000.
Most of the increase will be in France, Japan and Korea. Parallel to this
growth in capacity, it is expected that performance of reactors will improve
as well. So total worldwide uranium requirements for reactors are predicted
to increase by 17 per cent by 2000.
In that year, reactor requirements outside the former Communist bloc are
projected to be about 54,000 tonnes. If the CIS supplies about 6,000 tonnes
and 4,000 tonnes comes from reprocessing 9,000 tonnes of material, this
would leave about 44,000 tonnes to be covered by western producers - 18,000
tonnes more than 1991 production.
Therefore the Institute projects that most of the 75,000 tonnes of 'excess'
uranium stocks will be drawn down in a comparatively short space of time.
However, on present trends there should be no uranium shortages because, not
only could some western mining capacity be brought back into production if
demand required it, but also consumers have access to those stocks in the
CIS and China.
The present uranium glut has quite naturally raised questions about the
continuing need for the reprocessing of nuclear fuel. Twenty years ago
countries with nuclear power programmes believed that reprocessing would
help reduce the volume of radioactive wastes, and so ease disposal problems.
It would also release plutonium from the spent nuclear fuel. Plutonium was
considered an essential fuel for 'fast breeder' reactors and for nuclear
weapons.
But plutonium-fuelled fast reactors have proved expensive and prone to
technical mishap. Also most countries seem intent on dismantling nuclear
weapons rather than building new ones.
Many experts now suggest that storing spent fuel is cheaper than
reprocessing.
