FT  01 DEC 92 / US Senate under fire as scandal accusations grow
MEMBERS of the US Congress had hoped that the purgative effects of an
election campaign might allow them to make a new start. But just four weeks
after the election, the list is already lengthening of members who stand
accused of abusing women, alcohol and power.
Over the past year, it has been the House of Representatives which has stood
lowest in public esteem, in the wake of scandals over the House's private
bank and post office.
Electoral catharsis seems, however, to have had some effect on the lower
chamber, where many of the worst abusers of the House bank's loose overdraft
practices were voted out. In the Senate, on the other hand, the nightmare
appears to be starting over again.
Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, a leading contender for the Republican
presidential nomination in 1996, yesterday had to deny suggestions in a New
York Times article that he had intervened with federal regulators on behalf
of a property developer and savings and loan owner who had billed him only
Dollars 63,000 for Dollars 117,000 of work on his holiday home.
After Senator Brock Adams of Washington state was compelled to retire after
allegations of sexual harassment, three other senators now face charges of
sexual misconduct, in some cases stretching back over years.
Senator Daniel Inouye of Hawaii won re-election last month after easily
shrugging off complaints that he had forced himself on his hairdresser, but
charges of a pattern of unwanted sexual advances by Senator Bob Packwood of
Oregon only emerged after he had narrowly won his campaign for re-election
against former Democratic Representative Les Aucoin.
Senator David Durenberger of Minnesota, meanwhile, gave blood samples a
fortnight ago to help determine whether he is the father of a child whose
mother claims to have been raped by him in 1963.
The Senate last year gained few admirers for its clumsy handling of sexual
harassment charges made by Ms Anita Hill against Mr Clarence Thomas before
his confirmation as a Supreme Court justice.
It now risks reinforcing an image of harbouring a nest of ageing libertines
 -with Senator Packwood suggesting heavy drinking may have been a factor in
some of the sexual advances he is alleged to have made. He is seeking
alcoholism counselling.
The Senate faces a quandary over what to do about these latest charges. A
formal investigation by the ethics committee seems likeliest in the case of
Senator Packwood, since three of the women who claim to have been his
targets have said they plan to file formal complaints. But, in the interests
of party balance, the committee may then feel compelled to take up the case
of Democratic Senator Inouye.
Even if the ethics committee decides to step in, it runs the risk of
reinforcing the Senate's reputation as a club for insensitive white males
with little understanding of the realities of sexual harassment, unless
Senate leaders can persuade one of the four newly-elected women senators to
serve on that committee.
The four used the issue of the Senate's male insensitivity freely in their
election campaigns, but are now reluctant to join either the ethics
committee or the judiciary committee, scene of the Thomas-Hill hearings.
So far, Senator-elect Patty Murray of Washington has indicated she would, if
forced, serve on ethics, while Senator Dianne Feinstein of California may be
press-ganged on to judiciary.
