FT  25 AUG 92 / Arts: Life, near-death, sin and wickedness - Glasgow
Exhibitions
THE ART Gallery and Museum, Kelvingrove, Glasgow, celebrates John Bellany's
50th birthday with a sumptuous exhibition entitled 'A Long Night's Journey
into Day' (until Sunday). Bellany has created his own legend from the time
when, as a student at the Edinburgh College of Art, he hung his paintings on
the railings outside the Royal Scottish Academy as a protest against the
prevailing stuffiness inside. His art and his life are inextricably bound
up, and he has acted out his life on the canvas as tempestuously as did Van
Gogh. The work is the man and vice versa.
The exhibition is divided into three parts. The first room consists of 18
oil paintings from the 1970s announcing the themes which have consumed him
throughout his life: sin and guilt, stemming from his strict Calvinist
upbringing, and man's innate wickedness, with which he was confronted on a
visit to Buchenwald in 1967.
In these paintings, Bellany's chief theatre of operation is the bed, upon
which birth, sex and death are enacted, usually by surrogates  - symbolic
creatures nearly all drawn from the sea, reflecting his childhood in the
fishing village of Port Seton, Lothian. Lobsters and skates perform
unnatural acts with a peculiar joylessness; a dog is ensconced in the lap of
a naked woman who sits on a sofa resembling a deliquescent lump of meat  -
shades of Francis Bacon. 'You're 30 Today, John' is a lugubrious comment on
la comedie humaine, the shrouded figure of the artist supported by a fish
and a monkey.
The next room is the kernel of the exhibition. By 1984 he had become
seriously ill, though he never ceased painting, sustained by his wife Helen,
whose calm strength is celebrated in an iconic portrait of a modern madonna.
By 1987 he shows himself holding a watch: time is clearly running out. The
following year he underwent a life-saving liver transplant. The watercolours
he painted of his post-operative self, oxygen-masked, tubed and stitched,
are emotionally raw and profoundly moving.
The third room is alight with optimism. 'You're 50 Today, John' epitomises
the distance travelled in the intervening 20 years. The man is substantial,
instead of shrinking, and saturated blues and oranges replace rancid greens
and yellows. Bellany affirms his faith in painting as a means of portraying
ultimate truths, aligning himself in the tradition of the Old Masters, such
as Rembrandt, Titian, Rubens and Delacroix, whom he has never ceased to
revere.
He returns in 1992 to his roots in Port Seton, reworking themes first
painted in the 1960s of fish gutting and curing, now celebrated in radiant
colours. A sardonic sense of humour, and a lively sense of the absurd,
redeems the lushness of the imagery from any danger of sentimentality.
Tony Cragg's sculpture is being exhibited at the Centre for Contemporary
Arts (ex Third Eye Centre) and at the Tramway. Cragg is probably the most
form-inventive sculptor working on the international scene and the scope and
variety is admirably demonstrated in the echoing barn-like space of the
Tramway.
The earlier pieces are reassuringly familiar  - the jostling, wall-mounted
crowd scene made from bits of coloured plastic of 1984, the hugely oversized
eyebath in cast iron of 1986, the bronze turnip-lantern heads, cast from
sugar beets (1987) and the elegant 'Minster,' a post-modern version of the
Towers of Trebizond, which graced the roof-terrace of the Hayward Gallery in
1987. Thereafter, we are towed along in the wake of his fertile imagination.
Cragg represented Britain at the Venice Biennale in 1988 and won the Turner
Prize in the same year; yet the vast majority of his exhibitions have been
outside the UK and Glasgow is the only venue for this show. Cragg's declared
aim is 'the creation of objects that do not exist in the natural or in the
functional world, which can reflect and transmit information and feelings
about the world and my own existence.' Preconceptions as to how we perceive
the world about us are thereby overturned.
There is no hierarchy of materials in Cragg's work. He is equally at home in
bronze, steel, glass, wood, stone and plastic, but in each case any
suggestion of the mimetic is undermined by a certain perversity in the use
of that material. 'Branching Form,' in steel, is like a diagram of blood
vessels in three dimensions; 'Bodicea,' in wood and steel, resembles a sea
slug heaving itself over an object on the sea bed.
He uses gigantism to make a pyramid of rubber stamps in steel, ironically
entitled 'Subcommittee', and a Sony Walkman evolves from a three-foot-square
block of black limestone, alternately shiny and matt, with all the knobs,
leads, grooves and batteries clearly delineated.
Though resolutely committed to modernism, Cragg can still indulge in
art-historical appropriation. 'Spyrogyra' is a spiral of spiked steel on
which are impaled a number of odd-shaped, sand-blasted bottles, a somewhat
threatening reference to Duchamp's 'Bottle Rack' of 1913. The difference
lies in the opposition of Cragg's carefully assembled piece and Duchamp's
cheeky 'found object,' presented as a work of art because it was declared to
be so by the artist.
Perhaps the most accessible pieces are the traditional bronzes, huge
distorted blow-ups of laboratory equipment yielding zoomorphic and
anthropomorphic associations which allow the viewer, as Cragg would like,
'to get involved with the sculpture.' The exhibition runs until September 6.
