FT  21 NOV 92 / Schlesinger firm on interest rates
MINIMAL room exists for German manoeuvre on interest rates, Mr Helmut
Schlesinger, Bundesbank president, warned yesterday, in remarks which will
dampen widespread hopes of a cut in German rates this year.
Speaking at the European Banking Congress in Frankfurt, he emphasised that
the Bundesbank's policy is aimed at medium-term price stability, cautioning
that this goal is being challenged by sharply growing money supply, strong
credit growth, considerable price rises and the weakening of the D-Mark
against the US dollar.
By sticking to its policy objectives, the Bundesbank was simultaneously
doing the best it could to ensure stability in Germany, and helping the
process of economic and monetary integration in Europe, he argued.
His speech contained a highly sceptical assessment of the path to monetary
union as outlined in the Maastricht treaty. He said that monetary union was
desirable and realisable - but not necessarily within the timetable laid
down in the treaty.
The treaty specifies that countries should complete the process of monetary
union before the end of the decade. Mr Schlesinger said that the timetable
should not be regarded as a 'straitjacket'. Going beyond his prepared text,
he said that the timescale could even be prolonged if things developed in a
more difficult way than expected.
He laid heavy emphasis on the economic convergence criteria that have to be
met before the move to monetary union. He said these were not excessively
ambitious, but the path to fulfilment would lead to a painful process of
adjustment in some countries.
'You don't have to be a prophet to see that setting up a European central
banking system, with the overriding commitment to price stability, will for
some countries mark a profound caesura with traditional ways of doing
things,' he said.
The Bundesbank's policymaking Council meets only twice more this year, on
Thursday next week and again on December 10, when a money supply target will
be set for next year. Any decision on whether to cut the key Lombard or
discount rates will be influenced by provisional data for October money
supply growth and November inflation, to be published next week.
The internationally sensitive Lombard rate is currently 9.5 per cent, cut
from 9.75 per cent in mid-September. The domestically important discount
rate stands at 8.25 per cent, cut from 8.75 per cent in September. Money
market rates are about 8.80 per cent, around a percentage point down from
the beginning of September.
