FT  13 APR 92 / Election 1992: Relief at BBC over Mellor post
WITH INTERESTS ranging from the composer Glazunov to Chelsea Football Club,
Mr David Mellor is equipped to head the new national heritage ministry
responsible for the arts, the media, heritage and sport.
There will be relief at the BBC that its future is in the hands of Mr
Mellor, who understands the complex policy arguments in broadcasting. This
is particularly important since some Tories have muttered about taking
revenge for alleged anti-Conservative bias by the BBC during the election
campaign.
A green paper on the BBC is expected later this year. Its charter expires at
the end of 1996 and must be renegotiated. While Mr Mellor is likely to give
short shrift to any arguments from the BBC that smack of vested interests,
he will not be inherently hostile to the notion that there should be a body
like the BBC funded by a licence fee and committed to quality programmes.
Mr Mellor, who combines previous ministerial experience for broadcasting and
the arts with a feeling for handling large budgets from his most recent post
as chief Treasury secretary, will know that the superficially attractive
idea of putting advertisements on BBC television could destroy the finances
of ITV. It was principally Mr Mellor who turned the 1990 Broadcasting Bill
from being a potential disaster for ITV into an Act that may turn out to be
workable, in spite of its imperfections.
With a mixture of responsibilities from no fewer than six departments being
assembled under his bailiwick, Mr Mellor will be anxious to keep
bureaucratic teething problems to a minimum. He will preside eventually over
a 350-strong staff in a yet-to-be-determined location.
The creation of this ministry is one of the clearest signs that Mr John
Major is attempting to put a distinctive stamp on his premiership. Mr Mellor
will bear a heavy responsibility in making a success of it, and will need
his robust debating and bargaining skills.
He spoke yesterday of seeing a role for government in assisting 'the
accessibility of the arts.' There was 'a clear feeling' that the arts were
'a lasting and enduring part of society' and hence needed cabinet-level
representation, he said. His will be the final word on whether works of art
may be exported.
Lord Palumbo, chairman of the Arts Council, welcomed Mr Mellor's
appointment, saying he would give the arts 'leadership, direction and a
vision for the future'.
