FT  05 MAR 92 / A better road to freedom
Last month, Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (ETA), passed something of a milestone.
Nearly 23 years after beginning a terrorist war to 'free' the Basque country
from Spain, it killed its 700th Spaniard in Madrid.
ETA has killed 271 civilians, 26 of whom have been children or teenagers.
This year alone, its bombers and pistoleros have killed 15 people, in an
accelerating attempt to frighten the Spanish government into negotiating to
ensure calm for this year's festivities: the Olympics in Barcelona and the
Universal Exposition in Seville.
Sensibly, the government has done no such thing, though it is always alert
to any cracks it might exploit in the wall of separatist fanaticism it finds
among ETA prisoners, the operating leadership which hides in France, and the
spread of support organisations in the Basque country, including the
political party, Herri Batasuna.
Occasionally, a senior Herri Batasuna figure will peel off from the fight;
sometimes a prisoner decides to leave the cause and is 're-inserted' into
society. Dozens of ETA leaders are being picked up in France and Spain.
But the killing continues and Herri Batasuna has a firm hold on 15 per cent
of the Basque vote. For any Spanish government, it must be a tiring
struggle.
It has been perhaps most depressing for Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez and
his Socialist party, in power since October 1982. Many of its political and
trade union leaders, drawn from the Basque country, genuinely believed that
under enlightened liberal rule from Madrid, Basque separatist terrorism
would wither and die.
The Basque country is, probably, the most truly autonomous region in the
European Community. Its three provinces collect all their own taxes. It has
its own police force. Its obscure and difficult language is taught in
schools and universities despite the fact that fewer and fewer Basques wish
to learn it. Central government subsidies have kept alive the region's
dilapidated steel and en-gineering industries.
In Spain, Basques control some of the land's biggest business and banking
empires. The Basque country itself is a glorious place. Its chefs are
probably the best in Europe. San Sebastian, its second city, is one of the
most beautiful. Its alpine countryside is a breathtaking relief from the
arid meseta at the centre of Spain.
It is easy to understand why Basques love their country. They all do, and
they are almost all nationalists. But a small and determined group continues
to kill and maim for it.
Few countries would have been able to respond to this violence with the
maturity shown by Spain. It quite reasonably considers the Basque country to
be an integral part of its territory and has refused to bend to the
provincial and anachronistic arguments for separation that draw - as do most
such causes - on dreams of recreating history before the birth of modern
nation states.
Madrid does not expect anyone else to fight its battle for the hearts and
minds of the Basques, but somehow the issue needs to be broadened. ETA's war
is not of much concern to the rest of the world, but it remains a serious
threat - probably the only threat - to a liberal and respected democracy.
Somehow, ETA's supporters need to know that violence will not be rewarded
and that violent separation from Spain means exclusion from the political
and economic communities Spain already belongs to.
Members of ETA are highly motivated and well-organised. They draw morale and
political sustenance from the Basque public that regularly votes for Herri
Batasuna. It is time Spain's friends and neighbours began to speak to those
voters before the Basque country becomes a European problem closer to the
heart of the continent than Northern Ireland.
This does not excuse Madrid from doing everything possible to find its own
political solution. But the narrow Basque gaze needs to be shifted from
Madrid to the wider European stage.
