FT  30 SEP 92 / International Company News: Venture capital becomes a scarce
resource - Emiko Terazono examines why Japan's investors are turning ever
more conservative
VENTURE capital in Japan, always a rare resource, is becoming even more
scarce following the downturn in the country's economy.
The slump in the equity market and gloom over the economy has made investors
more conservative. Many financial institutions - which were keen newcomers
to the Japanese venture capital market in the years of loose credit in the
late 1980s - have retreated to their core businesses.
Problems at Ascii, the computer and software company led by Mr Kazuhiko
Nishi, typify the troubles faced by small companies in raising venture
capital. The company's expansion was funded in 1990 by bonds convertible
into equities. However, the sharp fall in the Tokyo market has left the
bonds - which expire next March - unconverted, and the company does not have
the funds to repay investors.
Faced with mounting debts, Ascii turned to its banks for help, and managed
to persuade its six main creditors to come up with a rescue package.
'Small companies are under great pressure, especially with larger companies
cutting back on capital expenditure,' says Mr Alan Acosta, analyst at Baring
Securities.
The amount loaned by banks to small companies is likely to fall year-on-year
for the first time in 15 years. New public offerings have virtually come to
a halt since the over-the-counter (OTC) market plunged along with the first
section of the Tokyo stock market.
Mr Sadayoshi Hayashi, a director of Jafco, Japan's largest venture capital
company and an affiliate of Nomura Securities, admits that times are hard.
'The capital markets are in bad shape, but in the long run, the trend
towards increasing listings for smaller companies has not changed,' he says.
The downturn in the economy is working favourably for Jafco, since it makes
investment decisions easier. 'When things are good, everybody makes profits,
but in times like these, we can pick out the good ones,' Mr Hayashi says.
Venture capital in Japan has traditionally been different from that in the
US and Europe, where capital is invested in the start-up of high-risk
companies. In Japan, under a culture which values stable growth and the
credibility of an organisation rather than that of an individual
entrepreneur, there have been few small start-up ventures.
'Japan's venture capital market is not socially developed, and there is no
real grass roots growth,' says Mr Gary Chan, an analyst at James Capel, the
broking firm.
Venture capital companies in Japan focus on finding growing but mature
companies with potential to be listed publicly, rather than taking large
equity positions in companies. This is because they look for future profits
through flotations and underwriting.
In the past, smaller companies have relied on government financing, and
loans from small banks and loan co-operatives. The focus on stable growth
rather than high profits, and the unwillingness of investors to place funds
into start-up companies, has also mitigated against Japanese venture
capital.
Another characteristic among Japanese companies, resulting from the lack of
risk-taking by venture capitalists, is low profit growth. According to
Nomura Research Institute (NRI), the average annual growth rate of revenues
at the top 20 US companies, during the first four years of listing on
Nasdaq, was 132.5 per cent. However, the figure for the top 20 Japanese
companies listed on the over-the-counter market was 32.9 per cent.
Mr Shinichi Shibayama at NRI points out that the closed business structure
in Japan, where leading companies and small corporations are not regarded as
equals, and the lack of intake of qualified staff at small companies hamper
growth.
Mr Hayashi at Jafco said: 'We are not deliberately avoiding new companies
when we invest, it's just that there is no market for start-up companies
which nobody has heard of.'
Small companies face several years before they establish their credibility
and become ready for public listing. On the OTC market, companies have been
in business for an average 29 years before their initial offering. In the
US, it is 4.7 years on Nasdaq.
In addition, fast growth areas such as high technology and biotechnology,
usually targeted by venture capital companies in the US, are taken on by
larger companies in Japan. For example, leading pharmaceuticals and foods
corporations are active in research and development in biotechnology.
Recession or no recession, the venture capital business in Japan still faces
social and cultural barriers. 'One major hurdle is the reluctance among
investors to provide credit on the back of innovation and new technology,'
says Mr Takehiro Tsuda, analyst at Ichiyoshi Securities.
