FT  16 APR 92 / World Trade News: Caribbean feels cold winds blow -
Recession is hitting a once-thriving industry
AS THE Caribbean high season draws to a close, the glum faces in the tourist
industry and indications of despair among hoteliers suggest all is far from
well.
Few countries in the region are attracting the numbers of visitors they
traditionally entertain: there has been no especially cold northern winter
to drive shivering thousands southward and the recession in North America
and western Europe continues. The depression in the industry must be shared
by more than a few finance ministers in the region, particularly those in
which the leisure and travel industry has become a pillar of otherwise
straitened economies.
Many people involved in the industry reckon that a host of domestic and
international problems probably means the industry's fortunes this year will
be hardly better than in 'awful' 1991 when 11.6m tourists earned the resort
countries about Dollars 9bn (Pounds 5.2bn). Acknowledging the gravity of the
situation, Caribbean political leaders recently gathered in Jamaica to see
how the product might be improved and earn more. They concluded there was
much hard work ahead.
Mr Jean Holder, director of the Caribbean Tourism Organisation, says the
industry faces the threat of stagnation after 10 years' healthy growth. It
was first hit by the decline in leisure travel because of the Gulf war, then
by the recession in western European and North America, from where the US
provides three out of five of the region's tourists.
Amid these problems, the recent collapse of Pan American Airways could not
have come at a worse time. The airline was long an important carrier of US
tourists and had become more important with the earlier demise of Eastern
Airlines. American Airlines is now the only major carrier.
Mr Luther Miller, one of the organisation's marketing specialists, says: 'We
need to put our heads together to find the best possible position for the
Caribbean to secure our tourist industry. God forbid that, for whatever
reason, American Airlines should go on strike. The effect would be
catastrophic.'
Most of the Caribbean resorts cater to the higher end of the market, and the
region is generally regarded as an expensive destination. Competing for
market share, especially during a recession, is difficult, and destinations
which offer a better bargain will be preferred.
'A few years ago, you were doing somersaults in the marketplace,' says Mr
Gordon Stewart, one of Jamaica's leading hoteliers. 'You are going to have
to do triple somersaults at this time to simply stay where you were a couple
years ago.' The image of the region has also suffered from an increasing
number of well-publicised attacks on tourists. It is a problem which resorts
can ill-afford to treat lightly, and one which Mr Miller thinks has to be
faced by the governments of the region.
'Very seldom a day goes by,' he says, 'when I don't hear a horror story on
one island or another about crime against tourists. It is all well and good
to suggest there is more serious crime taking place in the city centres
where our tourists come from, but when someone comes here for a vacation,
they do not want to be interrupted by ugly experiences.'
Meanwhile, while the industry is still hoping for an improvement by way of
an upturn in the US economy, the traditional resorts are looking anxiously
at a renewed source of competition: the Cuban government has decided that
the almost instant cash which tourism provides, can offer it some relief
from its hard-currency shortage.
Cuba is expanding its tourism infrastructure and intends to increase its
hotel rooms, currently at 7,000, to 30,000 by 1995. Tourist arrivals last
year were 400,000, and the government in expecting half a million this year,
with over 1m a year from 1995 onwards, most from an increased market share
in Canada, Mexico and west Europe. Cuba could be expected to exploit its
control of all aspects of the industry, setting prices to undercut other
Caribbean resorts.
