FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (24): A Gospel for Basildon
 -Economics, Finance, Industry, Trade, Management
IS THERE A GOSPEL FOR THE RICH? by Richard Harries Mowbray Pounds 12.99, 182
pages
WHEN ALL is said and done, the Gospel is not much help to the digestion of
your typical FT reader. It is not just the eye of the needle conundrum: the
blessings of poverty, hostility to possessions and attacks on
acquisitiveness feature on every page. True, the apostles - even Christ
himself - were, by and large, self-employed petit bourgeois. But 'love
communism' is a fair description of the life they and their early followers
led; and the ideal animates not just third-world Catholic priests, but at
least part of the impoverished masses to whom they minister.
It is something of a relief, then, to have Richard Harries, the urbane
Bishop of Oxford, interpret the Word to the City. Yes, the poor demand our
attention and generosity. But no, you do not have to sell all and donate it
 -unless you feel called to do so.
More to the point, there is no hard-and-fast definition of who are the poor.
'All are rich in the light of world poverty,' yet poverty is not simply
about material wealth. Anyone suffering affliction and oppression - 'all
those who are losing out in some way because they are up against the world
as it is' - are poor.
Bishop Harries's argument is fairly conventional, though elegantly
expressed. Free-market capitalism is 'the worst system we've got - except
for all the others.' Following Luther, if jobs are necessary to the working
of human society, then filling them is an honourable Christian vocation. 'It
is as Christian to be a banker as a bishop, as religious to be a stockbroker
as a monk.'
The generation of wealth is a moral activity, and the job of business is
that of 'increasing the resources of society so that the quality of life for
all might be improved.' Provided, that is, it is done in an ethical fashion
 -pause to praise the City ('a place of great personal integrity') and to
plug the bishop's campaign against the Church Commissioners for failing to
follow an 'ethical' investment policy.
It is the uses to which wealth is put that matter. The bishop does not go as
far as Wesley ('gain all you can: save all you can: give all you can'), but
almost. There is no Christian blueprint for a fair and just order - just
precepts and a tradition to guide individual Christians. Most of the book is
a commentary on the two, peppered with thoughts-for-the-day on Modern Life.
The latter are not particularly profound, but revealing for the light they
cast on the Church of England's post-Thatcher view of the world.
'God wills a stable order as a precondition for genuine human community,'
says the bishop. Inflation is the enemy of stability, 'so however painful
and undesirable it is, it may be necessary for a society to experience
substantial unemployment. All a Christian can do is insist that extensive
unemployment cannot be tolerated indefinitely.' So Norman Lamont can sleep
with a clear conscience. But not George Bush, alas; since some pages later
the American dream is derided as 'destructive' because 'it fails to
recognise that there are other values in human society besides success, and
we all have to relate to one other as mutual failures, not just potential
victors.'
The biggest lacuna in the book is its obsession with the very rich and the
very poor - home and abroad - fortified by an outdated preoccupation with
Marx and Marxism. What about Essex Man - rich in the light of world poverty,
but with little in the way of shares and capital of which to dispose, and
living on the margins of middle class respectability?
Most of us, after all, are middling in our own society's estimation. The
bishop has something to say about what should be done to us: companies
should follow stakeholding policies a la Charles Handy, offering
consultation and share options aplenty. But what should be done by us goes
largely unsaid. Refuse to work for companies investing in Serbia? A tenth of
our income to Oxfam - and to hell with the mortgage?
In other words, is there a gospel for Basildon? Until the bishop and his
colleagues start telling us, the C of E and its works will become still more
irrelevant to the great mass of its own people.
