FT  23 DEC 92 / Business and the Environment: Skiing's natural balance -
Victoria Griffith examines the row over water use in the US
Skiers heading for the slopes this winter are unlikely to be plagued by
doubts that they are doing something harmful to the environment. Indeed,
fresh air and mountain scenery have always been part of the lure of the
sport, which appears comfortingly benign to nature.
Yet at mountain resorts all over the US, environmentalists are in a fierce
ecological battle with the ski industry over an increasingly precious
commodity - snow.
The fight over snow is really a battle for water. Environmentalists say ski
resorts are siphoning so much water from mountain streams that the streams
may begin to run dry for part of the year. A dry river or stream bed is not
only an unpleasant sight; it can also be lethal to fish populations.
'The snow-making issue is turning into the most bitter environmental battle
this region has seen in years,' says Andrew Hamilton, a lawyer with the
Conservation Law Foundation, a Boston-based environmental group which has
challenged the ski areas' water rights. In some areas, ecologists say, the
water drainage has been devastating, threatening the survival of fragile
trout and salmon populations.
In years past, ski resorts relied on Mother Nature to provide them with the
snow they needed, and she was kind enough to oblige. So was the world's
economy. After the second world war, increasing wealth in the industrialised
world turned a once obscure sport into an internationally popular pastime.
In the US, the industry enjoyed tremendous growth, becoming a big
money-earner in states like Colorado and Vermont. Over the last two decades,
though, growth in the ski business has slowed dramatically, and ski areas
are competing for a greater share of a stagnant market.
In the fight for customers, snow-making has become a common way of extending
the season, guaranteeing snow from late October through April or even May.
Unfortunately, the demand for artificial snow is at its highest in November
and December, months when mountain streams are at their lowest level, and
when fish eggs are most in danger of being destroyed if the stream freezes
through.
'We are concerned that the stream rates are too low for the survival of the
fish, particularly Atlantic salmon, which is a threatened species,' says
Spencer Conley of the New England Fish and Wildlife Service. In Colorado,
which faces a state-wide water shortage, limits on water withdrawal for
snow-making have hit the ski industry hard, nipping in the bud plans for
expansion at many resorts.
But the hard times have also unleashed unprecedented creativity in the art
of making snow. Some resorts have financed 'cloud seeding', an experimental
procedure in which aeroplanes fly through clouds in the hope of producing
precipitation.
To protect the fish population, some ecologists suggest planting trees on
river banks for shading, and placing boulders and rocks at strategic points
in the water to create pools of water for fish eggs. Others are advocating
the recycling of treated sewage water for snow-making, though the idea may
not be well-received by skiers.
The best alternatives are, unfortunately, among the most expensive. One
option is to create storage tanks above the ground to collect rain water
throughout the year. The problem is that the tanks are not aesthetically
pleasing, an issue of great importance for the ski industry. Another
possibility is the creation of artificial lakes, which collect water when
the snow melts in the spring, and can be used later to make snow. This
method is not only feasible, it is also aesthetically attractive.
However, the creation of an artificial lake is prohibitively expensive for
any single resort to contemplate. Yet in Colorado, competing resorts have
begun to pool resources to try to resolve their problems together. In one
case, five ski areas have just agreed to help finance the creation of an
artificial lake together with the city government of Denver. In return for
their investment, they will each be awarded a certain amount of the
collected lake water.
The ski industry is understandably concerned about the anti-snow-making
movement. 'If our customers see that there is no snow here in November, they
may not book into Vermont for their winter ski vacation,' says Joseph
Parkinson of the Vermont Ski Areas Association.
Even so, environmentalists believe much of the industry is anxious to
co-operate. 'It's in their best interest to work together with us,' believes
Lewis Milford, an attorney with the Vermont Conservation Law Foundation.
'They are selling to an increasingly environmentally-conscious public. If
their customers start to believe that skiing is not
environmentally-friendly, they may begin to stay away.'
