FT  04 MAR 92 / Clever Japanese invent pocket-size resignation
DIRECTORS of Ricoh, the Japanese office equipment and camera maker, have
been ordered to bring letters of resignation to work each morning - as a
reminder that they are personally responsible for hauling the company out of
loss.
Mr Hiroshi Hamada, Ricoh's president, told the 23 directors, each of whom is
directly responsible for a business division, to 'have a resignation letter
in your shirt pocket'. He warned that he wanted to promote younger managers,
and hinted that resignations could become effective at any time if the
company's performance did not improve.
The Ricoh resignation method is one of the more dramatic responses to
plunging profits at leading Japanese companies, which have been shaken by a
slowing domestic economy and embarrassed by uncharacteristically poor
results.
Ricoh said yesterday that most of the directors had already drafted their
resignation letters, and some had submitted them to Mr Hamada.
His order came after Ricoh announced that it would report a Y5.8bn (Pounds
25m) pre-tax loss for the year to March 31, the first loss since the company
was listed in 1949.
Ricoh said the resignation threat should be seen as 'not merely ceremony',
as is generally the case with executive resignations in Japan. At the height
of the stock scandals last year, the president and chairman of Nomura
Securities resigned to take responsibility for the shame brought on the
company while other executives took symbolic cuts in salary.
'The resignations show our sincerity. They indicate our responsibility to
our shareholders, customers, and our employees, Ricoh said.
Ricoh, like Sony Corporation and Honda Motor, is regarded as a maverick in
Japanese industry, having risen outside the powerful corporate families
known as keiretsu. These companies, guided by often charismatic executives,
have cultivated strong corporate cultures and sometimes employ unorthodox
methods in crisis control.
However, Sony, which expected to report a Y20bn loss, said yesterday that it
would not start a 'resignation movement'. Clarion, the car audio maker which
will also report a loss, said the company was examining its management
policy, but was not likely to take a 'drastic decision' similar to Ricoh's.
Mr Hamada, Ricoh's president, has a fondness for philosophy and likes to
remind listeners of 'The Spirit of the Three Loves', the company's guiding
principles of: 'Love Your Neighbour, Love Your Country, and Love Your Work.'
In a recent speech, Mr Hamada explained that he liked executives to 'own'
their problems. By drafting resignation letters, he had forced the directors
to stake their future on the company's recovery. 'I think that changing
human attitudes is much harder than changing methods, but that's what must
be done in order to get quality work.'
