FT  27 OCT 92 / Survey of Sri Lanka (13): Growth continues despite conflict
 -Tourism
TO have one civil war may be considered unfortunate, but to have two is
inexcusable. This seemed to be the view of international tourists who,
having tentatively placed Sri Lanka on the map during the 1970s, promptly
removed it as the island gained a reputation for bloody civil strife.
Tourist arrivals had grown rapidly in the 1970s to a peak of 407,000 in
1982. Annual growth was running at an average 24 per cent from 1976-1982.
The outbreak in 1983 of government hostilities with the Tamil Tigers quashed
hopes of further expansion. Arrivals dropped dramatically, even more so when
violence - previously confined largely to the north and east - erupted in
the south with the attempted insurrection of the People's Liberation Front
(JVP).
By 1987, the number of visitors had dropped to a mere 180,000, a level from
which it failed to recover in 1988 and 1989. Discounting was so fierce that
a night in a five-star hotel was being offered for as little as Dollars 7.
Few would have predicted the impressive upturn witnessed since then. Boosted
by the virtual annihilation of the JVP in the south and by the temporary
halt of fighting with the Tigers, the number of visitors began to grow,
reaching 317,000 in 1991. This marked an increase of 6.7 per cent over the
previous year, bucking the world trend in tourism which was hit hard by
recession and the Gulf war.
Growth continued in spite of the renewed outbreak in June 1990 of fighting
in the north and east - out of bounds to tourists - as Sri Lankan
authorities gradually persuaded the international industry that most of the
island remained safe.
In terms of foreign exchange earnings, growth has been even more
satisfactory with receipts of Dollars 155.6m in 1991; some 17.4 per cent
over 1990.
That trend seems likely to continue and even accelerate. Arrivals in the
first eight months of this year are 27.7 per cent up on the same period in
1991, according to figures from the Ceylon Tourist Board. The board
estimates that total arrivals for 1992 will be at least 380,000.
The government, says Mr N. U. Yasapala, director-general of the tourist
board, is keen to promote the sector both for its foreign exchange earnings
and for its ability to provide employment. According to the central bank,
tourism in 1991 accounted for 64,800 jobs - 27,000 directly and 37,800 in
ancillary sectors.
Keen to capitalise on such benefits, the government has commissioned a
10-year tourist 'masterplan' drawn up with the help of Horwath Consulting of
the UK. The plan, a draft of which is due to be published in November, sets
a target of 874,000 air arrivals by the year 2001 - more than double the
1982 peak.
Mr Martin Gerty, director of Horwath Consulting, says the plan calls for the
upgrading of existing hotels, the development of more up-market resorts, and
the improvement of facilities around cultural sites which need to be more
'visitor friendly'. Mr Gerty says such infrastructure was severely run down
in the 1980s, but he thinks it remarkable that it was maintained at all.
There may also be the need for additional airport facilities to those at
Colombo's international airport because aircraft unable to land during bad
weather are presently redirected to Madras in southern India. One
possibility is development of the military airfield at Hingurakgoda on the
east of the island, particularly if ethnic tensions subside.
Such ambitious plans for tourism, especially at a time of budgetary
constraints, will require substantial private sector investment. The
government has accordingly extended tax incentives already enjoyed by
export-driven companies to investors in tourist infrastructure.
Some local observers feel such incentives have been too generous, allowing
already profitable concerns to avoid tax. Mr S. T. Fernando, deputy governor
of the central bank, counters that new investment must be encouraged
following the collapse of tourism in the mid-1980s.
Some 25 projects are being considered, worth an estimated total of Dollars
120m. These would add 2,350 graded rooms to the island's stock which now
stands at 9,680 - 18,950 beds.
Obstacles to growth remain. Most immediate is increasing anxiety among
certain groups that an expanded tourist sector would have a negative
cultural and environmental impact. There is concern that more tourists would
encourage drugs and prostitution - there are already an estimated 800 people
infected with the HIV virus - and that hotels will monopolise resources such
as land, power and water.
The government was recently forced to abandon plans for a showcase Dollars
40m holiday complex at Chilaw on the west coast because of protests by the
Roman Catholic Church. The Buddhist clergy, an extremely powerful political
force, is threatening the future of other schemes.
Mr Gerty feels that such protests can be dissipated by outlining some of the
sector's potential benefits, such as employment. Tourism will, he says, have
limited environmental impact as resorts will not be permitted to sprout up
piecemeal but will be strictly controlled according to a planned development
strategy.
Another obstacle to growth may be Sri Lanka's over-reliance on certain key
markets. Western Europe makes up more than 60 per cent of total tourist
traffic, with Germany, France, the UK and Italy representing nearly 80 per
cent of that share. North America provides a paltry 3 per cent of arrivals.
Fashions change quickly and the 'discovery' of a new long-haul destination
could jeopardise Colombo's plans.
The most serious question mark, however, remains Sri Lanka's international
reputation. Despite recent evidence that Colombo is winning the public
relations battle in reassuring the public of the island's safety,
international confidence remains fragile. If, on the other hand, the civil
war ends, prospects for growth would be excellent and the potential for
achieving a million visitors annually would become realistic.
Assuming, however, that civil strife staggers on, it would only take a few
well-publicised incidents of violence or a period of political instability
for the country's tarnished image to resurface. That would effectively end
the growth of the past few years and Sri Lanka would return to the
backwaters of the tourist industry.
