FT  02 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Dragon's wrath
MR CHRIS PATTEN has never pretended it would be easy to persuade China to
consider his plans for political reform in Hong Kong. But he may not have
expected, in putting forward his proposals nearly two months ago, that
Beijing would move so swiftly, and with such force, to thwart him.
China's threat to repudiate commercial agreements after June 1997 already
appears to be having the desired effect of damaging financial confidence in
the colony, and fuelling unease about Mr Patten in the business community.
No doubt China has further weapons to unsettle the markets, and the
governor, in coming weeks.
Worrying as its threats may be, however, they do not constitute an argument
for changing course. For one thing, they are still largely rhetorical. In
saying that it will, after the handover, reverse reforms and refuse to
honour contracts, Beijing is underlining that, notwithstanding the
Sino-British deal on Hong Kong's future, it will be in charge and will do as
it pleases. The hope must be that in practice its policies will be shaped by
an economic self-interest based on the status quo in Hong Kong.
For another thing, Mr Patten's ideas for improving democratic accountability
still enjoy - so far as can be gauged - overwhelming support from the Hong
Kong people. His proclaimed object is to ensure that they have a say in
their destiny. So long as they, and their representatives in the colony's
Legislative Council, continue to express the wish for greater political
freedom, that is what he should be striving to provide, even if the price is
friction with China and financial instability.
Nothing in recent events has undermined Mr Patten's basic judgment that
trying 'in a modest way' to accommodate the Hong Kong people's aspirations
is the best way to promote political stability. Indeed, China's rulers would
be wise to consider the relevance of that notion in their southern
provinces, where rapid economic growth may also spawn rising political
expectations.
It may be that the communists in Beijing will refuse to accept this,
preferring to confirm their own absolute power rather than to nurture Hong
Kong's economic miracle; that, in other words, they remain determined to
snuff out Mr Patten's 'contagion' even if it means inflicting serious damage
on the colony. But if so, and if the cost to Hong Kong of Mr Patten's
political blueprint eventually seems too high, Hong Kongers themselves, not
their colonial masters, should be the judges.
