FT  27 JUL 92 / Broad Yugoslav conference 'must look at refugees'
GERMANY yesterday threw its weight behind the British initiative for a
full-scale international peace conference to end fighting in former
Yugoslavia, and called for the growing refugee crisis to be high on the
agenda.
The conference was announced at the weekend, as part of a European Community
effort to broaden the scope of existing peace efforts.
Mr Douglas Hurd, British foreign secretary, said the conference, to be held
in late August, probably in London, followed calls from several quarters -
including France, the United Nations Security Council and the EC - for an
international initiative.
Mr Klaus Kinkel, German foreign minister, called for a radically improved
aid effort by both the EC and the rest of the international community. As
the first three of six special trains arrived in Germany carrying 2,600
refugees fleeing fighting in Bosnia-Hercegovina, Mr Kinkel said: 'No time
must be lost. This conference must begin as quickly as possible.'
He called in particular for Russia to be involved in the conference, in
addition to the UN, EC and the Conference on Security and Co-operation in
Europe, in order to exploit Moscow's influence on the Serbian leadership.
Mr Kinkel said the fighting in Bosnia had already unleashed the greatest
flight of refugees in Europe since the second world war, and Germany had
borne the brunt of it. Since the start of the war in the former Yugoslavia,
more than 200,000 people from the region have been allowed into Germany as
asylum-seekers or refugees.
'We can only help the refugees by acting together,' he said. 'This problem
cannot be solved without European and international solidarity.'
He also appealed to the UN to allow aircraft involved in the present
humanitarian airlift into Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, to be used to carry
children and wounded refugees out.
Mr Kinkel insisted the conference be based on principles already worked out
by the EC peace conference, chaired by Lord Carrington. These include the
refusal of international recognition of any territory conquered by Serbia by
force, guarantees of the rights of ethnic minorities, and an immediate
renunciation of the use of force.
In London, the Foreign Office said discussion of military options would be
on the agenda, but only insofar as they could help secure a long-term
solution to the region's problems.
British officials are anxious to portray the international conference as a
continuation of existing efforts, in order to safeguard undertakings already
given.
UN officials were considering yesterday an air drop to Gorazde, the last
Moslem stronghold in eastern Bosnia, after the failure of efforts to reach
the besieged town overland, writes Laura Silber in Belgrade.
Mr Fabrizio Hochshild, representative of the UN High Commissioner for
Refugees, said yesterday: 'The only other option is a ceasefire, but given
the history of ceasefires this seems unlikely.'
After returning to Sarajevo with a relief convoy, Mr Hochshild ruled out the
possibility of overland relief to Gorazde, besieged by Serb forces for 80
days. Some 70,000 people are trapped in the town without water or
electricity and supplies of food and medicine are badly needed.
The UN convoy was trapped 12 km outside Gorazde after hitting two landmines
on a road strewn with the corpses of Serb soldiers.
Meanwhile, after heavy shelling overnight Radio Sarajevo said that fighting
had eased in the besieged capital yes-terday.
