FT  28 SEP 92 / Michael Prowse on America: The twilight of foreign aid
The news that Sweden is to cut its foreign aid budget sharply is, in its
way, almost as richly symbolic as the crumbling of the Berlin Wall.
The fall of the wall symbolised the collapse of communism and a radical
change in relations between the rich capitalist democracies and the
centrally planned eastern bloc. The paring of the aid budget in a nation
long renowned for its exceptional generosity symbolises a waning global
commitment to aid and the beginning of a shift in relations between advanced
countries and the other main component of the global order that emerged
after the second world war: the third world.
Aid fatigue was palpable at last week's annual IMF/World Bank meeting. The
bank is seeking donations for a new cycle of lending by the International
Development Association (IDA), its concessional finance affiliate. It had
hoped for a substantial increase in resources - to reflect the needs of nine
newly eligible countries (including some former Soviet republics) and the
cost of environmental pledges made at the Rio earth summit. But Mr Lewis
Preston, the bank's president, left in sombre mood, wondering whether even
the Dollars 18bn needed to maintain the current volume of loans would be
forthcoming.
Foot-dragging on IDA is part of a broader retreat from a postwar consensus
that rich countries had a duty to help the poor. Aid flows have stagnated
for a decade despite substantial growth of real output. Only five of the 20
richest countries have achieved the United Nations target of development
assistance equivalent to 0.7 per cent of gross domestic product. The ratios
in the US and Britain are far below target, at about 0.2-0.3 per cent of
GDP. In the richest 20 countries military spending is about 11 times greater
than foreign aid.
The retrenchment partly reflects severe budgetary strains in developed
countries. But the origins run far deeper. Nobody should be surprised that
the pressure to cut aid budgets has emerged so soon after the absorption of
communist countries into the capitalist order.
The two trends are not unrelated. Harry Truman, the architect of the US
'containment of communism' strategy, also laid the foundations for an
unprecedented expansion of official aid programmes. From a US vantage point,
one of the main goals of overseas assistance was always to help prevent the
spread of communism. Now that we are (almost) all capitalists, the
geopolitical case for aid has vanished.
Shifts in the intellectual climate have also played a role. Prominent
critics of aid in the 1960s and 1970s, such as the British economist, the
now Lord Peter Bauer, are still out of the mainstream. But their arguments
are no longer quite so controversial.
Aid has a somewhat devalued status: most economists now accept that the
creation of markets and the lowering of barriers to trade and foreign
investment are likely to play a bigger role in long-term development than
official assistance.
The risks attached to aid programmes are also better understood. Aid is
always support for particular governments rather than for poor people: if
governments are corrupt or inefficient, aid will achieve little.
Aid flows, moreover, while small in absolute terms, are often large relative
to the tax resources of third-world governments. By increasing the public
sector's political power, they may sometimes inhibit the emergence of
beneficial market and trade relationships.
The heady post-1945 expansion of foreign aid paralleled the growth of
welfare states in advanced countries. Now both are in retreat. Welfare is
often attacked for fostering 'dependency'. The power of this movement in the
US is evident in the reformist stance adopted by Mr Bill Clinton, the
Democratic presidential candidate. Mr Clinton argues that welfare has to be
seen as a 'second chance', rather than a way of life, and promises to stop
welfare cheques after two years if recipients do not accept training or
jobs. In the US, at least, foreign aid is perceived in a similar light: it
makes sense as an emergency response to disasters but not as a permanent
crutch.
The anti-aid arguments are often wrong-headed. But they show that aid
fatigue is a reaction to deep currents in contemporary life as much as to
temporary budget constraints. When Sweden embraces the market and takes an
axe to its own government, it cannot be expected to leave its aid budget
untouched. Other converts to the market feel the same way.
This climate of opinion presents a quandary for the World Bank and other
providers of well-managed programmes that offer real benefits for developing
countries. If the politics of welfare spending is any guide, the best way to
rekindle enthusiasm for aid is to convince donors that it will produce
lasting changes in behaviour.
The only reliable way is to impose tougher forms of conditionality: aid has
to be tied more directly to domestic reforms by recipients, including, for
example, the shift of resources from military to social budgets. Such
reforms may help convince sceptics that aid will not be wasted; but with the
post-cold war world being rebuilt on market principles, the going is likely
to be tough.
