FT  12 SEP 92 / Books: There is nothing like a Dame . . . - Tow biographies
of theatrical giants
MAGGIE SMITH by Michael Coveney Gollancz Pounds 16.99, 286 pages
MY FATHER LAURENCE OLIVIER by Tarquin Olivier Headline Pounds 16.99, 270
pages
WE MAKE them dames but we don't venerate actresses as we did. Once there
were postcards of Gladys Cooper or Marie Tempest on the railway station
bookstalls. Today, the Flying Scotsman is as likely as Judi Dench. Michael
Coveney gives his Maggie Smith the Shakespearian subtitle A bright
particular star, but this is an all-round portrait of Dame Maggie that goes
beyond the theatre. It has veneration, and to spare.
She is not an easy subject for a theatre biography. Her approach is
businesslike: 'Acting is what I do," she told a New York Times interviewer.
'I've never been in a position to question it.' She does not like public
appearances, except on the stage.
Moreover, a lot of her best work was done in Canada at Stratford, Ontario,
where she was memorable as Millamant, Cleopatra, Rosalind, Beatrice and more
under the influential direction of Robin Phillips. The Canadian exile arose
from an unhappy marriage with Robert Stephens, by whom she has two sons,
both in the theatre. Dame Maggie is now married to writer Beverley Cross, an
old friend from Oxford days when he was at the university and she at the
playhouse. Their life is happily reclusive.
Dame Maggie's aficionados may think of the film of Jean Brodie, or, if they
were lucky, of the line: 'This haddock's disgusting' as she gave it in the
National's Hay Fever, which brought not only a laugh but a round of
applause. Coveney's vast amount of discreet and friendly research - which
surely must have been as enjoyable as it has proved fruitful - presents the
personal life as sensitively as the professional.
Dame Maggie used to be accused critically of frivolous gestures and odd
inflexions, but if such faults really existed, they are gone now. Indeed,
her intonations, to which she gives endless thought, often are clearly right
even when they are unfamiliar: 'Always full of new touches of invention,'
says Sir John Gielgud on directing her. Coveney's book is worthy of her, and
I cannot speak more highly than that.
Tarquin Olivier's book about his father is another matter, an account of the
actor's life seen from close up with little research needed. It was not hard
to overlay one's admiration for that great man with a film of dislike after
the publication of his autobiography, Confessions of an Actor, which Tarquin
reckons he wrote 'in a blind and bitter rage.' It is disagreeable to feel a
like reaction to his son's book, compiled out of deep affection, an emotion
that clearly was mutual and abiding.
Tarquin was Olivier's son by his first wife, Jill Esmond; he was always
close to her. Olivier seduced Vivien Leigh while Jill was pregnant with
Tarquin.
Later, when Vivien had told him that she no longer loved him (and was
already beginning to suffer from her mental difficulty), he transferred his
affections to another actress, Joan Plowright, now Lady Olivier.
The book is a marsh of casual Christian names, and there are many extracts
from family letters of only family interest. Of drama criticism there is, of
course, little. Almost everyone turns out to be a goodie in whatever
circumstances - most of all, Tarquin himself, who must be the most patient
fellow imaginable.
