FT  14 NOV 92 / Books: Pearson's second Lord
A LIFE 1887-1965
by John Jolliffe
Michael Russell Pounds 15.95 184 pages
CLIVE Pearson was the second son of Weetman Pearson, the first Lord Cowdray.
His father made a big fortune as one of the most successful contractors in
the world, building, among other successful projects, the Admiralty Harbour
at Dover, the Tehuantepec Railway in Mexico and the East River Tunnels in
New York which, an aggressive American matron told him, proved the
superiority of American engineers over all others. He politely replied that
he would make a point of inspecting them after his next transatlantic
voyage. His assets were reckoned at Pounds 10m in 1921. When he died in 1927
he was said to be the sixth richest man in Britain.
He certainly provided lavishly for his children. Later he diversified the
company into Mexican oil and long after his death the Pearson Group acquired
the Financial Times.
Clive was his successor in the business. Because of the firm's dealings in
Mexican oil - essential for the Navy - he was exempted from military service
throughout the First World War. He was unhappy about this. The pointing
finger in the famous Kitchener poster haunted him, as did the death in
action of his younger brother, Geoffrey. The dilemma of civilian or military
service vexed many people in both world wars. No one can say that Clive was
wrong.
This biography is written at the request of his three daughters; Mrs
Tritton, Mrs Smiley and Lady Gibson. Books with such a provenance can be
bland and boring, uncritical works of piety like the marble effigies on
tombstones commissioned by children in memory of much loved parents. The
author's task is not made easier by the existence of three overlapping
earlier books; JA Spender's biography of Weetman Pearson, Desmond Young's
Member for Mexico, and Mrs Smiley's account of life at the family home, A
Nice Clean Plate. Of course they are useful sources, but biographers tend to
prefer an untilled field. John Jolliffe has overcome all these difficulties
and has written an entertaining, perceptive and very readable book.
Clive was concerned with a host of important business transactions, first in
conjunction with his father and later on his own. He was much involved in
Latin America, though oddly he never learnt Spanish - rather like the
British wine merchants in Oporto who disdained Portuguese till the
revolution of 1974. In South America he ran into the perennial problem of
Third World countries, their belief that capitalism is part of foreign
exploitation and that the remedy for former colonies in search of a national
identity must be socialism. This naturally suits their tyrannical populist
dictators but is invariably an economic disaster. Latin America is at last
abandoning this Marxist nonsense. Africa has been ruined by it and may never
recover.
Clive Pearson commissioned Evelyn Waugh to write his least known book,
Robbery under Law, attacking President Cardenas of Mexico, the chief
expropriator. Waugh was not proud of it and excluded it from his collected
works. In business Clive was meticulous and thorough. The Pearson fortune
had been created partly by the most careful calculation of costs and prices.
But directors of BOAC, of which he was part-time chairman, did wonder
whether the width of margins on the typed minutes of board meetings
warranted so many hours of discussion.
Lord Cowdray in 1921 acquired for Clive two immense houses, Parham near
Pullborough and Castle Fraser a few miles from Aberdeen. Clive's wife Alicia
Knatebull-Hugeson was a born collector, graduating from rabbits' front teeth
at the age of nine to the antique furniture, splendid pictures and
armorially bound books which forms such features of Parham. Before 1939 the
house was staffed by a butler, three footmen, a valet, a housekeeper, a
cook, four housemaids, two kitchen-maids, a scullery maid, a still-room maid
and a night watchman, plus a nanny and nursemaid to look after the children.
Even the very, very rich could not live in this style after 1945.
The Pearsons were among the earliest owners of stately homes to open them to
the public, and they did it with great success. John Jolliffe has written an
agreeably nostalgic life of a second generation tycoon who bridged the gap
between the Victorian and the modern Elizabethan era. It is the perfect
Christmas present for people - one must use words carefully - for people of
a certain age.
