FT  19 FEB 92 / Personal View: Three ways to free housing from the public
spending trap
The Labour party's decision to consider redefining the public sector
borrowing requirement (PSBR) to exclude funds raised for investment in
transport and housing highlights the dilemma facing those advocating more
public spending.
A sound economic and social case can be made for extra spending on housing
and transport. But scope for additional expenditure by any public sector
body is constrained by limits on the PSBR.
The dilemma is faced most starkly in housing, where repossessions,
homelessness and waiting lists for council housing are all increasing. These
are the symptoms of a crisis which has arisen because more than 1.5m rented
council homes have been sold over the past decade and not been replaced.
Most national housing organisations agree that an annual programme to build
100,000 affordable homes to rent is needed - more than twice the present
output. One way to finance that increase would be to use the capital
receipts from council house sales. A little less than Pounds 8bn is
available but under Treasury rules it is frozen in short-term investments.
The central problem is that, under present Treasury rules, spending the
receipts counts as public expenditure and increases the PSBR. This is
because the income from sales has been treated exactly like privatisation
proceeds and recorded as negative expenditure.
There are three possible routes out of the PSBR trap.
The first is to stop treating the receipts as if they were privatisation
proceeds. Council house sales are not the same as other privatisations: it
is not necessary to 'replace' BT but it is necessary to restore the supply
of rented housing. A decision could be made to start adding receipts
directly to each year's spending programme. This could be applied
retrospectively to use past receipts where they would not involve new
borrowing - the main part of the Pounds 8bn kept in short-term investments.
Second, a long-term strategy is needed which develops the capacity of
housing associations and local authorities to build more homes.
Housing associations have been in a relatively privileged position since the
1988 Housing Act which put them into the private sector for spending
purposes. Only the public subsidy received from the Housing Corporation, the
quango which distributes state grants to housing associations, counts
towards the PSBR: housing associations' private borrowing does not count
because it is not guaranteed by the Treasury.
It would not be hard to put the local authorities in a similar position to
the housing associations. This could be by using the 'ring-fencing' which
was introduced in 1989 to keep the authorities' housing accounts separate
from other council spending so that they cannot be subsidised from the poll
tax.
There is no macroeconomic reason why 'ring-fenced' housing revenue accounts
should be controlled by central government. If local authorities want to
increase spending or borrowing on housing, they should be free to do so - so
long as it is covered by revenue from housing.
The central government subsidy which backs local authority investment in
housing would continue to count as public expenditure, and contribute to the
PSBR. But investment decided locally should not, because it will be serviced
by raising rents or selling assets - or even borrowing against the actual
housing stock.
The purist will object to these two options because they involve changing
accounting conventions.
The third option would avoid this by creating independent agencies to own
and invest in local authority housing which would be technically outside the
public sector.
Councils would transfer stock to such an agency at the value of outstanding
loan debt. They could retain a strong influence over the agency through
membership of the board, combined with a 'golden share' to prevent the
agency selling off the stock. Tenants could be given all or a share of the
remaining positions.
The agency would be free to borrow, or invest from rents or asset sales.
Government control would be limited to the subsidy the agency receives which
would come via the local authority and, as with housing associations, would
still be regarded as public spending.
Agencies of this kind are responsible for a big proportion of social housing
investment in other European countries, where they are not classified as
part of the public sector - even where the local authority has a controlling
share.
Even in Britain, the present regime is not as tight as first appears. Local
authorities already have freedom to raise rents to invest from revenue (and
indeed about 10 per cent of capital spending is from revenue this year). In
Scotland, local authorities have the power directly to reinvest capital
receipts.
Now is a propitious time to relax controls, not just because investment is
urgently needed, but because the building industry is in recession and local
authorities are more debt-free than for many years. Council debt has fallen
by 50 per cent since 1975 and the net value of local authority housing stock
has been put as high as Pounds 130bn.
The arguments that investment controls are needed for macroeconomic reasons
or to temper demands on the building industry - always a thin case - have
even less validity at present. And these options are no more radical than
the government's plans to transfer hundreds of thousands of council homes to
new housing associations.
Whichever party wins the general election, one of the three options outlined
may be an attractive route to securing much-needed investment in affordable
housing.
John Perry is head of policy at the Institute of Housing.
