FT  05 SEP 92 / Banks warn Eurotunnel to settle cost dispute
EUROTUNNEL has been told by its bankers that it must settle its long-running
dispute over the cost of building the Channel tunnel by Monday night.
The bankers have warned that without an agreement with Transmanche Link, the
Anglo- French consortium of contractors working on the tunnel, Eurotunnel
may not be allowed to draw down funds from its bank facilities.
If that happened, the company would face grave financial difficulties. It
needs to draw around Pounds 100m from these bank funds in early October.
A banker involved in negotiations with Eurotunnel said: 'It is possible
agreement will be reached over the weekend.' However, he was braced for a
crisis early next week.
A Eurotunnel employee said: 'We have made our final offer . . . But the
contractors have yet to be persuaded that midnight has arrived.'
TML's members consist of five UK contractors and five French ones.
Opposition to the deal is coming from the French companies. TML has been
demanding that Eurotunnel pay for the huge over-runs in the costs of fitting
out the rail tunnels and building passenger terminals at Folke-stone, Kent,
and Sangatte, northern France.
However, Eurotunnel has been adamant that part of the responsibility for the
increases over the original budget was TML's and therefore TML should bear
some of the costs.
In the event, Eurotunnel is offering the most it can without making a
serious breach of its banking covenants, or the terms of bank facilities.
Its offer consists of a cash payment to TML of around Pounds 1bn, calculated
in historic as opposed to today's prices. It is also offering Pounds 200m in
some form of equity, likely to be a convertible debenture.
Eurotunnel has 206 banks which have provided a Pounds 6.8bn banking
facility, of which more than Pounds 4bn has been drawn. They are led by four
agent banks, National Westminster and Midland of the UK and Banque Nationale
de Paris and Credit Lyonnais of France, which are planning to meet on
Monday.
