FT  07 AUG 92 / World Stock Markets: Fare wars ravage European airlines -
But progress in cutting costs should help share prices to recover
European airline stocks have had a rough ride during the past few weeks, hit
by airline overcapacity, damaging fare wars, and the tortuous progress on
the part of management towards a lower cost base.
Since setting nominal and relative highs in the spring, most of Europe's
handful of quoted airline issues have fallen steeply. The worst performance
has come from Swissair, where the shares, down by more than a quarter since
their peak in May, have fallen 20 per cent faster than the local index.
As well as having to cope with industry-wide troubles, Swissair has
acknowledged that its cost base - one of the highest in Europe - has to be
reduced. The company is in the process of relocating its accounts department
to Bombay, India, with the intention of saving between SFr10m and SFr12m as
part of a plan to save SFr300m (Dollars 227m). Its first round of compulsory
job cuts has started: 420 staff will have left by the end of September.
This is only a small dent, however, in Swissair's total staff of more than
19,000. By comparison, British Airways axed 4,600 jobs, almost 10 per cent
of the workforce, in its last financial year. BA is the most profitable
large airline in the western hemisphere and its shares have declined by less
than 7 per cent since their May high.
After Swissair's sharp fall, there is scope for a share price recovery, says
Mr Guido Meier, an analyst at UBS in Zurich. 'As cost-cutting programmes go
on, we see an increase in the share price,' he says.
Austrian Airlines, too, has had a tough time. Until recently the stock had
followed the rest of the Vienna bourse in a drop of about 15 per cent since
May. Then suggestions that falling profits meant that the dividend was in
danger triggered a further 10 per cent retreat. Mr Frank Jonuschat of
Kleinwort Benson in London says: 'Our earnings estimates will probably have
to be revised downwards by roughly 20 per cent.'
Shares in KLM, the Dutch carrier, by contrast, recovered well at the end of
July. As one of the more entrepreneurially-minded airlines in Europe, KLM
has engaged in the kind of cost-cutting and price competition that industry
watchers in the US and Asia have seen for some time.
The late recovery in the shares was partly the result of a proposed
ground-breaking deal with the US Department of Transportation which should
allow the airline to operate within the US. Washington hopes, thereby, to
put pressure on European governments to allow reciprocal rights for US
carriers in Europe.
For KLM, any boost to transatlantic profitability would be welcome. It was
reluctantly drawn into the US-initiated price wars in the spring and its
Asian routes are far more profitable.
By comparison with its bigger neighbour, Lufthansa, the German state
carrier, KLM's challenges seem small. Lufthansa made an operating loss of
DM600m (Dollars 407m) in the first five months of this year. Since the
shares peaked in February they have lost more than 40 per cent of their
value and the reasons are clear: generous staffing levels and aircraft that,
on average, are barely more than half full.
In response, Lufthansa has grounded some aircraft and initiated a programme
of staff cuts. These are modest by comparison with what has happened at BA
but may begin to affect the bottom line by the end of the company's
financial year, according to Mr Gordon Smith-Carby, an analyst at Smith New
Court in London.
Lufthansa has also hived off its domestic services into a separate
organisation, Lufthansa Express, which may be incorporated eventually.
Cost-cutting measures include paying staff less, and Lufthansa hopes that
the DM350m lost on domestic routes last year will be eliminated.
Prospects for Lufthansa are uncertain in the short term, not least because
the Bonn government has said it wants to sell half of its 51 per cent stake.
A change of control might prompt Lufthansa's executives to reduce costs even
more sharply, to find themselves leading a lean management philosophy among
Europe's airlines and, perhaps, to win the friendship of shareholders and
creditors.
