FT  17 AUG 92 / The high price of ignorance: American worries over
competitiveness have put education and training on the political agenda
As Republican party leaders gather today in Houston to try to rescue Mr
George Bush's ailing presidential campaign, there is no more potent symbol
of his ills than the state of US education and training. Mr Bush singled out
improving education as his most important domestic task when he was elected.
But four years on, the education system that was once treasured for offering
the best chance of a college education in the world now strikes many
Americans as wasteful and inefficient.
The Japanese politicians who questioned this year whether US workers were
too ignorant to compete in the world economy thus touched a raw nerve. Mr
Bush, who promises to come forward with new ideas for his 'revolutionary'
education programme, has backed reforms such as national testing of school
pupils, but has not achieved enough to reassure voters. Mr Bill Clinton, his
Democratic rival, has called for more radical measures. Among other things,
Mr Clinton wants all high school pupils who do not enter college to have the
chance of an apprenticeship.
America's tradition of open access to university and college education -
started under the postwar GI Bill - remains a striking achievement. A
greater proportion of workers in the US hold college degrees than in any
other OECD economy - 19.2 per cent, compared to 11.5 per cent in Japan and
4.5 per cent in Germany. The growing worry is over the fate of the 67 per
cent of the US population which does not enter any form of post-secondary
education.
The quality of education and on-the-job training received by what has been
dubbed the 'forgotten half' of the US workforce has a number of clear flaws:
School academic standards are often lax. Only a small proportion of pupils
nearing high school graduation can accomplish a mix of writing tasks, and
half cannot handle moderately challenging mathematical problems, according
to the last National Assessment of Educational Progress. The first National
Education Goals report for 1991 says that only one in five pupils displays
basic competency in mathematics, and reports Japanese pupils scoring
significantly higher.
High school vocational education is often of poor quality, and has come to
be regarded as a 'dumping ground' for less able pupils. One study of 6,700
pupils taking vocational courses found that many were excluded from rigorous
maths and science courses, and often had never read a poem or a play. Nor
are pupils well-prepared for jobs by vocational classes: the Department of
Education estimates that only a third of such education is used at work
after leaving school.
There are few apprenticeships for young people not entering college, and
those that exist are concentrated in a few traditional industries such as
construction. In 1989, there were 1.7m young people placed in
apprenticeships with 500,000 employers in West Germany; the US had only
263,000 registered apprentices from a population four times as large. Many
employers resist apprenticeships because they dislike the principle of joint
union administration.
American companies carry out less training of adult workers than foreign
competitors, even compared with plants based in the US. Newly-hired workers
in US car plants receive under 50 hours of training each, compared with more
than 250 hours for workers in Japanese car plants in the US. Of the
estimated Dollars 30bn that American companies spend on training adults,
two-thirds goes to college-educated managers. Most is spent on orientation
courses for recruits.
There are two reasons why the US is worried about education and training
standards. The first is a gradual increase in the demands placed on
employees in jobs that do not require post-secondary education. Many
employers who have installed new technology, or initiated quality
improvement efforts that require greater involvement from entry-level
workers, have made awkward discoveries about the limited competence of
workers with high school diplomas.
The second reason for concern affects US society as a whole. Despite the
public attention given to trying to reduce the rate at which teenagers drop
out of high school before graduation, a high school diploma is of shrinking
value in the labour market. While the real wages of college-educated
employees increased over the past 20 years, those of male workers with only
high school diplomas fell by 25 per cent between 1973 and 1987.
Underlying this fall is the loss of well-paid jobs for men in industries
such as steel and car making: the unionised blue-collar jobs which used to
form the backbone of US employment. It is hard for a school-leaver to find
work in a steel mill these days. He or she is far more likely to be offered
an insecure and poorly-paid service job. One result is that 23 per cent of
white high school-educated males now earn too little to support a family of
four by themselves.
The need for educational and economic changes to address such problems is
not disputed. The US government has called for more companies to adopt a
'high-performance' model of work organisation, giving more responsibility to
entry-level employees. It has also backed educational reforms aimed at
improving preparation for work. Mr Clinton differs only in supporting more
radical efforts to make employers train, and to overhaul education for those
not entering college.
But the country's educational traditions mean that reform involves two
difficult tasks: the first is to raise the number of high-skilled jobs that
can provide well-paid employment. Some companies have reorganised work or
invested in new technology only to find that their employees are too badly
educated to cope. But most US employers have stuck with old methods: one
study last year estimated that only 5 per cent were altering working methods
in ways which required higher skills of entry-level workers.
Mr Ray Uhalde, an assistant secretary at the Department of Labour, says the
history of assembly-line work in the US means managers are more inclined to
automate work than seek higher productivity by upgrading skills. 'They know
how to make production more efficient by chopping up work, and you tend to
go with what is natural and comfortable when you are thinking of ways to
raise productivity,' he says.
The US faces problems in persuading companies to adopt different strategies
of work organisation. The economy has one of the highest rates of adult job
mobility in the OECD: only 35 per cent of male workers in their late 30s
have been with their current employer more than 10 years in the US, compared
with 58 per cent in Germany. The fact that workers are likely to leave
quickly reduces the incentive for employers to spend money on training.
The second task facing the US is improving school education, and finding
better ways to prepare young people for skilled employment. American
employers are increasingly critical of schooling standards: 'My sense is
that not many schools are producing people with the mix of skills we need.
They might be producing people with barely manageable, get-by sort of
skills, but that is it,' says Mr Harvey Greenberg, Polaroid's director of
education and training.
Until now, many employers have displayed little interest in how well pupils
are educated at school. Nor have they been willing to back apprenticeships,
or give incentives for young people to undertake further vocational
education. Compared to the close links forged between Japanese employers and
schools, and the involvement of German employers in the dual system, most US
companies have been indifferent to the education of their non-managerial
workers.
Some observers argue that this indifference has played a crucial role in the
poor standards of US high schools. Mr John Bishop, an economist at Cornell
University, says there is little incentive for school pupils to work hard
because employers neither bother to ask what they did at school, nor reward
academic competency. One study found that employers had asked to see records
of high school achievement in only 14 per cent of cases where a
school-leaver was hired.
There is now growing interest among both employers and educators in forming
closer links. The Educational Testing Service is working on an initiative to
give employers access to a computerised record of high school achievement.
Los Angeles, one of the largest US school districts, is trying to stimulate
employer interest in its school standards by guaranteeing any company
dissatisfied with a school-leaver that he or she will be offered free
re-education.
But such efforts only scratch the surface of the enormous task of
educational reform. Despite the current wave of interest in apprenticeships
as an alternative to flawed academic schooling, there is little chance of
apprentice places growing rapidly enough to match the German dual system.
'Schools operate on a demographic cycle and employers on a business one, and
they are hard to match,' says Mr Richard Kazis of consulting group Jobs for
the Future.
The best hope lies in better forms of vocational education that include a
broad academic grounding. America has a substantial asset in its network of
community colleges, which provide academic and vocational courses leading to
two-year degrees. Most educators and employers agree that the US needs to
combine a more rigorous school system with better incentives for students to
enter - and graduate from - community colleges.
So America faces a difficult struggle in raising the demand for, and the
supply of, better-educated workers. The alternative is to accept the growing
dispersion of wealth between the college-educated and others. For a country
formed in the promise of equal opportunity for all, such acceptance is
virtually unthinkable. However, the current political clamour over education
and training indicates the status quo will not be quietly tolerated.
Yet the means of achieving change appear elusive. The division of
responsibility for education among thousands of local school districts is
mirrored by the determination of each American employer to define its own
training policy. It will take a more inspiring call to action than Mr Bush
has yet mustered to unify this diverse body. And without such unity, America
cannot solve the education and training flaws that now hamper its economic
progress.
This is the first in a series of articles about US education and training.
The author is a Harkness Fellow of the Commonwealth Fund, New York
