FT  30 JUN 92 / Bonn decision on EFA hangs in balance: Kohl seeks compromise
THE future of Germany's participation in the European Fighter Aircraft (EFA)
project remained in the balance last night, only hours before key coalition
meetings were scheduled to decide the issue.
Mr Volker Ruhe, the defence minister, repeated his determination that
Germany pull out of the four-nation project. Yet leading proponents of the
scheme, being developed with Britain, Italy and Spain, are still fighting
for a postponement of the decision in the hope of maintaining German
involvement.
The whole issue threatens to split the coalition, as well as Chancellor
Helmut Kohl's own Christian Democrats (CDU). The party's defence working
group was meeting Mr Ruhe last night in an urgent effort to find a
compromise.
At stake is a decision whether to include in next year's budget - due to go
to Cabinet tomorrow - DM100m (Pounds 34.2m) for tooling up costs necessary
to prepare for EFA production. The German government has already committed
DM6bn to development costs, of which about half has been spent.
Mr Ruhe said earlier that the parties in the coalition - the CDU, Christian
Social Union (CSU) and Free Democrats (FDP) - should decide today to pull
out of EFA production, and open negotiations with the partner states on a
redesigned, cheaper and lighter aircraft. It was possible to put off any
final decision on a new fighter aircraft for the Luftwaffe, to replace the
present generation of ageing Phantoms, until 1996, he said.
The clear implication is that Mr Ruhe hopes to persuade the partner states
to switch development spending from the EFA to a new aircraft, and thus save
some DM3bn in further German development spending on an aircraft it does not
wish to buy. Until now, Germany insists it remains committed to the
development spending, even if it pulls out.
Speaking at a military airfield at Memmingerberg in the Allgau, Mr Ruhe
suggested three alternative plans: to build a new light-weight European
fighter; to buy one from abroad; or to build a foreign aircraft under
licence.
Whatever happened, the present EFA should not go into production, he said.
At the same time, Mr Theo Waigel, the finance minister and leader of the
Bavaria-based CSU, rejected any suggestion of buying an aircraft from
abroad. To take a later decision to spend virtually the same amount of money
on a foreign fighter aircraft, when one could be built in Germany or Europe,
was 'scarcely credible', he said.
His party colleague Mr Max Streibl, the prime minister of Bavaria, which
stands to bear the brunt of job losses if Germany quits the EFA project,
warned that the very existence of the coalition was in doubt if outstanding
differences were not resolved.
The parliamentary group meetings of the CDU/CSU alliance, and the FDP, to
decide on the EFA have been twice postponed until today, in an effort to
resolve the internal differences.
Yesterday FDP members demanded that a final decision be taken.
'It will be very hard for us to accept another delay in the decision,' an
FDP official said yesterday. 'For us it is a point of no return. If there is
no decision, it will mean a new coalition conflict.'
For want of a symbol, page 17
