FT  08 OCT 92 / UK Company News: Recession fails to halt advance at Halstead
JAMES HALSTEAD, the Manchester-based floor-coverings, weatherproof clothing
and trailers group, continued to defy the recession by posting a 5 per cent
improvement in full year pre-tax profits and by lifting its total dividend
by 6.7 per cent.
Pre-tax profits in the year to June 30 grew from Pounds 7.65m to Pounds
8.04m despite 'extremely severe' trading conditions which resulted in only a
modest increase in turnover to Pounds 58.9m (Pounds 58.3m).
Earnings per share rose to 37.71p (36.12p) and a recommended final dividend
of 7.5p (7p) makes a 12p (11.25p) total.
An extraordinary provision of Pounds 2.93m covered the costs of closing the
loss-making Belstaff garment manufacturing operations.
Mr Stephen Knight, finance director, said it had been a year of solid
achievement and consolidation for Polyflor, the group's core sheet vinyl and
tile floor-covering business which accounts for more than two thirds of
group turnover.
The DIY carpet tile business also showed improvement and the Driza-Bone
Australian weatherproof clothing business, acquired three years ago, had a
successful year.
Conway Products managed to increase camping product sales in both the UK and
Holland, helped by a new budget-priced trailer-tent model. As expected, the
Belstaff clothing business was closed after its losses accelerated towards
the end of last year.
During the year the group spent more than Pounds 3m on capital investment,
mostly in the floor covering business.
Despite the heavy level of investment and the cost of the Belstaff closure,
the group's strong positive cash flow enabled it to further strengthen its
balance sheet and end the year with no net borrowings.
A 1-for-1 scrip issue is proposed in order to improve market liquidity for
its shares which closed yesterday up 21p at 481p.
COMMENT
Halstead is a good, solid and safe investment in uncertain economic times,
but is unlikely to continue to outperform the market so spectacularly when
recovery comes. Its core vinyl flooring business faces growing competition
and margins are likely to come under increasing pressure, so promised new
PVC sheet flooring products will be crucial. Higher raw material prices are
likely following sterling's recent plunge, and the overseas manufacturers of
the group's motorcycle accessories are pushing for higher prices. But
Halstead's growing export business should help offset these pressures.
Pre-tax profits of about Pounds 8.4m are likely this year, producing
earnings per share of around 38p. Halstead is trading on a prospective p/e
of 12.6 and is a hold.
