FT  18 MAY 92 / A damaging fall at the highest fence of reform: Moves to
revise South Africa's constitution have stalled over the question of veto
powers for minority groups
by Mr Amichand Rajbansi, leader of the Indian National People's Party in
South Africa - that is the bald truth of South African life which rose up
like a spectre to shock the participants at last weekend's constitutional
talks.
For after five months of halting progress within the multi-party negotiating
forum known as the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (Codesa), the
country's political leaders fell at the last and highest fence: the share of
white political power in the new black nation.
By the time Codesa's two-day plenary session had ended on Saturday, they had
picked themselves up, dusted each other off, and declared the conference a
success. Mr Nelson Mandela, president of the African National Congress
(ANC), the main black leader at the talks, praised the 'remarkable job' done
by Codesa and portrayed the 200-odd delegates as members of a happy
multi-racial family. Mr FW de Klerk, the President and leader of the ruling
National Party, congratulated the gathering for transforming crisis to
success.
But away from the conference hall - where communal lunches and cocktail
parties have bred a spirit of inter-racial bonhomie which would make Mr
Hendrik Verwoerd, architect of apartheid, turn in his grave - the message
was blunt, and negative. 'Despite all the hard preparatory work put in,
nothing concrete has emerged. The negotiation process has stalled. It is
urgently necessary to revive it,' said the Patriotic Front, the ANC-led bloc
which includes other anti-apartheid groups.
Senior officials from both the Patriotic Front and the Government camp
(which includes some black homeland leaders, the Zulu Inkatha Freedom Party
and leaders of the discredited Indian and Coloured parties in the current
parliament) made clear that the gap between them remains large. The issue is
whether whites and other minorities should be allowed to exercise a veto
over the writing of the new constitution, and whether minorities should be
further protected by a federal constitution which devolves much power to
regional and local level.
The National Party position is that South Africa's fragmented society -
rendered so by apartheid - cannot be governed except by consensus. 'No
majority should ever be able to misuse its power to undermine the
constitution or to dominate minorities,' Mr de Klerk vowed.
Toward that end, the National Party demanded a 75 per cent majority of
delegates pass the most contentious clauses of a new constitution: the bill
of rights and, crucially, the clause setting out the powers of regional and
local governments which may be minority-dominated. Other clauses would be
passed by a 70 per cent majority. But the Nationalists also demanded the
creation of a senate under a final constitution, which would give
disproportionately large representation to minorities. These proposals are
designed to allow the National Party, in alliance with other ethnic minority
parties, to veto majority decisions.
The ANC proposed a two-thirds majority (which it assumes would be too high
to allow a National Party veto). It offered to accept a 70 per cent majority
(with 75 per cent to approve the bill of rights), but then insisted that a
popular referendum be called if that majority could not be achieved.
The dispute has now been referred back to a committee representing the 19
Codesa parties. They have been given three weeks to solve it, and it is
difficult to see how they will do so. For while the gap appears small in
percentage points, the final figure will determine whether blacks have the
power to write what is essentially a majority-rule constitution, or whether
whites and other minorities can entrench minority protections.
De facto or de jure, whites will have a veto over the new South Africa.
'There's a white veto right now,' points out Mr Frederik van Zyl Slabbert, a
political commentator. 'It lies in the army, in the economy, in the capacity
of capital to flee the country.' The battle now is over whether it is
entrenched in a constitution.
Neither side has so far demonstrated the political will to overcome this
obstacle. This is not brinksmanship, but a fundamental dispute over who
wields power. For while Mr de Klerk closed the conference by urging the need
for 'compromising on basics", it soon became apparent that this advice was
aimed solely at the ANC. Both sides seem to think that the other is in a
hurry to settle: outsiders find it difficult to reach the same conclusion.
The National Party, especially, seems content to sit tight. Despite
multiplying revelations of security force murders of political activists and
government corruption scandals Mr de Klerk appears confident and in no rush
to relinquish power. His negotiating team has been plagued by illness: one
senior minister is on sick leave due to exhaustion, another resigned after a
nervous collapse. But Mr de Klerk seems calm and collected.
ANC negotiators, trained in the trade union movement, are bearing up well so
far. But they have yet to feel the ire of their constituents, anxious to
benefit from the spoils of power. Their expectations cannot be frustrated
forever.
Nobody would disagree that South Africa pays a high price for delay. Mr
Mandela pleaded the case for speed: 'The question that faces us all is - how
long can we, who claim to be the leaders of our people, sit here, spin out
complicated forumlae and enjoy the applause while the country sinks deeper
into crisis?'
He concluded with a veiled threat of mass insurrection: 'Let none of us make
the mistake of thinking that the people will do nothing to change their
condition. Not only do the masses have the right, they have the duty to
engage in struggle to change their condition, change any government or
leader they see as acting against their common good.'
The Congress of South African Trade Unions (Cosatu), the largest union
federation with over 1m members, has said it will stage a general strike
next month unless a multi-racial interim government is installed by then.
This is no idle threat: last November, Cosatu led a 2-day strike which
paralysed the economy.
Despite this threat, Codesa failed to remove obstacles to the early
installation of a multi-racial interim government. Because of its failure,
multi-party control of the security forces, crucial to contain the violence
which has left 11,000 people dead since 1984, has been postponed. Remaining
economic sanctions, which would largely have been lifted on installation of
an interim government, will stay in place.
US commercial banks will not lend to Pretoria, several US companies believed
to be interested in investment will hold off, and lending from the World
Bank and IMF remains a distant prospect.
And while Codesa searches for a political solution, the economy remains in a
three-year recession, millions are jobless, homeless and hungry. Codesa's
negotiators ignore these pressures at their peril. For if they follow the
advice which doomed the rest of Africa - the dictat from Mr Kwame Nkrumah,
Ghana's first independence ruler, 'seek ye first the political kingdom' -
they may achieve political power only to regret it.
