FT  08 APR 92 / Business and the Environment: Going up in smoke - How
companies are cashing in on Mexico's pollution problems
Mexico, which a few years ago had some of the weakest and most poorly
enforced anti-pollution laws anywhere, is looking to clean up its famously
foul environment. The prospect of a multi-billion dollar market in clean-up
work is drawing in pollution-control companies from around the world.
Chemical Waste Management, a subsidiary of the US Waste Management Inc, has
recently set up an office in Mexico City and sees the overall market to be
worth Dollars 10bn (Pounds 5.8bn) by the end of the century, with the
industry growing even faster than the US market over the past decade.
'They (government officials) have the regulations in place. They know the
problems in the US and Europe. We feel they are going to push harder and
harder,' says David McConnel, manager of Chemical Waste Management's Mexico
office.
The country's list of environmental problems is depressingly long. Mexico
City's air pollution is among the worst in the world; the US-Mexican border
at places looks like a giant rubbish dump; Mexico's rivers and lakes and
open spaces are invariably polluted with toxic effluent; throughout Mexico
there is an acute shortage of water.
However, the government has begun to enforce regulations that are
approaching the level of strictness in the US. Last month the US and Mexico
unveiled a Dollars 840m joint plan to clean up the border area.
Manuel Camacho Solis, Mexico City's mayor, also ordered the city's largest
industries to buy anti-pollution equipment to help cut emissions of
suspended particulate matter by 90 per cent, nitrogen dioxide by 50 per cent
and solvents by 10-15 per cent in 18 months.
In the past, government regulations have usually been ignored, and no doubt
enforcement will continue to be weak. But there is reason to believe the
government is more sincere in the latest crackdown. Mexico hopes to sign a
free trade agreement with the US in the next 12 months, and its
environmental record will be scrutinised closely by the US Congress.
The environment is becoming an increasingly important political issue in
Mexico, and officials that do not enforce regulations risk losing their
jobs. Government rhetoric has thus stepped up a notch and industries which
fail to comply with standards are being closed down.
'As of now, every business (in Mexico City) knows that for the second
semester of 1994, if it cannot or will not adapt its production, it will
have to close or relocate outside of the Valley of Mexico,' said Patricio
Chirinos, minister for the environment, when unveiling the new plan for
Mexico City.
already, in response to the new regulations, 40 industries and 12 mines in
Mexico City have promised to spend Dollars 52m on buying scrubbers, filters
and energy saving devices - mostly from US companies such as the Clean Air
Group, Owen Rust Engineering and Northrop.
The government has promised more than Dollars 1bn in subsidised loans to
Mexican industries intent on reducing their emissions. Rene Altimirano, a
senior official at the environment ministry, says Mexico's industries would
have to invest a total of around Dollars 7bn if they were to comply with
existing regulations.
While Mexico City's air pollution grabs all the attention, the greatest
business opportunity in the short term probably lies in water treatment and
transportation. The Mexico City metropolitan area uses about 60 cubic metres
of water a second (60,000 litres per second), of which about 42 cubic metres
comes from underground water and 18 cubic metres from outside the city. The
government reckons that the underground aquifers are over-exploited by about
20 cubic metres a second, and that they will need a replacement source in
five years.
Carlos Cassasus, a senior official at Mexico City's planning office, says
about 4 cubic metres per second can be freed up by encouraging industries
and agriculture to use recyclable water. This would require, says Cassasus,
an investment of about Dollars 160m in water treatment plants.
The government has still not decided whether the transport of water will be
fully opened to private investment. But officials freely admit that they are
strapped for cash and 'creative financing' schemes are envisaged. The rest
of Mexico City's replacement water will have to be brought from the
Cutzamala system at a cost of about Dollars 900m in pump and pipe
investment.
The shortage of Mexico City's water mirrors what is happening in the rest of
the country, especially along the heavily industrialised Mexican-US border.
Only about 5 to 10 per cent of water is recycled, against about 70 per cent
in the US. Mexico City, Nuevo Leon and Queretero all regularly turn away
industries because of water shortages.
Alfonso Ruiz, of Cydsa, the large industrial conglomerate which has opened
an environmental business division, reckons that the private sector water
treatment industry will be worth at least Dollars 1bn by the end of the
decade, against next to nothing now. His company already has 50 industrial
clients that want treatment plants built for them, and is actively looking
for foreign partners to help meet demand.
Chemical Waste and a sister company hope to profit from providing sites for
treatment of solid and chemical waste. In the entire country there is only
one operating landfill site for hazardous waste, three incinerators, seven
recycling plants and about 50 landfills suitable for solid waste.
Until now, most Mexican-based industries have dumped toxic rubbish in
rivers, lakes or spare land. Altimirano says Mexico needs at least five more
incinerators - at a minimum cost of Dollars 14m each  - 30 recycling plants
and another 30 landfills suitable for toxics.
Chemical Waste is looking to build three landfills for toxic waste, and says
it will be investing at least Dollars 5m a year. A sister company will be
building solid waste sites.
Investing in Mexico's anti-pollution industry is not without its risks,
however. Environmentalists are demanding that clean-up industries comply
with particularly exacting standards, while corruption and poor enforcement
will continue to plague the business. But environmental laws are sure to get
tougher as Mexico develops, and more and more of the country's resources
will inevitably be devoted to abating the worst effects of
industrialisation.
