FT  10 MAR 92 / London Stock Exchange: Equities gain ground in thin trading
THE FINAL pre-Budget trading session in UK equities, also the opening of the
new two-week account in the stock market, saw shares moving forward
confidently, although turnover was restrained ahead of this afternoon's
speech from Mr Norman Lamont, the UK chancellor of the exchequer, in the
House of Commons.
Several London-based securities houses expressed the view that the
relatively generous budget which is expected today could set the stage for
gains in the stock market, especially if it triggers an election victory for
the governing Conservative party.
Announcement of the election date is widely expected this week. Mr Ian
Harnett of Strauss Turnbull, the UK securities arm of Societe Generale,
commented yesterday that in four of the last five UK general elections, the
equity market had risen by around 4 per cent between the announcement of the
election date and polling day.
Hopes for an early reduction in UK base rates, while dimmed somewhat by
recent pressures on sterling, also remained in place. Building and retail
shares, all likely beneficiaries of a rate cut, moved higher. But little
attention was paid to the consumer credit statistics for January announced
yesterday.
The market opened lower, reflecting the uncertainties facing it this week,
and the FT-SE 100 Index dipped to 2,522.7 in early trading as dealers backed
away in the face of an inadequate level of business from the big
institutions.
At this level the stock index futures market came in, and a good premium on
the March contract on the Footsie inspired a recovery in underlying
equities. The cash market moved back to the lower end of its current trading
range, brushing off the effects of downward adjustments in a batch of blue
chip stocks to allow for dividend payments.
At best, the market was more than 19 points ahead on the Footsie before it
closed at 2,550.7, leaving a gain on the day of 17.6 points.
Traders were quick to point out that last night's close left the index only
at the low end of its perceived trading range and that trading volume had
not been sufficient to provide much test of market confidence.
Seaq-reported volume of 383.6m shares underlined this point. Friday's total
reached 538.4m shares and reflected retail, or customer, business worth
Pounds 1.1bn; customer business has topped Pounds 1bn on five out of the
past seven trading sessions, indicating a significant improvement in market
profitability.
With the attention now firmly fixed on the domestic political and economic
scene, and Wall Street a mere two points off on the Dow Average in London
hours, the international blue chips lacked direction. Some leading stocks
moved sharply, but a fall in ICI was little more than the ex-dividend
adjustment, while speculative demand for Midland Bank was not regarded as
serious investment activity.
Today brings, in addition to the UK Budget, a test for Wall Street in the
form of the Super Tuesday primaries for the presidential elections. Economic
data on both sides of the Atlantic is likely to play a subdued role this
week, although the US retail sales figures, due on Thursday, will be eagerly
scanned for any signs of a nascent recovery in the economy.
