FT  10 MAR 92 / Technology: Computers go it alone - Why corporate IT
departments no longer need the human touch
How would you cope if you received 40 postcards a second and had to read
them all because one in 1,000 needed a reply? That's the kind of task that
operators of corporate computers face every day.
Computer-generated messages from all over a company's network arrive at IT
centres as fast as those postcards. The operators, surrounded by banks of
monitors, do their best to sort out the messages and keep the system
running.
But humans cannot react as fast as computers, and whenever they intervene it
slows things down. Only in the late 1980s, with the advent of software
designed to automate some of the operators' tasks, did solutions start to
arrive.
Robots are now available for loading and unloading memory tapes, and
schedulers for pre-arranging the flow of work through a computer over a
period of time. Other automation products will recover failed applications
or start or close the whole system in a safe and systematic way at the press
of a button.
Software can also attack the gush of messages, cutting out the junk-mail and
sending back standard replies. After most messages have been filtered out,
the remaining ones can be displayed on a single screen as a colour-coded
chart, for example. One glance can quickly show how the whole system is
performing.
Another way of cutting down the messages would be to stop writing software
that generates so many. Every year hardware gets faster and faster and more
and more messages are spewed out by software packages that were designed for
a slower environment maybe 20 years ago.
Operators have generally welcomed automation rather than seeing it as a
threat. The new technology makes their job more interesting.
'Software is taking over the grunt work,' says George Kurtz, an automation
expert with Computer Associates, the US systems house. Computer operators
are freed to become computer analysts, a more creative occupation with big
benefits for the employer. 'By the turn of the century I expect them to be
called network engineers. Their role will develop into the management of an
enterprise network.'
Despite its advantages, automated operations has been slow to take off. The
technology, centred on IBM mainframes, is five years old, says Suzanne
Nicastro, director of strategic planning with Legent, a US automation
supplier.
'In the first year, people were just poking at it. Some jumped right on but
others were scared off because it appeared untested or they thought it could
lead to them losing their jobs. Two years ago though it was shooting up like
crazy because there were more visible success stories to point to.'
Since then the recession has slowed things down. 'People have got distracted
and they're trying to make things work that they've already invested in,'
says Nicastro. 'But the automation market is only 25 per cent penetrated, so
there's still a lot of potential there.'
The threat to jobs is not as great as one might expect. US computer centres
are growing at an average of 25 per cent a year in terms of computer power
and workload, says Nicastro. Automated operations allows them to grow at
this rate without increasing staff, she claims.
When automation products first arrived, it seemed that completely unattended
or 'lights-out' computer centres would be the ultimate goal. There would be
no human operators - just a 'babysitter' or security guard.
Nowadays, few companies entertain ambitions of this kind. A more common aim
is to run a computer centre remotely, from a PC at home perhaps, or from
another building if the computer centre is on a split-site. This latter idea
offers big savings for a company faced with integrating two computer sites
after a merger or acquisition.
But the physical location of the nearest human expert is still of concern to
many. 'The idea of leaving a corporate nerve-centre totally unattended sends
chills up and down my spine,' says Kurtz. 'The last data centre I managed
would have sustained serious damage if personnel had not been on site.'
Automated operations have a more wide-ranging significance, he argues. 'It
forces a company to sit down and rethink the way it does everything. If you
want to automate the management of a company then automated operations is
nothing more than the foundation on which to build.'
Current products automate several different operational tasks on mainly IBM
machines. But the future is about systems that work across a wide range of
hardware and integrate the different automation products so that they feed
each other.
Computer Associates claims to be the only company offering such a system
today. Its products are designed for the company's open architecture called
CA90s which embraces any kind of hardware. 'Companies can't afford to build
interfaces to different platforms,' says Kurtz. 'The only way you can solve
the complexity is with an integrated system.'
Such integration promises to unlock the full benefits of automation as it
moves up to the higher levels of a company.
'Eventually it will be like flying an aeroplane,' says Kurtz. 'A jet engine
has maybe 30,000 components and the pilot sits in the middle and controls it
with a couple of levers. Every component is dependent on every other
component. Managing a company will be like that.'
*****
SHELL UK OIL wants its staff to have direct control of the computers they
use.
It is installing a voice-activated system for users who are spread across
many different sites in the UK.  Staff will phone the computer centre in
Manchester and be guided through a digitised meny to trigger the computer
programs they want.  They will be able to request recorded information,
cancel an application when it goes wrong, or speak to a human being, for
example.
This is part of the company's move into automated operations.  An automation
product called OPS/MVS from Goal Systems of the US is the hub of a strategy
that will move most operators away from Shell's central control room.
'Nowadays operators are not necessary for things like lifts, cashpoint
machines or phone calls - all of these gave users direct control of their
environment.  There's no reason why the same ideas are not applicable to
us,' says Ian Lowe, automation project leader.
All electronic messages coming into Shell's computer from various parts of
the network will be handled automatically.  Only 0.2 percent need a human
reaction.  These will be filtered out and relayed via BT to experts who
could be based anywhere.
'We're removing the trivia from the operators' job and giving them an
opportunity to get involved in more rewarding activities,' says Lowe.
*****
BOB JONES is one of his computer's best friends.  Sometimes it phones him up
to tell him its problems.
Jones is technical services manager at Physicians Mutual, an insurance
company in Omaha, Nebraska.  The company was one of the first in the US to
use automated operations software and last year took a further step by
introducing two new products developed by the US automation supplier Candle
Corporation.
One of these, AF/Performer, monitors and tunes the computers automatically.
 When it was installed, it uncovered technical problems and inefficiences
that no one had noticed before.  The other product, AF/Remote, allows the
computer to phone someone for help it it gets into trouble.
Together, the products allow the computer to work unattended.  This has
allowed Physicians Mutual to end weekend shifts for computer operators and
save more than Dollars 8,000 (Pounds 4,500) a year.
'If AF/Performer faces a problem, it attempts to correct it first, but if it
can't it calls out through, AF/Remote to an operator with a PC,' explains
Jones.
AF/Performer hs already saved four stoppages which would have knocked out
600 terminals and cost the company several thousand dollars.  'We haven't
eliminated any staff.  We've redirected them from being a slave to the
machine to making the machine a slave to them,' says Jones.
