FT  12 NOV 92 / Struggle to spike a smoking gun: The Matrix Churchill
scandal throws light on how Whitehall departments battle for control of
policy
The announcement of an independent judicial inquiry into the Matrix
Churchill affair has for the moment defused another embarrassing situation
for the government. But present and former ministers must now be wondering
how damaging the disclosures will turn out to be when Lord Justice Scott,
known as a liberal but pragmatic judge, delivers his conclusions.
The production of 500 Whitehall documents, many carrying high security
classifications, in the collapsed court case against businessman Mr Paul
Henderson and his colleagues has already provided a substantial indication
of potential discomfort to come. The papers also provide a unique insight
into the mechanics of Whitehall policy formulation. The episode will,
according to Peter Hennessey, professor of contemporary history at Queen
Mary College and a specialist on Whitehall, unquestionably prove to be a
locus classicus on ministerial and official behaviour.
The basic charge against ministers is that they colluded to break the
government's own guidelines on the sale of defence-related equipment to
Iraq; and that the relaxed attitude to the sale of so-called dual-use
equipment (which can have both civil and military applications) to Iraq
could have resulted in that equipment being used against British troops in
the Gulf war.
Certainly the documents revealed to the court, in the course of the case
brought against the former directors of machine-tool maker Matrix Churchill
by Customs &amp; Excise, suggest that the Whitehall machine was duplicitous.
While an inter-departmental committee appears to have wrestled tortuously
with the pros and cons of granting or revoking export licences for Matrix
Churchill's potential exports to Iraq, individual minutes by senior
officials convey a rather different impression.
One of the more striking is a note by Mr Michael Blackley of the Foreign &amp;
Commonwealth Office (FCO) Middle Eastern Department in January 1988, when
the Iran-Iraq war was still some months from its end. Whitehall had just
learned from intelligence sources that Matrix Churchill's machine tools were
being used to manufacture munitions at the Nasser and Huteen industrial
complexes in Iraq.
Part of Blackley's comment reads: 'I accept the recommendation that the
licences should for the moment not be revoked, but if it becomes public
knowledge that the tools are to be used to make munitions, deliveries would
have to stop at once. Once the UN arms embargo is adopted they will probably
have to stop. The companies should be warned of the falling guillotine and
urged to produce and ship as fast as they can.'
That implies that deceit was an essential element of the whole approach, at
least at official level. And it smacks more of opportunistic realpolitik
than enthusiastic adherence to the government's guidelines, announced in
revised form in the House of Commons in October 1985. These prohibited the
sale of any defence-related equipment that could significantly enhance the
capability of either side to prolong or exacerbate the war. But was deceit
so reprehensible in the circumstances at the time?
If the Foreign Office had concluded that it was in Britain's interests to
bolster the potential military capability of the country generally perceived
to be the weaker party in the war in order to maintain a stalemate, a policy
of non-disclosure would have minimised the fall-out for relations with a
highly dangerous power, Iran.
Officials appear also to have believed initially that revocation of the
licences might have bankrupted Matrix Churchill. And by helping keep in
business the company, which was majority-owned by representatives of the
Iraqi state and part of the Iraqi procurement network, Whitehall was
maintaining a source that might have provided much more valuable information
about the crucially important Iraqi attempt to establish a nuclear
capability.
A further reason for not revoking the export licences was that the single
intelligence source of information about the use of the machine tools for
munitions manufacture might have been compromised.
Much the same excuses could be made for ministers and officials once the
Iran-Iraq war was over. Since the maintenance of military balance was no
longer so important, it is not surprising that the Whitehall papers reveal a
shift in inter-departmental power away from the FCO in favour of the
Department of Trade and Industry. Indeed, it appears that the then trade
minister, Mr Alan Clark, who is at the centre of allegations about collusion
to breach government guidelines, responded to FCO foot-dragging over exports
to Iraq in characteristic fashion. Clark, a notorious loose cannon, appears
to have encouraged his department to license Matrix Churchill's exports
before obtaining the endorsement of the FCO, thereby bouncing the diplomats
into a retrospective endorsement.
Meanwhile, Mr William Waldegrave, then minister of state at the FCO, stated
in a letter to Mr Clark in April 1989 'that we should continue to interpret
the guidelines more flexibly in respect of Iraq' - an unpublicised policy
change that took place in late 1988. The political background, including
Iran's hostile role in the Salman Rushdie affair, was specifically cited as
a reason for the pro-Iraqi bias. The letter went on to suggest these weasel
words for parliamentary use: 'The guidelines on the export of defence
equipment to Iran and Iraq are kept under constant review and are applied in
the light of prevailing circumstances, including the ceasefire and
developments in the peace negotiations.'
Once again, a hard-headed observer might wonder whether this was really so
shocking. Disclosure of a policy that discriminated against Iran would still
have been potentially very damaging to British interests. And the fact that
none of the Whitehall documents released to the court carries any hint that
civil servants had worries about a breach of guidelines, or wished to flag
their dissent, leaves open the possibility that no one in Whitehall thought
twice about the issue.
The sale of dual-use equipment has long been the subject of debate in
Whitehall, with the DTI tending to put weight on commercial interests, while
the FCO's priorities are more political. In this particular case the West
Germans and Italians, not noted for their delicacy over the sale of
defence-related equipment, were competing for the business. It is scarcely
surprising that successive trade ministers, Mr Clark and Lord Trefgarne, are
revealed in secret papers as being in favour of a more emollient approach to
exports to Iraq.
But in the final analysis realpolitik arguments have to stand up to the test
of success or failure. And in this case success is hard to perceive.
Whether, for example, the intelligence that subsequently emerged via Matrix
Churchill was of any value seems questionable.
For a start, Mr Paul Henderson seems to have been a remarkably amateur spy,
who cheerfully admits to having served MI6 for a long time before he
recognised the extent of the risks he was running. Having been instructed by
his control to write nothing down and to memorise all telephone numbers, he
recorded the numbers against fictitious names that he invented because his
memory was poor. This looks potentially deadly for anyone at the other end
of the line - an extraordinary gaffe, given the fact that Henderson reported
to a chairman who was himself a high-ranking Iraqi intelligence officer.
Perhaps MI6 felt the risks were acceptable when Iraq appeared to be close to
achieving nuclear capability and intelligence was thus at a premium. But in
the absence of conclusive evidence, all we know for certain is that any
intelligence thus gleaned signally failed to prevent Iraq's invasion of
Kuwait.
In the 1980s Britain started putting its money on Saddam Hussein, in much
the same way that it had gambled on the Shah in the 1970s. In both cases,
commercial interests were given excessive weight, and the political
reporting on the spot failed to grasp the things that really mattered. The
best that can be said is that this time the FCO did at least have some
inkling of the menace of Saddam Hussein's regime, which was expressed in Mr
Waldegrave's letters to his fellow ministers; also that the prime minister,
Mrs Thatcher, expressed worries about exports to Iraq.
But only weeks before the invasion of Kuwait the MoD was calling for the
removal of export restrictions and Mr (now Lord) Ridley, Whitehall's other
and weightier loose cannon, then trade secretary, was writing a letter to
the prime minister that reads like a lament for the deterioration in
Britain's relations with Iraq.
Despite the newly discovered information about the Iraqi supergun and
Britain's recent interception of shipments of nuclear triggers and supergun
parts, Ridley expresses in his letter implicit concern about Customs &amp;
Excise investigations into exporters to Iraq. And despite the obvious signs
of the growing dangers arising from Iraqi trade, he states: 'I can see no
prospect of any improvement in the position while investigations into
possible breaches of export controls continue. On the contrary, I see a
considerable risk of further deterioration from which only our competitors
can benefit since we have no evidence that they take as restrictive a view
as we do on trade with Iraq'. Yet it should have been clear by then, even
without hindsight, that the problem was too much trade with this dangerous
regime, not too little.
The prime minister's response, and the outcome of meetings to discuss
Customs &amp; Excise investigations and to discuss a review of the policy are,
sadly, unrecorded in the court documents. Could it be that ministers
concluded that their position would look even more foolish and improper if
they sought to block the independent-minded Customs men in the legitimate
pursuit of their duty?
As for the commercial gains and losses from the episode, they were probably
negligible or worse, since the Export Credits Guarantee Department had a
Pounds 1bn exposure to Iraq, on which the Iraqis defaulted. The British
taxpayer, therefore, has had to pay a substantial bill.
But perhaps the grubbiest aspect of the saga was the readiness of four
ministers, Michael Heseltine, Kenneth Clarke, Malcolm Rifkind and Tristan
Garel-Jones, to sign public-interest immunity certificates that could have
condemned three men to jail. In this instance, ministers failed to suppress
information - the one failure for which there is reason to be grateful.
