FT  25 SEP 92 / World Stock Markets: Caricom sets up investment fund -
Companies in the region stand to benefit
Caribbean Community (Caricom) governments are considering proposals from
Crown Agents Assets Management, of the UK, and two Jamaican finance houses,
for the management of a Dollars 50m investment fund for the region.
The British company, which manages investment funds and aid finance
programmes in developing countries, is in competition with the ICWI Group, a
financial services conglomerate, and the Trafalgar Development Bank, which
has proposed itself as the lead partner in a consortium with foreign finance
houses.
The three companies' proposals are being reviewed by a committee of regional
central bankers and economists. They are expected to inform the community's
heads of government of their decision next February.
Although it is seeking one fund, the community will allow more than one if
companies provide adequate proposals on raising the capital and in meeting
other conditions.
The community's members are the English-speaking countries of the region,
including Belize in Central America, the Bahamas, and Guyana in South
America. It has a cumulative market of 5.5m people and is attempting to
create a customs union and a common market by 1994.
The community expects the fund to invest in equities in all member
countries, with a portfolio which will cover listed and unlisted stocks,
including unquoted companies wanting funds for expansion and likely to be
listed on the stock market. Only three of the countries - Jamaica, Trinidad
and Tobago, and Barbados - have stock markets, while the Guyana government
is planning one. The fund will also invest in countries without a local
stock market, including the smaller islands of the eastern Caribbean.
When it is established, the Caribbean investment fund will undertake equity
investments in sectors such as export and domestic agriculture, tourism,
construction, utilities, financial services and real estate development, but
with more attention to those undertakings involved in exporting.
The fund will include ordinary shares, as well as warrants for up to 10 per
cent of the capital, and these will be listed on an international stock
exchange. Its shares will be placed mainly with institutional investors in
developed countries which have a special interest in the Caribbean. Some
placings will also be done in the Caribbean.
Capital for the fund will be raised through private placings with
institutional investors which, the Community governments hope, will ensure
quick procurement and an early start. The Community feels that since the
investments will take some time, all the capital does not have to be
attracted at the start once there is an assurance of an ability to raise the
full amount over two years.
The fund will be particularly beneficial to the many companies in the region
which have become highly geared and want to change their debt/ equity
structure. Many have been dependent traditionally on loans for their
expansion, and have had only moderate success in attracting equity capital.
The new fund will have many opportunities for investing in regional
enterprises, with the governments of Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, and
Guyana divesting themselves of several companies, and inviting foreign and
local private sector participation.
The fund will be particularly beneficial to the many companies in the region
which have become highly geared and want to change their debt/equity
structure. Its shares will be placed mainly with institutional investors in
developed countries which have a special interest in the Caribbean.
