FT  02 JUL 92 / Recession deepens for builders as output stays low
THE RECESSION in Britain's construction industry appears to be deepening
almost daily, with forecasts yesterday of a further sharp fall in output
this year.
The National Economic Development Office delayed publishing its forecasts
for a week in order to revise its figures to take account of the
deteriorating conditions in the market.
According to the joint forecasting committee of Nedo's construction industry
sector group, the value of construction output, measured in constant 1985
prices, will fall by a further 6.5 per cent this year. Previously the
committee had forecast that output would fall by 5.5 per cent this year.
Last year UK construction output fell by 9 per cent.
The committee - with representatives from construction companies, mortgage
lenders, building material producers and building unions - said the
industry's recovery, which had been expected to start next year, would not
take place until 1994, when it is forecasting a 3 per cent rise in activity.
An increase, however, would depend upon a number of planned projects going
ahead, including the Jubilee Underground line extension threatened by the
failure of the Canary Wharf development in London's Docklands.
The forecasting committee said that falls in repair and maintenance work,
which tend to be closely affected by house sales, have been much greater
than expected. This had led it to increase its forecast for the fall in
output this year.
Housebuilders have reported that the housing market has faltered in recent
weeks after a brief flurry of activity following the general election.
Tarmac, Britain's biggest housebuilder, said yesterday: 'After a better
start to the year, sales in May and April were very poor.'
Just as worrying was the separate publication of a survey of architects'
order books, which showed that new commissions during the first three months
of this year had fallen by 19 per cent compared with the final three months
of last year.
The Royal Institute of British Architects, which conducted the survey, said:
'Architects come at the beginning of the construction process. No
commissions means no work for contractors.'
Worst affected has been the office construction market, which has been
squeezed by recession and previous over-development.
Nedo is forecasting a 25 per cent fall in commercial construction, mainly
offices and shops, with a further 10 per cent fall next year. Industrial
output is expected to fall by 3.5 per cent in each year. Private
housebuilding is expected to show a small increase in output this year
following big falls since 1988.
Construction Forecasts 1992-93-94. JFC Forecasts, Millbank Tower, Millbank,
London SW1P 4QX. Pounds 50 plus Pounds 1.20 postage.
House prices fall, Page 9
