FT  04 DEC 92 / Survey of Venezuela (4): Squeezed between rising taxes and
depressed prices - Oil industry tackles opposing pressures
VENEZUELA'S national oil company, Petroleos de Venezuela SA (PDVSA), faces
some serious difficulties which are not of its own making.
PDVSA, with 1991 gross international sales of Dollars 22.3bn, is squeezed
between weak oil prices and steep taxes and investment requirements. While
the company remains well-managed, efficient and profitable, the current
situation has produced serious cash flow problems and has forced PDVSA to
acquire nearly Dollars 5bn in debt, having been debt-free only a few years
ago.
It also has been obliged to stretch out its capital investment programme and
seek international equity partners for projects in petroleum sectors that
previously had been off limits to private investment.
Like other major international oil companies, PDVSA is suffering from the
effects of low oil prices on world markets. This year, the average export
price for PDVSA crude and refined products through mid-November fell below
last year's price of Dollars 15.92 per barrel. The export price was Dollars
20.33 per barrel in 1990 and Dollars 17.85 per barrel in 1989.
And, like other big suppliers of refined petroleum products to the US
market, PDVSA - the world's third largest oil refiner - must spend large
sums on upgrading its refining complexes in order to meet tougher
environmental standards for key export products such as gasoline.
PDVSA expects to invest at least Dollars 3.6bn in refinery improvements over
the next several years to meet or exceed provisions of the US Clean Air Act,
and to ensure compliance with environmental regulations in other places
where it sells refined products, especially Europe.
These investments are also aimed at permitting PDVSA's home refineries to
process increased volumes of heavy crude, which is abundant in Venezuela.
(Apart from four refining complexes in Venezuela, PDVSA wholly or partially
owns large oil refining and petrochemical plants in the US and Europe.)
In addition, PDVSA must constantly invest huge sums in crude oil production.
The country's oil fields suffer a potential decline in output of 22-23 per
cent per annum, which means that PDVSA must invest over Dollars 2bn a year
simply to maintain crude output at the present capacity level.
The company is also building new production potential, which requires even
greater investments. Its target is to raise crude oil production capacity
from the current level of 2.8m b/d to 4m b/d by 2002. 'PDVSA must grow,'
said Mr Alirio Parra, Venezuela's Minister of Energy and Mines.
At the same time, PDVSA is being slowly strangled by a heavy tax burden at
home. The company currently pays at least 82 per cent of its operating
profits to the Venezuelan Treasury in taxes and royalties. (The maximum
corporate tax rate for companies outside the oil sector is 30 per cent.) And
since the Venezuelan government relies on oil to provide most if its
revenues (despite years of talking about diversification), a dramatic
reduction in PDVSA's tax burden cannot be made overnight.
Working together, Energy Minister Parra and the president of PDVSA, Mr
Gustavo Roosen, have been able to develop some solutions to the company's
problems, although relief will not be immediate.
The Energy Ministry, which draws up policy guidelines for PDVSA, has eased
the company's tax burden slightly this year by adjusting the export value
system.
Export values of crude and refined products are used as a base to calculate
PDVSA income taxes. The minister also has introduced legislation that would
phase out the export value system on a staggered basis by 1996, and has
changed some accounting rules applied to PDVSA's books and tax declarations.
These initiatives will provide substantial tax savings for the national oil
company in coming years, but will not pull the fiscal carpet out from under
the the government.
Other changes are also being studied to ease PDVSA's tax burden. Taken as a
whole, these measures should ensure that PDVSA will be able to push ahead
comfortably with future investments and continue to generate net profits.
The government itself has proposed new taxes, including a version of VAT,
that will make it less dependent on the vicissitudes of its main commodity,
petroleum.
PDVSA is moving ahead with direct investments in production and refining,
which are necessary if the company is to maintain its international market
share. But it has stretched out some projects contained in its medium term
investment plan, delayed others and is looking to international capital to
develop a variety of joint-venture projects in heavy oil, refining, natural
gas and other areas that were formerly the exclusive domain of PDVSA and its
subsidiaries.
'The most limited resource that the the petroleum industry has today is
money,' said PDVSA president Roosen. 'I don't want things to be left undone
simply because we don't have the cash.' The company's current investment
plan through 2002 totals Dollars 40bn, at 1992 prices.
Of this total, PDVSA will carry out direct capital spending of Dollars 28bn,
while it hopes that international investors - either acting alone or in
joint ventures with the company - will invest another Dollars 12bn. Apart
from newly targeted areas for foreign investment such as oil production and
refining, PDVSA has established - or is negotiating - joint ventures with
Venezuelan and international partners in natural gas, petrochemicals, coal
and Orimulsion, a new fuel that is an emulsion of bitumen and water. PDVSA
is marketing Orimulsion as an alternative to coal in electric power plants.
To save money, PDVSA also has cut its operating and capital budgets this
year, and will continue controlling costs in 1993. Capital spending for 1992
is expected to reach Dollars 3.7bn, about the same as last year.
PDVSA this year opened the door to limited-scale private investment in oil
production. It asked oil companies from Venezuela and abroad to bid on crude
oil production contracts covering a series of old oil fields that PDVSA
itself did not want to reactivate.
As a result, two groups made up of Benton Oil (US)/Vinccler (Venezuela) and
Teikoku Oil of Japan signed operating contracts under which they pledged to
invest Dollars 280m over the next 10 years to develop new production from
marginal oil fields in eastern Guarico state and southeastern Monagas state.
The two groups will not own the oil and natural gas they produce, but will
turn it over to PDVSA subsidiaries and receive compensation according to the
volumes of oil they can pump.
Last month, Energy Minister Parra announced that the government and PDVSA
were seeking bids for production contracts on 73 other marginal fields with
total proven oil reserves of more than 1.2bn barrels.
Heavy oil is an important resource for PDVSA. Venezuela has the world's
largest known deposits of bitumen and extra-heavy crude in the Orinoco Belt,
an area that lies north of the Orinoco River. Heavy and extra-heavy crude
oils contain high levels of carbon, sulphur and metals that must be removed
at high cost before the crude can be processed in normal oil refineries.
PDVSA has two main approaches to developing its reserves of bitumen and
extra-heavy crudes. The first is an international marketing programme for
Orimulsion, a fuel composed of bitumen and water that is made by PDVSA
subsidiaries. The second involves seeking a foreign partner who can provide
technology and capital for developing new production of extra-heavy crudes
and converting them into lighter, higher quality oils (called syncrudes)
that can be processed in normal refineries.
An upgrading plant using Veba Oel technology to produce 131,000 b/d of
synthetic crude oil, for example, would cost over Dollars 4bn. PDVSA has
signed letters of intent with more than a dozen international oil companies
with the idea of developing strategic business associations in heavy oil.
Due to the long start-up period for heavy oil projects of this type, the
government and PDVSA plan to offer investors access to light/medium crude
oils during the first stage of project development. This would give
investors a positive cash flow until the heavy oil processing plant could go
on stream. PDVSA is currently considering offers on heavy oil projects from
Conoco, Veba Oel, Elf Aquitaine, Mobil and Total.
 ------------------------------------------------------------
PDVSA: DIRECT INVESTMENT 1993-98 (DOLLARS BN)
 ------------------------------------------------------------
Sector investments per cent of total
Total maintaining production capacity            13/65
Upgrading refineries in Venezuela               3.6/18
Increasing crude oil production potential        1.4/7
Exploration                                      1.5/8
Venezuelan market                              0.252/1
Support activities and others                  0.182/1
 ------------------------------------------------------------
 ------------------------------------------------------------
PROVED RESERVES OF CRUDE OIL
 ------------------------------------------------------------
(billions of barrels at year end)
  1976     1987     1988     1989     1990     1991
18,228   58,084   58,504   59,041   60,055   62,650
 ------------------------------------------------------------
Source: PDVSA
 ------------------------------------------------------------
