FT  11 AUG 92 / World Trade News: US throws out 12 complaints on steel trade
THE US International Trade Commission yesterday threw out 12 complaints of
unfair steel trade - including two cases against the UK - after a
preliminary investigation failed to turn up evidence that those steel
imports were injuring US companies.
The cases were among 84 unfair trade complaints filed by the US steel
industry in June.
The remaining 72 cases will now be sent to the US Commerce Department, which
determines whether companies have been given unfair advantage through
government subsidies or dumping their steel 'at less their fair market
value' in the US market.
The Commerce Department has been so swamped by the filing that officials
have extended the usual investigation period. A preliminary determination of
countervailing duty complaints was delayed until November 27 and
anti-dumping complaints until January 23.
After its first finding, the Commerce Department will investigate further
for a final determination before sending the complaints back to the ITC for
its own last ruling.
Some cases may get eliminated throughout this process. In fact, two of the
six ITC commissioners yesterday complained that many of the petitioners and
respondents had failed to provide 'sufficient compelling factual information
to substantiate their claims'.
By a 5-1 vote, the Commission said the US industry had not been injured by
imports of cold-rolled products from the UK. However, two complaints remain
against imports of British cut-to-length plate.
Other trade cases dismissed yesterday were against Japan, Italy, Australia,
and New Zealand. The big winner of the day was Taiwan which had all four
complaints tossed out.
Dr Hans Mueller, a steel expert with Middle Tennessee state university, told
the commission last month the immediate goal of the US companies was 'to
break steel buyers' resistance to price increases.'
The companies, he said, hoped to take advantage of election year politics.
'The votes in several major steel states are at stake, sufficient reason
even for a free trade president to opt for new restrictions on imported
steel.'
