FT  21 NOV 92 / A division lesson in the classroom: School league tables
reveal a widening gap in English education
One message comes loud and clear from this week's school league tables
published by the government: England is still two nations.
When Disraeli coined that phrase in the middle of the last century, he was
referring to the rich and the poor. Now the gap is between the educated and
the uneducated. The gulf between them is as great as the chasm separating
the classes in the Victorian era.
Consider the central-south London borough of Southwark. The league table for
the borough includes three independent schools: in all three, between 92 and
97 per cent of the 15 to 16-year-old pupils this year achieved five or more
good GCSE passes (grades A, B or C). Virtually all are going on to take
A-levels, and the great majority will proceed to university - a fair
proportion to Oxbridge.
By contrast, in not a single state school in Southwark did more than 34 per
cent of the pupils gain five good passes. Across the whole of Southwark's
state sector, excluding special schools, only one in six 15 to 16-year-olds
gained five good passes. It would be surprising if more than one in 10 makes
it to university.
There lie the two nations. Attending schools often a stone's throw apart,
their career paths will never meet and their salary and lifestyle
expectations are at polar extremes. It is the same in most other English
cities.
Educationalists and sociologists will tell you those two nations are none
other than Disraeli's rich and poor revisited. For the most part they are
hostile to the private education sector, and argue that the state sector is
woefully underfunded. In general they are also opposed to selective
admission policies, to the publication of what they term 'raw' exam results,
and to state funds being used to give children from deprived backgrounds the
same opportunities to opt out of the state sector that are available to the
upwardly mobile.
As one distinguished University of London professor put it in yesterday's
press: 'There are damned lies and government league tables', and where
schools are under-performing, 'inspectors and advisers are a better way of
supporting (them) than market forces'.
The political right will have none of that. It wants the market to play a
greater role, or at least what analysts are coming to term the 'quasi
market' of extending choice and diversity within the public sector. As to
financial support, it points to the poor performance of inner London schools
despite their relatively generous state funding.
Arguments over resources could keep the controversy going single-handed.
Secondary schools in Southwark will this year have about Pounds 2,200 per
pupil to spend; include services such as special needs schooling and the
figure rises to about Pounds 3,300. Dulwich College, the borough's top
private school, charges fees for day students of Pounds 5,700 a year.
The 'two nations' thesis embraces not only the children who go to school,
and their parents, but the teachers and staff who have responsibility for
their welfare when at school.
The contrast between the teaching life at Dulwich and the typical inner
London comprehensive is so stark, you might as well class them as separate
careers. In fact, they largely are, since the interchange of staff across
the divide is minimal, and they recruit from largely separate pools.
Nearly 60 per cent of Dulwich's staff are Oxbridge educated, and many hold
doctorates. Salaries are distinctly higher than in the state sector. With
nearly 200 A-level candidates a year, teachers have an ample and
appreciative audience. The pupil:teacher ratio is about 12:1.
'That, more than anything is what parents are paying for,' says Mr Anthony
Verity, Dulwich's headmaster. 'If we had to take our fees down to
Southwark's level of funding, we would have to lay off a lot of staff and
reduce pay.'
It is not, however, just pay - or even the subsidised housing and staff
creche - that attract staff to the school. 'It's the whole ambiance. The
beautiful grounds, the relative absence of discipline problems, and so on.
There's no 'knock-off-at-five' mentality. Success and confidence breed
confidence,' says Mr Verity. Of Dulwich's 120 staff, barely nine or 10 leave
each year - and that includes retirements.
Move the few miles to Morpeth School, a comprehensive in Bethnal Green, and
it is a different story. The school has no sixth form. Not atypically for a
Tower Hamlets School, one in three of its pupils does not have English as
his or her first language. (In four of the borough's schools, more than 80
per cent of the pupils are not native English speakers.) Its buildings need
urgent repairs.
More than half of Morpeth's pupils gained five GCSEs this year, but the
number gaining grades A-C was far smaller.
Mr Alasdair MacDonald, the headmaster, talks of the problems he faces: 'Of
our last year's intake of 11-year-olds only 97 of our 200 pupils were fluent
in English. The strain on the staff cannot be overestimated.'
The staff turnover is not unduly high - about 10 out of 70 staff leave each
year. 'But many of our staff have to play the role of parent as much as that
of teacher. We work hard to build up trust among the parents, but it's a
tough job.'
Like all schools in the area, Morpeth has to struggle against absenteeism,
and parents who take little interest in the education of their children. For
Mr MacDonald it means a fair amount of time with education social workers,
and continuous efforts to maintain staff morale. 'With persistent truants,
we write, we visit, we telephone, but many of the parents themselves have
their hands full.'
One of the worst problems, he says, is the feeling among teachers that the
government does not care. 'Teachers have been persistently undervalued by
the government - and are too often seen as an obstruction,' he says. In his
view, it is not just, or even mainly, salaries that are the problem, but the
perception that ministers and officials do not understand Morpeth's
difficulties.
Here, too, we are back to the two nations. Not just the educated and the
uneducated, but the government and the teachers. Nothing could bode worse
for the prospects of tackling the education problems facing England's inner
cities in the post-league table world.
