FT  25 MAR 92 / Amsterdam votes on the future of the car: A long battle for
control of the streets culminates in a referendum today
AMSTERDAM'S girdle of graceful 17th-century canals is proof that the Dutch
capital was built to accommodate boats, not cars. More than 300 years later,
however, the quiet canals are used for little more than sedate tourist
cruises, while the roads on either side of the waterways have become the
scene of increasingly fierce battles between cars, bicycles, trams and
buses.
Years of simmering resentment among car drivers, cyclists and pedestrians
will come to a head today when Amsterdam holds a referendum on the future of
the car in the city centre.
Amsterdam residents will be given two choices: they can either support the
city's existing traffic policy, aimed at a gradual reduction in car traffic,
or vote in favour of a drastic curtailment of automobiles in the inner city.
This more radical option would involve halving the number of parking spaces
to 11,000 and restricting access to the canal zone itself.
The referendum - the first in Amsterdam's history - pits a coalition of
environmental groups and cyclists' clubs against business organisations,
shopkeepers and local unions, which argue that as many as 20,000 of the city
centre's 80,000 jobs will be lost if the car is virtually banned. The
anti-car lobby dismisses this figure as scaremongering.
It says some jobs would go but others would be created, as central Amsterdam
becomes a more pleasant place to live, work and shop.
'Businesses which depend on cars do not belong in the city centre but on the
outskirts,' said a spokesman for the Car-Free City-Centre movement.
Exceptions would be made for delivery vans and cars driven by disabled
people, among others.
Residents of the zone who own cars would be allowed to drive in and out.
However, they would have to compete for ever-fewer parking spaces.
The Amsterdam Chamber of Commerce believes the referendum - non-binding but
sure to influence the city's policies - has already affected the business
climate.
'Companies are hesitant to make new investments in the city until they know
what the referendum will mean for them,' a spokesman said.
'It has created an uncertain climate for decisions on business location,' he
added.
The referendum campaign by the pro-car and anti-car lobbies has been bitter,
reflecting the animosity on the city streets between cyclists and car
drivers, who rival each other in their disregard for traffic lights, speed
limits, zebra crossings and pedestrians.
Proponents of a virtually car-free zone have filed a complaint with the
Advertising Code Commission, accusing the Amsterdam business community of
putting out misleading information in their promotional material.
They are particularly incensed about a cartoon showing road signs saying
'Goodbye cars, goodbye business, goodbye restaurants, goodbye jobs'.
Adding fuel to the controversy is the choice being offered in the ballot
itself. Critics say voters are unable to make an informed decision because
they have not been told exactly how cars would be kept out of the city
centre under the radical 'Choice B' option.
Physical barriers and the issuing of magnetic passes to drivers exempt from
the ban have been mentioned as possibilities, but no firm decision has been
taken; nor have specific plans been drawn up to build the parking garages
which would be needed on the edges of the city centre.
The fact that the referendum is taking place at all is a sign of Amsterdam
city council's fear that people have lost faith in conventional politics and
need to be mobilised through direct ballots on single issues.
In the last local elections, in 1990, voter turn-out was just 50 per cent,
the lowest on record.
Further referendums may be in the offing.
One popular subject might be another perennial Amsterdam hazard - dogs and
their excrement.
Of the nearly 900 referendum ideas forwarded to the city council in 1990,
more than 40 per cent were related in one way or another to the pervasive
dog nuisance.
