FT  24 AUG 92 / SPD about-turn on asylum seekers: New stance on use of
German forces in UN-led operations
GERMANY'S opposition Social Democrats (SPD) announced surprising about-turns
at the weekend on two of the most delicate policy areas plaguing the Bonn
government: asylum-seekers and the use of German forces in UN-led military
operations.
Bowing to grass-roots demand and risking a rift with his party's left wing,
Mr Bjorn Engholm, party leader, said immigration must be 'braked and
controlled'. The party was ready to approve a change in the constitution if
necessary. Some 240,000 asylum-seekers took advantage of Germany's liberal
laws in the first seven months of this year, arriving at the rate of one a
minute during July. Last year's total was a record 256,000.
Most are seeking work in Europe's richest country and have, by law, to be
housed and fed by local authorities and individual state governments. Mr
Engholm has come under pressure from state authorities, most of them
SPD-controlled, for a change of course. In future, he said after a private
meeting of party leaders, people arriving and giving no reason, or false
reasons, in their request for asylum should be excluded. Those from
countries where there was no political persecution, should also be turned
away.
Mr Rudolf Seiters, interior minister, welcomed the change, though it had
come 'late'. Leaders of the main coalition parties, the Christian Democrats
and Christian Social Union, demanded an immediate start to talks on
constitutional change.
The SPD also renounced its opposition to the use of German forces in
international military actions under the UN flag. Mr Engholm called for UN
reform, so it as a whole, not just 'three or four states', took
responsibility for policing world peace. That could be achieved in a few
years. Meanwhile, the party was ready to 'decide on' German military
participation in the case of 'unforeseen conflicts'.
The decision on use of the military is partly a response to divisions within
the SPD over the conflict in the former Yugoslavia. The constitution is
vague on the use of German forces, but has been interpreted by all parties
as banning deployment outside the Nato area. But the government has pressed
for a more liberal interpretation to allow an enlarged Germany to fulfil its
international obligations.
Mr Klaus Kinkel, foreign minister, said he had already drafted an amendment
to clarify the constitutional issue, which also laid down conditions for
out-of-area involvement. These included deployment only of volunteers, under
UN command and only after an examination of each case by the Bundestag.
Several hundred right-wingers attacked a hostel for foreign refugees in the
east German port city of Rostock yesterday and fought police for the second
night in a row, Reuter reports from Rostock.
