FT  13 FEB 92 / Brussels wants cash for action outside EC
'IF PEACE breaks out in Yugoslavia, or if the Middle East negotiations
succeed, the European Community will be called on to contribute massively to
reconstruction in those regions', says a senior Community budget official.
'But we have no idea when this might be.'
The official was illustrating the peculiar budgetary problem for the EC in
trying to foresee the unforeseeable five years ahead. Unlike governments
which can fine-tune their national budgets year by year, the Community tries
to lock itself into five-year plans, the second of which was proposed by the
Commission yesterday.
These five-year plans are not set in concrete. The EC's 'financial
perspectives' for 1988-92 has so far been revised five times through a
cumbersome and time-consuming procedure. But all these revisions were
prompted by foreign policy demands on the Community, arising from the Gulf
war, Kurdish refugees' plight, changes in eastern Europe and the former
Soviet Union.
These demands have led the Commission to propose:
Creation of a separate major budget category for EC external action. Up to
now cash for this has been lumped in with money for a host of internal
Community policies. The result has often been that the Commission has had to
trade off a request for, say, technical aid to Russia with the European
Parliament's demands for more money for EC transport.
A near-doubling of money for EC external action from Ecu3.6bn (Pounds
2.56bn) this year to Ecu6.3bn (Pounds 4.49bn) in 1997.
A new reserve, which will rise to Ecu900m by 1997, to make provision for
possible default by dubious borrowers like ex-Soviet republics and for
unforeseen foreign crises.
The Community is steadily building financial expectations on the part of its
eastern neighbours. Its so-called Phare programme for central Europe, the
Balkan and Baltic states is mainly project aid and does not carry long term
commitments.
Equally, Brussels has carefully avoided including specific financial
protocols in its recent association accords with Poland, Czechoslovakia and
Hungary.
But these agreements promise the central Europeans 'decisive support' in
their moves to market economies. In addition, the Commission assumes that
the combined needs of the 12 former Soviet republics will be greater than
those of the old Soviet Union, because they will all be self-destructively
pursuing their separate economic policies.
