FT  03 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Petrocon bid 'undervalues Wilkes potential'
MR ARTHUR Watt, chairman of James Wilkes, the engineering group which is
fighting a bid from Petrocon, yesterday claimed the company's worst problems
were behind it after the recent departure of its 'spendthrift' chairman. He
called on shareholders to reject the all-paper offer.
He said the bid was opportunist and took advantage of the lack of support
for Mr Stephen Hinchliffe, the former chairman who resigned after Petrocon
launched its bid. The bid, now worth Pounds 32m, was launched on the back of
overvalued Petrocon shares and would grossly undervalue Wilkes' potential
and the strength of its core engineering companies, Mr Watt said.
Under Mr Hinchliffe's buccaneering leadership Wilkes' central costs grew
almost as quickly as the company's debt. The head office operation in a
stately house outside Sheffield included a helicopter company.
Mr Watt said that after disposal of non-core businesses, including the
helicopter company and a promotional products division which is one of the
world's largest maker of beer mats, debt could be brought down from an
'excessive' Pounds 27m to nearer Pounds 10m for gearing of about 60 per
cent.
Mr Watt now plans to try to convince institutions that he is better
qualified than Mr Colin Robinson, Petrocon's chairman, to head a
slimmed-down Wilkes and give shareholders their first decent return on their
investment.
As Wilkes posted its defence document, Petrocon continued to question
whether Mr Watt was suitable to lead Wilkes given his association with Mr
Hinchliffe and various aspects of his business career.
Petrocon advisers pointed out that Mr Watt was a director of a Scottish
company, Computer Services (Scotland). He resigned one month before it went
into receivership leaving unsecured creditors with a deficit of Pounds
400,000.
Mr Robinson also refuted Wilkes' claim that there were no commercial
benefits. After Petrocon buys Beverley, a company making fluid pumps valves
and pipe fittings, which is controlled by Mr Robinson, there would synergy
with Wilkes' core businesses.
