FT  14 MAR 92 / Schools, the debate rages: Andrew Adonis summarises reaction
to last week's FT-500 survey
'I WELCOME your survey', wrote Peter Wilkes, headmaster of Cheltenham
College, 'as it highlights many areas which parents should properly
investigate.' That was the general response to last week's FT-500 survey of
independent schools. It came with a flurry of letters debating our
conclusions and methodology - and suggesting improvements for next time.
There were also a number of slips, a few caused by us but most by errors -
or confusion - in completing our questionnaire. Those brought to our
attention are noted below: they and others will be incorporated in the
booklet of the survey to be published in due course.
The issue of co-education attracted the widest response. We used - and
should have explained clearly - two different criteria. The main table,
intended as a general guide to parents, classified schools as co-ed if they
admitted both sexes at all levels, regardless of the proportions. But the
summary table of the top 10 co-educational schools, on page two of our
supplement, applied a more exacting test: schools were eligible for
inclusion only where more than a quarter of their pupils were boys and more
than a quarter girls. Most schools without that mix have the minority sex -
almost invariably girls - in their sixth forms only, and we did not consider
that an institution with only a few of the minority sex in the lower school
was fully co-ed.
Tony Evans, head of Portsmouth Grammar School - which was ranked correctly
as 61st in the main table, not sixth as stated in one article  - argues that
such an approach 'does not take into account the different stages which
schools have reached in co-education: some are completely co-ed; others are
in the process of becoming so.' Moreover, 'it fails to take account of the
highly selective nature, and the monopoly enjoyed by many, if not all, of
those schools which you cite as illustrating the merits of single-sex
schools.'
This, no doubt, is true. A corollary is that some schools, at least, have
gone co-ed because of difficulties in recruiting and/or maintaining
standards while single-sex. The survey offers strong prima facie evidence
for such a view. However, it does not affect our conclusion: that a
disproportionate share of the best schools, academically, are single-sex. It
does not, of course, follow that a system of single-sex education is
inherently better.
The wide variation in fees, and the weakness of evident links between fees
and performance, struck many readers. One was anxious to stress that fees of
up to Pounds 11,000 a year in the public boarding schools represented only
the 'headline cost.' With two sons at a boarding school and a daughter at a
day school, his fees totalled Pounds 8,495 a term. Yet, with school trips,
sports equipment, societies, and other extras charged by the schools, the
bill rose to Pounds 9,575 a term - another Pounds 3,240 a year.
Inevitably, our criteria for the rank-ordering attracted criticism. It gave
equal weight to the average A-level performance per pupil, and the average
performance per entry. Some readers objected to our use of the first
measure, others to the second. David May, of St Paul's School, London,
wanted AS levels to be included and questioned whether the breadth of a
curriculum could be related to the number of A-levels taken. 'This may well
be true (or it may not be), but there is no way of judging the issue from
the mere statistics,' he wrote.
The inclusion of general studies in the calculation of A-level scores was
questioned. This was partly because some heads believe GS is of a lower
standard and could be used to push up the scores of weaker schools, but also
because its inclusion was thought to be unfair to schools with broad but
unexamined curriculum-enrichment programmes. 'It places quantity above
quality,' says Averil Burgess, of South Hampstead High School, London.
We did compile a ranking which excluded general studies, but concluded from
a comparison of the two ranks that there was no convincing evidence that the
inclusion of general studies was systematically distorting. Some schools
with many good grades in general studies gained an advantage, but they
tended to be the better schools for other subjects. Others, where pupils
tended to fail or gain low grades in general studies, lost position. But
consistently poor performance in this exam could well reflect on the
standard of all-round education in these sixth forms. In future, we could
consider publishing both ranks.
The issue of 'value added' was discussed widely. All respondents agreed that
the range of information offered - plus the profiles and articles elsewhere
in the supplement - gave it a higher prominence than in previous surveys.
But some still thought us too wedded to 'raw' A-level results. James Miller,
headmaster of Framlingham College, Suffolk, described ranking by A-level
scores as 'analogous in commercial terms to saying that dividend yield is
the best measure of the quality of management in a company.' He wanted a
comparison of A-level scores with GCSE results. On this basis, he claimed,
Framlingham came fourth, not 22nd, in a study of 24 schools by the
Headmasters' Conference.
He, at any rate, still favoured ranking by exam results. Others deplored
even that, emphasising the equal - or greater - importance of the
extra-curricular side. That, however, did not cut much ice with Cheltenham's
Peter Wilkes. He stressed the importance of a school's 'mood' and
facilities, but added: 'I have always found the tendency of headmasters to
boast and glorify their schools' achievements very distasteful. John
Cleese's parody of this tendency in Clockwise has, sadly, not had much
effect upon us. I hope that most of today's parents look beyond the booming
bluster.'
The absence of a commentary on the Scottish results attracted criticism and
is something we will rectify in any future survey. Mrs DA Gardner,
headmistress of Wellington School, Ayr, claimed it was 'spurious' to give
average Highers' scores per pupil without any indication of the number of
Highers achieved. But the headmaster of Merchiston Castle School, Edinburgh,
believed it might be useful to divide the Scottish section in two, between
those schools following a broadly 'English' curriculum based on A-levels and
those concentrating on Highers.
We have recalculated our table incorporating new information supplied to us,
but the changed places given below should be regarded as provisional only
since revisions are still being sent to us.
ERRATA
It is Bryanston (not Brynston) and Cheadle Hulme (not Hume). St Anne's,
Windermere, is in Cumbria, not Lancashire. Winchester does not have a co-ed
sixth form, just the daughters of four members of staff there. The Queen's
School, Chester, is for girls, not boys as listed in one table. 'There are
those at The King's School, Chester, who would love this to happen: don't
give them ideas]' wrote the headmistress.
Errors in the hand collation of summary tables led to the omission of three
schools from the 'top 10' tables for co-educational and boarding schools. We
apologise to Stockport Grammar, which should have come top of the co-ed
table; to The King's School, Canterbury, which should have come third; and
to Charterhouse, which, on our present information, should have ranked 10th
in the boarding table. Revised tables will be reprinted when we have
completed the checking and recalculation of new data.
Badminton (not Badmington) had 34, not 46, A-level candidates last year.
This gives it a Universities Central Council for Admissions points score per
pupil of 20.06, and per entry of 6.69. Accordingly, it rises from 211th to
118th place. (UCCA scores grade A=10, B=8, C=6,D=4, E=2).
Epsom College, Surrey, overstated its number of A-level candidates at 155.
The corrected figure of 135 takes its UCCA score per candidate up to 20.90,
and per entry to 6.92. It rises from 141st to 83rd.
Forest School, London, has a revised pupil:teacher ratio of 11.2:1, and an
average of 3.4 passes per pupil. Its revised UCCA score per pupil is 22.58,
and per entry 6.28, taking it to 96th position.
Notting Hill and Ealing High, London, had a score per pupil of 19.97, and
per entry of 6.94, giving it 98th place.
Sevenoaks School, Kent, was not ranked because a third of its pupils take
the International Baccalaureate instead of A-levels. Using an agreed formula
for converting IB scores, it had an UCCA score per pupil of 20.75, and per
entry of 6.77. It takes 95th place.
Solihull School, West Midlands, which completed a form after publication,
has a score per pupil of 24.52, and per entry of 6.18, giving it 72nd place.
The Perse School, Cambridge, which advised us that it achieved one extra
grade A and one more grade B pass than declared on its form, gets a revised
score of 24.63 per pupil and 7.88 per entry, pushing it up from 23rd to
19th.
St Bede's College, Manchester, had 947, not 347, pupils, giving it 61 per
cent boys and a pupil:teacher ratio of 13.5:1.
The fees at Laxton, Northants, are Pounds 4,200 a year, not Pounds 11,790.
At Whitgift, Surrey, they are Pounds 4,400 per year, not per term.
At Francis Holland, London, 80 per cent-plus (not 54) go on to higher
education, and a similar proportion do so at St Helen and St Katherine's,
Abingdon, and Belmont House, Glasgow.
And, yes, the FT's proof-readers have done 300 lines on each of: Surrey,
boarders, Channel Islands, Guernsey and Shropshire. 'Borders and full
borders are worthy of Daisy Ashford or Richmal Crompton,' wrote Geoffrey
Elliott from Bermuda. 'But perhaps that's all you get nowadays for several
thousand pounds a year in fees.'
