FT  14 OCT 92 / London Stock Exchange: Abbey loan rate cut boosts market
A UK EQUITY market still suffering from lack of turnover and enthusiasm
burst into life in mid-afternoon following an unexpected mortgage rate cut
by Abbey National, a sharp rise on Wall Street and speculation that a
takeover involving a Footsie stock could be imminent. This combination drove
the Footsie up 27.5 to 2,584.7.
Markets were additionally helped by another good showing by sterling in the
foreign exchange markets, notably against the dollar but also against the
D-mark. The strength of the pound gave a strong boost to the gilt-edged
market where long dated stocks rose around a point.
Share prices started brightly with marketmakers hoisting prices in response
to a good overnight performance by Wall Street.
The Footsie 100 opened with a 10 point gain at 2,567.2, but this was eroded
in mid-morning by a sell programme, estimated to have been worth some Pounds
45m and executed by one of the more aggressive of the UK integrated
securities houses. The effects of the programme, which featured big blocks
of Cable &amp; Wireless, BT, British Gas, Marks &amp; Spencer and Guinness, lingered
for much of the session but the immediate result was to pull the Footsie 100
back to the day's low point of 2,549.5, or down 7.7 just before lunch.
Very little genuine business was transacted until the Abbey National news
came into the market. The effect was immediate and dramatic, with the
Footsie future jumping 40 points and driving the cash market sharply better.
The Footsie 100 galloped ahead and peaked at 2,587.7 just ahead of the
official close, with stories of a Footsie bid gaining an ever-growing
audience.
The bid stories encompassed a wide spectrum but were sharply focused on the
banking arena. TSB, where takeover stories have rumbled on since the group's
problems with its Hill Samuel merchant banking subsidiary and its ill-fated
acquisition of the Target Life became public, was one of the potential bid
targets. Standard Chartered and Royal Bank of Scotland also came into the
picture, although dealers remained highly sceptical of any early moves in
the banks, highlighting the relative low levels of activity in all the
so-called takeover candidates.
Other Footsie names regarded as vulnerable included Fisons, the chemicals
group, and Asda, the food retailer. Actual takeover news lifted shares in
fund management group Henderson Administration, involved in merger talks
with Touche Remnant.
Utilities were unsettled by the report issued by the electricity industry
watchdog, Offer. The report triggered big selling of the power generators
and undermined sentiment in the regional electricity companies. Other weak
performers in the Footsie included BICC, the heavy electrical and cables
group which suffered from a Cazenove sell recommendation, and Forte, the
hotels group, which weakened after a less than enthusiastic recommendation
from Warburg Securities.
Equity turnover picked up well during the late afternoon but remained
unsatisfactory at 470.5m shares. Monday's 305m-share turnover resulted in a
meagre Pounds 625m-worth of customer business.
