FT  03 JUN 92 / Rolls-Royce enters the power league: Paul Betts looks at the
partnership with Westinghouse to challenge General Electric
ROLLS-ROYCE has decided to play with the big boys in the fiercely
competitive industrial power generation market by agreeing to form a 15-year
partnership with Westinghouse of the US.
'The arrangement with Westinghouse takes us into the world market,' Mr Terry
Harrison, head of Rolls-Royce's industrial power activities, said yesterday.
He becomes the company's chief executive at the end of September.
The deal - which will also link Rolls-Royce to Westinghouse partners such as
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries of Japan and FiatAvio of Italy - will again
pitch the UK group against General Electric, its American arch-rival in the
aero-engine business and the power generation world market leader.
For Westinghouse - whose traditional role as the industry's number two after
GE has been eroded with the decline of nuclear power programmes - the
alliance will strengthen its hand in its leadership battle with GE.
Westinghouse's power business had total sales of Dollars 2.6bn (Pounds
1.44bn) last year and made an operating profit of Dollars 283m.
Surplus capacity and the gradual breakdown of protected national power plant
markets has accelerated consolidation and cross-border partnerships in the
power generation industry.
Power plant manufacturers have faced a fundamental choice in order to
survive: they can either opt to collaborate in large technologically
powerful alliances operating over the full range of power generation
products; or they can become smaller 'niche' players specialising in a
particular market sector.
'We've clearly gone for the broad alliance,' said Mr Harrison, the former
chief executive of Northern Engineering Industries (NEI), the UK power
equipment supplier acquired three years ago by Rolls-Royce.
Even before its acquisition, NEI was looking for partners. It forged an
alliance initially with Mitsubishi. This collapsed after the Rolls-Royce
merger because the aero-engine maker had a separate agreement with the
Swedish-Swiss Asea Brown Boveri group. After the merger, NEI and ABB formed
a joint venture to sell power plants in the UK.
Originally Rolls-Royce decided to acquire NEI in order to increase its
presence in the industrial power business and help broaden its industrial
base. It is far more heavily dependent on the aero-engine sector than its
two main US competitors, GE and Pratt &amp; Whitney, both of which are part of
much larger diversified groups.
The strategy helped Rolls-Royce ride through the current cyclical slump in
the commercial aero-engine market and the decline in military aero-engine
activity. Industrial power accounted for 42 per cent of the company's Pounds
3.5bn sales last year and made a pre-tax profit of Pounds 73m compared with
a Pounds 6m loss by the aerospace division.
But to make headway in the world market and increase the industrial power
group's share of turnover to 50 per cent, Rolls-Royce decided it needed to
forge a partnership.
GE already has a wide range of partners, from GEC/Alsthom in Europe to
Toshiba and Hitachi in Japan. Siemens of Germany has links with Pratt &amp;
Whitney, while ABB acquired the US boiler maker Combustion Engineering and
the power generation interests of Ansaldo and Franco Tosi of Italy.
Westinghouse has formed a trilateral alliance with Mitsubishi and FiatAvio
but was looking for a technological partner to provide it with the
aero-engine technology it lacked compared with GE, which has its own
extensive aero-engine activities.
'The attraction of Rolls-Royce for Westinghouse was our aero-engine
technology while they offered us an opportunity to get into the
international marketplace,' Mr Harrison said.
The power industry expects most of the near-term growth in the market to
come from natural gas-fired combustion turbine or combined cycle plants.
This has brought aero-engine and industrial power plant manufacturers closer
because gas turbines for power generation are derived from aircraft engine
technology.
The availability of much cheaper natural gas, the greater thermal efficiency
of combined cycle plants, their environmental advantages, their lower and
much faster installation costs have significantly boosted demand for gas
turbines in electricity generation, Mr Harrison explained. 'The hotter you
run a gas turbine, the more efficient it is. And you need aero-technology to
do that,' he said.
Westinghouse and Rolls-Royce started working together last year when they
jointly bid for a US government contract to develop a new gas turbine engine
for the US Navy. After winning the Dollars 160m contract in January, the two
companies decided to expand their relationship into a much broader
technology transfer and marketing alliance.
'One thing led to the other,' said Mr Harrison, who also expects to see the
partnership offer Rolls-Royce additional opportunities to co-operate with
Westinghouse in related sectors like coal gasification.
The arrangement, he emphasised, would not affect NEI's existing venture with
ABB, which was restricted to the UK market, while the Westinghouse deal
covered all other world markets. Mr Harrison also said the new partnership
would not have any impact on Rolls-Royce's venture with Cooper Industries of
the US in pumping machinery for the oil and gas industry and offshore power
generation.
Mr Harrison conceded it would take some time before the Westinghouse
agreement would reap tangible results. 'There are no miracles in the heavy
engineering business but the arrangement will have very significant payoffs
for all the partners in due course,' he said.
It has, however, already had one immediate effect. It has enabled the
combined forces of Westinghouse and Rolls-Royce to throw down the gauntlet
to their common enemy GE.
