FT  06 OCT 92 / International Company News: SAS may rejoin bidding for
Continental
SAS, the European airline which has already written off a Dollars 106m
investment in the US's Continental Airlines, is considering rejoining the
current bidding for the bankrupt US carrier.
Yesterday afternoon, a press release issued in the US said that SAS had
joined the attempt by Houston Air, a Texas-based company owned by Mr Alfredo
Brener, to acquire a majority stake in Continental. This proposal, announced
in August, was one of five offers made to Continental over the past four
months.
Two other carriers - Northwest Airlines, the US airline, and Mexicana
Airlines, in which Mr Brener's family owns a sizeable stake - were said to
be participating in the revised bid, 'in an advisory capacity'. The release
said neither of these carriers would contribute any capital to the offer,
but made no such statement was made about SAS's role.
However, five minutes into a telephone press conference, Mr Jon Kutler from
Wasserstein Perella, the investment bank advising Houston Air, broke off to
take an external telephone call. He immediately halted the conference.
No explanation for the hiatus was forthcoming, but various parties suggested
that SAS had been acutely embarrassed by the release. The company acquired
18 per cent of Continental's voting rights in 1990, shortly before the
airline went into bankruptcy, and - despite writing off its investment -
still holds three board seats. The Continental board met yesterday in New
York, and Mr Jan Carlzon, the company's chief executive, was present.
Since company directors have fiduciary duty to all shareholders, SAS
representatives face a potential conflict of interest if the European
airline joins a bid for Continental. Nevertheless, in Stockholm SAS
maintained that there were no plans for its representatives to resign from
the Continental board, and that these directors had not been present at all
of the competing bidders' presentations.
SAS confirmed that it was talking to the Brener group. It declined to
comment on whether it would commit new funds to Continental.
