FT  09 MAY 92 / Keep out, this is western Europe: As refugees flock to
richer countries from more troubled areas, David Marsh observes the backlash
ALONG THE Austrian-Hungarian border, winding through the fertile Burgenland
region south of Vienna, the gaunt steel watchtowers on the eastern side are
deserted, relics of the Cold War. On Austrian soil, new look-out platforms
have sprung up, manned by army conscripts in sheepskin coats. They are
watching not for the march of communism, but for travellers from Turkey,
Romania, Sri Lanka or Bangladesh seeking illegal entry. The Iron Curtain has
been dismantled. But as the west attracts a growing stream of fugitives from
troubled parts of the world, immigration has become the focus of Europe's
fears.
In the gentle hills of the Burgenland, an immigrant's first encounter is
often with a man in uniform. 'They can cause disquiet among the population,'
says Gerhard Wild, a burly official at police headquarters in Eisenstadt,
the main town in the region. Some steal local bicycles, he says. 'Most are
economic refugees,' adds Karl Barilich, a young Austrian gendarme on patrol
in his van. Captured border-crossers are taken to an impromptu reception
centre in bleak rooms at a disused sugar refinery. They are questioned,
photographed and given medical checks. After a few hours, those without a
prima facie case for political asylum are sent back to Hungary. 'Normally,
they are exhausted - they just want to sleep,' says Barilich. Before going,
they can take their pick from second-hand clothes donated by local
residents.
The fugitives are disaffected survivors of the revolutions and disruption
which have swept through eastern Europe and the Third World. Instead of
succour, they meet bile. Immigrants put pressure on jobs, housing and social
security. The prosperous half of the continent is experiencing economic
slowdown and a sharp swing to xenophobic far right-wing parties - seen in
elections in France, Germany and Italy during the past few weeks. In the
ugliest of ironies, the newcomers find themselves blamed for political
turmoil in places they regarded as the promised land.
From all sides they come; and, on all sides, they are unwanted. Spain's
Guardia Civil stands ready to repel immigrants from north Africa. The French
gendarmerie are on patrol in Marseilles, while German border guards scan the
wetlands of the River Oder for illicit arrivals from Poland. Most fugitives
seek political asylum - even though their chances of acceptance are small.
In western Europe 540,000 asylum-seekers were registered in 1991 - nearly
twice the 1989 figure and more than three times 1987's. Germany alone
attracted a record 256,000 asylum-seekers last year. Total immigration into
western Europe topped 1m (including 220,000 ethnic Germans from eastern
Europe and the former Soviet Union who went to Germany and get automatic
citizenship rights there). The flows have crossed to Britain too. The Home
Office recorded 44,000 asylum applications in 1991. A lorryload of illegal
Indian immigrants hit the headlines in March after being apprehended by
police on a motorway.
Austria is the traditional gateway between east and west. But on the border,
hopes of a new life can turn sour quickly. Last year, the Austrian police
and army caught 12,000 illegal immigrants from Asia, Africa and eastern
Europe. Many are taken to Hungary by unscrupulous international couriers and
unloaded from buses and vans within walking distance of Austrian territory.
Then, they are on their own.
In Austria, as across the whole of Europe, the strains are coming to the
surface. Last year, 27,000 people applied for asylum - more per capita than
in Germany, An additional 13,000 fugitives from the civil war in Yugoslavia
 -most from Croatia - were given temporary refuge in Austrian homes, hostels
and church buildings. Anti-foreigner sentiment helped Austria's
nationalistic Freedom Party to a sharp surge in council elections last
November. Jorg Haider, the party's demagogic leader, used the slogan 'Vienna
for the Viennese,' in his November campaign.
General elections in Switzerland and Belgium last year produced a marked
far-right shift. Jean-Marie Le Pen's Front National (FN) in France attained
13.9 per cent of the vote in regional elections in France in March. And in
Germany on April 5, the ultra-right German People's Union and Republicans
parties swept into state parliaments in Schleswig-Holstein in the north and
Baden-Wurttemberg in the south. Christian Kas, the Republicans' leader in
Baden-Wurttemberg, accuses the country's established politicians of
showering largesse on asylum-seekers while plunging east Germans into
poverty.
Ballot-box support for such parties parallels an increase in
racially-motivated violence. Even peaceful Sweden has seen an increase in
apparently motiveless attacks on foreigners.
In Germany, where racial attacks have become almost routine since the
autumn, the number of immigrants camping out in Munich has prompted fears
that the city's traditional autumn beer festival could be cancelled. An
Interior Ministry official in Bonn says: 'The asylum problem, linked to
worries about law and order, is the number one question. It's only a matter
of time before this blows up.'
Tension is certainly in the air at a sprawling camp for displaced foreigners
in the town of Traiskirchen, near Vienna. Since 1956, the former Austrian
military academy has been a transit centre. Around 300 asylum-seekers live
there. They stay for a few days to complete formalities before being
allotted more permanent quarters in guesthouses and hostels around the
country.
Under recently-toughened laws, asylum-seekers who arrive in Austria from
'safe' countries can be expelled summarily. Some immigrants throw away their
identification papers to hinder the authorities. Faced with such awkward
charges, the camp staff are not overly sympathetic. 'The niggers are this
way,' said a young administrator, bustling through the building towards a
group of Sudanese men cutting each other's hair in the corridor. In an
attempt at heavy irony, directed at the administrator, one man grins: 'The
Austrians are not racists. Oh no, they are not Nazis.'
The atmosphere 600 miles away, in the south of France, is only a little less
chilly. Frejus, an undistinguished, sun-specked town of 40,000 between Nice
and Toulon on the Riviera, is home to 4,000 foreigners, most from North
Africa. Some are new arrivals but most have lived there for years, normally
in relative harmony with the locals.
In January, however, police swooped on a shanty town near the railway
station housing immigrant workers. They arrested 12 people on arms or drugs
charges and 18 for holding invalid identity documents. Municipal employees
then pulled down some of the shacks. The Front National claimed the
ramshackle village was not only a centre for drugs dealing but also an
illegal source of cheap labour for construction companies, undercutting
normal pay rates.
On the outskirts of the town is the Agachon housing estate which the local
FN labels a 'ghetto.' It is, a fairly basic, low-rise housing complex,
renovated and whitewashed in the best Mediterranean style. Many
second-generation immigrants living here have parents who came to France
from the Magreb during the 1960s' boom. Marcel, a young mixed-race resident,
tells me that one of his parents came from Africa but he has French
nationality. He praises behaviour on the housing estate compared with others
in the town.
Fifty miles westwards, in the port of Toulon, Jean-Marie Le Chevallier, a
bespectacled European parliament deputy for the FN, who propelled the party
to 29 per cent of the vote in the town in the March elections, tells a
different story. Over lunch in his dusty house, he holds forth on the
Front's repatriation policies. What, I inquire, would he do with Marcel?
'Ask him: 'Does he love France?'' replies Le Chevallier, between mouthfuls
of lamb and red wine. The implication is that, if Marcel does not, he would
be deported. Le Chevallier adds: 'It is less costly to spend billions to
return them to Algeria and Tunisia than to have a civil war.'
He claims that immigrants in France were, simultaneously, taking jobs away
from the French and sponging on social security. 'You earn more for doing
nothing here than by working in a developing country.'
As the chief destination of European immigration, Germany is at the eye of
the storm. The town of Unna-Massen, an hour's drive from Dusseldorf in the
prosperous state of North Rhine-Westphalia, is host to one of the country's
best known refugee transit centres. Opened in 1951 for German refugees
expelled from Poland, last year it was temporary home to 60,000 ethnic
Germans from the former Soviet Union and eastern Europe.
Jurgen Kraska, the camp's deputy head, thinks numbers will increase this
year because of 'uncertainties' in the Soviet republics. He said that more
Soviet Jews - given special status in Germany - are turning up at the camp,
reporting anti-Semitic attacks around Moscow and St Petersburg.
Among the roughly 2,500 inmates is Erika Ems, a wizened lady from
Kazakhstan. She is glad to be here. 'It is like the difference between day
and night,' she croaks. Peter Potempa, an engineer who says he left Poland
because 'nothing has changed' after the end of communism, is looking forward
to getting a job in Germany. Potempa, however, speaks only Polish - and, in
western Germany, jobs are growing scarcer.
To cope with growing public irritation about unkempt refugees clogging
Dusseldorf, the North Rhine-Westphalian government is trying revolutionary
methods to try to stem the exodus from south-east Europe. It has allocated
around DM20m (Pounds 6.80m) for a programme of house-building and job
creation in the Macedonian town of Skopje, and repatriated itinerant
Macedonians who were camped in tents on Dusseldorf's Rhine banks. Albert
Harms, the enterprising government official who negotiated the arrangement,
says the deal could save money by pruning state government spending on
social security for asylum-seekers.
Schemes like this offer a constructive way of easing migration pressures. In
general, however, governments throughout Europe are tired of putting up
funds, and are talking of putting up barriers instead. As the havens grow
less secure and more unwelcoming, the tide of those seeking to come ashore
shows no sign of ebbing.
