FT  17 OCT 92 / Suddenly, it's the S-word: Dominic Lawson wonders if there
hasn't been some economic over-reaction
THIS YEAR'S US presidential election is notable for what has not been said,
rather than what has passed the lips, read or otherwise, of the candidates.
In particular, no one, so far as I am aware, has asked of any of the
contenders: 'Will it be safe if his finger is on the button?'
As older readers than I will remember, it was that question which ditched
Barry Goldwater's presidential campaign back in 1964. Voters had a genuine
fear of being blown to smithereens, or something even messier, in a nuclear
holocaust. But no one even talks about fingers on nuclear buttons these
days. The greatest of all our fears has ended with the cold war.
And yet, human nature being what it is, we are no happier, no more relaxed.
Indeed, recent polls of American opinion, for what such polls are worth,
suggest that peace between the superpowers has not increased one iota the
happiness of those formerly in the firing line.
What seems to happen, in fact, is that we experience a roughly constant
level of panic and stress which we attribute not to our own neuroses but to
whatever external factor seems to be the most distressing to us. In the
cossetted west, this leads us into an absurd misuse of language.
You may recall the newspapers and television programmes at the time of Black
Wednesday. Even the non-tabloid papers used words such as 'catastrophe ' and
'disaster' and 'nightmare.'
Normally sober-suited men from the Bank of England described the occasion as
the 'national day of humiliation.'
Yet, all that had happened was that the pound had been forced to find its
own level against the D-mark - not by any means an unprecedented, or
unfamiliar, or even damaging state of affairs.
At about that time, I took out to lunch someone who had recently spent a
number of years in eastern Europe. She could not understand the angst of the
British press, expressed in such hysterical form.
'If you use words like these to describe what has happened on the foreign
exchange market, what words will be left for you to employ when you
experience a real disaster?' she asked.
'In Poland, we have just endured a 40 per cent drop in industrial output.
What word would an Englishman use to describe that, if it happened here?'
Now, following the announcement of 30,000 redundancies in the coalfields,
the commentators are wheeling out the S-word. What will they say if we
really do enter a slump? Clearly, a new word will have to be invented.
For the time being, headline writers talk of 'male unemployment reaching
levels not seen since 1930s.' Yes; but, as in all things, it is proportions
that count.
Male unemployment is now about 10 per cent of the workforce. In 1932, the
figure was 23 per cent. In the past 20 years, the British labour force has
grown by 3.2m. Ninety per cent of those new jobs went to women. The
two-income family, almost unknown in the 1930s, is now a commonplace, with
all the added security that it brings.
There is, however, an awful danger that the hysterically gloomy
prognostications of the pundits will bring about precisely the dire state of
affairs which they fantasise about. If people believe what they read in the
newspapers, or are influenced subliminally by them, then certain things
inevitably will follow.
Items of domestic spending, which could be afforded easily, will be
postponed. Businessmen thinking of taking on new staff will, instead, start
to wonder if they shouldn't actually be laying off workers.
One of the less attractive aspects of a market economy is the stampede
factor. When one businessman moos and runs for cover, others lower their
horns and head for the same hills. To mix the metaphor still further, we can
observe that there are rather too many people about who enjoy shouting
'Fire' in a crowded theatre.
Such people often forget a minor detail: that they are as likely as anyone
else to get crushed in the ensuing rush for the sign marked Exit. Unlike the
man with his finger on that old-fashioned nuclear button: he, at least, had
his own personal bunker.
Dominic Lawson is editor of The Spectator
