FT  26 OCT 92 / Havel undaunted by failure of federalism: The former
president's plans for a comeback
ONLY the 0001 licence plate on the BMW occasionally parked in front of the
decrepit three-floor house in Prague betrays any sign of the importance of
its resident.
Back in his modest home since he resigned as federal president in July, Mr
Vaclav Havel has not lost sight of the presidential castle. In recent weeks,
he has been staging his political comeback as the future president of an
independent Czech republic. The last champion of the Czechoslovak
federation, forced by Slovak nationalist aspirations to abandon his dream of
a united and prosperous country, does not admit failure.
'We must come to terms with the fact that things don't always come out the
way we would want them to. I have experienced many such failures and defeats
and shall experience them again, but it will not prevent me from striving
again and again for certain values' he said in an interview with the
Financial Times.
After two years of struggling with the divisions ripping his country apart,
Mr Havel is hoping to return to his role of consensus builder - this time
within the Czech lands.
As the only presidential candidate endorsed by all Czech political parties,
Mr Havel is offering himself as a mediator to mend growing differences over
the future shape of the 10m-strong Czech nation.
Unlike Slovak parliamentarians who promptly declared their republic's
sovereignty after last June's elections and adopted a local constitution,
Czech politicians have been deadlocked over the creation of their state.
Constitutional negotiations have been bogged down particularly by the
demands of opposition parties for a three-pronged administration in which
the northern and eastern regions of Silesia and Moravia would enjoy an
autonomous status. Such fragmentation is rejected by the ruling coalition
parties, led by the Civic Democratic Party of Mr Vaclav Klaus, which favours
a structure decentralised among a greater number of regions.
Unless consensus is reached, the Czech nation could find itself without the
constitutional framework needed to assume its independence which, following
the post-electoral negotiations between Mr Klaus and Mr Vladimir Meciar, his
Slovak counterpart, is scheduled for January 1, 1993.
Mr Havel's power will continue to rest on the will of Czech parliamentarians
who are yet to decide whether he will be elected directly, as he wishes, or
with a parliamentary vote, as the ruling parties advocate. The presidential
election could then take place next spring. Czech deputies will also decide
on the presidential powers, which could be limited if Mr Klaus's views
predominate.
Mr Havel speaks admiringly of President Richard von Weizsacker of Germany
but says he does not wish to hold only a titular role in Czech politics.
Yet critics say that the former playwright cannot have it both ways. The
reluctance of Mr Havel to step into the world of practical politics and form
his own party-driven power base contradicts his political ambitions, they
say.
Faithful to his intellectual past, Mr Havel rejects pure pragmatism. 'People
need to hear something about the meaning of life; something about their
prospects; something more than money. . . shocked by sudden freedom though
not able yet to build their own civic society, they tend to be more or less
drawn towards authoritarian leaders. However, I see it as one of the many
stages of the complicated post-communist development.'
But he is closer today to practical politics than is indicated by his
earlier political philosophy, which attempted to marry morals and public
office. The virulent advocate of citizens' rights no longer even calls for a
referendum on his country's division.
'Alienation from high politics is something that can be observed to a
smaller or greater extent in all democracies. Here, it is sharpened by the
fact that our democracy is so young and inexperienced. But the Czech and
Slovak voters elected leaders with clear programmes and should not be
surprised once they implement them, even if it is difficult for them to come
to terms with the fact that Czechoslovakia will cease to exist within less
than 70 days.'
