FT  05 SEP 92 / Markets: Banks put their faith in apathy - Serious Money
SCENE: a bank manager's office. A customer enters and sits opposite the
manager and his assistant, who is taking notes. The customer begins to
speak.
'I'd like a new type of account, please.'
'Certainly, sir. What would you like?'
'An account where I give you lots of money and you hit me with a charge
every time I try to claim my money back. In return, I want you to pay me a
minimal rate of interest.'
'Minimal?' the assistant asks, incredulously.
'Yes' says the customer, with a superior smile. 'You spell that with two
Ms.'
'How much interest?' asks the manager.
'Oh, only 1 per cent.'
'Right away, sir.'
Surreptitiously, men in white coats have crept into the office and start to
carry the customer away.
'And I want to pay 30 per cent interest if I go into overdraft,' he shouts,
'You can't turn me down. I'm the Emperor Napoleon . . .'
                     *      *      *
That scene will doubtless be repeated in thousands of banks up and down the
country as customers embrace the prospect of paying charges on their
accounts - even when in credit.
Of course, it might not happen. The banks may have been indulging in the
time-honoured political tradition of kite-flying. If a minister plans a
potentially controversial change in policy, the tactic is to leak to a
newspaper that such a move is being 'considered.' If the story passes
without comment, it is safe to go ahead. But if armed gangs march on
Whitehall, the minister can drop the change with only a minimal loss of
face.
Plenty of angry words have been directed at the banks over the past few
days. Whether any of it will translate into action is another matter.
Britons are notoriously lethargic about changing their bank accounts -
something which the banks know only too well.
Indeed, you could argue that most customers are mad not to have moved their
accounts away from the Big Four already. The rates of interest available on
current accounts have dwindled to paltry levels and can be beaten easily
elsewhere (as David Barchard shows on the opposite page).
The problem is that changing accounts involves a lot of hassle. Every
standing order and every direct debit must be altered. Your employer must be
told to pay your salary into the new account. And if the whole process does
not go smoothly you can get into a dreadful mess, with angry unpaid
creditors, or an overdraft, or both.
But if you really want to avoid paying charges, and you do not want to
change your account, you might be able to avoid all the aggravation by
sending just one letter. Write to your local branch manager and tell him
that you will move your account if the bank imposes charges when you are in
credit.
Despite all the sound and fury of the past few days, this is not a moral
issue - just a financial one. Banks are there to make a profit; and if they
cannot earn money from business lending (because of bad debts), share
trading (because of low volumes) or mortgage lending (because of the state
of the housing market), it is only natural that they will seek to take their
profits from their account-holders.
That is the nature of capitalism. It is a strange nation that keeps
re-electing Conservative governments time after time, yet fails to
understand the profit principle.
So, the customer merely has to work the levers of the capitalist system. If
enough people threaten to withdraw their accounts, the banks will not risk
making the change - for the good reason that it will not be profitable.
Some would argue that the moral case against the banks is that they are
planning to introduce charges as a group. It is always possible to see plots
everywhere, but one suspects that the most important factor in this instance
is the fear of being first. As soon as one moves, the others will feel it is
safe to follow (just as others were quick to copy the first bank which paid
interest on current accounts). Is this a cartel or a form of what economists
call a 'perfectly competitive' market?
Take credit cards. Lloyds was the first to levy an annual charge;
eventually, the other Big Four clearers followed its example. But it is
still possible to own a card that does not charge a fee - most consumers are
too apathetic to make the effort of getting one, perhaps because most fees
are relatively small.
Indeed, the card issue is an appropriate precedent for the account-charging
issue. Initially, most people were slow in paying off their balances and,
thus, ended up paying the (fairly hefty) interest rates to the issuers.
Eventually, however, smart consumers realised they could get free credit by
paying off their balances in full every month.
As a result, the banks' profits fell and they started to argue that the
indebted customers were subsidising the early payers. Hence, the
introduction of the annual fee.
A cynic might see this as merely the Darwinian system of the capitalist
jungle in action - a never-ending battle between the predators (the
industry) and the prey (the customer), with each evolving strategies that
frustrate the other. Sadly, lethargy is no longer an option; the price of
free banking is eternal vigilance.
