FT  09 DEC 92 / Survey of Global Custody (13): Figuring out hidden fees -
Norma Cohen investigates how custodians generate revenue
CUSTODIANS do not enjoy talking about how they generate revenues and are
circumspect when asked to give details of fees charged. But it is clear that
to survive, global custodians must find ways of earning fees in addition to
those paid directly by clients.
Indeed, a recent study of the global custody business by management
consultants Booz Allen, concluded that 50 to 60 per cent of custodians'
revenues come from the fees they charge clients. An additional 20 to 30 per
cent come from net interest income on client balances and 10 to 20 per cent
from foreign exchange trading and other transactions.
How custodial banks are able to do this is worth examining, particularly by
UK and European clients who tend to rely on relationship banking and do not
shop around for the best deal like their US counterparts.
First, foreign exchange transactions offer many excellent opportunities for
banks to earn extra revenue. For example, a US pension fund as a customer
wishing to purchase securities on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange has to
transmit cash through its global custodian to a sub-custodian who then
purchases D-Marks. Some custodians, such as Barclays, execute all foreign
exchange orders through their own dealing systems, although Barclays says it
always seeks the best dealing rate. Still, the bank will earn a turn on the
dealing spread between the bid and the offered rate, helping to cut its
overall costs.
In minor currencies, particularly those in emerging markets, obtaining
interest on foreign currency accounts can cause problems and only the most
insistent clients are likely to get the best rates. Mr Jeremy Paulson-Ellis,
chairman of Genesis Fund Management which specialises in emerging markets,
says his agreements with custodians allow him to deal away from them when
the rates are not the best on offer.
While awaiting settlement, the cash will sit in an account. If the client is
not careful, interest may not accrue or it may not accrue at a commercial
rate. The custodian bank, however, may earn a turn by putting that cash into
the money markets unless the client agreement specifically offers cash on
all balances.
Finally, there is what is known as 'fail float'. This occurs when bargains
are struck but for one reason or another, the stock is not delivered and the
cash is not paid. According to an executive at one leading US global
custodian, most clients pay funds from the official settlement date, not the
actual. In particularly inefficient markets, banks may have free use of
client funds for days, even weeks, and the client earns no return.
Indeed, says Mr Richard Foster, a partner in Booz Allen, a smoothly running
clearing, settlement and payments system is not necessarily profitable for
banks. 'Thirty per cent of revenues of commercial banks come from interest
income. They do not have an interest in seeking more efficient cash
management.'
For some custodians, particularly the investment banks which have a large
stockbroking and market-making operation, the driving force for entering the
global custody business is stock lending, said Mr Foster. Having the
securities in-house in their custody department guarantees them ready access
to securities needed for delivery to their own clients on the stockbroking
side. And, while clients receive typically a fee equal to half a per cent of
the value of the transaction, returns to the custodian can be far greater.
'For the investment banks, it is securities lending that is driving them
into the custody business,' Mr Foster said.
Some custodians admit that stock lending is a significant source of revenue.
One US bank described an agreement with a public pension fund client with
more than Dollars 9bn under management. As long as the bank is allowed to
lend the client's stock, the custodial service is free. When stock lending
dries up, the fees rise to Dollars 400,000 to Dollars 500,000 a year.
Mr John Morris, head of European investor services at Citibank, said his
organisation favours the use of a simple tariff with two elements: one is a
per-transaction charge and the other is one based on the value of the
portfolio and covers all transactions in a given period. However, Mr Morris
concedes that some customer anxieties about the lack of fee transparency do
have some basis. 'Sometimes fees are difficult to track and charges from
sub-custodians are passed on to the customer,' he said. It may not be clear
to clients exactly how much they are being charged for each transaction or
whether the fee they are charged bears any relation to the sub-custodians'
cost.
Mr Michael Robarts, managing director at Fleming Investment Management, said
he prefers an arrangement known as 'contractual settlement' in which the
client pays for securities bought and receives cash for securities sold on
the day of contract. If the counterparty fails to hold up the other end of
the bargain, the custodian either must lend the cash to the client or is
allowed to receive the benefit of unused cash.
ALTHOUGH global custodians have diversified, it is still the ability to
settle trades in a timely fashion which clients rate as the most significant
aspect of the business. More than 90 per cent of all types of fund managers
rank the provision of basic settlement services as crucial to their choice
of custodian. Also, the quality of information systems and responsiveness to
clients rank high.
Significantly, securities lending, perhaps the most attractive aspect of the
global custody business for some of the new entrants, is still a relatively
insignificant service. Fewer than 30 per cent of all clients find it of any
importance at all.
