FT  17 SEP 92 / The ERM and Britain: Major faces the most serious test of
his career
NOW Mr John Major must assess the cost of conviction.
During 22 frequently turbulent months in No 10 Downing Street the prime
minister has weathered his share of crises. But sterling's enforced
withdrawal from the ERM confronts him with the most serious test of his
career.
Mr Major had insisted that holding the pound's exchange rate against the
D-Mark was at the heart of his economic strategy. He believed it. At 5pm
yesterday the markets overwhelmed him, leaving the credibility of his
economic policy in shreds. One ministerial colleague described Mr Major as
'devastated'.
The damage was wider. As Mr Major blamed the Bundesbank for contributing to
the crisis a question mark hung over his ability to continue selling the
Maastricht treaty to his Conservative colleagues.
The recall of parliament next week will again expose his party's deep
divisions over Europe. Ministers may join the questioning of the prime
minister's pledge to keep Britain 'the heart of Europe'.
The first message from Downing Street yesterday was that Mr Major remained
determined to hold sterling at the rate at which he took it into the
Exchange Rate Mechanism two years ago. The speculators were unimpressed.
When the pound slid below its ERM floor the question asked in Whitehall  -
then answered in the negative - was whether Mr Major's determination would
be enough.
By late afternoon he was being told by Mr Robin Leigh Pemberton, the
governor of the Bank of England, that sterling's position in the ERM was no
longer sustainable. The Bank was running out of money and unconvinced that
still higher interest rates would hold it.
Mr Major is committed to the defeat of inflation. He regarded the ERM as the
framework to achieve that. The constantly-repeated phrase was that he would
do 'whatever is necessary to defend the parity'.
Now he must start again. Downing Street insists that sterling had been
'suspended', not removed from the ERM. The expectation is that once calm
returns to the markets after Sunday's French referendum on the Maastricht
treaty it will rejoin.
Even as the pound slumped well below its ERM floor last night Mr Major's
aides were not prepared to admit the reality that he had been forced into
the devaluation he always refused to contemplate.
He did not give in without a fight. As one minister said last night, Mr
Major did not readily seize the 'soft option' of devaluation. The markets,
always more powerful than the politicians, left him no option.
It will be difficult to pick up the pieces. Whatever his intentions now he
cannot simply start again with a different ERM rate. As one minister said:
'It will take us years to regain credibility . . . it is disastrous. It
undermines everything we have been trying to do for the past two years'.
The opposition against the ERM on the Conservative backbenches has been
mobilised. It will be given new impetus by the admission in Downing Street
that the prime minister believes the Bundesbank must bear much of the
responsibility for the crisis.
For the Tory Euro-sceptics the threat that higher borrowing costs will drive
the economy from recession into slump is an ideal recruiting ground in their
campaign against the Maastricht treaty.
Even before yesterday's drama the Euro-sceptics were promising that the
prime minister would meet a stormy reception at the party conference in
Brighton in two weeks' time. It was once supposed to be a celebration. Now
they are pledging open revolt.
A French Yes for Maastricht might ease some tensions on the financial
markets but it would still foreshadow a bitter struggle with the Tory
rebels. There was acknowledgement in Whitehall yesterday that even if the
treaty was endorsed by the French it might be some time before interest
rates fell again to 10 per cent.
With one or two MPs publicly calling for Mr Norman Lamont's resignation as
chancellor the possibility of a symbolic challenge to Mr Major's leadership
can no longer be dismissed as fantasy.
There has been no sign of revolt in the senior ranks of the government. When
the absolute commitment to sterling's parity was underlined by Mr Lamont at
last week's cabinet meeting, no one dissented. Mr Major was careful
yesterday to ensure that all the cabinet heavyweights - Mr Michael
Heseltine, Mr Douglas Hurd and Mr Kenneth Clarke - shared in the decisions.
Officials insisted that Mr Lamont remained secure at the Treasury. But
inevitably the parallel was being drawn with 1967's resignation of Mr James
Callaghan as chancellor when he was forced into devaluation.
Mr Lamont may be forced to follow the Callaghan example. But this time it is
not that simple. Mr Harold Wilson, prime minister at the time, distanced
himself from his chancellor's handling of the crisis.
At last week's cabinet meeting and in a subsequent speech to Scottish
business Mr Major went out of his way to praise Mr Lamont and stress his
personal commitment to the policy. He referred to the Labour government's
experience in 1967 - but only to remark that subsequent events demonstrated
that Mr Wilson had been wrong to give in.
The strategy now is to try to hold the line until next week, hoping that a
Yes vote will bring a return to sanity.
Mr Major can claim with justice that no prime minister could have resisted
the pressures of the markets and of the apparent determination of the
Bundesbank to force a general ERM realignment.
The prize of victory against the markets would have been the credibility for
his anti-inflation strategy that had eluded every British post-war
government. But it was an enormous gamble. The markets are unimpressed by
conviction politics. Mr Major must now count the cost of losing.
