FT  23 MAY 92 / Arts: Women, priests and angels - Theatre
IT IS delightful to see an old-fashioned West End problem-play again. The
genre is thought to be dead; to find a close parallel to Roy Kendall's
semi-new piece (originally staged in Watford a decade ago, now 'reworked'
with the director Val May), you'd have to search old volumes of Plays of the
Year. Yet Body and Soul revives the formula with some zest, and May has
staged it with exemplary sympathy at the Albery Theatre. A formula it
remains; but it doesn't insult your intelligence, and it goes down quite
pleasantly.
The problem is (God help us) the ordination of women priests in the C. of E,
and in the time-honoured way the stage is peopled with defenders of
irreconcilable views. As usual, the playwright is at undisguisable pains to
flesh out characters who are really there to illustrate the debate. Kendall
does that with the hand of a practised TV scriptwriter. Good enough; on this
wonderfully archaic question, there is no room for anything like rational
argument, and he is savvy enough to disdain cheap laugh-lines.
For the saving twist is that his heroine is not a militant religieuse, but a
gentle transsexual: a properly ordained, conscientious vicar when s/he was
still Christopher, and keen now to continue her vocation as Christine.
Naturally her Bishop is the man who must face up to the dilemma, and
naturally he is a chap of cautiously liberal views who must consult experts
in canon law. Naturally too he has a wife who is passionately committed to
the feminine cause, and ready to hint at divorce if Christine is sacked; for
theatrical purposes, that enlivens their domestic life considerably.
Thus Kendall can get away with staging plain debates between the Bishop (who
naturally utters the F-word just once, prompting a gasp from the stalls) and
his ecclesiastical chums. The chums are cast prudently from strength: Hugh
Sullivan as the decent legal go-between, Peter Cellier representing smug
pedantic authority, Moray Watson a ripely quirky Archbishop of York.
If the homely details of the Bishop's hitherto becalmed life are a bit
routine - he is a drinking man and a hockey fanatic, his wife frustrated and
a touch stroppy - Robert Hardy and Angela Thorne transfuse them, like the
good professionals they are. Hardy could play the Bishop in his sleep, but
in fact he is alert and disarmingly energetic beyond the call of duty; Miss
Thorne is not afraid to sound strident from time to time, which lends useful
grit to her character amid the comfy West End naturalism.
Christine might have been a problem: naturally an actress must play her  -
an actor in drag would queer the pitch of the debate - and naturally she
must be the soul of sweetness and unpretentious piety, neither a mere
obsessive nor a rude troublemaker. (A discreet veil is left over just how
s/he was driven to the surgeon's knife.) Nicola Redmond, conveniently tall
in flat heels and wielding a husky contralto, rescues her triumphantly.
Glowing with intelligent, down-to-earth sincerity, she also radiates hints
of private stress with which she will not burden anybody else - nor test the
frail dramatic construct too hard: perfect. Embattled C. of E-ers will find
it all rivetting, and even disinterested parties, or deeply uninterested
ones like me, may find themselves drawn in.
As Marlene Dietrich sped to her final rest in a 1950s Cadillac last week,
the Royal Shakespeare Company fine-tuned its stage version of the film that
made her famous. The Blue Angel has transferred from The Other Place,
Stratford, to The Globe. The show still entertains, but lacks its original
edge. Trevor Nunn's production of Pam Gems' play-of-the-film-of-the-book has
coarsened and dwindled in the transfer from Stratford.
While The Other Place studio felt like the eponymous nightclub, with
audience on three sides of the stage, the large stage at the Globe
dissipates the intimate intensity which made the studio version work. The
story is tried and tested. A middle-aged school Professor becomes besotted
with a Hamburg nightclub chanteuse, Lola; they marry, he is ostracised, and
so starts to blackmail his way onto the social register.
Heinrich Mann's 1905 original, Professor Unraat Oder Das Ende Eines Tyrannen
and Josef von Sternberg's 1930 film, Der Blaue Engel, allowed the European
middle-class to frown at the Professor's foolishness, and the New World to
smile knowingly at his rediscovered sexuality. This new staging exposes the
play's weaknesses. The Blue Angel feeds off the popularity of Der Blaue
Engel, but has strayed too far from its originals to deliver the degree of
social and psychological comment available in them. Now the love story is
less engaging, the play's politics, concerned with class hypocrisy and
nationalism in 1920s Germany, are too slight to bear scrutiny.
The play has evolved into a vaudeville act lead by a surefooted director.
The edgy songs of Friedrich Hollander and Mischa Spoliansky are here less
germane and more incidental to a plot which was, like Lola's attire,
shamelessly flimsy. The performance, like Maria Bjornson's set, has become
shallower. The principals appear against a flatter background. But the
considerable talents of Kelly Hunter as Lola, Philip Madoc as Professor
Raat, and Sidney Livingstone as the Angel's MC keep the show buoyant.
Hunter's singing, especially of Hollander's 'Nimm' Dich in Acht vor Blonden
Frauen' ('Beware Blondes') and 'Jonny' has become fuller. But overall, a
fine studio production now risks becoming forgettable main-house kitsch.
