FT  11 MAY 92 / Mr Preston makes poverty his judge
Suppose you are a middle-ranking World Bank official trying to put together
a lending programme for a Third World country. What kind of loan will most
enhance your promotion prospects? Judging from an unusually frank
operational directive issued today by Mr Lewis Preston, the World Bank
president, the answer is a loan designed explicitly to reduce poverty.
In a foreword to the directive, which is being distributed to Bank offices
throughout the world, Mr Preston states: 'Sustainable poverty reduction is
the overarching objective of the World Bank. It is the benchmark by which
our performance as a development institution will be measured.'
Mr Preston was under no obligation to make such a strong pledge. The idea of
putting greater stress on poverty originated with his predecessor, Mr Barber
Conable. If Mr Preston, who has spent his entire career on Wall Street, had
been unsympathetic to this shift in Bank priorities, he could have let the
Conable initiative quietly lapse. Instead, he is serving notice of a
cultural revolution: staff who expect to be upwardly mobile during his
presidency had better make poverty reduction their top priority.
The sudden emphasis on poverty may seem rather confusing. After all, the
Bank has been promoting economic development for more than four decades;
surely this means that poverty alleviation has always been its 'overarching
objective'. Alas, this is far from the case.
In its first few decades, the Bank was addicted to project lending. It
supported investments that had high rates of return, but made no special
effort to locate them in areas of poverty or to ensure that the worst-off
groups benefited. In the 1970s, it became aware that the poorest often
gained little from general economic development, but it lacked a
comprehensive strategy for tackling poverty. During the Reagan-Thatcher
years, poverty took a back seat; the Bank swam with the ideological current,
making the promotion of economic efficiency and growth its primary goal. As
today's directive openly concedes: 'In the early 1980s, policy-based
adjustment lending overshadowed the Bank's poverty reduction objectives.'
Some conservative economists still argue that the Bank should strive mainly
to promote growth, claiming that the poor will benefit from 'trickle down'
effects. Today's leading capitalist economies grew rapidly, the argument
runs, precisely because a low priority was initially placed on alleviating
poverty. But would the Industrial Revolution really have been aborted if
Victorian mill owners had cared about poverty?
Modern research suggests not. By today's standards, the UK's Industrial
Revolution was rather inefficient. Starting in 1780, the UK took 58 years to
double its per capita income. In modern times, South Korea did the same in
just 11 years. The acceleration partly reflects access to modern technology.
But social policy also plays a role. If South Korea had paid as little
attention to the education and health care of workers as Britain did in the
19th century, it would have developed less rapidly. By building 'human
capital', poverty alleviation adds to, rather than subtracts from, a
country's growth potential.
The Bank's theoretical strategy for reducing poverty is well known. It
consists of a 'two-pronged' approach: economic reforms to promote
labour-intensive growth supported by improved social services to allow the
poor to take full advantage of income-earning opportunities. The importance
of today's directive is to ensure that the crucial second prong is
implemented. As Mr Sven Sandstrom, one of Mr Preston's top aides, warned in
a briefing, too often sensible policies 'are not followed through with
sufficient vigour to have a significant impact'.
The first important reform mandated by today's directive is a requirement
that Bank officials undertake comprehensive poverty assessments in all
client countries. No, you have not misread that sentence. For more than 40
years the Bank has tried to promote development without a road map - without
a clear understanding of the extent and nature of poverty in the Third
World. Poverty assessments will include profiles of the poor, details of
existing safety nets, and summaries of the impact on poverty of existing
government spending and regulatory policies.
The second important reform is a commitment to make loans conditional on
social justice as well as economic efficiency. The directive states that the
volume of loans should be linked to the strength of a country's efforts to
reduce poverty. Or as Mr Preston's press release puts it: 'Stronger
government commitment to poverty reduction warrants greater support;
conversely weaker commitment to poverty reduction warrants less support.'
The release also says the composition of lending will be tailored to support
local efforts to reduce poverty.
Mr Preston's directive is an endorsement of Asian development strategies,
which have generally placed considerable stress on social services. It makes
a great deal of sense. But it will succeed only if pursued with firmness and
tact. If 'social conditionality' is to take hold in the 1990s, attitudes
will have to change fundamentally, both within developing countries and the
Bank. Mr Preston, however, has left no doubt of the criterion by which he
expects to be judged.
