FT  24 DEC 92 / State of the Art: The verbiage of creativity that is. .
.mad, bad and dangerouse to use - Ballet/Dance
'WHEN I use a word,' Humpty Dumpty said in a rather scornful tone, 'it means
just what I choose it to mean - neither more nor less.' 'The question is,'
said Alice, 'whether you can make words mean different things.'
AS any dance-follower today knows, the problem is really to find words that
mean the same thing for any two observers of the art at the same time. The
very word ballet, which might be supposed to have a certain exactness, has
been used to describe the central European lumberings of Kurt Jooss, the
abrasive activities of William Forsythe in Frankfurt, and the dire
posturings of Bejart's troupe, as well as the academic rectitude of the
Mariinsky company in Petersburg - which does show us ballet in the exact
sense. Confusion is worse confounded when two common words of criticism -
classical and modern are examined.
Classical identifies the language of the ballet as established by such late
19th century stagings as Sleeping Beauty or Raymonda. It has nothing to do
with classical in an art-historical or musical sense, yet it embraces ideas
of formal harmony and balance which share that meaning in other arts. Sir
Frederick Ashton's choreography is classical because he used and understood
the older language, and revitalised it for our national ballet. It thus also
earns the title of neo-classical, though this is less used. Similarly,
Balanchine took his classical inheritance from the Mariinsky to New York,
naturalised it on American bodies in a freer, speedier society. He produced
a classical dance language of the late 20th century, and a survey of his
work will be seen in next May's 'Balanchine Festival' to be staged by his
company, New York City Ballet, marking the tenth anniversary of his death.
It will be an apotheosis of classical ballet for our time.
Classical is also merrily used to describe any girl in point shoes or any
boy with tights and a blank expression. Not so. True classical dancers are
the product of a rigorous schooling in the danse d'ecole, the purest
academic style. There is implicit in this identification an idea of a
harmonious and balanced physique as well: Ludmila Semenyaka and Yury
Posokhov, two former Bolshoy dancers seen in the west this year, are ideal
examples, their artistry noble in proportion, grand, like their schooling
and their actual appearance. They offer pur sang classical dancing, and
despite the attractions of high-kickers and whizz-bang virtuosi to set the
groundlings in a roar, classical ballets are only truly alive with such
serene artists at their heart.
Modern, as in modern dance must be taken to mean that free dance which
emerged in America 60 years ago with Martha Graham, when it was indeed
modern, just as Art Nouveau was once nouveau. If we talk about modern dance
in its exact sense, then we pass by post-modern, which implies American
dance only 30 years ago, until - perish the thought - we reach
post-post-modern, which is more a stutter than a definition, and new dance
which can be used to indicate recent activity. That it is often neither new
nor dance is another example of a vocabulary resonant with special pleading.
The French, who have precise minds about language, but vastly serious
problems about what is being passed off as modern dance, call it La jeune
danse Francaise. In these pages we have called it other, unlovelier things.
Yet it is hard to find labels, those emergency exits from thought, to
identify the work of such fine practitioners of today's dance as Siobhan
Davies, Laurie Booth, Julyen Hamilton, Yolande Snaith, Jonathan Burrows.
Their dancing and choreography is, in truth, modern, and the label is
meaningless. My colleague Alastair Macaulay notes that certain terms are
burdened with purely local meaning, so that new dance was used in London in
the 1970s to describe choreography which had a social and politically
radical stance, while in Montreal there is something called danse actuelle.
Having seen some of the dance coming out of Montreal, the very words are
like a knell.
