FT  29 OCT 92 / Japan's dissidents form breakaway faction
A POWER struggle within the largest faction of Japan's ruling Liberal
Democratic party (LDP) intensified yesterday, threatening to distract the
government at a time when decisions are needed on crucial economic and
international policy issues.
The split within the Takeshita faction widened yesterday when Mr Tsutomu
Hata, Japan's finance minister, established a 'policy study group' within
the faction, in a move that could herald a long and destabilising campaign
to take control of Japanese policy-making and a political reform programme.
The formation of the new group followed the formal appointment yesterday of
Mr Keizo Obuchi as chairman of the faction, which was run by Mr Shin
Kanemaru, the disgraced godfather of Japanese politics, who resigned
recently after violating political funding laws.
After his appointment, Mr Obuchi said that he would try to reunite the
faction, but Mr Hata and Mr Ichiro Ozawa, a former LDP secretary-general and
the most powerful member of the new group, said his selection had breached
the faction's rules because it was announced before a consensus had been
reached.
The factional friction of the past two weeks has distracted the government
and raised the possibility that it will be unable to reach conclusions on
sensitive political issues, such as the opening of the rice market to
foreign producers or aid to Russia.
There is also concern among Japanese executives that the wrangling within
the LDP and attacks by opposition parties will delay the passage of an
emergency economic package at a parliamentary session beginning tomorrow.
Mr Hata said the package was unlikely to be obstructed, but opposition
parties are demanding that evidence about recent scandals be presented to
parliament.
Mr Noboru Takeshita, the former prime minister and the founder of the
faction, is likely to be asked to explain his alleged links to gangster
groups.
The creation of the new faction grouping is an attempt to undermine the
authority of Mr Takeshita, who favoured the appointment of Mr Obuchi.
It is likely that the policy study group will become a faction unless Mr
Hata or Mr Ozawa or a compromise candidate is appointed to the post of
chairman of the faction.
For the next few months, the two senior officials are likely to work within
the existing faction to sign up members for their own faction, which could
become the most powerful within the ruling party.
