FT  09 MAY 92 / MI5 to lead intelligence operations against IRA
INTELLIGENCE operations to uncover IRA units operating on the British
mainland are to be led by MI5, the security service, instead of the Special
Branch of the Metropolitan Police, Mr Kenneth Clarke, the home secretary,
announced yesterday.
He told the Commons that 'political change' - a Whitehall phrase for the
less active role being played by the agents of the former Soviet Union and
its satellites - had made it possible for MI5 to devote more resources to
countering IRA terrorism in mainland Britain.
The move had been widely expected after the leak just before the general
election of a report proposing the change by Mr Ian Burns, a senior Home
Office official with experience of Northern Ireland.
Mr Barry Sheerman, a Labour spokesman on home affairs, yesterday expressed
concern about the lack of effective parliamentary scrutiny of MI5 and called
for the establishment of a select committee of privy councillors to oversee
all the intelligence agencies.
Mr Antony Scrivener QC, the former chairman of the Bar Council who has wide
experience of terrorism cases, said MI5 agents had a reputation for
withholding documentation and refusing to give public evidence in court.
In practice MI5 has for several years been working behind the scenes in
anti-terrorism intelligence-gathering both on the mainland and in Northern
Ireland, in co-operation with the police and Army intelligence.
Yesterday's announcement drew an unprecedented if still uninformative public
comment from the head of MI5, Ms Stella Rimington. She said in a statement:
'We look forward to strengthening still further our already close
co-operation with the police service and combining our skills even more
effectively with theirs to help them bring terrorists to justice.'
Mr Clarke said yesterday that the change did not imply any reduction in the
activities of special branch forces in the UK or in the resources available
to them to fight terrorism.
Responding to questions in the Commons he underlined the scope for the
expertise of MI5 operatives in detecting the membership of Provisional IRA
cells, their plans, intentions and movements.
Mr Clarke emphasised that the police would continue to be responsible for
the collection of evidence and the arrest and prosecution of those suspected
of terrorist offences. 'There need be no conflict between intelligence
gathering and operations,' he declared.
Some legal experts predicted that by seeking to give MI5 greater public
prominence the government could be paving the way to greater friction
between the security services and the police.
The general expectation in the security services is that Mr George
Churchill-Coleman, the commander of the Metropolitan Police anti-terrorist
branch, will retire before the end of this year or early next year.
The Association of Chief Police Officers said yesterday it welcomed Mr
Clarke's announcement, although some senior police officers are understood
to have been privately opposed to MI5 taking a bigger role in the detection
of terrorism.
