FT  29 JUL 92 / World Trade News: Investors find the door ajar in Cuba -
Businessmen report limited but growing foreign involvement
FOREIGN involvement in the Cuban economy is growing significantly, according
to British businessmen recently returned from a trade mission to Cuba.
Their conclusions, described in a restricted circulation report, are that
the government is trying to move towards a state that is 'managed rather
than intimately controlled' by the Communist Party.
The report, 'Cuba opens its doors to British business', says a kind of
'creeping privatisation' - with the notable exception of land ownership - is
under way in a bid to re-orient the economy following the collapse of trade
with the former Soviet Union and east Europe.
Competition is being encouraged between autonomous and older state
enterprises, as is profit, and the retention of hard currency earnings is
allowable through an independent banking system.
The Cubans are seeking to re-orient export production, obtain new markets
and find new sources of convertible currency. The report suggests companies
from Spain, Italy, France, Canada, Brazil, Mexico and Argentina are taking
the lead in investment in Cuba.
The report points to two main growth areas: biotechnology and tourism. In
biotechnology, the aim is to link laboratories to the production and
commercialisation of advanced research finished or nearing completion.
Biotechnological research is likely to be marketed in the EC through joint
ventures with Spanish, Dutch and Hungarian companies.
In tourism, already the country's largest foreign exchange earner, the
development of new facilities has become the highest priority. In 1991, Cuba
received more than 400,000 visitors and expects to receive more than 500,000
this year, projected to reach 1m by 1995 of which 80 per cent will come from
Europe.
Cuba plans to build a further 3,000-4,000 rooms a year to 1995. Based on
projects already implemented and other feasibility studies, foreign partners
can recover investment in three years.
Spain has been the most aggressive investor in tourism, while Austrian,
Italian, German, Swiss and Mexican companies have also shown interest.
Projects are being discussed with Ramada, Inter-Continental, Camino Real,
Lonhro Metropole Group, Club Med and other companies, including some from
the US.
A recent decision to encourage joint ventures and commercial arrangements in
other sectors may in reality be somewhat limited. The report notes that the
government is not interested in joint ventures in the production of sugar,
health care, education, tobacco or in infrastructure outside Havana.
Cuba has, however, proposed to the Russian government a joint venture in
Russia to refine sugar. Cuba is also looking at the possibilities of
providing health care, hospital clinics and other social services to
republics of the former Soviet Union.
The report suggests changes made thus far are likely to be followed by yet
more dramatic changes and innovation in developing new commercial
relationships and towards acquiring more advanced technology.
'Almost every aspect of traditional Cuban central planning has been
abandoned in the autonomous sector and for joint ventures and there are
signs that this process is now spreading to the internal sector,' the report
says.
Already all enterprises and government agencies are meant to cover
expenditure from income. Even the sports ministry now has to earn its hard
currency requirements from its training and other activities in third
countries.
The State Committee for Economic Co-operation, whose historical role was as
co-ordinator of government-to-government negotiations and with which the
predominant responsibility for joint ventures now lies, says some 50-60
joint venture agreements or other forms of economic association have been
signed, and about 200 are under discussion.
However, the report says Cuban ministers acknowledge that most investment
opportunities will be through economic association since a true joint
venture is difficult to structure.
There are other difficulties too, not mentioned in the report. Some British
businessmen considering business with Cuba say they have received hints that
it might have adverse consequences on their regulatory treatment in the US.
The Administration has already tightened regulations on shipping goods to
Cuba.
Congressional proposals to tighten the economic noose around Cuba are
causing concern as they could trigger a row with the British and other
governments over the extraterritorial ambitions of US law. 'It is for the
British government not the US Congress to determine the UK's policy on trade
with Cuba,' one UK official warned.
Companies have also experienced not-so-subtle pressure from Cuban exile
groups, which sometimes have significant knowledge about companies'
investment proposals in Cuba.
