FT  02 JUL 92 / Leaked details of report spark angry reaction
DISSIDENT Lloyd's Names and some other observers of the insurance market
reacted with surprise and anger yesterday to reports that the committee of
inquiry set up by Sir David Walker appeared to have dismissed allegations of
fraud.
Newspaper reports of the inquiry findings - which were considered by the
market's ruling council yesterday but were not made public - indicated that
Lloyd's was cleared of fraud and malpractice. But the inquiry criticised the
standards of some professionals and the process by which some Names were
allocated to syndicates.
Mr Peter Hain, Labour MP for Neath, renewed his call for the government to
launch an official inquiry into Lloyd's and described the Walker report as
'a whitewash'.
Mr Clive Francis, chairman of the Syndicate 334 Names Association, said: 'It
would appear that Sir David Walker has confirmed the worst fears of all the
Names out in the sticks that there has been materially sharp practice at
Lloyd's'
Mr Claude Gurney, an outside Name who has helped to call an extraordinary
general meeting at which the council will be criticised, said: 'If there is
negligence and malpractice, either the council has covered it up, which is
very serious, or they were not aware of it, which is even more serious.'
Mr Andrew Grossman, the outgoing chairman of the Distressed Names
Association, said he believed the 'ultimate judgment' would be made in one
of the actions in US courts. He said he was not completely surprised by the
conclusions of the Walker report. 'I am disappointed because I think it
means that there is no immediate official remedy. It is a reflection of the
inadequacies of investor protection as applied to Names, and many of these
Names were clearly in need of protection.'
He added: 'Basically Lloyd's is exempt through an accident of history.'
Mr Tom Benyon, chairman of the Society of Names, said: 'I understand that
David Walker has strongly criticised agents on grounds of negligence. In
that case obviously one applauds that. He says there were no grounds for
fraud in the spiral, but I should like to see Sir Patrick Neil's comments on
that.'
Sir Patrick's report on whether there was fraud in the spiral is due in
August. Mr Benyon said the Walker report's comment that there was nothing
improper in the development of the LMX spiral was 'astonishing'.
He said: 'You have got thousands of people herded on to these disastrous
syndicates by negligent agents who are the responsibility of Lloyd's. Of
course it was preventable.'
