FT  20 AUG 92 / World Trade News: US calls truce in oilseeds row with EC
THE US has called a truce in its dispute with the EC over oilseeds subsidies
and put off, at least temporarily, threats to levy Dollars 1bn (Pounds 516m)
in sanctions against EC food and spirits.
Although the 60-day period for compensation talks under world trade rules
has elapsed without agreement, the US has signalled its intention to go into
further meetings with the EC early next month.
A 'strongly worded' message was reported to have been sent to the EC this
week. The US expressed its willingness to continue negotiations into
September, but insisted that a swift solution be found.
The US oilseeds industry and Bush administration officials badly want a
settlement. The threatened Dollars 1bn in sanctions, which would be likely
to lead to retaliation, could set off a trade war that would prove fatal to
businesses and the Uruguay Round.
But the US industry is insisting any agreement be in time to have an impact
on European planting of its 1993 oilseeds. Much of that crop is planted in
the autumn but officials believe agreement could be reached in time.
The American Soyabean Association (ASA), which brought the dispute to Gatt
in 1987, yesterday was still urging the US Trade Representative to act
without delay. In an alliance with producers of sunflower seeds and canola,
another genus of oilseed, the ASA was preparing a letter to the
administration expressing its 'deep concern' about the lack of progress in
the talks.
The ASA has won decisions by two dispute settlement panels. In 1989 and
1992, these found that EC oilseeds subsidies impair the duty-free status
given soyabeans in negotiations three decades ago. 'The deadline for
negotiations under Article 28 is now past,' said Ms Nancy Foster, an ASA
official. 'It is imperative the EC realise the US is serious. We won our
case in 1989. Here we still are and talk, talk, talk has not redressed the
injury'.
In case the administration misses the domestic political significance of
this, it is being pointed out that Governor Bill Clinton, President George
Bush's Democratic opponent in the presidential election this year, has
spoken out strongly on the issue. 'If the EC is trying to stall, it should
think twice before assuming it would get a better deal from him,' an
official said.
Reuter adds from Brussels: Mr Ray MacSharry, EC farm commissioner, yesterday
welcomed the US decision to refrain from activating a list of retaliatory
tariffs. He praised the decision not to publish the hit list of Dollars 1bn
of European wines, liqueurs, cheeses and other goods, saying the two sides
would actively pursue talks on the issue. 'It's in everybody's interests to
find a solution and avert a trade war,' Mr MacSharry declared.
