FT  23 APR 92 / Russia hopes for Dollars 4bn credit: Accord with IMF next
month would unlock Dollars 24bn pledged by G7
THE RUSSIAN government hopes to agree a stand-by credit with the
International Monetary Fund for Dollars 4bn by the second half of May, Mr
Konstantin Kagalovsky, Russia's chief negotiator with the international
financial institutions, said yesterday.
It would allow the government to stabilise the rouble, and unlock the
Dollars 24bn agreed by the Group of Seven leading industrial countries.
The IMF arrangement, along with Russia's own economic reform package, will
be discussed when Mr Yegor Gaidar, Russia's deputy prime minister, visits
Washington during meetings of the interim committee of the IMF and World
Bank and G7 this weekend.
Following discussions with IMF officials in Moscow this week, the government
is looking to agree the terms of a stand-by credit during a subsequent visit
by the Fund starting on May 10. It hopes IMF board approval would follow
shortly after.
Of the total Dollars 4bn, three tranches of Dollars 1bn each would be
disbursed simultaneously this year, officials say.
Mr Michel Camdessus, IMF managing director, said last week that a delegation
from his organisation would return to Moscow in May with a view to
negotiating an economic programme to support a standby financing facility.
He was cautious on when the latter might become available, suggesting that
funds might not start flowing until July.
The Russian government hopes to receive Dollars 24bn from western
governments and institutions this year, of which Dollars 4.5bn will come
from the international financial institutions - Dollars 3bn from the IMF,
and Dollars 1.5bn from the World Bank and the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development. It is also seeking a Dollars 1bn loan from
the World Bank aimed at supporting crucial imports.
Mr Kagalovsky said Russia would have to gain control over monetary policy in
the rouble area before the currency could be stabilised. Russia, which
inherited the rouble from the former Soviet Union, then intends to stabilise
it through establishing sole responsibility for issuing it and controlling
its exchange rate.
He explained that the countries of the former Soviet Union would have access
to the rouble through the Russian central bank, which would be the sole body
responsible for issuing the currency.
Conditions of access to the rouble by the other republics, or replacement of
the rouble by those republics that intended to introduce their own
currencies, would have to be negotiated, he said. Agreement betweeen Russia
and the republics had to be reached before the rouble could be stabilised.
Russia will print a new Rbs5,000 note, the first without Lenin's likeness
and the official stamp of the defunct Soviet State Bank, the Russian central
bank said yesterday, AP-DJ reports. The note, to be issued this summer, will
be the highest denomination note in circulation.
New coins featuring the Russian imperial double-headed eagle will also be
issued.
MR YEGOR GAIDAR, the architect of Russia's radical economic reforms, was
back at his desk yesterday after being taken to hospital suffering from high
blood pressure on Tuesday night, writes Leyla Boulton in Moscow.
Colleagues blamed the punishing work schedule of the 36-year-old first
deputy prime minister in his relentless pursuit of rapid market reforms. Mr
Anatoly Chubais, privatisation minister, said he was trying to persuade Mr
Gaidar to get some rest before his trip this weekend to Washington, where he
will join the Group of Seven ministers for part of their talks and will also
complete discussions on Russian membership of the IMF.
'But even rest is difficult to organise,' said Mr Chubais, who shares with
his other colleagues a non-stop diet of work, frequent travel, little sleep,
and lots of small administrative problems which are spared their colleagues
in the west.
