FT  05 AUG 92 / Bumpy transition for a lord of the City: Bronwen Maddox
looks at what life holds for Lord Stevens after his departure from Invesco
MIM
When I cross a bridge, I cross it,' says Lord Stevens of Ludgate. He is the
first to remark that last week's boardroom upheaval at Invesco MIM, the fund
management group, brings a radical change in his life.
He will stay as MIM's chairman until next spring but has given up executive
responsibilities immediately. In effect this marks the end of his 30-year
career in the City.
The MIM shake-up - which came as little surprise to its directors - follows
a troubled period in which MIM found it hard to attract new UK clients. A
widespread perception that Lord Stevens had been close to the late Mr Robert
Maxwell did not help. Lord Stevens says he had suggested taking a less
prominent role six months earlier, but 'this isn't the smooth transition I
wish had happened'.
'I don't regret leaving the City, though I do regret leaving some of the
people,' he says. 'The City's not fun any more,' he adds, blaming recession
and regulation - although he hastens to say that he does not disapprove of
the increase in regulation that followed the Financial Services Act of 1986.
His departure leaves him, now 56, still chairing two other businesses:
United Newspapers, publisher of the Daily Express, and Alexander Proudfoot,
one of Europe's leading management consultancies.
After years of juggling his three roles - 60 per cent of his time on United
News, 30 per cent on MIM and 10 per cent on Proudfoot, he reckons - he now
plans to spend more time at his two newer careers. Neither offers a
trouble-free ride.
Proudfoot may present the most pressing demands. Its shares have fallen by
40 per cent in the past month following the sudden departure of its chief
executive and the downgrading of profits estimates by brokers. Specialising
in factory-floor advice on improving production, Proudfoot had appeared to
weather recession well until early this year.
Two recent overseas acquisitions - in management training and strategy  -
will now take the group a step closer to the heartland of rivals such as
Bain and McKinsey. To help the integration of the new acquisitions Lord
Stevens plans to visit Proudfoot's offices in Brussels, Stockholm and Palm
Beach in the next few months.
He says that he loves the business. 'A lot of consultancies don't get their
hands dirty and Proudfoot does.'
More widely known is the combative pleasure Lord Stevens takes in chairing
United Newspapers. 'If I hadn't taken over the newspapers, you'd still be
calling me David,' he said at one City presentation, leaving at least one
hereditary peer and several fund managers spluttering.
A provocative joke, given that the board of United Newspapers has few City
fans: the share price of 392p is stubbornly at the same level as five years
ago, stalled by the group's high debt and the slump in advertising.
This year circulation and advertising have begun to pick up and industry
observers estimate that pre-tax profits will be slightly ahead of last
year's Pounds 85.2m. But the cashflow will be eaten up by interest payments
on the Pounds 400m debt, by capital spending of about Pounds 25m a year and
by the generous dividend of Pounds 42m which has supported the shares.
Lord Stevens says that raising finance to buy small European titles should
still be possible, although his ambitions have clearly been scaled down
since the group's mid-1980s acquisitions of Fleet Holdings, former Express
owner, and Extel, the financial services group.
If some of the excitement has diminished since then, however, so have the
threats; a hostile takeover became less likely two months ago when Mr Conrad
Black, proprietor of the Daily Telegraph, sold his 9 per cent stake.
Lord Stevens says he is at United to stay. 'I became chairman 11 years ago
and at some stage people have to realise I do know something about the
business.'
One of the few remaining thorns is the question of the depth of his
relationship with Maxwell. The latter held stakes in Fleet and Extel before
United Newspapers took over those companies; he also held a stake in
Britannia Arrow, the fund management group, before it merged with MIM; and
he underwrote Pounds 20m of Proudfoot's launch on the stock market.
Critics have suggested that Maxwell's involvement in these deals, which were
crucial to the development of Lord Stevens's businesses, points to a close
relationship between the two.
Lord Stevens argues that the relationship went no further than conventional
business deals, and that it was possible to negotiate with Maxwell in a
straightforward manner. 'OK, Maxwell was shifty, but he never double-crossed
me. If he double-crossed others it was because they're wimps. I liked him.'
He is adamant that the connection did not run deep: 'My diary says we met on
only 17 occasions since 1985.' He points, too, to the fact that he refused
to let Maxwell print the Express, 'because when it came down to it, I never
trusted him'.
He clearly feels that the public preoccupation with Maxwell was partly
responsible for his departure from MIM. 'Since Maxwell, everyone associates
the combination of publishing and fund management with skulduggery and I
knew that wasn't going to go away.'
Aside from fending off speculation about the extent of his relationship with
Maxwell - which is likely to rumble on for years - will United and Proudfoot
be enough to keep Lord Stevens occupied?
His second wife, who died three years ago, suggested in her book, Woman as
Chameleon, that wives adopt a different personality each day to keep their
husbands entertained. Lord Stevens denies that he has needed three
chairmanships to keep his life full. 'Some people do, but I don't. I'm
getting older. My wife died. I remarried. I want an easier life,' he says.
Then he adds: 'There are other things I want to do with my life - perhaps
politics.' That answer is made less surprising by a recent speech in the
House of Lords on the responsibilities of the press. Perhaps because of his
own sensitivity to press comment on his links with Maxwell, he says: 'I
don't like the way the press goes for people who have fallen on hard times.'
He adds quickly: 'I'm not sure yet exactly what I want to do. But there
comes a time when you want to think about something else. Well, I'm
thinking.'
