FT  15 SEP 92 / Technically Speaking: Keeping tabs on benchmarking
PROFITS and share price are simple measures of overall corporate
competitiveness. Individual departments, however, find it more difficult to
put up hard numbers to show how they compare with the opposition -
especially if they are service organisations rather than profit centres.
These days, data centres and management information systems departments have
urgent need of a reliable benchmarking technique. They are under attack from
senior management, anxious to get better value for the money spent on
information technology.
Installed computer power is rising by an average of 40 per cent a year in
large data centres, yet there is heavy pressure on IT budgets and an
increasing tendency to look at the possibility of 'outsourcing' - turning
over the company's entire data processing operations to a computing services
company for a fee against an agreed level of service.
With this background, it is easy to see why IT departments from large
organisations are keen to take part in projects such as the 'Impact'
programme, initiated by the National Computing Centre and now managed by
consultants Peat Marwick. Impact is sponsoring a number of studies designed
to measure the effectiveness of IT investment.
As one of the participants remarked: 'It helps to give us an ideas of where
we are in the spectrum.'
It seems likely that most companies could make substantial reductions in
their data centre costs. Compass, a Scandinavian company which has developed
a technique for measuring the efficiency of data centres, reckons that
savings of between 5 per cent and 40 per cent can be immediately identified
for most IT operations.
Compass's data are particularly interesting because the company now has
records for many of the largest UK businesses stretching back to 1987. Its
method is to measure some 800 variables in data centre performance. It is
then able to combine them into an overall picture, not only of the
efficiency of the centre but also of how it compares with competing
organisations.
Compass has followed a fixed group of UK companies since 1987. Its results
suggest that although total IT costs for the group rose by 14 per cent
annually, overall unit costs fell 31 per cent each year. In other words,
although the members of the groups were increasing their investment in IT,
they were getting better value for money.
Now, as managing director Theo Sahlsberg is happy to admit, there is no
magic in the Compass approach or that of its competitors, Real Decisions
Corporation or Nolan Norton.
The benefits come from the detailed way in which the data are collected,
which forces companies to think hard about every aspect of the data
processing department.
The level of measurement involved seems to be new to many companies. IT
spending decisions are too often taken on inadequate data.
Outsourcing, for example, may for all its fashionability produce a more
expensive solution. One company which quoted a minimum Dollars 13.4m (Pounds
6.8m) a year for a seven-year facilities management deal found that by
following Compass's recommendations it saved more than Dollars 46m in four
years. Over the entire period, concentration on internal efficiencies
resulted in lower costs than outsourcing.
For maximum benefits, however, data centre costs have to be measured
regularly. In the five years Compass has been investigating UK companies it
has seen the use of its technique change from a one-off 'health-check' to a
continuous method for monitoring performance.
Ford of Europe, for example, has carried out a study each year and acted on
the results. Production capacity has been doubled with lower staff levels
and without increasing overall costs.
Once the cost base has been established through measurement, it is possible
to set targets with a real chance of achieving them.
