FT  14 OCT 92 / World Stock Markets: Athens sinks in spite of government
reassurance - Kerin Hope discusses the slide in Greek equities
GREEK investors feel that they have more to worry about than mere turbulence
on international currency markets.
Continuing fears of war in the neighbouring, former Yugoslavian republic of
Kosovo, combined with a rise in interest rates and the prospect of a harsh
1993 budget, have sent prices on the Athens Stock Exchange plunging.
After an attempt at recovery earlier this month, the market resumed its
downtrend nine days ago, hitting new 30-month lows in consecutive sessions
since the middle of last week. The Athens stock exchange index closed
yesterday at 636.43.
The early October recovery followed an initiative by the economy ministry,
which took the unusual step of reassuring investors publicly that its
two-year old economic adjustment programme is still on track. It pledged
that measures to curb inflation would yield results in the near future,
bringing a steady decline in interest rates. This brought about a three-day
rally, culminating with the index at 675.49, in steady daily volume of some
Dr1.2bn (Dollars 6.3m), on October 2. But the prevailing mood of gloom has
not really lightened.
'There's not much expectation of good news,' says Mr Spyros Kriticopoulos,
chief of research at M. Kyranis Securities. 'The budget is going to be
strict to stop the deficit from expanding. It's hard to feel confident that
interest rates will come down quickly.'
Even before the turmoil erupted on the currency markets, Greek interest
rates had started to rise. A Dr580bn revenue-raising package launched in
August, which included increases in petrol tax and VAT on raw materials,
added almost two percentage points to the inflation rate.
With inflation running at some 15 per cent, the government raised interest
rates on 12 month Treasury bills, the main vehicle for financing the public
sector deficit, to 21.5 per cent. As borrowing rates moved close to 30 per
cent for working capital, companies started to postpone plans for
investment.
The drachma, which is not a member of the exchange rate mechanism, was
partly cushioned from speculative assaults last month by tight exchange
controls.
Anticipation that the drachma would be devalued gave the bourse a
short-lived boost. Shares in leading exporting companies, producers of
cement, plastics and textiles, were snapped up.
The government, however, has remained opposed to devaluation and the central
bank has reaffirmed its policy of pegging the drachma to the D-mark, in
spite of a heavy drain on foreign exchange reserves in the past three weeks.
Against the dollar, most of the drachma's decline last month of just over 4
per cent, has now been made up.
Nevertheless, the government's strong drachma policy is under constant
attack from Greek exporters who claim that the currency is now overvalued by
around 10 per cent. They argue that following the recent devaluations of the
lira and the peseta, Greek products are becoming increasingly uncompetitive.
Mr Jacovos Babalitis, an analyst with Northern Greek Securities, says: 'The
drachma's strength is another factor depressing the market. Investors are
generally hesitant because of doubts about future government policy and
events outside Greece.'
Amid this anxiety, some encouraging first-half results from construction and
food processing companies have been disregarded. More attention was paid to
a weak first-half performance in the banking sector, which accounts for over
40 per cent of the market's total equity capitalisation. After several years
of strong profit growth, rising operating costs and reduced spreads on
lending in a more competitive environment are affecting their earnings.
Underlying political uncertainty is being reinforced by the government's
repeated warnings that conflict is imminent in the Albanian populated
province of Kosovo, ruled by Serbia.
'The possibility that war may spread close to Greece's northern border is at
the back of every investors mind,' says Mr Babalitis.
