FT  05 SEP 92 / Guns and drugs: Estonia's growth industries - Pelle Noreth
meets smugglers, KGB soldiers and CIA agents in Tallinn
THE trooper shoves a machine-gun in my stomach and bawls: 'Dokumenti]' There
is no need to be a linguist to know what he means. He and about five
colleagues, all in riot gear, have burst into the restaurant where I am
eating with an English friend, alighting on us as potential smugglers.
Neither of us, alas, has his passport but we don't look hard or crazy enough
to risk our lives by swallowing pure heroin tied up in condoms. The soldier
lowers his gun, grunts and bounds off with his men to intimidate the only
other guests in the restaurant, a young couple frozen in mid-smooch.
Another evening, another place. It is Sunday 10pm at the Viru Hotel
restaurant, one of Tallinn's better establishments. There are few guests
since Estonians, like the Swiss, go to bed early so they can rise with the
sun and put in a good day's work. Even the DJs, who have been playing a
curious mix of Abba and Elton John, have gone home. The only activity comes
from a table by a window offering a view of the snow-covered city below. The
guests seem to be enjoying themselves in a most un-Estonian fashion. There
are about six of them, all male, sitting around a table which looks like a
battlefield, the history of their four-course meal smeared on the white
table cloth. They are surrounded by empty bottles of Russian champagne and a
bottle, half-empty, of Armenian brandy. A pall of smoke hangs over the table
and the pungent whiff of Caucasian tobacco fills the air. The men are in a
boisterous mood, slapping each other's backs and toasting each other loudly.
The contrast to the gaunt and frosty Estonian waiters in black tuxedos
serving them could not be greater.
These are the smugglers - never Estonian, frequently from central Asia,
nearly always rich - whom the Estonian KGB were so desperate to catch.
They are the kings in Estonia's fastest-growing business, toasting each
other's latest deals, which often involve weapons and drugs, though
sometimes it is as innocuous as caviar. Last year, 400 tons of heroin found
their way to the West from central Asia. Much of it through Tallinn,
Estonia's capital, and from there by ship to Helsinki, 50 miles away across
the Gulf of Finland. From there sea and air connections can be made all over
the world.
'Estonia is a favoured smuggling channel for a variety of reasons,' says
Tarmu Tammerk, an Estonian journalist. 'A lot of them have to do with
independence. It is a new country. All the institutions that guard borders
in other countries have to be set up from scratch.'
Four fifths of the heroin consumed in Europe comes from central Asia,
according to Dagmar Thomas-Halasek of the United Nations Drug Control
Programme. The heroin used to come from central Asia through Turkey, across
Bulgaria and then through Yugoslavia.
But the conflict there has forced the smugglers to take a more northerly
route through Estonia, Latvia or Lithuania. These countries are ideal places
for drugs smugglers to launder their profits. Their banks, newly set up,
badly need hard currency for start-up capital and, unlike Western banks, are
unlikely to ask any questions.
'They need capital and will take it wherever it comes from,' says Joel
Jutkowitz, a drug expert. 'And, if you're in the drug business, what better
way to launder your money?'
Who can stop it? When Estonia became independent it had no armed forces, let
alone border guards. Ants Laaneots, the newly appointed chief-of-staff,
faces an enormous task in setting up a fledgling army. Barracks, equipment,
trained officers and above all recruits are in short supply because there is
no draft law.
                       *      *      *
The drugs trail starts in poppy fields in the mountainous central Asian
republics of Tajikstan, Uzbekistan or Kirghizia. The opium is refined on the
spot into heroin, which is easier to smuggle. Almost a third of the world's
poppies are grown there, and small farmers are eagerly planting more. Unlike
wheat, opium is not bought cheaply by the state nor does it rot in railway
sidings.
Drugs running is a labour intensive and dangerous industry. Human 'mules'
carry the heroin in condoms in their stomachs or in false-bottomed suitcases
to Estonia. Drugs smuggling is a capital offence in the former Soviet Union.
The drugs are moved by rail or by air, sometimes both, in a journey which
crosses 5,000 km, four time zones and three or four former-Soviet republics,
depending on the route. There are no borders except between Estonia and
Russia. The Russians do not bother to check the border traffic. The Estonian
border guards are young, inexperienced, outnumbered and outgunned. They have
no mines, pill boxes or armour to stop more determined smugglers. It is said
that the secret services of the ex-Communist countries are on the payroll of
the heroin kings, using their contacts and skills to outwit Western drug
squads.
The smugglers spend the profits on sophisticated weapons such as the
American Stinger anti-aircraft missile which costs Dollars 100,000. The
weapons are used in ethnic feuds, supressed during communism but which have
resurfaced with independence. Fighting has been raging in Tajikstan. It
could break out in Uzbekistan at any moment. Any money left over is spent on
whisky, TV sets, videotapes and other goodies to be enjoyed by tribal
leaders in private.
The central Asian republics have a tradition of criminal secret societies,
sometimes promoted by their governments. In the 1970s the bosses of
Uzbekistan pocketed millions of roubles from Moscow by pretending to grow
cotton that did not exist.
                       *      *      *
It was an ice-cold February morning. A freezing wind swept in from the
Baltic. Jaan Tooming, a customs officer, turned up his collar, looked east
and sighed: another blue day, four hours of twilight during which the sun
barely rose above the horizon. He inspected his first shipment. According to
the label, the crates contained 7,500 sports rifles destined for the Isle of
Man. When he opened the crates he found row upon row of tightly-packed,
brand new Makarov machine pistols, 15,000 in all.
The weapons are standard issue Warsaw Pact weapons which would turn ducks
into feathered mulch. Three days later a similar haul of 25,000 guns, with
the same destination, was made in Helsinki, same end destination. The
directors of the Isle of Man company were a mysterious Russian couple who
operated from Yaroslavl, a city north of Moscow. They said the merchandise
had been swapped at the factory where both guns are made. By whom? The
couple refused to say or did not know. According to James Short, a British
security expert, the Isle of Man company is a conduit for the IRA.
The smuggled arms follow a different route from the drugs, often coming from
the 'enemy within', the 22,000 former-Soviet army troops still stationed in
Estonia. Soldiers sell their personal equipment: Kalashnikov rifles,
hand-held rocket launchers and hand grenades. Smugglers pay Dollars 500
(Pounds 251.20) for a Kalashnikov which will, at current exchange rates, pay
a conscript's wages for three years - longer than his entire draft period.
The soldiers' superiors approve. 'Troops ought to sell army property and
material. It's the only way they can survive,' the leader of an Officers'
Council (a disciplinary body) told the Russian newspaper SM Sevodnya.
The former Soviet army, which consists mostly of Russians, has reluctantly
promised to leave within two years what is considered a cushy posting. And
not before time, according to Laaneots: 'We are still an occupied nation.'
'This is the tip of the arms-trafficking iceberg,' Clyde Kull, who functions
as Estonia's Mr Soundbite abroad, told NATO's foreign ministers in April. He
asked for infra red detectors, light arms and patrol boats to stop Estonia
from becoming a channel for 'arms, drugs and strategic weapons'.
'If one arms cache heading for the IRA was discovered,' Kull said, 'the
number that have slipped through unnoticed can only be guessed at.' Yet only
Sweden - which is not even a member of NATO - has responded so far, giving
Estonia a dozen or so coastal patrol boats. Britain and most of the NATO
countries on Estonia's doorstep have done nothing.
But the US, as I found out, is watching the country as closely as it did
before the Second World War when Tallinn was a spies' den and a listening
post on the Soviet Union.
Gerald was fortyish, with a flat Slavic nose and a boxer's lip. He was the
proud possessor of the only tan I saw in Estonia. He said he was a visiting
US businessman who was so 'wowed' by my article for the local
English-language paper, The Baltic Independent, on the illegal arms trade
that he had to take its author out to lunch. He got straight to the point.
'How much do you know about the arms trade?' he asked, which I thought was
an odd question from some one who claimed to export Estonian birch-tree
water to the US for its homeopathic qualities. Loosened up by expensive
French wine, I ditched all my journalistic integrity and told him everything
 -including who my sources were.
'AFP - can you clarify that. Is that a code name?' he asked, looking
excited.
'No that's Agence France Presse. The wire service,' I replied.
'Oh,' he said, his interest in me waning fast.
'Listen,' he said as he paid the bill with a stack of crisp dollars. 'Here's
my fax number in the United States. If you get any more information - hot
information - on arms why don't you just get over to that little fax for
yours and send it me. You will be compensated financially for it, of
course.'
Back in England I checked the number.
'Langley, Virginia,' the US operator chirped. 'Yes sir, that's where CIA
headquarters are located.'
Well, here you are Gerald. Hope your bosses like it.
