FT  14 JAN 92 / Ravenscraig-related job losses estimated at 5,500
THE FRASER of Allander Institute, Scotland's leading economic forecasting
body, says about 5,500 people - excluding steelworkers  - will lose their
jobs in the next four years because of British Steel's closure of steel
plants in Lanarkshire.
That is considerably lower than figures in the region of 16,000 indirect job
losses circulated last week when British Steel said it would be closing the
remainder of its Ravenscraig complex later this year with the direct loss of
1,220 jobs.
The Fraser of Allander estimate, based on its computer model of the Scottish
economy, takes into account last year's closure by British Steel of the hot
strip mill and a blast furnace at Ravenscraig, the shutting down of much of
the nearby Clydesdale tube works and this year's closure of the remainder of
Ravenscraig.
Taken together, those involve 4,400 direct job losses, the institute
suggests.
The estimate assumes that British Steel will maintain the Dalzell plate mill
at Motherwell, which employs 500 people, the Imperial tube works at Airdrie
(400 people) and the remnants of the Clydesdale works (200 people). Further,
it assumes that the government will intervene to offset the steel closures.
It says the loss of steel at Ravenscraig and the other plants will reduce
Scottish gross domestic product by less than 0.5 per cent and make
Scotland's GDP growth only 0.07 per cent less than it would otherwise have
been.
Yesterday the Lanarkshire Development Agency, which had previously used the
16,000 indirect job losses figure in seeking government funds, said it
regarded the Fraser of Allander job losses figures, which total almost
10,000, as realistic.
Mr Ian Lang, Scottish Secretary, told the House of Commons yesterday that
the Ravenscraig closure, which was announced last week, would cost 2,400
direct and indirect jobs, pushing up unemployment in Lanarkshire by less
than 1 per cent. Related job losses in other parts of Scotland might bring
the total to 3,000.
