FT  20 NOV 92 / Ticket to delays and disruption: Underground staff are
poised to stage a strike which has echoes of the 1970s
First, public demonstrations against pit closures; then, warnings of strife
over the government's public-sector pay squeeze; and now a strike call for
most of the workers on London's Tube network.
The language and the issues seem like a throw-back to the 1970s as politics
takes to the streets, and the government 'goes for growth' and talks about
imposing a 'pay policy'. Mr John Monks, the deputy general-secretary of the
Trades Union Congress, claims: 'There is a mood similar to 1979, the feeling
that a particular approach to running the economy has failed and that we
need a change.'
But with unemployment nudging 3m, common-sense suggests the balance of power
is unlikely to shift back to unions. It is only weeks since the publication
of figures showing strikes at a 100-year low, and the unions themselves are
playing down the prospect of action over pay in the public sector. The Tube
workers' threat to start an indefinite strike next Tuesday over pay and
conditions, like yesterday's strike ballot by British Airways ground crew at
Gatwick, seems to be a special case.
The 21,000-strong Underground workforce is highly unionised and tends to
mistrust management. Many are inclined to listen to the few activists whose
arguments are bolstered by past victories over less ambitious plans to alter
their pay and conditions. The last such attempt was in 1989 when there were
17 separate day-long Tube strikes.
The current dispute, if it comes, could be bitter and perhaps violent.
London Underground has made it clear that it will run a service if the RMT
railworkers' union calls its members out, and claims enough people will
cross picket lines to enable it to do so. Passengers will be carried free if
there are insufficient employees to staff the booking offices and ticket
barriers.
The origins of the dispute lie in a 119-page document called the Company
Plan, launched with a fanfare almost exactly a year ago. This set the scene
for a three-year programme of change aimed at turning the Underground into
what it always should have been: a clean, efficient, punctual, reliable,
safe and customer-friendly railway.
Passengers were told of the plan through a bold - some might say bizarre -
advertising campaign in which London Underground accepted that the railway
was performing unsatisfactorily, blamed itself, and promised better things.
What appeared baffling was how the Underground's management could accept
responsibility for allowing services to become unsatisfactory while
simultaneously expecting passengers to have any confidence in its ability to
put things right. And in any event, if the problems with the railway were
capable of resolution, why had they not been solved before?
The answer, explained Mr Denis Tunnicliffe, London Underground's managing
director, lay in the railway's recent history. Throughout the 1970s and
early 1980s, passenger numbers declined as employment in the capital fell,
and there was little incentive either to invest in the Underground or manage
it any better. Then, just as passenger numbers started to climb again during
the boom in London's financial services industry in the mid-1980s, the
King's Cross disaster struck in 1987.
Some 31 people died in the horrific fire that swept through the north London
Underground station. From that point onwards, safety became the overriding
priority. Manpower, which until then had been falling, rose again by 3,000
over two years as employees were taken on to implement safety measures and
act as human fire detectors pending the installation of electronic
surveillance systems. Meanwhile, stations deteriorated as work was started
to rip out potentially inflammable materials, and services were constantly
disrupted by the need to halt trains and call out the fire brigade on even
the tiniest suspicion of fire.
Only in 1990 did London Underground reach the stage where it felt safety
could be reasonably assured. Then, in response to the deafening din of
complaints about the quality and reliability of the service, it turned its
attention to efficiency. It assembled 200 managers into 'value analysis'
teams and sent them out across the railway to investigate how it could do
better.
What the management had expected to find was a series of areas of
underperformance that could be picked off one by one and targeted for
improvement. Instead, it found such large swathes of poor performance right
across the railway that it decided to tackle everything at once. Hence, the
Company Plan.
One aspect of the plan is simply a case of doing obvious things to make the
railway run better - for example, making more effort to get train intervals
right. As London Underground points out, it may not sound particularly
serious if trains due to run at two-minute intervals run at intervals of one
and three minutes instead. But the result is that 75 per cent of passengers
experience 50 per cent higher passenger loadings than they should do.
The solution, according to London Underground, lies in discipline and
training. Much of it is simply a matter of making sure the train begins its
journey at the right time instead of having to wait on the convenience of a
driver finishing his tea-break. After that, it is down to the line
controllers and station staff to prevent bunching.
But more important in the context of the current dispute is the other prong
of the Company Plan: the onslaught on labour costs. It provides for the
workforce to be cut by 5,000 to 16,000, partly by contracting out ancillary
activities and partly through an attack on restrictive working practices.
One example of the cuts is the contracting-out of station cleaning, where
this has not already been done, at a cost of more than 400 jobs. The move
will be accompanied by the contracting out of train cleaning, with the loss
of another 400 jobs.
More jobs will go through the ending of restrictive working practices. For
example, existing agreements lay down that a driver's shift lasts 8 hours 1
minute. In practice, it is almost impossible to create rosters which fully
employ drivers and still get them back to their depots before their shift
ends. The introduction of flexible rostering - accepted years ago by British
Rail drivers - will enable London Underground to make more efficient use of
drivers' time, with a consequent reduction of 600 jobs.
Once redundancy costs have been met, efficiency savings are expected to
lower the Underground's operating costs by Pounds 150m a year by 1995. In
theory, passengers are supposed to feel the benefit through a freeing of
resources for higher levels of investment in the railway. Unfortunately,
that sentiment is looking a little hollow after the chancellor's decision
last week to axe London Underground's investment budget by more than Pounds
200m a year below the previous plan to about Pounds 500m.
And yet, says London Underground, the rationale for the plan has in no way
been undermined by the chancellor's decision. Nor will workers who keep
their jobs necessarily be worse off. All employees will switch to salaried
status, and most will have more interesting and satisfying jobs; 70 per cent
of workers will enjoy pay rises averaging 6 per cent as a result of the
changes, and the 30 per cent who stand to take a cut will have their present
level of earnings protected until 1995; and redundancies will be voluntary
and spread over three years.
So why strike? One idea the unions find difficult to accept is that gains to
the winners should overshadow losses to the losers. The average driver may
see his salary increase from Pounds 20,250 to Pounds 23,000 a year, but less
skilled workers such as senior booking clerks will see their pay fall from
Pounds 18,568 to Pounds 16,700 a year.
The unions argue that London Underground's divide-and-rule strategy will not
work. It has, they say, neglected certain small groups, such as some 300
signals technicians, who are mostly members of the largest rail union, the
left-leaning RMT, which has called the strike. The salary of an assistant
signals technician, for example, will drop 15 per cent to Pounds 13,440. The
RMT says 60 per cent of all signals technicians will lose money under the
company's plan. This group, the union says, fears its work will in future be
contracted out.
But the dispute, from the union perspective, is not just about pay. The
unions believe they are defending a workplace tradition of consultation
which management wants to abandon. Even workers who stand to gain
financially are exercised by the new conditions. The drivers are concerned
about new redeployment rules under which they claim earnings could drop by
as much as Pounds 8,000 a year after three years.
Many workers are upset about other planned changes, such as the move to
multi-skilling. For instance, booking clerks who may have been dealing with
passengers from behind screens for 30 years could find themselves rostered
for platform duties.
There is also concern over ending the link between promotion and seniority
and the move to make some workers re-apply for their jobs under new training
schemes. The management counters by saying it has responsibility for
promotion and deployment.
Privately, some union officials admit they have been surprised by the
strength of members' feelings. However, they have considerable doubts about
striking in a recession, and while they point to public support for the
miners, they suspect that people are unlikely to demonstrate in support of
Tube workers whose jobs were not immediately in jeopardy.
Despite their misgivings, union officials are committed to public backing
for the strike. They remember the wild-cat action at the time of the 1989
dispute and are determined not to witness a repeat of it. But the RMT's
unilateral call for a strike has already irritated both Aslef, the train
drivers' union, and the TSSA white-collar rail union, whose members are
still balloting.
As for the passengers - what they want to know is whether they are going to
get to work on Tuesday. The answer may well be yes. Although three out of
four RMT members voted for the strike, only 55 per cent turned out for the
vote; and many of them may have been seeking to strengthen their
negotiators' hand rather than express a desire to strike, especially in the
run-up to Christmas.
Disruption, on the other hand, seems inevitable, with all that implies in
delays, cancellations, overcrowding, lack of information and short tempers.
The joke among London commuters is whether anybody will notice the
difference.
