FT  28 MAR 92 / IMF works on to agree terms for new members: White House may
back capital increase to Fund
EXECUTIVE directors of the International Monetary Fund were yesterday making
plans to work through the weekend to complete preparations for Russia's
membership of the Washington-based financial institution.
The IMF board began discussions on Thursday on the size of the Russian quota
in the fund, as well as those of the other former Soviet republics, and is
expected to reach agreement early next week. The quotas will help determine
the amount of financial assistance each republic can eventually call on from
the IMF.
A quota of slightly over 3 per cent is expected to be agreed for Russia  -
which would give it access to roughly Dollars 4bn (Pounds 2.3bn) of IMF
financing in a full year.
Concern over Russia's ability to carry through its economic reform plans
could affect the IMF's readiness to agree to financing facilities once the
republic has joined the fund, but is not thought likely to hold up the
processing of its membership application.
The US, meanwhile, is expected to announce in the next two weeks a new
package of measures to help Russia and the other former Soviet republics.
The package is expected to include a US contribution of up to Dollars 1bn to
a rouble stabilisation fund, some Dollars 600m of additional food and
technical aid, and the relaxation of curbs on trade with the former Soviet
republics.
The package is a response to sharp criticism from former President Richard
Nixon and senators in both parties who have accused the Bush administration
of a 'pathetically inadequate' response to the changes in the Soviet Union.
The White House is also considering campaigning openly in favour of the US's
Dollars 12bn share of a Dollars 60bn capital increase for the IMF. Without
US agreement, the whole Dollars 60bn capital increase would be blocked,
leaving the IMF perilously short of cash and possibly forcing it to start
delaying financial commitments later this year or early in 1993.
The Democrats who control Congress have been reluctant to vote this funding
for fear of coming under attack from the Republicans for pouring money
overseas, as they did last time they voted an IMF quota increase in 1983.
They have demanded that President George Bush himself publicly back the IMF
funding, instead of leaving the job to his treasury secretary, Mr Nicholas
Brady.
