FT  17 DEC 92 / Survey of European Finance and Investment - Switzerland (1):
Outsiders with a purpose / Moves to restore international competitiveness
will not be helped by a slow economy or the people's refusal to join the EEA
AFTER A decade of relative decline, the Swiss financial centre appears
finally to be on the mend.
In the past year, Swiss government, banks and quoted companies have burst
into action, taking important forward-looking steps to restore and enhance
the international competitiveness of Finanzplatz Schweiz.
Stamp duties have been removed from many transactions, a new companies law
has encouraged companies to become more investor friendly, a plan to develop
a single national electronic stock exchange has been fixed and toughened
regulations to prevent money laundering have come into force.
Whether these and other moves are enough to bring back some of the billions
of francs-worth of securities and money-market activities that have decamped
to London and Luxembourg remains to be seen. But Swiss bankers are at least
confident that they are at last stopping the rot.
'The Swiss financial centre is alive. It still accounts for 9 per cent of
GDP and 135,000 jobs. And it is performing,' says Mr Oskar Holenweger, chief
executive of Bank Vontobel in Zurich.
That does not mean that the way ahead for Swiss banking and finance is
trouble-free. The whole industry was shaken at the beginning of the year
when Moody's downgraded Credit Suisse's rating from triple-A, and did the
same to Swiss Bank Corporation three months later.
The appeal of Swiss banks in international markets relates crucially to
their reputation for sound management and capital strength, but Moody's
decisions focused attention on some lax management as well as some possible
negative effects of liberalisation in Swiss financial markets.
'Realistically, it is a price we had to pay for our lending mistakes', Mr
Georges Blum, prospective chief executive of SBC, admits.
The process of recovery is not being helped either by the dreary state of
the Swiss economy, likely to suffer a third year of recession in 1993 as a
result of the rejection of the European Economic Area (EEA) treaty.
The pressure on many banks from the slump in property prices is unlikely to
ease in the near future. Several have warned that their provisions arising
from soured property loans, especially in western Switzerland, will remain
high this year, and probably next year as well.
The refusal of the Swiss people to join the EEA will also make life tougher
for Swiss bankers. In the past, some bankers, especially those in the very
large private banking fraternity, might have argued that they would be
better off remaining a haven outside European institutions. But no more.
Swiss bankers know that their task of remaining competitive has become
greater, because it will now be more difficult for them to attract highly
qualified people to work in Switzerland.
Of equal concern is the damage caused this year by further scandal. In July,
it emerged that a senior executive of Rothschild Bank, the Zurich affiliate
of NM Rothschild of London, had made more than SFr220m (Pounds 99m) in
unauthorised loans to a single group, breaking federal banking regulations.
Swiss bankers wince at the mention of this affair, but point out that at
least the Rothschild family covered the losses and no clients were hurt.
On the brighter side, the tough economic climate is accelerating the pace of
much needed rationalisation. Consultants Arthur Andersen forecast, in a
study published in November, that another 100 of the remaining 577 banks in
the country could go in the next few years.
Much of the contraction so far has been among small regional banks, which
specialise in mortgage and small business lending. Their number has plunged
from 186 to 160 in the past two years, and is likely to continue to fall
rapidly. The worry among Swiss bankers is that healthy banks will not be
able to absorb the casualties as quickly as they emerge.
There have also been retreats by a few US banks from private banking and,
more recently, by a few of the 40 Japanese banks and securities companies,
because of the slump in Japanese Swiss franc bond issues.
A big question-mark hangs over Swiss Volksbank, now a distant fourth among
the universal banks with assets of SFr48.3bn at the end of September. In
October, it warned that cash flow could be off 10 per cent this year and
loan loss provisions would be higher than last year's SFr394m. In a step
that seemed to be clearing the way for a merger or a takeover, Volksbank
said it would convert itself from a co-operative into a joint stock company
next year.
It has been an eventful year for the Swiss capital markets as well. From
early on, there was considerable excitement in the equity market about the
implementation in July of company-law amendments that would enable companies
to split their shares and simplify share structures.
Many took advantage of it to improve their overall transparency and to
remove discriminative clauses against foreign shareholders. Analysts agree
that these changes contributed substantially to the popularity of Swiss
shares, especially among foreign investors.
During the first 11 months of the year, the Swiss Market Index rose nearly
15 per cent, making it one of the best performers in the world.
On the other hand, the opening of a lavish new stock exchange building in
Zurich in July was cause for only muted celebration. This was because a far
more important move - to create a national electronic exchange - had finally
been agreed a few months earlier.
When it comes into operation at the end of 1994, the electronic exchange
will concentrate the activity of the three remaining Swiss exchanges -
Geneva, Basle and Zurich - in one screen-based market, thereby rendering the
new Zurich trading floor obsolete. The hope is that the greater liquidity in
the market will help Switzerland to compete with London for trading volume
in Swiss shares. Analysts say that more than a fifth of all trading in Swiss
shares is now done in London.
On the bond market, the most momentous trend of the year was the
deterioration of Swiss public finances. According to Bank Julius Bar, the
combined public sector deficit this year will rise to SFr8bn.
The result has been that the hitherto somnolent domestic bond market has
come to life. A benchmark federal issue has been established for the first
time, and a future on it has been one of the hits of the year on the Soffex
futures and options exchange.
In the foreign sector, Switzerland's once flourishing junk-bond market
collapsed, as issuers such as Heron, Mountleigh, Polly Peck and Bond
Corporation came to grief. But there was little mourning for a market that
did not seem to coincide with the Swiss image of quality. The big worry in
the market now is what will happen next year when the peak of the
redemptions of Japanese warrant bonds will occur.
Swiss bankers are, on balance, heartened by the progress they have made in
the past year or so to improve the international attractiveness of their
financial markets. They have no delusions about catching up with London, but
they are confident that they can maintain their position as Europe's second
truly international market. The key, as they see it, is to concentrate on
their strengths, particularly international private banking where they
remain far ahead of any competitor, and fund management in general.
They also know much can still be done to improve the attractiveness of their
capital markets, such as clarifying the law on investment trusts,
introducing a takeover code and making further tax reforms. And the
country's decision to stay outside the European single market increases the
urgency to get on with it.
