FT  09 SEP 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Diamond cartel 'needs sales
boost'
DE BEERS' rough (uncut) diamond sales will have to rise to about Dollars 5bn
a year before the South African group, which controls about 80 per cent of
world trade, can start to whittle away at stocks that are growing at an
alarming rate, analysts believe.
This compares with its record sales of Dollars 4.17bn in 1988 and the
second-best level of Dollars 4.16bn in 1990.
Mr Graham Roberts, research director at Carr Kitcat &amp; Aitken, part of the
Banque Indosuez Group, pointed out yesterday that De Beers' Central Selling
Organisation (CSO) had contracted to buy about Dollars 4.4bn of diamonds
from producers next year. Another Dollars 300m of rough diamonds would be
left with producers this year because De Beers had told them it would take
only 75 per cent of their output from September onwards - as permitted under
the terms of the CSO contract.
The CSO attempts to stabilise the rough diamond market by stockpiling excess
gems during times of market weakness and then releasing them as conditions
improve. So, assuming that smuggling from Angola, Russia and other areas
continues but at a reduced rate, there may be a further Dollars 400m of
rough diamonds to be mopped up if De Beers wants to maintain a stable
market.
Mr Roberts suggested De Beers' rough diamond sales would be about Dollars
3.4bn this year, that its cash balances would be seriously reduced and that
'it might even have to borrow money.'
The worrying aspect of the present situation was that many of the problems
De Beers faced were structural and outside its control, he added.
Meanwhile, a special report today from the Economist Intelligence Unit
suggests that De Beers diamond sales 'could exceed Dollars 5bn by 1996,
assuming no major disruptions to production and no supply or price shocks.'
It predicts that world diamond production, which rose by 19 per cent from
89.6m carats to 106.7m between 1986 and 1990, will grow by a further 15 per
cent, from 108m carats to 119m between 1992 and 1996.
Ironically, De Beers' own Venetia mine, near Messina in the northern
Transvaal, which is now building up production towards its expected annual
capacity of 4m carats, is the main contributor to the production increase.
The report says De Beers will have to absorb more diamonds into its buffer
stock and the market imbalance will be most marked in relatively low
quality, small diamonds which have already been accumulating at the CSO and
cutting centres since 1990.
The EIU expects the diamond cartel to survive, however, and even suggests
that its most testing time will come after the market revives 'and with it
the incentive for producers to break with the cartel, or at least to seek a
degree of independence.'
Diamonds to 1995; a cartel and its future. Pounds 95 from the EIU, 40 Duke
Street, London W1A 1DW, UK.
