FT  18 FEB 92 / Ill health hits image of US drug groups: Safety of medical
products
THE corporate world is at its most vulnerable when product safety is called
into question - and nowhere is there greater sensitivity at present than in
the area of health care.
In recent weeks there has been a string of criticisms of four US drug and
medical product companies - Dow Corning, Upjohn, American Cyanamid and
Pfizer. These have buffeted the industry, raised questions about the
performance of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and worried consumers.
The issues involved go beyond the safety of a few products. They concern the
basic question of how far the public is willing to trust drug companies and
regulators to look after their interests. The debate has become all the more
heated because of the way the the companies have chosen to meet their
critics head on, with forceful rebuttals.
The most public - and controversial - issue concerns the charge that Dow
Corning, a 50-50 venture owned by Dow Chemical and Corning, has misled US
authorities about the safety of silicon-gel breast implants.
The company has denied any wrongdoing, but its parents have replaced the
venture's top management. Starting today, an advisory panel to the FDA will
conduct a review of whether implants - taken off the market last month - are
safe or not.
A second controversy concerns Halcion, the world's most widely prescribed
sleeping pill made by Upjohn. The manufacturer's critics, including Dr Ian
Oswald, a retired professor of psychiatry at Edinburgh university, say
Upjohn did not disclose not all the side-effects of Halcion to the FDA. The
agency itself is accused of being less decisive than British health
authorities, who banned the drug last October.
Claims that Halcion's side-effects may cause dangerous behaviour have been
roundly denied by Dr Theodore Cooper, the combative Upjohn chairman. The
company is suing Dr Oswald for libel. Upjohn has also served writs against
the BBC - which broadcast a programme called 'The Halcion Nightmare'. Dr
Cooper said claims Upjohn had concealed data were false and reckless, and
that its critics were guilty of 'junk science.'
A third recent example is that of Pfizer, the drugs company, which says some
400 patients have either died or suffered from the internal fracturing of an
artificial heart valve it stopped selling in 1986. The company does not
accept that the valve is defective, but it has agreed to commit up to
Dollars 505m (Pounds 279m) to cover claims by recipients of the product who
become ill or die.
American Cyanamid, another US drug company, has meanwhile become the subject
of a government investigation amid claims that it falsified research data
relating to a medicine contained in animal feeds.
Among these controversies, it is the breast implant issue that has moved
most prominently from the health to the political arena. 'Any time you mix
sex, women, big business and the government, you get a political issue,'
said Mr Arthur Caplan, director of the Center for Biomedical Ethics at the
University of Minnesota. 'If these were hip replacements, you wouldn't have
the same reaction.'
Dow Corning is the world's biggest maker of breast implants, with a
commanding share of a world market that already numbers 2m women recipients.
The company has been damaged by both the government moratorium on implants
imposed last month and by its inability to block the release of confidential
documents that suggested doubts inside the company over the product dating
back some 20 years.
One effect of these controversies is the potential threat to the US public's
confidence in health-care products. There has been no greater problem of
corporate image since the barrage of criticism over Exxon's handling of the
Alaskan oil spill three years ago.
Each of the safety issues has been simmering for many months. They attracted
public attention only after lawsuits have been filed by patients claiming
they had been injured.
In the case of Halcion, pressure on the the FDA to investigate mounted after
an out-of-court settlement last summer, in which Upjohn, while not admitting
any guilt, agreed to pay an undisclosed sum to a woman who had filed a
lawsuit alleging that she murdered her mother in a fit of madness induced by
her reliance on the sleeping pill.
The problem with breast implants, which have been on the market for decades,
first came to a head in 1988 as a result of complaints from several women.
Last December Dow Corning was ordered to pay Dollars 7.3m compensation and
punitive damages to a San Francisco woman who had brought a lawsuit linking
her ruptured implants to illness.
The company appealed against the decision, but more publicity followed
Congressional hearings called by Mr Ted Weiss, a New York Democrat.
While the FDA has some of the most stringent pre-market testing requirements
in the world, the agency has less power once drug and devices are on the
market. There is no mechanism for monitoring problems once the products have
received the FDA's formal blessing. There have been congressional proposals
to give the FDA subpoena powers so it would have access to company records.
'This is a sterling example of why the FDA needs teeth,' says Mr Caplan of
the University of Minnesota. 'As things stand, they have to wait for
anecdotal evidence to trickle in.'
Among the proposals put forward is one by Mr George Annas, professor of
health law at Boston University's school of medicine, that would require
doctors and drug companies to report problems to the FDA.
The impact of these matters, apart from adverse publicity and consumer
worries, may also be financial. While Pfizer has agreed to set aside up to
Dollars 505m, its share price was only affected temporarily. As far as Wall
Street is concerned, the problem has been addressed by provisions.
At Upjohn, the Halcion issue is one of several factors that depressed the
company's shares. Halcion, with Dollars 260m of annual sales, is Upjohn's
second biggest drug product.
Dow Corning is not a publicly quoted company, but Corning, owner of 50 per
cent of the venture, has seen its share price suffer from the publicity over
breast implants. Dow Chemical, the other parent, is less reliant than
Corning on revenues from the venture.
Despite the intensity of the public debate, it seems unlikely that there
will be wide-ranging changes in the US regulatory process in the near
future. The safety issues raised in each of these cases, however, will
continue to preoccupy critics of the pharmaceutical industry.
