FT  16 JAN 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): The ascent of
Everest - Soft drinks / Coca-Cola's plans for a new global sales assault
Somewhere in the outer reaches of the Himalayas, a small and
specially-trained band of Nepalese sherpas has found a new vocation.
Coca-Cola, the biggest soft drinks company in the world, has hired the
sherpas to lug cases by backpack up to the lodges where mountain travellers
rest.
Meanwhile in Moscow, Coca-Cola is today teaming up with Gavriil Popov, the
city's free market-oriented mayor, to announce the formation of what is
claimed to be the first fully-private joint stock company in Russia since
the formation of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
The Moscow venture, a privately-owned business that will manufacture syrup
and establish up to 2,000 retail outlets in the city, is part of Coke's
assault on the eastern Europe market, a stronghold of arch-rival Pepsi-Cola.
In India, Coca-Cola is planning a joint venture that would bring it back to
the populous sub-continent for the first time since it left in 1977, after a
dispute with the government.
Each example demonstrates Coke's drive to strengthen its international sales
volume. It recognises that distribution plays as great a part in a
successful marketing strategy as the the traditional concepts of
advertising, promotion and other marketing techniques.
It is all part of a master plan described by Roberto Goizueta, Coca-Cola
chairman, in Olympian terms: 'By the year 2000, we will have Coca-Cola
available within an arm's reach of desire of the 6bn people who will be
housed on this planet.'
Donald Keough, Coke's president, says the corporate goal is to double total
non-US sales volume by the end of the 1990s, meaning the company will have
to do better than keep pace with the market.
Surprisingly, Jesse Meyers, editor of Beverage Digest, the industry's bible,
thinks that this is not a wild objective: 'At this point, I don't think even
Coca-Cola knows how big it could become.'
Coke is already the world market leader in soft drinks, with a commanding 46
per cent share that compares with Pepsi's 15 per cent. In the competitive
and more mature US market, Coke has 41 per cent, and Pepsi has 33 per cent.
Outside the US, Coke claims it sells four times as many cases as Pepsi,
while Pepsi insists the ratio is three-to-one.
For much of the 1980s, the marketing focus of Coke and Pepsi was on the
famous cola wars, on Coke's rapidly aborted change to its formula in 1985
and on the high growth US beverage market.
Cola wars continue in the US, with Pepsi now aiming for the younger market
segment, but profit margins are higher in the European Community and much of
the Pacific. Allan Kaplan of Merrill Lynch says that non-US markets offer
the best sales growth potential, which is not surprising since Coke's US
volume grew by just 2-3 per cent last year.
In 1985, about half of Coke's operating profits came from outside the US.
Last year, non-US soft drinks accounted for about 79 per cent of Coca-Cola's
operating income and two thirds of volume.
Coke spent Dollars 3.2bn (Pounds 1.78bn) on selling and advertising expenses
worldwide in 1990. Of this total, only Dollars 932m was spent on traditional
advertising in the media.
Coca-Cola declines to break down its marketing expenditure outside the US;
Pepsi spent Dollars 500m last year outside the US. But all of Coke's top
executives in Atlanta - each of them sipping incessantly from ice-cold cans
of their product - agree that while their brand name may be among the best
known in the world, the real challenge is to create the bottling,
manufacturing and distribution infrastructures in each market.
In 1992 Coke will boost capital spending by 30 per cent, to around Dollars
1.3bn, much of which will pay for the development of bottling plants and
other infrastructure.
Nowhere is distribution more important than in eastern Europe, where thanks
to a Nixon-era deal, Pepsi-Cola outsells Coke. Neville Isdell, the man who
negotiated the new Moscow venture, says the best marketing of Coke in newly
emerging east bloc democracies 'is to get a bottle on the shelf'.
This is in keeping with Coke's fundamental marketing strategy, known in
Atlanta as 'the three As', or availability, affordability and acceptability.
The company's goal is to drive volume by selling concentrate or syrup to
local bottlers, be they independent or joint venture partners. Local
distribution deals are designed to make the product available. It is priced
to make it affordable as a proportion of disposable income. Acceptability
comes through sponsorships, political contacts, or other means, to
infiltrate Coca-Cola into the local culture.
Depending on the country, Coca-Cola will approach marketing differently. In
China, where Coke has 13 joint venture plants and is prepared to wait many
years before it gets any money out, marketing means buying delivery trucks
rather than spending on advertising.
In Japan, Coke last year spent Dollars 500m on 130,000 vending machines, as
half the drinks there are sold that way.
In much of Latin America, the key to marketing is for Coke to supply ice
coolers for the rural markets. In the Dominican Republic and Haiti, Coke
bought 10,000 push-carts and trained local people to sell soft drinks in the
street. In Brazil, the key was to make larger bottles in order to take
advantage of that market's changing consumer habit.
The biggest marketing coup in eastern Europe has been in what used to be
east Germany, where Coke was not available under the Communist regime. The
day the Berlin Wall came down in November 1989, executives in Atlanta
ordered Berlin employees to hand out free cans of Coke to east Germans as
they walked into west Berlin.
By February 1990, without any distribution network in place, Coke began
trucking cases into eastern Germany from its French bottling plant in
Dunkirk. During the year, some 21m cases were sold to wholesalers and
retailers by an army of employees from the west.
At the end of 1990, Coke decided to spend Dollars 450m in east Germany
buying and refurbishing the land, buildings and equipment of state-owned
bottling plants. The result is that in 1991, Coke says it sold 89m cases in
the old east Germany and is aiming for sales of 139m cases in 1992.
The market represented by the European Community is one of Coca-Cola's most
profitable, accounting for around a third of Coke's non-US soft drinks
operating income, estimated at Dollars 2.1bn in 1991.
But not all EC markets have been easy. France, in particular, has thrown up
problems, ranging from past difficulties with Coca-Cola's local bottler to a
certain cultural resistance to the product.
This year Coke is undertaking a traditional marketing campaign that aims to
reach some 42m consumers by a series of sponsorships, contests and other
gimmicks tied to the winter Olympics in Albertville and summer games in
Barcelona, the opening of Euro-Disney park near Paris, the Seville Expo,
Wimbledon tennis, Tour de France and European Cup in Sweden.
Back in the US, one of Coke's most talked about marketing moves was the
agreement last year to hire Michael Ovitz, the Hollywood power broker who
chairs Creative Artists Agency, as a consultant. The big idea is that Ovitz
will forecast entertainment trends worldwide that will enable Coke to link
its products to hits.
The Coke marketing strategy, therefore, is supposed to range from Hollywood
to the Himalayas.
