FT  02 APR 92 / G7 pledges Dollars 24bn Russian aid
UP TO Dollars 18bn (Pounds 10.4bn) in credits and loan guarantees is to be
provided for Russia this year, along with Dollars 6bn for a rouble
stabilisation fund, under an aid programme unveiled yesterday by the Group
of Seven leading western industrialised states.
The package was sealed only after the US committed itself to the programme.
President George Bush said the US backed a 'comprehensive and integrated
programme to support the struggle for freedom' in the former Soviet Union.
'The stakes are as high as any we have faced in this century. Together we
won the cold war and today we must win the peace', Mr Bush said. The package
was presented in Bonn and Washington as the basis of a 'Help for Self-Help'
programme, which must be underpinned by agreement between the Russian
government and the International Monetary Fund on a full-scale structural
adjustment programme.
Although many details, particularly of the rouble stabilisation fund, have
yet to be finalised, the scale of western assistance was spelt out in Bonn
and Washington as part of an attempt to win support for the economic reforms
of Russian president Boris Yeltsin. He faces a crucial vote on his package -
intended to be the basis of the IMF agreement - in the Russian parliament on
Monday.
The package, seen in Moscow as an important show of international support
for Mr Yeltsin, will put him in a stronger position to beat off critics at
the congress. Some deputies at the meeting will be seeking the resignation
of Mr Yegor Gaidar, first deputy prime minister and architect of the reform
programme.
Mr Helmut Kohl, the German chancellor, and the driving force behind the aid
programme as chairman of the next G7 world economic summit in Munich, said
the package was intended as 'a decisive signal of the political and economic
support' of the western powers for Mr Yeltsin's reforms.
'We know that we can only have a limited influence on the reform process in
the Commonwealth of Independent States', he said. 'But given the dimension
of the task . . . the west must do everything to contribute towards the
stabilisation of the democracy and the economy there.'
Mr Horst Kohler, German state secretary for finance, and Mr Kohl's chief
negotiator in the G7, said the Dollars 18bn was the sum total of credits
from the IMF (Dollars 4bn) and the World Bank (Dollars 1.5bn), as well as
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, export credit
guarantees and food credits, both from the G7 and Scandinavian countries.
He forecast that the total would be enough to meet the immediate gap in the
Russian balance of payments this year.
He said G7 finance officials had agreed in Paris on Tuesday to extend the
roll-over period for repayments of principal on ex-Soviet debt - in exchange
for Russian agreement for western auditors to inspect the books of the
Vneshekonombank, and the country's leading hard currency industries.
The intention would be to try to identify where hard currency earnings are
leaking out of the Russian system, either in the form of capital flight, or
as illegal foreign currency bank accounts kept abroad.
In addition to these multilateral aid measures Mr Bush threw his weight
behind the US's Dollars 12bn contribution to the IMF's quota increase, which
has been stalled in Congress, and announced a series of unilateral US aid
measures.
These include Dollars 600m of agricultural credit guarantees to help Russia
buy US food, and a further Dollars 500m for the Ukraine and other former
Soviet republics and the repeal of 'Cold War legislation'.
Mr James Baker, US secretary of state said the US would take up 25 per cent
of the rouble stabilisation fund, and its overall share would be between 20
and 25 per cent of the Dollars 24bn G7 package.
IMF timing crucial for Yeltsin
Aid to fill trade gap Page 2
Editorial Comment Page 18
