FT  21 JAN 92 / Arts: Alban Berg - Barbican Hall/Radio 3
As the BBC's mini-festival of Berg, 'An Affair with Numbers', ended on
Sunday evening, a great many listeners must have felt they had a new
familiarity with the contours and secrets of his style. Hearing virtually
all of Berg's music in one weekend brought home how often he re-deployed
elements which had a special significance for him - certain phrases,
patterns, cadences - over 30 years' worth of composing. While his musical
forms grew ever more ingenious and intricate, those expressive fingerprints
constantly recurred; they are vital clues to the sense of each new piece.
His Lyric Suite (1927) for string quartet is full of them, both backward-
and forward-looking. A few years ago, George Perle's brilliant detective
work established that it is also crammed with coded references to Berg's
secret love affair with Franz Werfel's sister; and that the code is partly
numerological, and that even the musical proportions of whole movements are
aligned to it.
Hence, obviously, the title chosen for the BBC series - though it might
mislead. Berg didn't generate his music from numbers (as some dull Darmstadt
epigones did later) but from his own feeling-laden idiom, within his ever
more obsessively calculated ground-plans, as these successive concerts made
crystal clear.
The Lindsay Quartet's account of the Lyric Suite crowned the afternoon
concert, with an awkward skew. Perle's decoding of the work has shown that
Berg's finale conceals an impassioned song-setting (of Baudelaire), a secret
between him and his inamorata. Of course it is irresistible to try it out,
now, with the words actually sung; but as broadcast, at least, Sarah
Walker's fervent, full-cry entry amid the strings sounded wildly out of
scale and unintegrated. Most of the Lindsay's playing earlier had been up to
their best standard, creatively alert and dramatic, and their account of
Berg's precocious, inspired op. 3 quartet (1910) teemed with sharp insights.
In his piano sonata, in this same programme, Peter Donohoe matched their
incisive attack and drew a high profile of Berg's moody, restless extremes.
The evening concert by the BBC Symphony brought Donohoe back to join Gyorgy
Pauk in the Chamber Concerto for piano, violin and 13 winds, which used to
sound forbidding but has somehow become 'accessible'. Excellent performance,
proportions confidently fixed by the conductor Andrew Davis; the stamp of
authentic character in Pauk's playing, however, was the outstanding feature.
That was what one missed in Der Wein, the soprano cantata that Berg wrote to
a commission while he was already at work on Lulu. Though Judith Howarth
delivered it with careful attention and attractive tone, no great conviction
about what the music means was transmitted. The result was civilised but
mild, where this piece can - on a rare occasion - take on a rapt, silvery
intensity. As in the Violin Concerto on Saturday, the BBC violins fell a
degree short of the exacerbated radiance Berg wants from them in the upper
regions.
Nor did the performance of the three Lyric Suite movements he arranged for
orchestral strings rise much above sensitive sincerity, in contrast to the
Lindsay's searing attack on the original version. (It was unwise to employ
all eight of the BBC double basses: sometimes the music sounded bottom-heavy
and sluggish, which the quartet-score never does. Oozy, yes; but not
sluggish.) With the Lulu Suite, however, Davis, the orchestra and Miss
Howarth excelled themselves.
The soprano sailed into Lulu's high-flying 'Lied' like someone with keen
ideas about what it has to say, and with the tone and technique to make
seductive sense of Berg's fearsomely difficult roulades. In other movements,
the BBC strings opened up at last; the aching beauty of Berg's most
inconsolable paragraphs must have penetrated all but the dullest ears. The
alto saxophone - a sexy major role here - was faultless.
Davis has distinguished himself in this festival, even when his meticulous
tenderness with the music has stifled a little of its energy. It was
satisfying to hear his lively operatic instincts energised by this Lulu
music at the close. The sinews of the musical action were taut and
resilient, the dramatic range imposing, Berg's subversively lovely surfaces
polished softly until they glowed with their own light. When Davis conducts
Lulu in the opera-house, I should go to a lot of trouble to hear it.
