FT  17 DEC 92 / Ofgas demands British Gas be split in two
OFGAS, the gas industry regulator, yesterday demanded the break-up of
British Gas into two wholly separate businesses, claiming that nothing less
would bring effective competition to the gas market.
In a submission to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, Ofgas called for
the removal of British Gas's transport and storage arm from the trading arm
which buys and sells gas. The new transport and storage business, which
would include the national gas pipeline network, would be transferred into a
new company under separate ownership and management.
The report drew a sharp response from British Gas. Mr Robert Evans, the
chairman, said last night: 'While the gas business is under review it is
totally inappropriate for public statements of this nature to be made. We
shall continue to discuss this matter with the MMC.'
Ofgas's demand is the culmination of a long-running and frequently
acrimonious battle by Sir James McKinnon, the gas regulator, against what he
sees as British Gas's dominant position in the gas market.
Last summer British Gas requested the MMC inquiry in the hope of heading off
Sir James's attacks. But it proposed to put the transport and storage
business into a separate division rather than selling it off.
Although Ofgas has hinted it wants a break-up, yesterday's report, prepared
by Mr Greg McGregor, the director of competition and tariffs, is the first
time it has laid out clear demands.
The report says: 'We recognise that the break-up of a large, complex,
integrated business such as British Gas is not a simple matter and therefore
see the need for transitional arrangements. However, we believe that all
structures short of full separation should be seen as a transitional phase
within the context of a commitment to separation.' The report says so long
as British Gas owns the pipeline network it will be able to discriminate
against companies wishing to use it. Even if 'Chinese walls' were set up to
reinforce management independence, it could acquire information about its
competitors' business by watching their shipments.
Ofgas denounces British Gas's plan for a divisional hive-off as 'a paper
separation' which would not resolve the company's inherent dilemmas.
Anything short of complete break-up would mean that 'conflicting interests
will have to be resolved sometimes to the disadvantage of independent
suppliers', it said.
British Gas wins Argentine deal, Page 21
