FT  11 JUL 92 / Minding Your Own Business: High-tech wind in his sails -
David Blackwell on a man trying to transform a cottage industry
SAIL MAKING in England has suffered too long from being a basic cottage
industry. That is the view of Nicholas Gray, who speaks with the authority
of a lifetime's interest in sailing - and who has made his hobby his
business by buying from the liquidators a sail making business in Neyland,
Milford Haven, Dyfed.
In early 1990, for Pounds 25,000, he found himself the owner of one of the
few purpose built sail lofts in the UK, complete with sewing machines and
stocks. With a little more capital and a bank overdraft facility the
business, originally set up only a few months earlier with some help from
the Welsh Development Organisation, went from zero turnover to Pounds
100,000 in the first year.
From the start Gray, a solicitor who left London for west Wales four years
ago so that he could spend more time sailing, recognised that the local
market for sails was not going to be big enough to support the business. He
was seeking to rationalise and modernise an industry which would still be
recognised by a sailmaker from the 19th century - panels of cloth being cut
and stitched together.
'There are lots of sailmakers all doing the same thing,' he explained. While
everyone is up to date with computer assisted design and computer laser
cutting for cloth, few sail makers outside the US have divorced production
from their sales outlet.
'In other words all sails are made where they are sold, which leads to
enormous duplication.'
He had an eye to the big sailing market in southern England, and seized the
opportunity to buy for Pounds 15,000 Stephen Ratsey of Southampton, a
well-established family firm which, in his words, had 'lost its way a bit'
since the death of Stephen Ratsey three years ago.
His strategy was to close down the manufacture in Southampton, retaining the
premises for sales and service and make the sails in the Neyland loft, which
is in an enterprise zone and has low overheads.
'Where neither business was profitable in its own right we have got rid of a
whole layer of overheads with no reduction in service. The thing is
beginning to make sense,' he said. The company now employs six people in
Neyland and three in Southampton, and is expecting to turn over Pounds
300,000 this year.
Stephen Ratsey has a reputation for making big sails for classic boats, and
as Gray intends to stay in that market, he renamed the business Stephen
Ratsey &amp; Copp. His marketing drive has taken him to Brest this weekend where
1m visitors are expected to attend a show of traditional and classic boats
from all over the world.
But the other huge advantage of buying Stephen Ratsey was that the company
was considering a link with Doyle of Marblehead, the Cowes of the US east
coast.
Doyle is highly successful in what Gray terms the 'racing yacht and
mega-yacht field.' The company was looking for a UK outlet to promote sales
and service existing Doyle sails. Gray has tied up a deal with Doyle to
operate as Doyle UK, selling their sails in the UK from Southampton.
'They are selling to quite different markets - Doyle to racing and Ratsey to
traditional classic boats and cruising boats,' he said.
The link with Doyle is expected to provide a further boost to turnover
within a year. But in addition, Doyle is at the leading edge of sail
technology, and Gray is convinced the days of cottage industry sail making
are drawing to a close. 'I wanted a US tie up to make sure we know all about
and can take advantage of modern technology.'
Sophisticated computer software is becoming established in sail design. The
materials and techniques themselves are on the verge of change, with carbon
fibre sails and welded seams in the offing. 'A small business just would
never get hold of that sort of technology on its own,' says Gray, who has
ambitions to become one of the biggest sailmakers in the Pounds 15m-a-year
UK market.
