FT  09 OCT 92 / World Trade News: French farmers set to fight Gatt
concessions
FRENCH farmers are once more mobilising themselves to try to thwart any EC
concessions on farm trade in the negotiations under the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (Gatt).
In the run-up to the EC's Birmingham summit on October 16 - which would have
to endorse any deal reached with the US in Brussels this weekend - they will
next Wednesday launch a 'day of action' to lobby MPs, MEPs and local
officials across the country.
But, clearly nervous about this weekend's negotiation, Mr Jean-Pierre
Soisson, France's new agriculture minister, was in Brussels last night to
stiffen EC negotiators' backbones.
France was taken aback by the virtual isolation of its trade minister, Mr
Dominique Strauss-Kahn, in the EC Council of Ministers earlier this week on
Gatt, and particularly by the line taken by his German counterpart, Mr
Jurgen Mollemann, that a Gatt deal was needed to calm the world's money
markets.
Mr Strauss-Kahn retorted that the two elements were quite unrelated, but
Paris is clearly worried.
French officials regard it as unlikely that the Council of Ministers might
try to push a Gatt deal through by majority vote. But there is concern that
the US may have now bought Germany off by accepting that the bulk of direct
aid to farmers, of prime interest to Germany's small and inefficient
agricultural sector, should be exempted from cuts.
Paris' prime concern is that this weekend should not produce an US-EC accord
on agriculture alone. This would not only further foment next Wednesday's
demonstrations. It would also, officials in Paris say, weaken the
Community's bargaining hand on other unresolved Gatt issues, in which France
has a big stake. These include:
Services. France wants to push the US harder on liberalising trade in
services. After the US, France is the second biggest exporter of services -
chiefly related to finance, technology, telecommunications and tourism -
with a FFr50.7bn (Pounds 5.95bn) surplus in 1991.
Subsidies. France wants the draft Gatt code on subsidies to exempt subsidies
for aircraft-making, research and development and environmental
improvements.
Intellectual property. France feels Gatt protection of marks of origin for
wine and cheese is inadequate.
Dispute settlement. Like its EC partners, France wants any strengthening of
Gatt dispute procedures to stop the US seeking unilateral redress.
For French farmers, of course, the fight with the US is on agriculture
alone. They proved their political clout by helping bring the Maastricht
treaty within a whisker of defeat in the September referendum, and the
unpopular Socialist government needs all the votes it can get in next
March's parliamentary elections.
The main farmers' union, FNSEA, is furious with Brussels 'betrayal' in first
selling the Common Agricultural Policy reform as a 'shield against Gatt',
and now asking them for further concessions in Gatt. Their chief complaint
is the 'unfair' way in which Gatt proposals would cut EC and French exports
back far more than US exports.
