FT  05 FEB 92 / Three shot dead at Sinn Fein offices: RUC constable kills
himself after attack on west Belfast advice centre
THE MURDER of three men at offices of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the
IRA, yesterday formed a violent backdrop to the first official visit to
Northern Ireland by an Irish president since the partition of Ireland in
1921.
A 24-year-old off-duty police constable opened fire at Sinn Fein's west
Belfast advice centre about lunchtime, killing three and injuring two
others. He later shot himself dead.
It was the first time in more than two decades of 'troubles' that a member
of the Royal Ulster Constabulary has carried out an attack in such
circumstances.
Mrs Mary Robinson, president of the Irish Republic, was about a mile away
when the shooting occurred.
Unionist leaders organised a demonstration against her visit in protest at
articles two and three of the Irish constitution which lay claim to
jurisdiction over Northern Ireland. Mr Nigel Dodds, the lord mayor of
Belfast, said: 'I don't think that she can be welcome as long as those
articles remain.'
Previous Irish presidents have visited Northern Ireland in the past, but in
an unofficial capacity, for example to attend funerals of victims of
paramilitary killings. The west Belfast attack came as thousands gathered in
the city centre to demand an end to terrorist murder and intimidation of
workers. The rally, organised by the Irish Congress of Trade Unions, was
called following the IRA killings last month of eight Protestant workers at
Teebane Crossroads near Cookstown.
The police constable gained admission to the advice centre, which also
houses the Republican Press Centre, by posing as a journalist who had
arranged an interview. Once inside, he opened fire with an automatic
shotgun. Eye witnesses said he later escaped in a BMW car.
About two hours later, the policeman's body was found on the shores of Loch
Neagh at Ballinderry, about 25 miles from Belfast. He had a gunshot wound to
the head and a shotgun was found nearby.
The day before, the constable had attended the funeral of a police colleague
at Comber, County Down. He was arrested after firing shots over the grave
later that evening.
Subsequently he was medically and scientifically examined and police took
possession of his service Ruger revolver. He was told to attend a further
examination yesterday morning but did not turn up, the RUC said last night.
An police inquiry is under way into the killings. One of the dead was an
elderly doorman and the other victims were a centre worker and a member of
the public.
Mrs Robinson said she was upset by the killing, saying: 'Any death by
violence is distressing.'
Mr Brian Mawhinney, Northern Ireland minister responsible for security, said
the deaths were 'an absolute tragedy, as is all waste of life in Northern
Ireland'.
Ulster protesters demand peace: Picture, Page 8
