FT  28 FEB 92 / BA and KLM call off talks on merger after five months
MERGER TALKS between British Airways and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines collapsed
yesterday after more than five months of intensive bargaining.
Failure of the merger, which would have created the world's fourth largest
carrier, leaves in tatters BA's plans to build a pan-European airline to
rank alongside the US giants.
The much smaller KLM is left without a partner in increasingly deregulated
European skies.
Project Sahara, as the plan was called, failed because the airlines could
not agree on how much they were worth. This was 'an insurmountable obstacle
to reaching an accord', KLM said. A BA executive said: 'People know our
global strategy to expand through alliances but we will only do that at the
right price.'
The news caused dismay on the London and Amsterdam stock exchanges. BA
shares fell 11p, or 4 per cent, to 265p. KLM fell Fl 2.1, more than 5 per
cent, to Fl 38.2.
The airlines were attracted to the idea of a merger by the prospect of
saving between them up to Pounds 500m through combining their central
offices, maintenance and other operations.
For several weeks, however, arguments about whether BA would take at least
70 per cent of the final company, as it wanted, or 60 per cent, as KLM
wanted, have spilled into the public domain.
The plan was kept alive until late on Wednesday when face-to-face meetings
held simultaneously in the Netherlands and the UK failed to resolve the
disagreement.
KLM said yesterday that talks had devised a corporate structure which would
have been approved by European Community competition authorities. Only the
valuation question had remained unresolved.
KLM said it was still interested in international partners but had no
specific plans.
The Dutch government, which owns 38.2 per cent of KLM, insisted that the
airline had acted on its own in ending the talks. The government controls a
supervisory board which can veto decisions made by KLM's main board.
Without a link-up between BA and KLM, the future of heavily indebted
Northwest Airlines of the US, in which KLM has a 20 per cent stake, is
thrown into doubt. Northwest is strong on Pacific routes but weak in Europe.
A three-way tie-up might have helped solve some of its problems.
The collapse of the deal is only the latest in a series of aborted talks
involving European airlines ahead of de-regulation.
Under rules due to apply from 1993, any European airline should be able to
fly anywhere in Europe.
Deal that did not fly, Page 17
Lex, Page 18
