FT  13 MAY 92 / Machine tool industry holds EC crisis talks
LEADERS of Europe's recession-torn machine tool industry are holding crisis
talks with the European Commission in an attempt to win agreement on the
first EC-wide industrial policy for the sector.
The initiative by the Dollars 19bn European sector reflects fears that the
recession has seriously damaged the competitiveness of a strategically
important industry. Output fell by 8-10 per cent last year, due to the
near-total collapse of east European business and a sharp decline in the US
and western European markets.
The downturn has exposed the financial weakness of a fragmented industry of
1,500 producers, and raised questions about the survival of several leading
companies.
The talks are being spearheaded by Cecimo, the umbrella body for 12 European
machine tool associations, which earlier this year submitted to the EC a
document outlining the sector's plight and listing a raft of short- and
medium-term measures.
Cecimo wants an EC framework programme to revive manufacturing investment by
Europe's mechanical engineering sector, through measures such as tax
changes, faster depreciation, capital grants and lower interest rates.
Financial and fiscal matters are still the responsibility of EC member
states, but Cecimo is keen that individual countries can select from a range
of initiatives which will not be blocked by the EC.
Medium-term measures include better financial and fiscal incentives to carry
out cross-border mergers, and improved access to EC research and development
programmes for the industry's predominantly small and medium-sized
companies.
But the organisation also wants, as a priority, the creation of a 'European
pool' for machine tool control systems, motors and drives to challenge the
supremacy of Fanuc, the Japanese producer.
Cecimo's approach to the EC has been encouraged by the Bangemann paper of
November 1990 which laid out a new industrial policy strategy for the
Community. The group is hoping for an EC communication on the mechanical
engineering industry in the second half of this year, in which the problems
of the machine tool industry would be addressed.
