FT  14 JAN 92 / UK News (Employment): BT to appeal against RSI damages
BT ANNOUNCED yesterday that it would appeal against a court order to pay
damages to two former keyboard operators who suffered repetitive strain
injury (RSI).
The case is widely regarded as a test case on RSI and is being watched
closely by employers and unions.
In an unusual move, BT said it would be offering a 'substantial financial
contribution' to the National Communications Union, which backs the former
keyboard operators.
BT said: 'This is clearly a test case of some importance, not only to us but
to other companies.'
It said that it was making the contribution to what will be 'hefty costs'
for the NCU in defending the appeal 'as a matter of goodwill'.
The former keyboard operators were awarded Pounds 6,000 damages each for
pain and suffering, plus Pounds 660 in interest at a county court in the
City of London last month. Loss of earnings have yet to be calculated. The
court ruled that BT had failed to provide adequate desks and chairs for the
operators and had failed to ensure correct posture.
Another nine associated cases have still to be heard. According to the NCU
more than 90 other cases against BT are pending.
RSI mainly affects the arms and hands of workers and can cause severe pain
and disablement. It has been associated with manufacturing jobs but is
increasingly being linked to keyboard work.
BT said it was appealing against the judgment because, in its view, the
organisation 'should never have been held responsible for injuries the
nature of which could not have been foreseen at the time, and the causes of
which are still the subject of medical controversy'.
Financial Times journalists yesterday decided to hold a new ballot on
industrial action after the 28-day mandate of a previous ballot expired.
The journalists voted by 173 to 67 to take strike action last month after
the management said it was considering compulsorily retiring nine
journalists on health grounds.
The journalists affected are all suffering from repetitive strain injury.
The management has said it will be presenting a new offer in the near
future.
