FT  23 JUL 92 / British Coal reports record profit of Pounds 170m: Big rise
in productivity helps boost earnings
its biggest since nationalisation in 1947, the company reported yesterday.
The result, for the year ending March 1992, was due to dramatic improvements
in productivity and cost cuts, which boosted the operating profit by 51 per
cent. The company also paid nearly 35 per cent less in interest on debt.
Fifteen pits closed during the year with the loss of about 16,000 jobs,
leaving a workforce of 53,000, of which about 41,000 are miners.
The result was sharply higher than last year's figure of Pounds 78m, British
Coal's first profit in 13 years which followed the restructuring of the
company by the government and the beginning of a more efficient regime.
It was overshadowed, however, by fears that British Coal, which is due to be
privatised in the next few years, will never again be able to sell as much
coal at such a high price.
Mr Ken Moses, the company's joint deputy chairman, warned that British
Coal's sales to the electricity industry could shrink to only 20m tonnes in
the year to March 1994 compared with 65m tonnes today. This would happen if
British Coal was unable to secure new contracts with the electricity
industry.
Its contracts, which give British Coal a favourable price, expire in March
1993. Without them, competing fuels could take a bigger share of the
electricity market.
British Coal said this was hard to accept when in many cases gas had been
chosen by the electricity industry although it was more expensive to burn
than coal.
The outlook for the year to 1993 was for a smaller profit, Mr Neil Clarke,
British Coal's chairman said. Although the company will still earn the
revenue from its electricity industry contracts, it expects to have to close
pits during the second half. That is because the new contracts are expected
to require only about 40m tonnes of coal in the first year, and less
thereafter.
The new contracts would be for smaller volumes and at a lower price, since
the now-privatised electricity industry is forcing British Coal to compete
with other fuel suppliers.
Because the new contracts would determine the size and shape of British
Coal, and its value for privatisation, Mr Clarke said, the company had to
keep cutting costs and improving productivity. In the year to March 1992,
productivity rose by 13.1 per cent, and has risen another 14.6 per cent
since then.
Coal's future faces pitfalls, Page 6
Observer, Page 17
