FT  23 JUN 92 / Leading Article: A Slav divorce
THE LAST time Czechoslovakia was dismembered it was a victim of Nazi
invasion and western impotence. This time the decision to break up into two
separate sovereign states follows a general election, in which 85 per cent
of the electorate turned out to vote, and several rounds of talks between
the elected leaders of both the Czech and Slovak nations. Although deeply to
be regretted, the decision at least places responsibility securely upon
Czech and Slovak shoulders.
The political situation has polarised and crystallised with extraordinary
speed. All pre-election opinion polls showed that a large majority in both
republics wanted the common state to continue in some form or other. Now the
Czechs, and with slightly less conviction the Moravians, of whom more may be
heard later, appear to be rallying behind Mr Vaclav Klaus. He won electoral
support in the Czech lands because he promised to continue, and even
accelerate, the pace of privatisation and other reforms. These are designed
both to prevent a return to the authoritarian past and to fulfil the
criteria for full European Community membership by the turn of the century.
His view that continuation of a common state on lines demanded by Mr
Vladimir Meciar, the Slovak leader, would both jeopardise economic reform
and risk pulling Czechoslovakia back towards its recently shed authoritarian
past is widely shared in the Czech lands.
But the outcome of the negotiations also furnished the latest proof that the
richer and more numerous Czechs do indeed call the shots in the common
state, as Slovaks have complained for decades. It is not easy to play second
fiddle without hope of advancement, and many Slovaks feel that 1,000 years
in somebody else's shadow is enough. It is also true that they have suffered
more than the Czechs from economic policies made largely in Prague. Their
heavy industry was more vulnerable to the collapse of the Soviet market,
more difficult to privatise and less able to adapt to western markets.
Once independent, the Slovaks will be able to work out their own policies,
and make their own mistakes. This may be psychologically a good thing, if it
helps them to work out long felt resentments. But they are likely to find
that their freedom of manoeuvre is savagely limited.
Independent Slovakia aspires to eventual EC membership, but to qualify, it
will have to fulfil onerous entry requirements. That means an open and
competitive economy and respect for the rights of minorities. The irony is
that this will require following similar policies to those demanded for
continuing the federal state.
