FT  10 OCT 92 / Gardening: Face the facts: fuchsias enjoy breaking rules -
Robin Lane Fox takes the RHS to task over a question of hardiness
AT LAST, we have a proper English autumn: green grass is framing damp
flowerbeds, berries are everywhere, and there are not so many wasps that
plums become too hot to handle. Much less has been heard about global
warming, except among those gardeners who have burnt their fingers bolting
to Tuscany. My violas are loving it all in full sun, refuting the usual view
that they must grow in shade and cool soil.
Fuchsias are loving it, too; these are plants we should not confine to
wretched hanging baskets. I suspect strongly that we under-estimate them:
many are hardier than we are all taught to believe.
The Royal Horticultural Society has just put its name to a new encyclopaedia
of gardening which is characteristically cautious: 'Breeders have produced a
vast range of hardy and slightly tender hybrids . . . most fuchsias cannot
tolerate intense sun . . . in cold areas, many may need frost protection in
winter . . ' The encyclopaedia names only one example of a hardy fuchsia:
Lady Thumb, a white and red flowered version of Tom Thumb which died with me
last winter.
Since the RHS refuses to face the fuchsia, I will rely on other sources:
what does that encyclopaedia think about the botanic garden in Leicester?
Three years ago, its curator showed me the sort of sight I relish: masses of
fuchsias growing happily from year to year in beds in full, hot sun.
The garden can list more than 70 varieties which break the supposed rules
and survive the winter in a garden which is not unduly sheltered.
Nonetheless, we are all taught that almost all fuchsias need shade and have
to spend the winter in a cool greenhouse. The bushes are never pruned until
spring, and their bare skeletons sometimes are protected with a mound of
earth or debris piled over their crowns.
Nowadays, we can all use Fibre Fleece instead, although the new
encyclopaedia does not even mention it. This is the brand name for rolls of
a protective white blanket which can be cut and pinned over any tender plant
during the next month. It keeps off most of the frost and allows water to
continue to permeate the ground. My results with it have been excellent.
Perhaps the thought of bare skeletons in the winter might deter you;, if so,
you should follow a trick used at Hidcote for many years. In the next few
weeks, plant bulbs of the bright blue scilla sibirica right up to the
fuchsia's main roots. They flower brilliantly in the spring before the
fuchsia regains its leaves, and they do not object to its competition.
The RHS encyclopaedia permits this trick, too: 'Choose just one cultivar per
container,' it tells us, 'as different cultivars grow at different rates.
Mixtures of fuchsias and other plants also make a successful display.'
Surely 'other plants' grow at different rates and, anyway, which others?
Fuchsias and French marigolds look awful, although they have been seen at
Wisley. As a gardener, I can never take too seriously advice which goes on
about 'cultivars' without being specific.
My second pillar is the Fuchsia Lexikon, by Ron Ewart, published in 1982 by
Blandford Press. Admittedly, he goes on about cultivars, too, but his book
is one for specific reference, not reading through, and it does give us an
expert's view of hundreds of varieties from Angela Rippon to Yum Yum. Ewart
was a professional grower for 20 years and served the Fuchsia Society in
high office. I trust him.
Even in 1982, after a frightful winter, he was prepared to name quite a
range of fuchsias as 'garden hardy': pink and mauve Elfin Glade, cerise and
purple Genii, old red and purple Brilliant, and many others like Henriette
Ernst and Marjorie Blake which you need to hunt out in your Plantfinder.
Whenever I have lost a Ewart selection, it has been my own fault; but, on
Leicester experience, the list of possible hardiness is even longer. Right
now, in Oxford, we have mature plants of the lovely Voltaire which are
flowering freely in a sunny position, having survived several winters, dry
summers, and the little ways of the student body. Yet, Voltaire is usually
marked as a half-hardy form.
During the next fortnight, you still have time to take cuttings of any
fuchsias you want to perpetuate. Almost all of them root with absurd ease in
a slightly warm place. By next year, they will be flowering, a wonderful
postscript to the season among pale blues, white, and soft colours. Back,
then, to the fuchsia - just the plant for traditional autumns if the weather
is planning to return to tradition.
