FT  12 MAR 92 / Hussein seeks aid and solace
KING HUSSEIN, Jordan's ruler, is expected to use today's meeting with
President George Bush, the first between the two men since the Gulf war
strained relations between Jordan and the US, to call for measures to
alleviate the effects of sanctions on the Iraqi people.
The King's visit coincides with that of Mr Tariq Aziz, Iraq's deputy prime
minister, to the United Nations in New York on a mission to persuade the
Security Council to lift the embargo against Iraq.
The timing is accidental, but Mr Aziz, who left for New York from Amman,
took the opportunity while in Jordan to seek the King's support in Iraq's
campaign to have the 20-month old sanctions lifted.
The King, whose speeches reflected strong pro-Iraqi sympathy among
Jordanians during the Gulf war, is likely to plead for an easing of the
pressure on Iraq for humanitarian reasons.
Before leaving Amman, senior Jordanian officials said they would argue in
Washington for measures to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people. 'It
is no longer a question of who is in power in Baghdad, but of the agony of
people trying to feed and clothe themselves,' said, Mr Mutasem Bilbeisi, the
Foreign Ministry under-secretary.
The King will also discuss the Bush administration's role in furthering the
Arab-Israeli peace talks during talks this afternoon in the White House.
Washington is the second stop on the King's North American tour after
Canada, where yesterday he received promises of increased economic aid to
help Jordan cope with the influx of post-war refugees.
Mr Brian Mulroney, Canada's prime minister, said they discussed regional
security in the region and UN sanctions against Iraq. 'King Hussein is a key
voice for stability and moderation in the Middle East,' Mr Mulroney said
after the talks. 'We recognise his dedication to bringing peace to the
region.'
Although the US and Jordan kept channels open during the Gulf crisis, the
King's mixture of formal neutrality and often impassioned support for the
Iraqi people angered the US administration, which responded by suspending
military assistance and economic aid to Amman.
However, President Bush restored this assistance in September last year, on
the grounds that it was both in US interests and 'would be beneficial to the
peace process in the Middle East'.
In a further sign of the thaw in relations, Mr Baker last week urged the
House of Representatives to increase aid for Jordan to an annual Dollars 77m
from Dollars 55m.
