FT  22 DEC 92 / The empire splits up: The fragmentation of Warsaw Pact
countries is creating an unstable division of military might
Across central and eastern Europe, armed forces are being remodelled or
created anew. In place of a monolithic system, a new military map is in the
making, fragmented, unstructured and disparate.
Since the winding-up last year of the Warsaw Pact and then the Soviet Union
itself, a pattern of new regional powers and spheres of influence has begun
to emerge. In its closing months, after the loss of East Germany in 1989,
the Warsaw Pact had six members. In the new year, when the Czech and Slovak
republics split, the six will have become 21 countries, all either
possessing their own armies, or forming them, or planning to form them, with
differing degrees of civilian control and varying levels of clarity about
doctrines or aims.
Old grievances and suspicions are returning in a region where borders
affecting large swathes of territory and ethnic groups have changed within
living memory. Nationalism is resurgent. Tensions and clashes of interest
are inevitable. The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI)
counts some 30 current territorial disputes in the Caucasus region alone,
arising from frontier changes in the 1920s, 1930s and 1950s.
On the fringes of the former Soviet Union, war has already struck Georgia,
Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan and Tajikistan. The conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia have revealed the inability of present European security
structures and mechanisms to tackle crises of this sort.
Military authorities in central and eastern Europe all now profess
democratic principles, but they are largely survivors from the old system.
For 36 years their armies acted as an extension of the Soviet command, with
standardised military doctrines and equipment. Today's reform-oriented
general staff officers come from a background of allegiance to the party and
to the dominant ally.
Reform of army structures is going on while remnants of a Soviet troop
presence remain in Germany and Poland as well as various former Soviet
republics, and while part of Moscow's long-range nuclear arsenal lies
stranded in three republics outside Russia.
Military spending among Moscow's former allies has been dropping for several
years, although according to SIPRI the process slowed down in 1991.
Throughout the region cuts have begun under the Conventional Armed Forces in
Europe (CFE) treaty, which demands the destruction of large numbers of heavy
weapons, aircraft and helicopters. But the treaty, agreed between the Warsaw
Pact and the Nato nations two years ago, was designed to balance two blocs,
not to secure stability within either group of countries.
There are enormous disparities. Belarus, finding itself unexpectedly
independent, currently has twice as many tanks as Britain, more big guns
than France, more combat aircraft than Germany.
In Ukraine, there are reckoned to be about 700,000 troops, including forces
withdrawn by Moscow from Germany, Hungary and Czechoslovakia. Under agreed
manpower ceilings, these are due to be reduced to 450,000 in 1995. The
official aim is a strength of 250,000 - roughly equivalent to the UK's - at
the end of the decade. Most have signed oaths of allegiance to Ukraine.
Experts say some 10,000 officers have refused and are due to leave. But
there may be up to 200,000 Ukrainian officers currently serving in other
republics and eligible to return.
Ukraine now has more tanks, armoured vehicles and combat aircraft than any
other country in Europe after Russia. Even under the CFE cuts its
entitlements for tanks and armoured vehicles are Europe's third largest, and
for artillery and aircraft the second largest, dwarfing those of its
neighbours to the west.
With seven national borders and a Black Sea coast, Ukraine holds a pivotal
position in the region. The greatest source of international concern is its
ambiguity over the nuclear weapons on its soil: 176 SS-19 and SS-24
intercontinental ballistic missiles and two bases with nuclear-armed Bear
and Blackjack bombers. The country's leaders have promised to become
non-nuclear by the end of 1994. But Ukraine has yet to ratify the Start
treaty with the US on reducing strategic arsenals, as Russia and Kazakhstan
have. Unlike Belarus it has refused to accept full Russian control over the
weapons.
In the spring, it stalled over the transfer of short-range nuclear arms for
destruction in Russia. Its aim now appears to be to win the financial
assistance it failed to obtain then. The US has already offered it Dollars
175m to help dismantle the strategic arsenal and store the materials, on
condition that Kiev joins the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty.
'It is largely a bargaining chip, but we can't be sure,' says Dr Mark Smith,
who heads research on the former Soviet Union at the Royal United Services
Institute in London. Ukraine does not have operational control over the
weapons, nor the command system it would require. But experts believe it
could overcome these hurdles. Under the Soviet system, the most advanced
stages of nuclear weapon production were kept in Russia, but Ukraine could
undoubtedly develop an indigenous capability.
Nato officials are worried that President Leonid Kravchuk may be attracted
to the idea of a place in the family of nuclear-weapon states. Some
parliamentarians have spoken of the desirability of a small nuclear
deterrent.
'Why should they give it away, if they distrust the Russians?' asks Mr Henry
Plater-Zyberk, a military expert at the University of Surrey.
Uncertainty also surrounds the future of the former Soviet Black Sea fleet.
Agreement was reached in August on a temporary joint Russian-Ukrainian
command, putting off the division of the fleet for three years. But there
have been hints that Ukraine may want to extend its naval presence beyond
its coastal waters and possibly into the Mediterranean.
The European countries that have emerged from Moscow's domination have all,
except for Belarus, clearly turned their backs to Russia. Since the Warsaw
Pact's demise in April, 1991, a queue of potential applicants has built up
at Nato's door.
However, officials at the organisation's headquarters in Brussels complain
that the central and eastern European countries have 'exaggerated
expectations of what Nato can do'. The North Atlantic Co-operation Council,
set up by Nato as a forum for these countries, also embraces the former
Soviet Union's central Asian republics, with which they have few interests
in common and which still have ties with Russia.
Nato, created for stability in Europe, has yet to work out what its function
is in that part of the continent which used to be in Moscow's dominion. Mr
Dick Cheney, the outgoing US defence secretary, recently issued a personal
warning to Nato colleagues: 'An organisation devoted to security that does
not address these concerns is not going to survive long-term.' Nato should
ultimately agree to admit 'at least some of these nations', he said.
But Nato allies are reluctant to provide security guarantees over territory
reaching to the borders of the former Soviet Union. They are also anxious
not to sideline Russia.
In the Baltics, Nato has been trying to dampen fears about Russian
aggression and about the concentration of Russian forces in the Kaliningrad
enclave between Lithuania and Poland. This area contains as many as 400,000
troops, officials say, including units being withdrawn from Germany and the
independent Baltic republics. Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia are creating new
armies - still tiny with hardly any equipment. They are the only three
countries building up their military from scratch.
Elsewhere the greatest advances in ideas for reform and restructuring have
been made in Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia, the members of the Visegrad
group formed last year. All want to redeploy forces concentrated near their
western borders. But in the case of air forces this means building new
airfields. The problem is at its most acute in the division now being
undertaken between Czech and Slovak forces. Military strength, including air
defence, has been concentrated in western Bohemia, although the defence
industry is mostly in Slovakia.
Equipment in these countries lagged behind that of Soviet forces. But
modernising is difficult, with Nato not yet ready to supply arms and
traditional suppliers demanding payment in hard currency.
Hungary, which has had fighters on alert since a cluster bomb fell on a
border village in October last year in a spillover from the fighting in
former Yugoslavia, has obtained aircraft identification equipment from the
US, the first such supplies to a former Warsaw Pact country. It is also
getting spares from the former East German army and recently agreed to take
Dollars 800m worth of equipment from Russia as part of debt repayments.
Most of the members of the Commonwealth of Independent States - the fragile
grouping of former Soviet republics other than the Baltics and Georgia -
have founded their own national forces; Tajikistan plans to; Turkmenistan is
the only one planning to share command with Russia.
But if these countries want professional, western-style forces, how are they
going to afford them? Their ministries frequently cannot even afford the
fares to take part in seminars with Nato members.
Implementing the CFE cuts is an awesome problem for all central and eastern
European countries. Cutting up tanks is expensive and environmentally
hazardous. It is unclear how Russia and Ukraine, in particular, will face up
to the force reductions required, with large-scale military unemployment
adding to the effects of economic upheaval.
The deterioration of morale and discipline in the Russian military is
already notorious. Officers are disoriented, some bitterly resentful of the
way arms control has been handled. Most of the Russian forces are now
regarded by Nato as being in poor condition.
Cuts promised for the end of the decade include a 45 per cent reduction in
current troop numbers. But even then, Russia will still have an army of
1.5m, backed by 3,000 long-range nuclear weapons, the accoutrements of a
superpower. When a Nato military official declares that 'none of us is
afraid of the Russians any more', he is speaking for stable, secure western
Europe and not for the countries that have emerged from the Warsaw Pact.
