FT  21 JUL 92 / Glaxo to focus on Aids drug
GLAXO, the UK pharmaceutical group, is pouring millions of pounds into a
priority development programme for its candidate Aids drug, 3TC.
The company's scientists hope the drug will emerge from clinical trials as
the first commercially successful alternative to Wellcome's AZT drug
Retrovir. First results of those trials are due this week at the
international Aids conference in Amsterdam. Although only 180 patients have
taken 3TC for a few months, studies show the drug reduces the impact of HIV,
the virus that causes Aids.
3TC prevents HIV replicating in the same way as AZT and two recently
approved similar drugs - DDI from Bristol-Myers Squibb, and DDC from Roche.
However, 3TC avoids interaction with human cells which causes some toxic
side-effects in the other drugs.
In a statement in Amsterdam yesterday, Glaxo tried not to arouse premature
expectations among Aids patients. Glaxo said it was developing 3TC 'with the
highest priority' but it was 'too early to be sure of the ultimate role of
the compound in the treatment of HIV infection'.
Its shares closed in London up 10p at 688p while Wellcome was down 25p at
845p in a weak market. The Aids conference, also likely to bring positive
news for Wellcome's AZT Aids drug, comes as investors make their final
decisions on Wellcome's Pounds 2.65bn global share offer which closes on
Friday.
Glaxo is developing 3TC with BioChem Pharma, the Canadian company that
discovered it. Dr Gervais Dionne, research vice-president of BioChem Pharma,
said the plan was to move to large-scale clinical trials in 1993. If they
also give good results, Glaxo will apply for a marketing licence in 1994.
Glaxo is devoting 'very substantial resources' to 3TC, said Dr Grahaem
Brown, in charge of the development programme. 'Nothing is being allowed to
stand in its way.'
Glaxo is prepared for heavy demand for 3TC, if the drug receives marketing
approval. With HIV infection still increasing rapidly worldwide and few
other alternatives to AZT giving encouraging results, sales of 3TC could be
worth several hundred million dollars a year to Glaxo in the late 1990s.
Market, Page 34
