FT  26 OCT 92 / Cuba defies US move to tighten trade sanctions
THE Cuban Communist party said the latest US economic sanctions against the
Caribbean island would not change its commitment to socialism but would
reduce the chances of a diplomatic end to the 30 years of hostility between
the two countries.
The new sanctions imposed at the weekend by President George Bush
represented 'a pirate's licence', according to the official media in Havana,
the Cuban capital. They are contained in legislation described in Washington
as the 'Cuban Democracy Act' (also called the Torricelli Bill), which bans
foreign subsidiaries of US companies from doing business with Cuba. Ships
which call at Cuban ports will be banned from US ports for six months.
The sanctions have already been rejected by several countries which trade
with Cuba, including members of the European Community, Canada and Mexico,
and have been condemned as an unfair trade practice by the shipping industry
in Cuba's Caribbean neighbours. Earlier this month the European Commission
lodged a formal protest and the UK government said last week it would invoke
an existing law to prohibit UK companies owned by US interests from
complying with US legislation.
US legislators supporting the measures said they are intended to force the
administration of President Fidel Castro towards democracy.
The Cuban Communist party said the move indicated unlimited 'visceral
hatred' of the Cuban people, and referred to a recent statement by Mr Castro
that Cubans were willing to undergo 'death a thousand times' rather than
abandon the island's socialist ideology.
If the new sanctions are even partially effective they will be a further
blow to a Cuban economy reeling from shortages of energy and hard currency
following the collapse of the Soviet Union, formerly Cuba's main foreign
beneficiary. The new measures are likely to be debated soon at the United
Nations when Cuba's efforts to have the 30-year-old US trade embargo on the
island ended will be discussed.
