FT  14 MAY 92 / Ratners to take extra Pounds 53m charge: John Thornhill on
restructuring costs at troubled jewellery chain
RATNERS GROUP, the troubled jewellery chain, is finalising plans for a
sweeping restructuring of its operations and announced yesterday it would
take an extra Pounds 53m exceptional charge this year to cover the
anticipated costs, bringing the total to Pounds 98m.
The company was forced to make the announcement after disclosing its plans
to bankers while renegotiating its credit lines.
Ratners stressed the company's financial position was not in jeopardy and
strongly denied the review might lead to the departure of Mr Gerald Ratner,
its controversial chief executive.
Ratners' announcement was made 4 minutes after the close of the London
market. Earlier, the company's shares closed  1/2 p higher at 19 1/2 p
giving it a market value of Pounds 55.9m. In January, after a disastrous
Christmas trading period, Ratners announced it would take an exceptional
charge of Pounds 45m to cover rationalisation costs. This latest increase in
provisions suggests it will cut more deeply than envisaged.
The company intends to close its Colindale warehouse and concentrate UK
distribution at one site in Birmingham. About 250 jobs will be phased out
over the next year although some may be reabsorbed in Birmingham.
Further exceptional costs are expected to relate to stock write-downs both
in its jewellery chains such as Ratners, H. Samuel, and Ernest Jones, and
its Salisburys bags shops.
Analysts speculated that up to 200 of Ratners' 2,000 outlets might also be
earmarked for closure. Although the tarnished Ratners chain may be heavily
rationalised it is understood that it is unlikely to be phased out.
Additional costs are also likely to be incurred in rationalising Ratners' US
businesses.
Further details of the restructuring will be released when Ratners reports
its financial results for the year to February 1 in a few weeks although a
date has not been set.
Analysts suggested there was now added reason to strengthen the balance
sheet although no fund-raising exercises were likely to precede the annual
results.
'This is only likely to increase the likelihood of some kind of capital
restructuring at the expense of ordinary shareholders,' said Mr Quintin
Price, analyst at stockbrokers James Capel.
Ratners is not denying reports that it is in talks to dispose of its Watches
of Switzerland chain although any anticipated losses on its disposal are
likely to have been considered as an extraordinary charge.
