FT  23 JAN 92 / Tepid US recovery expected in first half
THE economy should begin to gather momentum in the spring, with a tepid
recovery taking hold in the second half of the year, Mr Robert Reischauer,
director of the Congressional Budget Office, predicted yesterday in a report
to Congress.
The report says a moderate recovery is more likely than a 'double dip'
recession, despite signs of a mild contraction of output in the fourth
quarter of last year.
CBO projections indicate growth at an annual rate of 0.9 per cent in the
current quarter, rising to 2.9 per cent in the second quarter and more than
3 per cent in the third and fourth quarters.
The projections were roughly in line with recent private-sector forecasts,
which mostly predict a weak economic recovery in the second half of the
year. The CBO, which is a non-partisan adviser to Congress, publishes
semi-annual economic forecasts.
The latest report says federal spending will account for nearly 25 per cent
of gross national product this year - the highest share since 1945. The
federal budget deficit is forecast to reach Dollars 352bn, or 6 per cent of
GNP, in the current fiscal year. This compares with a deficit of Dollars
298bn, or 4.8 per cent of GNP, last year.
The CBO is pessimistic about the prospects of reducing the deficit in the
medium term. Its forecasts show the deficit falling slowly - from Dollars
325bn in fiscal 1993 to just under Dollars 200bn in fiscal 1996, before
rising again.
Over the next six years, it expects the federal debt to rise by a total of
about Dollars 1,500bn to Dollars 4,200bn.
The report says there is a significant risk that the economy could be weaker
than forecast early this year, but it says a sharp decline is unlikely. This
time last year, the CBO, like most private forecasters, wrongly predicted
the recession would end last summer.
The study warns that the tepid recovery will reduce economic hardship no
more than gradually in much of the country, putting pressure on the
administration.
