FT  02 APR 92 / Falklands invites oil search tenders
THE FALKLAND ISLANDS gov-ernment is inviting tenders for seismic studies in
disputed territorial waters in the South Atlantic, in effect excluding
Argentina from the initial search for oil in the area.
Senior Falklands government officials have been told by the Foreign Office
that further steps towards developing an oil industry in the area  - such as
full-scale exploration  - must await agreement between London and Buenos
Aires.
However, this initial move, coinciding with the tenth anniversary today of
the Argentine invasion of the Falklands, could provoke a strong protest from
Argentina, which has been pressing for joint participation with the UK on
every stage of the Falklands' oil programme.
Its timing also appears to have pre-empted the outcome of the UK general
election, which Falkland Islanders fear may lead to a Labour victory and a
more conciliatory attitude towards Buenos Aires on the issue of sovereignty.
Surprised foreign ministry officials in Buenos Aires said they had been
reassured by the UK there would be no unilateral move on oil. Argentina
wants to participate in the seismic studies, which it considers important in
establishing the true economic potential of the area.
Argentina, which does not recognise the islands' government, claims
sovereignty over the surrounding waters. But the Foreign Office in London
said that the Falklands government could, under local legislation, exercise
rights over the seabed and the subsoil of the continental shelf around the
islands.
There is widespread speculation in the Falklands and in Buenos Aires that
the islands have large oil reserves. A study of their oil potential by a
private company in the 1970s has remained a closely guarded secret.
Mr Ronald Sampson, chief executive of the islands' council, said there was
no reason why the Falkland Islands could not go ahead with the studies. He
expected seismic studies to be completed by the end of this year and to be
in a position to licence blocks for exploration by the middle of 1993.
Mr Sampson said local councillors had been 'made aware by the British
government' that in the 'longer term there will have to be a much closer
co-operation with Argentina in the exploration of oil'.
UK-Argentine talks in Buenos Aires in February about oil were inconclusive,
but further negotiations are planned for in London in June.
The Foreign Office said last night that, given the 'sensitivity' of the oil
issue, London and Buenos Aires were remaining in constant contact with each
other.
