FT  17 DEC 92 / Survey of Zambia (5): The mood changes - Recovery is in
sight but hard evidence is lacking
AFTER more than a decade during which Zambian economic management was the
butt of cruel jokes, many of them justified, the Zambian economy is on the
mend. But for now, recovery is more a matter of a radical change of mood
since the new administration took office, with little concrete evidence,
other than sweeping deregulation, that the corner has been turned.
'We are pointing in the right direction,' says Mr David Frost, chairman of
the Zambia Confederation of Industries and Chambers of Commerce 'but the
vehicle is stationery, if not still slipping backwards'.
Figures bear this out. Inflation still running at 100 per cent - but down
from 400 per cent in the dying days of the Kaunda administration - money
supply is still out of control, GDP is forecast to fall 10 per cent in 1992
and a pre-rescheduling debt-service ratio of stands at 65 per cent of
exports.
But there are some chinks of light. The 1992 budget deficit, excluding
external debt-service, is down to 2.5 per cent of GDP from 7.5 per cent a
year ago. If drought relief is taken from the numbers, the deficit is only
0.9 per cent - a remarkable achievement.
The Chiluba government has had its share of bad luck. Early forecasts of
marginal economic growth in 1992 were torpedoed by the drought. The Kaunda
administration's desperate final spending spree, designed to buy votes,
translated into surging inflation during 1992. This is turn sparked massive
devaluation with the Kwacha tumbling from K85 to the dollar a year ago to
K325 in early December.
All agree that slaying the inflationary dragon is Zambia's top economic, and
social, priority. The central bank, under the leadership of its new
governor, Mr Dominic Mulaisho, has bravely liberalised financial and foreign
exchange markets, pushing lending rates up to historic highs of 75 per cent
or more for prime borrowers, and forcing the banks to hold two-thirds of
their liabilities to the public in statutory or inner reserves.
With the impending introduction of a Treasury Bill auction system, the
central bank will have abandoned direct controls over interest rates as well
as the exchange rate, leaving the markets to call the tune. 'We are
democratising the economy,' says Mr Mulaisho.
But there is only so much monetary policy can achieve when government
borrowing is out of control. In the year to August, government borrowing
from the banking system rose 300 per cent. Restoring monetary discipline now
requires fiscal restraint.
This is promised for 1993 when the government says it will present a
balanced budget, based on cash limits. This means the government will borrow
only from the market - not the Bank of Zambia - and solely to bridge the gap
between expenditure outgoings and revenue inflows.
At the same time, the cabinet is working on a 'constitutional formula' to
prevent overspending by the line ministries.
Cynics point out that budget balance was the target for 1992 and that one
reason it was breached was because the planned 70 per cent public sector pay
award escalated into one of 120 per cent. The drought added fuel to the
flames as did Zambia Airways, reportedly losing Dollars 3m a month.
Indeed, after meeting the IMF's benchmarks in the second quarter of the
year, in the September quarter the targets were missed and Zambia failed to
accumulate any 'rights' as part of the programme for repaying IMF arrears.
Officials say the programme is now back on track and December benchmarks
will be met, but all agree that the fate of the programme hangs on the
budget to be presented by finance minister Emmanuel Kasonde at the end of
January.
In Paris last week, the government told a sympathetic donor community it
would bring money supply down from its estimate of more than 70 per cent in
1992 to 17 per cent by the end of next year, while inflation would drop to
55 per cent and would be an annualised 20 per cent rate by the final quarter
of 1993. These targets, the government says courageously, are minimum, not
maximum, goals.
Much can, and almost certainly will, go wrong. Few believe that Zambia has
either the managerial skills or the institutional capacity to push through
so challenging a reform programme without mishaps along the way.
The debt overhang and the dependence on copper are further complications as
is the deterioration of the infrastructure and a worsening AIDS epidemic. To
these must be added two human problems: government recognition that the man
in the street desperately needs to see some improvement in his living
standards. 'The political honeymoon is not going to last much longer,' warns
one international banker.
Above all there is the problem of culture change. Zambia has long been a
paternalist society. This mindset has to change. The experience of the past
28 years demonstrates that a government, even with the most laudable
motives, cannot be a fairy godmother.
Formidable though this task may be the transformation of the business mood
is a reminder of the facts of economic life. Change at the top is a
prerequisite for successful recovery and in its first year in office, the
Chiluba administration has breathed new life into an economy which, 18
months ago, seemed in terminal decline.
Investment is a contentious area. Zambia's investment code is 'the best in
the region', according to Mr Bob May, managing director of Dunlop Zambia.
But powerful voices in the business community believe it should be improved.
Officials say the government will introduce further improvements in the
investment code in the January budget.
At the end of its first year in office, Mr Chiluba's government earns high
marks for transparency, for its undisputed commitment to reform and for its
courage.
What remains in doubt is its ability to translate intentions into
performance. Achievements made so far will count for little if, next year,
the government fails the stiff fiscal test of stern budget discipline.
With the local government elections behind it and no need to go the polls
until 1996, now is the time to administer the fiscal dose without which
economic decline will continue.
But there can be no quick fix. Mr Nick Brentall, managing director of
Barclays Bank, Zambia, puts it into context. 'It took us 27 years to get
where we are. We are not going to get out of it in 27 months.'
