FT  04 DEC 92 / Survey of Thailand (5): Progress towards a free trade area -
Links with Asean
On January 1, Thailand and its five partners in the Association of South
East Asian Nations (Asean) are due to start cutting tariffs on goods traded
within the group. By the year 2008 these first steps should have led to the
creation of an Asean Free Trade Area (Afta).
Thailand was the main driving force behind the agreement to set up Afta.
This was not because Thailand was more liberal than the other five - Brunei,
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Singapore. Far from it; Thailand's
tariffs are on average the highest in Asean and towards the end of the year
some Asean partners were beginning to question Thailand's good faith.
There were two principal reasons for Thailand's push. First, in the months
leading to the 25-year-old group's third summit in Singapore in January this
year, Thailand happened to have as its prime minister Mr Anand Panyarachun.
Mr Anand is a committed free-trader and, as an active member of the Asean
Chambers of Commerce and Industry, had lobbied for years for Asean trade
liberalisation. His efforts bore fruit when the Afta agreements were signed
at the January summit.
Second, with the Europeans and North Americans integrating their markets,
and with the Uruguay Round of world trade liberalisation talks in limbo,
some sections of the Thai business community and bureaucracy were convinced
that Afta was needed.
With a population size matching that of the European Community, a
liberalised Afta would attract more investors, according to this view. It
would cut costs and help Asean respond to the increased competitiveness
arising from the North American Free Trade Agreement and the European Single
Market. If necessary, it would provide alternative markets for Asean exports
which presently depend on the west, should Nafta and the EC become
protectionist trade blocs.
Asean countries still tend to trade more with Europe, North America and
Japan than among themselves. Only about 20 per cent of Asean members' trade
is with other Asean countries, and the figure falls to about 5 per cent if
Singapore is excluded. But the statistics show a slow growth, suggesting the
six are gradually becoming more important to each other.
Economic integration within Asean would imply that the prices of traded
goods would be more uniform among the six markets, that exchange rates would
rise and fall together more closely and that money and capital markets would
show greater unity. This has not been happening in Asean, says Prof Rolf
Langhammer of the Kiel Institute of World Economics in Germany.(*)
'One cannot say that Asean as an entity enjoyed a trend towards a higher
degree of market integration in the past, perhaps except for some small
segments like consumer goods,' he says. 'Against this background, Afta has
to be seen as a signal and perhaps as a push factor towards some degree of
convergence.'
Mr Anand also offered his Asean partners a special gesture. Because Thai
tariffs were the highest in the group, he promised that from January 1,
1993, a ceiling of 30 per cent would be imposed on all tariffs on goods
imported from other Asean countries. Eleven months later, Thailand is seen
in some Asean countries as having second thoughts.
On December 11 and 12, the Asean ministerial council set up to administer
Afta is due to agree on details of the first steps towards regional free
trade. Thai officials preparing for the meeting were considering seeking
delays in some tariff cuts that could cause resentment among other Asean
countries and even threaten to unravel the Afta agreements.
The most controversial is an Agriculture Ministry plan to delay import duty
cuts on palm oil. Palm oil and chemicals are product groups that have been
the subject of the most intense lobbying for continued protection in
Thailand. They are among the 15 sectors specified at the Singapore summit
for 'fast-track' accelerated Afta tariff cuts to 0-5 per cent within seven
to 10 years, but with escape clauses that allow delays in liberalisation at
least for eight years.
The southern provinces, where most of Thailand's oil palm is planted, are
the stronghold of the Democrat Party of Mr Chuan Leekpai, who replaced Mr
Anand as prime minister after the September 13 general election.
In November, a House of Representatives committee said it would call Mr
Anand to explain why the Afta agreements had been signed without
parliamentary ratification.
But perhaps the most confusing episode for Thailand's Asean partners was in
October when Asean economic ministers held their annual meeting in Manila.
At the start of the meeting, the Thai delegation said it had no mandate to
agree on Afta subjects, the most important item on the agenda, because right
at that moment the Thai parliament was debating the new government's policy
statement.
However, there was more going on than the simple question of Thai
parliamentary protocol. Severe rivalries have developed within the Thai
bureaucracy over which ministry should take the lead in international trade
negotiations, and without strong leadership from the new coalition these
rivalries left the Thai delegation in disarray.
As soon as parliament had approved the policy statement, Mr Supachai
Panitchpakdi, the deputy prime minister assigned to handle international
trade negotiations, took charge of the situation. He assured the rest of
Asean that Thailand remained committed to Afta, both in principle and
according to the agreements signed in Singapore. Was he right, or are the
suspicions that Thailand is having second thoughts justified?
The suspicions are partly justified because the arrival of a new, elected
government has shifted the emphasis slightly away from the modern business
interests that Mr Anand and his appointed government represented. This,
together with the Democrats' strength in the south, means that pressure to
protect palm oil now carries more weight. And because palm and other
vegetable oils are important exports for Malaysia, the Philippines and
Indonesia, an attempt by Thailand to delay liberalisation in this sector
would be viewed with displeasure by those countries.
A coalition government means a greater susceptibility to lobbying, and a
greater need to seek compromises. Therefore the chemicals industry's desire
to remain protected could also carry weight. But the lobbying is not new and
in this sense does not represent a shift in Thai thinking.
The principles of free trade have gained considerable acceptance in
Thailand. Sectors seeking continued protection normally need to base their
arguments on special and temporary needs, and often face opposition within
their business associations.
The Federation of Thai Industries has long been split on regional free
trade. Countering the arguments of the chemicals industry are the textiles
and garments manufacturers who want lower-cost fibres and dyes, made from
those chemicals, in order to retain competitiveness in the export markets in
the west.
In one sense Thailand is different from the rest of Asean with the exception
of the Philippines: the debates between the interest groups are more public
and more intense. This may not always be easy for Thailand to explain to
neighbours such as Malaysia and Singapore where the governments are more
authoritarian.
The bids by the various lobbies to retain protection could still fail.
Because Afta is being phased in over several years, officials are preparing
programmes to absorb the shocks. And compromises can be found to allow
tariff reductions while retaining some protection.
The Thai chemicals industry is not so much afraid of competing with imports
made in other Asean countries, but of low-duty imports of non-Asean
chemicals that have undergone cosmetic changes within Asean countries such
as Singapore.
This particular problem could be solved with tougher rules of origin, a
sensitive issue debated behind closed doors at Asean meetings that has not
received much public attention. The Thai chemicals industry could find an
ally in Indonesia which has been pressing for stiff rules of origin.
* Rolf Langhammer: Afta - A step towards intensified economic integration?
Paper presented at a seminar on Asean: Future Economic and Political
Co-operation, Institute of Strategic and International Studies, Kuala
Lumpur, November 13-15, 1992.
