FT  14 MAY 92 / Survey of World Electricity (14): Power line under the ocean
 -Ulster is no longer an electricity island
THE ink was barely dry on the documents transferring ownership of Northern
Ireland's four power stations to the private sector when the province's
annual round of electricity price increases was announced.
A 4 per cent average rise in line with inflation was hardly surprising but
it handed detractors of privatisation a fresh platform for a bitter attack
on Ulster energy policy.
It underlined the fact that the Government is in the process of privatising
the power industry in spite of fierce opposition from consumer groups,
unionist and nationalist politicians and trade unions fearing massive job
cuts and higher tariffs.
Northern Ireland Electricity (NIE), an amalgamation of four small municipal
authorities less than 20 years ago, ceased to exist as a public utility on
April 1. Its power stations were taken over and all of NIE's obligations and
employees moved to a new company, NIE plc. The new company, Ulster's
biggest, continues to have responsibility for providing a reliable supply of
electricity and controls the scheduling and despatch of all generating
units. The new power station owners have to compete for the right to sell
electricity to NIE.
It in turn has a statutory duty to operate the system in a manner
facilitating competition in generation and supply. NIE Plc is due for
flotation in November. In selling the power stations the over-riding concern
of Ministers was to inject as much competition as possible.
Historically, NIE's main problems have been its dependence on costly fuel
imports, isolation from national grids and its small size - peak winter
demand throughout the province was a mere 1,447MW last year.
The utility's 70 per cent dependence on oil led to big Government subsidies
in the early 1980s but modest profitability has been restored in recent
years as fuel costs have stabilised.
It could be argued that privatisation has provided an answer to all the
problems at a stroke and raised Pounds 353m for the Treasury's coffers.
British Gas has bought Ballylumford power station at Larne, County Antrim,
for Pounds 132.4m. The 1,080 MW oil-fired plant meets the demand of almost
half of NIE's 600,000 customers. The new owners will be converting the
station to run on natural gas by 1997.
Premier Transco, a new British Gas subsidiary, will be building, owning and
operating a pipeline to carry natural gas into Northern Ireland from
Scotland. Ballylumford will be the first user but the pipeline will also
service other suppliers wishing to bring gas to Ulster consumers.
Another subsidiary, Premier Energy Suppliers, is being established to market
the product in Northern Ireland. Both the pipeline and power station
conversion project have attracted European Community backing.
Terms have been agreed but British Gas has still to complete a detailed
undersea survey and complete negotiations with Bord Gais Eireann in Dublin
regarding the shared on-shore pipeline in Scotland.
Applied Energy Services and Tractebel, an American/Belgian consortium, have
formed a joint venture, NIGEN, to acquire Kilroot power station near
Carrickfergus and the Belfast West plant for a total of Pounds 214m.
However, the deal had not been finalised by the April 1 deadline. The
Department of Economic Development has taken over responsibility for running
the plants while NIE is providing a payroll system allowing wages to be
paid.
NIGEN has made it clear that an agreement with the Government has been
realised and the delay is due to 'technical reasons'. It said: 'It is not
because they can't raise the money. It is the process involved in project
financing which has led to the hold-up'.
NIGEN has Pounds 25m in place and is in the process of placing the remaining
capital with a syndicate of international banks.
Kilroot, Ulster's most modern station, is a dual coal and oil firing plant
with a capacity of 520MW satisfying about one third of the province's total
demand. Belfast West, the province's oldest station, is a 240MW coal-fired
plant covering about 10 per cent of demand.
Coolkeeragh power station at Londonderry, the only plant in the west of the
province, has been acquired in a management-employee-buy-out for Pounds
6.5m. The 420MW oil-fired station also meets about 10 per cent of demand but
is strategically important because of its geographical location.
The industry's competitive goals will be strengthened towards the end of the
1990s when an electricity inter-connector between Scotland and Ulster comes
on stream. Scottish Power and NIE reached agreement on the Pounds 170m
project before the power station sales. The cable will be capable of
transmitting 250MW of power and provide another mainland link.
There is also renewed interest in restoring the inter-connector with the
Republic of Ireland, out of commission since being repeatedly targeted by
the IRA in the 1970s. NIE and the Republic's Electricity Supply Board have
announced plans for a small power link providing back-up in the north-west
of the country.
With the new power station owners likely to figure in any competition for
future NIE generating requirements, it seems the industry is well placed to
meet demand, currently growing at 4 per cent a year.
The whole scenario throws a question mark over the exploitation of lignite,
the province's only indigenous source of fuel. It has been found in huge
quantities and studies suggest a lignite-fired power plant would be viable.
But given the environmental implication of such a project and the plans
already announced for meeting future requirements, lignite is unlikely to be
developed in the forseeable future.
The government has insisted that the privatisation is in the best interests
of tax payers and energy users.
But consumers will judge the restructuring of the industry by the bills
dropping through their letterboxes. Mr Geoffrey Horton, the new electricity
regulator appointed by the Government to protect consumers rights after
privatisation, is likely to be a busy man.
