FT  19 OCT 92 / Companies protest over software bill
A GROUP of the world's leading computer companies has attacked proposed UK
legislation designed to outlaw software theft, saying it is flawed. It has
asked the British government for substantial changes and has also complained
to the European Community authorities.
The group includes International Business Machines, Digital Equipment, and
the Business Software Alliance (BSA), which represents big personal computer
software companies including Microsoft and Lotus, as well as the Federation
Against Software Theft.
They are concerned that a rush to ensure the legislation reaches the statute
books by January 1 next year will result in a flawed law. They believe it
will prove difficult to interpret in the courts and leave the UK out of step
with software protection being enacted throughout Europe. Copying and
counterfeiting of software in the UK is thought to cost the industry more
than Pounds 300m a year.
The draft legislation is a consequence of a 1991 EC directive. The directive
was approved after more than two years of lobbying and debate by computer
industry factions concerned with software protection and with the rights of
software users and suppliers. Observers in Brussels say no other EC
directive has ever generated such heat.
The principal issue was 'reverse engineering' - unravelling a piece of
software to understand its structure so that compatible programs can be
constructed. The BSA said the directive had proved to be a compromise fought
'to the last comma', which gave 'satisfaction and dissatisfaction in equal
measure to all'.
UK legislators have, however, rewritten the directive. The computer
companies have written to the Department of Trade and Industry and to
Brussels to complain that the UK draft 'fails to implement aspects of the
directive, introduces unnecessary and untested language, proposes additional
exceptions to software authors' exclusive rights and omits sections of the
directive which the industry considers essential for a clear understanding
of its scope, intent and effect'.
A government spokesman said the UK draft had been circulated to seek the
views of those likely to be affected, and that modifications might be made
in the light of comments received. A balance had to be struck between
existing copyright law and the new provisions. In Brussels, officials said
the Commission could take action if the UK failed to implement the spirit of
the directive. Privately, they confirmed that the directive had been drafted
so tightly that there was little room to alter the text and retain the sense
of the original.
