FT  14 DEC 92 / US groups combine work on electric car
AMERICA'S big three car makers - General Motors, Ford and Chrysler - are to
co-operate much more closely in the development of electronic vehicles.
The trio have signed an agreement to investigate co-operation in the design,
development, testing and possible manufacturing of electric vehicle
components which would ultimately be used in each company's own vehicles.
The announcement comes as financially-troubled GM, the biggest of the three
US groups, scales back its much-vaunted solo effort in the field of electric
vehicles.
The venture will take place under the auspices of the US Council for
Automotive Research (Uscar), an umbrella body which co-ordinates research
among the big three, and it will aim to find 'the most effective way to
hasten electric vehicle development'.
Electric vehicles are currently uneconomic but California has insisted that
carmakers begin offering 'zero emission' vehicles - in other words, electric
cars - by 1998 if they are to sell other models in the state. Japanese
manufacturers are also intensively investigating electric vehicle
technology.
GM, which for years has trumpeted plans to have its plastic-bodied Impact
electric vehicle in commercial production by the mid-1990s, now appears to
have quietly dropped that plan because of the severe financial pressures
facing the group.
GM said it would produce up to 50 electric vehicles next year which would be
provided to utilities, local governments and others for technical feedback.
However, GM has also reportedly told hourly workers who had expected to
build the Impact of an indefinite delay in commercial production plans.
Detroit's big three have co-operated increasingly in recent years - in areas
ranging from vehicle research to political lobbying - as competition from
Japanese manufacturers has intensified. Uscar is already looking at advanced
battery technology for electric vehicles.
The alliance unveiled on Friday goes beyond previous joint ventures into
possible parts manufacturing. This might have caused anti-trust problems but
the companies evidently believe the competitive threat from Japan will
over-ride any monopolist concerns in the Clinton administration.
