FT  03 JAN 92 / UK Company News: US drug approval for SmithKline Beecham
SMITHKLINE BEECHAM, the drug company, has secured its first US drug approval
since it was formed in 1989 by the merger of SmithKline Beckman of the US
and Beecham of the UK.
The US Food and Drug Administration approved Relifen, the company's
arthritis drug, giving SmithKline access to the US non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) market worth about Dollars 1.7bn (Pounds
930m) a year.
This class of drugs is used to treat severe arthritis, especially rheumatoid
arthritis and osteo-arthritis. Current market leaders are made by Ciba-Geigy
of Switzerland and Syntex of the US.
Approval for Relifen was expected following the recommendation of the
advisory committee to the FDA in early December. The speed of approval
surprised even SmithKline. 'We didn't expect it for another few weeks.'
There will be a formal US launch before the end of January when the US
price, which will partly determine the profitability of the drug, will be
revealed. In the UK a year's supply costs Pounds 102.
Mr Jonathan de Pass, an analyst at BZW, estimated that US sales of Relifen
in the first year would be at least Dollars 200m.
SmithKline shares leapt 6 per cent before profit taking and concerns over a
US medical report that some ulcer drugs should not be taken with alcohol
left the price only slightly higher on the day.
SmithKline makes Tagamet, the world's second best-selling ulcer drug. Shares
in Glaxo, which makes Zantac, the best seller, dropped 15p to 838p.
Wellcome's Aids treatment Retrovir, or AZT, received its second boost in a
week yesterday from Aids researchers. They have found evidence that when
Retrovir is used in combination with ddC, made by Roche, the Swiss drug
company, there was an increase in the level of white blood cells which are
crucial in fighting the Aids virus.
Wellcome shares climbed 24p to 1125p.
The news comes after research findings that suggested that a mixture of
Retrovir and Zovirax, Wellcome's other big selling drug, did well against
Aids.
