FT  24 JAN 92 / P&amp;O stirs up cross-Channel route dispute
BRITAIN'S two biggest ferry operators yesterday looked poised for a bitter
battle over the future of the Dover-Calais route, the shortest and busiest
cross-Channel link between Britain and France.
P&amp;O appeared to be staking a claim to the route by announcing that it was
seeking a 'rationalisation' of the two ferry companies' operations on the
crossing in preparation for the opening of the Channel tunnel in 1993.
Sealink Stena Line, P&amp;O's troubled rival, said it was rebuilding its
strength after a recent cost restructuring. 'We are not going to go away,'
the company said.
P&amp;O signalled its move in a letter to the Office of Fair Trading in which it
sought to be released from undertakings not to combine operations with other
ferry companies on the Dover-Calais route.
Ferry operators believe they will be able to compete with the Channel tunnel
only by joining forces and offering a single, high-frequency service between
Dover and Calais.
When the ferry companies last made a joint submission, in 1989, Mr Nicholas
Ridley, then trade and industry secretary, invited them to re-submit their
application closer to the tunnel's opening.
P&amp;O has approached the OFT alone, avoiding any mention of joint services in
its submission, and instead repeatedly emphasising the need for
'rationalisation' of the short sea routes.
It has offered to hold all 1993 passenger fares at this year's levels and
all freight tariffs at this year's levels adjusted for inflation if its
application succeeds.
Lord Sterling, P&amp;O's chairman, refused to say what form he expected any
rationalisation to take. He said the purpose of the application was to give
the company the freedom to enter negotiations and discussions.
Sealink, which has suffered severe financial difficulties since being taken
over by Stena Line of Sweden, said it was not prepared to enter negotiations
until the benefits of its recently completed cost restructuring had been
given time to show through.
