FT  13 JAN 92 / BT prices to come under scrutiny
BT may have to cut its prices more sharply than at present after a far
reaching review which starts this month.
The review will be the most comprehensive examination of the
telecommunications group's prices since it was privatised in 1984.
Other issues to be examined include which of the company's prices should be
controlled, how fast they should fall each year and whether there should be
an immediate large cut.
BT is currently required to cut the average price of a basket of its main
domestic and international services by 6.25 per cent a year after inflation.
Oftel, the industry regulator, plans to publish a consultative document to
start the examination at the end of this month. The document will be more
wide ranging and longer than a similar document produced four years ago when
BT's prices were last comprehensively reviewed.
Sir Bryan Carsberg, Oftel's director general, will be conducting the review
in a more highly charged political atmosphere than in 1988. Following a
Financial Times analysis last November, the Labour Party called for cuts in
BT's prices. The analysis showed that the company could reduce its charges
by Pounds 1bn a year and still make profits comparable with those of
telephone operators elsewhere in the world.
Sir Bryan, however, is expected to come under pressure from BT and its
competitors, such as Mercury Communications, to keep prices high. It is
easier for BT's rivals to compete if its charges are not reduced too
sharply.
Small investors who bought shares in the government's Pounds 5.6bn BT sale
last month will also have an interest in the prices staying high. Sir Bryan
may feel that they were adequately warned of the price review by his
statement in the BT prospectus.
The document, which is in an advanced stage of preparation, is understood to
address all issues which directly or indirectly affect the company's prices.
It will look at whether BT should be allowed to increase charges to
residential customers while reducing business tariffs and whether its
profits are excessive.
Issues which indirectly affect BT's prices include whether prices should
vary with the quality of the company's services and whether BT is investing
enough in upgrading its network. Oftel will also consider whether BT's
diversification into non-core businesses should be controlled to protect
customers from potentially unprofitable ventures.
Sir Bryan intends to be more open about the way in which he reaches his
conclusions than in previous price reviews, following criticism that earlier
reviews were negotiated behind closed doors.
The document will indicate Sir Bryan's preferences on some main issues. For
example, he believes that the broad principle of regulating prices rather
than profits is correct because this gives BT an incentive to improve its
efficiency.
After consultation, Sir Bryan will try to negotiate an agreement with BT. If
he is unable to reach agreement, he may refer the matter to the Monopolies
and Mergers Commission, which can impose a solution.
