FT  22 APR 92 / Major throttled by back-seat driver
THE IRONY of Mrs Margaret Thatcher, who suffered from the backbench snipings
of Mr Edward Heath, her predecessor, inflicting similar wounds on Mr John
Major has not gone unnoticed at Westminster.
Since her enforced resignation as prime minister and party leader in
November 1990, Mrs Thatcher has been regarded by the Tories with the mixture
of caution and respect which might be afforded an unexploded bomb. A sense
of unpredictability and of danger has never been far away.
Mrs Thatcher's article in the April 27 issue of Newsweek, the US magazine,
includes explicit warnings (above) to Mr Major under the headline Don't Undo
My Work. She begins: 'People are asking, is John Major free to go his own
way? He is - within the constraints of the principles set out in the
Conservative manifesto. Don't forget, I set out our principles . . . '
She writes that she 'set out to destroy socialism because I felt it was at
odds with the character of the people' and, in an attack on the Labour
party, she says it was defeated because of 'what that party was, and still
is'.
Mrs Thatcher's words soon after her departure from Downing Street about
being a good back-seat driver showed that her relationship with her
erstwhile protege would not be easy.
The most consistent source of friction has been Europe. She avoided voting
against the government in the Commons debates before and after the
Maastricht summit, but her difference from Mr Major on the issue was clear.
Last year, for example, she said in an interview that the government's
refusal to consider a referendum on the issue of a single European currency
was 'arrogant' and 'wrong'.
As well as public comments, there has been the continual irritant for
ministers of press reports of criticisms expressed by Mrs Thatcher to
friends - about the abolition of the poll tax, for example, and the handling
of interest rates.
Mrs Thatcher spent a loyal election campaign, as the party had always
prophesied she would. She regarded a fourth successive Tory victory as
essential for protecting her achievements. She shared a platform with Mr
Major and launched a rousing rallying cry to party candidates, even though
it did contain faint jibes at her successor. She found time to mention that
the 'enormous detail' in the manifesto might obscure important issues and
that it was still vital to keep a grip on public spending.
During the campaign, Mr Major himself seemed unsure at times whether he was
addressing her disciples or was seeking to reach out to the disenchanted
with his brand of a more caring Conservatism.
In winning the election, he has secured time to make his mark on the party.
But if Mrs Thatcher has lost influence, she has retained her ability to make
headlines.
Don't undo my work
I don't accept the idea that all of a sudden Major is his own man.
I cut back the powers of government.  Now they've got to be jolly careful
they don't give government too many extra powers and undo what i've done.
If new ministers pursue a policy of intervening in industry ..then the
economy will go downhill again.
Just because you speak softly and talk more about welfare and social
services dosn't mean that you do more for them ...look at the record and
make a judgment.
There isn't such a thing as Majorism.  There couldn't be, at the moment.  My
colleagues and I turned round the whole philosophy of government.
There is a line of analysis that says Mr Major synthesizes the best of the
'wet' with the best of the 'dry' and forges a new consensus for Conservative
Britain.  But consensus is the absence of principle and the presence of
expediency.
Thatcherism will live.  It will live long after Thatcher has died, because
we had the courage to restore the great principles and put them into
practice ....
