FT  07 AUG 92 / Islamic nations press UN on force
THE 46 members of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC) are
applying pressure on the United Nations Security Council to intervene
militarily in Bosnia-Hercegovina following an increase in fighting
throughout the republic.
The OIC, which recently formed a 'contact group' or lobby at the UN, wants
the Security Council to exempt Bosnia from the arms embargo, deploy more
military forces in the independent republic and step up the humanitarian
relief effort.
The lobby, which emerged from the OIC meeting in Istanbul in June, is
chaired by Mr Mustfa Aksin, Turkey's ambassador to the UN, and includes
Pakistan, Iran, Egypt and Senegal. Saudi Arabia will soon join the lobby
which acts on behalf of all the OIC member countries - which include a
quarter of UN members.
'We (the lobby) think the Security Council is not doing enough in trying to
stop the killing in Bosnia-Hercegovina,' a Turkish diplomat based in the US
said yesterday. He added that last Monday, it asked Daoyu Li, the (Chinese)
president of the Security Council, to adopt a much tougher resolution in
defence of Bosnia's Moslem population against Serb aggression.
'We are prepared to take other measures if the Security Council does not
respond favourably to our proposals,' an official from the Turkish Foreign
Ministry said yesterday. Although he did not give details, he said Turkey
would continue to comply with current UN resolutions and sympathise with any
EC resolutions.
Eastern European diplomats at the UN said Morocco, which is a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, has repeatedly backed Hungary and Austria in
attempts to apply more pressure on Serbia to stop the killing.
But despite the unanimity among OIC member states in criticising western
caution and in condemning the violent break-up of Bosnia, the movement
remains unclear about its goals. It provides aid to the Bosnians but is
unlikely to launch any unilateral military initiative.
A Pakistani diplomat said: 'In all honesty, the movement is pretty
spineless. The most important Arab countries continue to hide behind the US.
They give a bit of money to the Bosnian Moslems. But it does not add up to
much, yet.'
In their effort to seek assistance from the Islamic world, Bosnia's Moslems,
who are Sunni, and Slav, have to play a delicate balancing act.
They cannot afford to receive support from any fundamentalist Shia movements
because that would give credibility to Serbian propaganda that the Moslems
are intent on setting up an Islamic fundamentalist state in Bosnia, a claim
denied by Bosnian officials.
On the other hand, the longer the war continues in Bosnia, and the longer
the international community hesitates in taking military action, the more
likely it is that sections of the Moslem community will be further
radicalised.
