FT  03 OCT 92 / UK Company News: A time to test the strengths of the rising
son - Robert Hanson talks to Roland Rudd about his promotion to the board of
the family firm
WHEN THE son rises, the share price often falls. Fund managers are nervous
about backing companies managed on dynastic rather than meritocratic
principles.
So the appointment of Mr Robert Hanson to the board of Hanson, the
Anglo-American conglomerate created by his father Lord Hanson, has raised
eyebrows among fund managers, who fear the promotion smacks of nepotism.
Last week, after news of Mr Hanson's promotion to the board chaired by his
father, the company's shares dropped 3p on a day the market rallied.
Mr Hanson, who celebrates his 32nd birthday today, is adamant it was
coincidence. 'The idea that I am being groomed for chief executive or
chairman is ridiculous', he says in an interview with the Financial Times.
As a director with special responsibilities for Europe his office, in the
group's London headquarters in Grosvenor Place, is strategically placed on
the sixth floor between his father's and that of Mr Derek Bonham, chief
executive.
'Life may not always be fair and other executives here may feel they should
be on the board. But Mr Bonham wanted me on the board which approved my
appointment. There will be no dynasty here because Hanson is a meritocracy.'
Yet the possibility that the company could become a Hanson dynasty has upset
some managers. A former executive said one of his nightmares was that he
would come in one day to find Mr Hanson his boss. 'I did not go into
business to serve a family,' he said.
Mr Hanson always thought he might go into the family business, but by that
he means Hanson Transport, the privately-owned transportation company in
Huddersfield, and not the publicly-quoted Hanson.
Indeed, he always assumed that he would never work for Hanson. When he
joined NM Rothschild in 1983 Sir Evelyn de Rothschild asked him how he
wanted to be treated at the merchant bank. Did he regard merchant banking as
his career or was he about to leave after a year or two to join his father's
company?
Mr Hanson made it clear that he thought it unlikely that he would ever join
Hanson. 'If it was a small company it would be easy to join but it had
become more daunting to join as it grew bigger.'
If Sir Evelyn believed him most of his colleagues at work did not. A
contemporary at Rothschild says: 'No one ever doubted that he would
eventually join his father. I think that explained his extraordinary
confidence.'
After a spell in Hong Kong and then in Chile, he was posted to Spain to
establish a fund management business. In early 1990, nine months after
running the new venture, he received a call from his father to join Hanson.
'I immediately wanted to know what my prospects would be at Hanson. I knew
both my father and Gordon (Lord White) were going to retire by the end of
1997. I had to think very carefully about whether I wanted to move.
'My father told me I could make of the job what I wanted. If I did well I
could get on the fast track.'
In May he joined as an associate director.
Mr Hanson says his father's relationship with him at work is no different
from that Lord Hanson has with any other executive. He admits to being more
adept, though, at avoiding Lord Hanson's legendary short fuse. 'But if I
screw up he will let off at me like anyone else.'
Over the last two years Mr Hanson has worked on acquisitions with Mr
Christopher Collins, who is married to a niece of Lord Hanson's. He was
closely involved in the possible bids for PowerGen, the electricity
generator, and Canary Wharf, the troubled property development, and helped
draw up the plan to take a 2.8 per cent stake in Imperial Chemical
Industries.
All three targetted companies were politically sensitive and appeared to
consume a lot of the conglomerate's time. Mr Hanson believes it was time
well spent.
'We looked at them because of the economic and financial possibilities.
Frankly, I do not give a damn about the politics. Other people here can look
after that. They were also a smokescreen. While the press concentrated on
these big deals we were also looking at hundreds of other deals in private.'
Mr Hanson believes that the next big deal will be in Europe. Lord White, who
remains in charge of acquisitions, bemoans the fact that big undervalued and
poorly managed companies no longer exist.
'I believe they do exist', says Mr Hanson. 'They are in Europe. One of my
responsibilities is to look at the Continent more seriously. We have
traditionally been nervous about buying companies on the Continent.
'Yet there are many undervalued and poorly managed conglomerates on the
Continent. We have already looked at a number of different European
companies. It is only a matter of time before we buy a big European group.'
To take advantage of the opportunities of his new directorship Mr Hanson is
aware that he has to play down the playboy image. 'I think things have
changed since the fifties when it was cool to be seen out with film stars'.
His father was famous for being in the company of such people, but in the
nineties 'glamour does not mix with seriousness', he says.
At Eton and St Peter's College, Oxford, Mr Hanson's taste for the fast life
was well known, not least for his involvement in the notoriously riotous
Assassins dining club and the Bullingdon - whose members were once
photographed in the tabloids making Nazi salutes after a riotous dinner. Mr
Hanson was not a member at the time.
His involvement in such clubs proved a salutary lesson. 'I learnt to me more
careful and I know the power of the press.'
As a bachelor, he has his own polo team, the Bulldogs, and spends weekends
at his Berkshire home. Friends still talk of his thirtieth birthday party
which turned out to be an all-weekend affair for those staying with him. The
tabloids hailed it as the 'bash of the decade'.
With 3.7m Hanson shares - worth Pounds 7.7m at yesterday's closing price -
Mr Hanson points out that he has every incentive to make a success of his
new job. 'With 90 per cent of my wealth in one basket it is important to
have as much say as possible. I sleep better at night because I work here.'
