FT  22 JUN 92 / International Capital Markets: Maxwell questions for the
City
THE ARREST of the Maxwell brothers will in one sense take the pressure off
the authorities, who needed to be seen to be doing something; but in
another, it ought to give them an even more awkward time.
Now that we are to have a prolonged holiday from the absorbing questions of
who knew what and who signed what, we should be facing the larger issues -
not just of pension arrangements, but of arrangements in the City. Those who
come out of the affair with any credit are thin on the ground.
The questions are too numerous even to list in a short column, so I will
concentrate mainly on three: custodianship, including share registration;
the abuse of collateral; and self-regulation.
It ought to be simply impossible for any borrower to pledge as collateral
securities which he does not own, for ownership should be a simple matter of
fact. Ambiguity arises only because of slow back-office operations, and the
lack of any clear, legally defined custodial function.
In New York these matters are better defined. Custodial and back-office
operations are run, very economically, by a handful of specialists with
clear legal obligations and no possible conflicts of interest. Similar
arrangements should certainly be legislated here for assets held on trust;
and if the banks and brokers are seriously interested in cost-cutting, the
practice would quickly become general. Indeed, it is only because of the
easy-money laxity of the 1980s that these functions are not already
contracted out.
Of course, the Maxwell problems would never have arisen had not
stock-lending been a normal feature of pension fund life, and had not the
banks been willing to extend credits on collateral which they would
routinely have withheld. This could be a matter for legal reform; my
post-bag suggests that I am not quite so lonely as I supposed in arguing for
a law ending the banks' prior claim on pledged assets.
The main reasons for this are moral and economic: it seems both wrong and
economically damaging that the main losses in a bankruptcy should fall not
on those who created the risk by excessive lending, but on suppliers and
others who were in no way involved.
There is also a fundamental question of monetary control. Existing
arrangements make it much too easy to monetise existing assets while
retaining ownership. This helps to explain why credit booms run so far out
of control, and why interest rates have had to be so much higher since
deregulation. The Maxwell story of apparent abuse of this system is only a
footnote: the system is wrong.
Finally, the Maxwell affair must cast still further doubt on the whole
London system of self-regulation, already under question from earlier
scandals and because of the present imbroglio at Lloyd's. The apologetic
self-examination from Imro deserves some sympathetic attention.
The regulators were clearly too ready to give the benefit of any doubt; but
would anyone have acted differently in their position? The whole system is
redolent of cups of tea and Governor's eyebrows - effective when the City
was a club and a blackball fatal, but increasingly inadequate to a
deregulated system.
This is not just a question of attitude, but of manpower and rewards.
Effective policing cannot be left simply to the serious fraud squad. An
unregulated market surely needs policing by a basically adversarial body,
properly financed and staffed, on the lines of the Securities and Exchange
Commission in Washington.
None of this will prevent scandals; still less will any official safety-net
system, such as US deposit and pensions insurance. The US savings and loan
scandal has already given a new and deeper meaning to moral hazard, and
there is good reason to fear that American company pensions will be
defaulting on a scale which will pose yet another fiscal problem for
Washington.
But a better policed City would be more widely trusted, and banks forced to
be prudent might not be forced into overcharging like the unregulated public
utilities they are. Scandals are only the smell of a decay with much wider
effects.
