FT  05 AUG 92 / The Barcelona Olympics: Barcelona ripple signals love-in -
Fans in the main stadium make no distinctions for race, sex or talent
IT IS better than the tedious Mexican wave. It is the Barcelona ripple. When
the runners circle the Montjuic track, the crowd applaud as they pass. The
athletes' progress is marked by the patter of 120,000 hands rising to a warm
crescendo in the final straight.
If there is a Spaniard running, the ripple builds to a roar; if it is a
Catalan, the stadium goes crazy. The knots of supporters from other nations
(notably Japanese, American and British) are a little raucous in support of
their boys and girls. Otherwise, this is an equal-opportunity love in: no
distinction for race, sex or athletic ability.
The fans seem to enjoy all the events. They applaud each toss by the hammer
throwers and set up rhythmic applause for every triple jumper. They
sympathetically lament each no-throw and foul jump. Sometimes, there is even
a spontaeneous round of applause for no apparent reason.
Today, when the athletics resumes after a one-day break, there should be
plenty of rippling. It is the first day of the decathlon, and there will
also be finals in both men's and women's 400 metres, the men's 800m, the
women's 400m hurdles and the men's discus.
At a reunion of decathletes yesterday, the experts thought Dave Johnson of
the US would be given a fight. Daley Thompson said Robert Zmelik of
Czechoslovakia and Mike Smith of Canada would run Johnson close, though
Johnson was particularly strong in the second-day events.
One of the most striking things about the reunion was the physical diversity
of decathletes. There was the sheer bulk of Bob Matthias (Olympic gold in
'48 and '52) and Jurgen Hingsen (silver in '84). There were the tall, but
surprisingly skinny, Bill Toomey (gold: '68) and Bruce Jenner (gold: '76).
Thompson seemed almost petite.
Afterwards, Frank Zarnowski, a broadcaster with NBC, said that the decathlon
was the only event 'in which the world record had been held by a red man
(Jim Thorpe), a yellow man (Yang Chuan-Kwang), a black man and a white man.'
If you are sprawling at home on your sofa, a Barcelona ripple or a Mexican
wave is not much fun. So here is another game all the fans at Montjuic are
playing. You can join in. It is called Spot the Druggie.
This is a murky world. Gwen Torrence, the US sprinter, has released a
statement clarifying remarks she reportedly made after finishing out of the
medals in the 100m final. She had not said Juliet Cuthbert of Jamaica, the
silver medalist, had taken drugs, she insisted.
Torrence said: 'I told Cuthbert I did not think she was taking drugs. I did
tell her there were three people in the final who were competing unfairly,
but I will not say names.'
How could she tell?
Assuming that her rivals were not shooting-up in the dressing room, Torrence
would have to go by the same clues apparent to any TV viewer.
Today, the female sprinters are back in action in the 200m semi-finals, so
here are the things to notice:
Listen for unusually deep voices; keep an ear cocked for women who give
press conferences that sound like Louis Armstrong concerts. One visible
side-effect of growth hormones is growth of the chin and, some say, of the
nose. Steroids cause facial hair, acne and large, bulging muscles whose
definition is increased by an almost complete absence of body fat.
In women's sprinting, then, celulite round the thighs is a thing of beauty.
