FT  21 SEP 92 / Survey of Northern Ireland (10): Hackles rise over sell-offs
 -Unions say privatisations will hit the consumer in the pocket
PRIVATISATION reached Northern Ireland later than it did the rest of
Britain. The process of transferring government-owned companies and public
utilities to the private sector only got going just over three years ago.
The management-employee buy-out of Harland and Wolff, the Belfast
shipbuilder and the sale of aircraft and missiles manufacturer Short
Brothers to Bombardier, Canadian transportation giant, signalled the start
of privatisation in earnest. In spite of fierce trade union opposition, the
sales were completed and saved the UK government from paying substantial
annual subsidies to keep the businesses afloat.
While privatised companies have not had it easy since then, Harland has a
reasonably healthy order book and Shorts, the region's largest private
company, was profitable enough two years ago to enable a dividend to be paid
on shares for the first time in years.
Successful transfers to the private sector encouraged the government to
press on with its timetable.
The first part of the privatisation of the electricity industry was
completed with the sale of the province's four power stations to British
Gas, NIGEN (an American/Belgian consortium) and a management-employee
buy-out team.
However, completing the flotation will not be so easy. Last week Mr Robert
Atkins, the province's economy minister, unexpectedly announced that the
flotation of the transmission, distribution and supply business of Northern
Ireland Electricity (NIE) - planned for November - would be postponed. Mr
Atkins said a number of outstanding matters needed to be resolved, the most
important of which related to the funding of a proposed interconnector to
Scotland. NIE and ScottishPower reached agreement on the Pounds 200m
interconnector project earlier this year, and the government is believed to
be seeking about Pounds 70m from the European Commission towards the cost of
construction.
Unions argue that, as well as leading to large scale redundancies, the sale
will hit consumers in the pocket. The Federation of Unions Supplying
Electricity believes the provision of an efficient service will be secondary
to the requirement to keep shareholders happy by making profits.
The government dismisses such fears and says legisation will be introduced
to protect consumers.
While the power industry sell-off is almost complete, another project in its
early stages is already causing concern. The privatisation of water and
sewerage services in Northern Ireland has set alarm bells ringing, although
it is not taking place for another three years. Opponents point to
experience elsewhere in the UK where bills have been rising.
Two months ago, Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland Secretary, revealed
that the government was dispensing with a plan to transfer the Department of
the Environment's water and sewerage functions to a government-owned company
before privatisation. The new proposal will take the services directly into
the private sector in 1995/96, earlier than would otherwise have been the
case.
A customer billing system for water and sewerage will have to be introduced.
Since domestic water charges are currently included in rates charges in
Northern Ireland, the changes mean the calculation of the regional rate will
have to be adjusted.
The Northern Ireland Public Service Alliance (NIPSA) which represents 1,200
employees in the water industry, is angry at the sell-off proposals.
Mr Sid McDowell, NIPSA deputy general secretary, said: 'Experience in
England clearly shows that farming, industry and other commercial interests
will face substantial increases in water charges. Northern Ireland will
suffer those charges over a much shorter timescale than in England.'
One of the big concerns is just who will pay the Pounds 500m being spent in
the province over the next eight years to bring Ulster's water and sewerage
facilities up to EC standards. Mr McDowell has no doubts about where the
money will come from: 'Years of failing to invest in the water industry
means that the vast amounts of money needed to make good that negligence
will now be found by privatising and shifting the burden from the taxpayer
to the consumer.'
The General Consumer Council for Northern Ireland has called for a system of
strict, independent regulation.
Several other privatisations are in the pipeline. Northern Ireland Airports,
which runs Belfast International Airport, is to be transferred to the
private sector and a study has been commissioned on introducing a private
element into the management and operation of Northern Ireland Railways -
either in its entirety or on certain routes.
Legislation on compulsory competition tendering is also to be introduced
affecting all 26 of Northern Ireland local authorities. Councils will have
to put out to tender their main services, such as refuse collecting and
street cleaning. Again the unions say the cost will be a poorer service and
job losses as companies vie for the work by under-cutting each other.
In spite of the oppositon, however, there seems little chance of turning
back the tide of privatisation. As one senior civil servant put it: 'The
philosophy is enshrined in government policy. The sales will continue and
the question is no longer whether to move to the private sector but how.'
