FT  26 JUN 92 / International Company News: Trizec cuts payout after drop in
interim profits
TRIZEC, North America's biggest publicly-traded property developer, has cut
its dividend as part of efforts to shore up the real estate arm of the vast
business empire controlled by Toronto's Bronfman family.
Trizec's decision to cut its semi-annual dividend, from 18 Canadian cents to
12 cents a share, comes on the heels of a CDollars 275m (USDollars 229m)
privately-placed equity issue earlier this month. In addition, its 67 per
cent-owned subsidiary, Bramalea, last week announced that it was suspending
dividends and seeking to restructure its debt.
Trizec and Bramalea have combined long-term borrowings of CDollars 14.6bn,
which is about CDollars 1bn more than the debt of ailing developer Olympia &amp;
York. O&amp;Y has a minority stake in Trizec.
Calgary-based Trizec reported earnings of CDollars 12m, equal to a loss of
1.4 cents a share, for the six months to April 30, down from CDollars 31.8m,
or 7.9 cents a share, a year earlier. Rental revenues rose slightly to
CDollars 694m from CDollars 685m. The figures include consolidation of
loss-making Bramalea.
Cash-flow from operations tumbled to CDollars 72.8m from CDollars 114.5m,
due to interest payments on recently-completed developments. The interest
bill for the six months rose to CDollars 233m from CDollars 220m.
Trizec controls over 300 income-producing properties, with space roughly 25
times that of London's Canary Wharf. The company said that occupancy in its
office buildings had risen slightly in the past six months to 90 per cent.
Occupancies in US shopping centres had also improved to 92.5 per cent.
But Mr Kevin Benson, president, said no significant recovery was likely
until 1993.
Trizec's recent share issue, which diluted its equity by almost 40 per cent,
underlines the difficulty which North American property developers are
experiencing in raising debt.
The shares were issued at CDollars 4.50 each, which marked a 20-year low in
Trizec's share price.
Trizec's controlling shareholder, Carena, contributed CDollars 50m towards
the issue. Nonetheless, outsiders are interpeting the issue as a sign that
the Bronfmans' top managers would prefer Trizec and Bramalea to sort out
their problems by themselves.
