FT  10 NOV 92 / The Matrix Churchill Case: Secret support of Saddam that
went to the top - Cabinet ministers 'sought to suppress evidence' /
Documents indicate Foreign Office warned of arms embargo
IT took the trial of three Midlands businessmen at the Old Bailey to provide
the first firm evidence that the UK government encouraged shipments to
Saddam Hussein's military machine and that senior ministers were aware of
this policy.
Documents released yesterday give the first detailed information on how the
government allowed the machine tool industry to make shipments with a known
military purpose.
Hundreds of pages of memos and letters between senior Whitehall officials
show that senior ministers in the Thatcher government were aware of what was
going on.
They also indicate that the former prime minister was kept abreast of the
Whitehall debate over exports to Saddam's military machine which continued
to within weeks of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
Few British trials have been so dominated by a sub-plot of political
intrigue. An array of witness box confessions came from senior civil
servants, officers from MI6 and MI5 giving evidence behind screens, and Mr
Alan Clark, the pugnacious former defence minister under Mrs Thatcher.
Four ministers, three of them cabinet members, tried to suppress the
evidence, the defence claimed. They failed and yesterday the case,
prosecuted by Customs and Excise, collapsed amid recrimination and
embarrassment.
The tide for the defence, representing three former executives of the
Coventry lathe manufacturer Matrix Churchill accused of exporting restricted
machine tools to Iraq, began to turn when Judge Brian Smedley agreed to the
release of some 500 previously classified documents.
Mr Kevin Robinson, solicitor for Mr Paul Henderson, former managing director
of Matrix, said afterwards: 'It was like treading in a field of diamonds.
Every document was damaging, said Mr Robinson. But what he called 'the
Koh-i-Noor' was a typed sheet from the Middle East section of the Foreign
Office with a handwritten note. Signed by an official on the Middle East
desk called Michael Blackley and marked confidential, it warned that a UN
arms embargo in January 1988 would affect the shipment of machine tools to
Iraq: 'The licences should not for the moment be revoked,' it said, 'but if
it becomes public knowledge that the tools are to be used to make munitions,
deliveries would have to stop at once . . . the companies should be warned
of the falling guillotine and urged to produce and ship as fast as they
can.'
The drama which ended in court yesterday began in the middle of the bloody
Iran-Iraq war, in October 1984. Sir Geoffrey Howe, then foreign secretary,
declared an embargo on the supply of lethal equipment to either side.
Ministers pretended that this remained policy when the war ended but, by the
end of 1988, Iraq had become the third biggest market for machine tools,
much of them so-called dual-use equipment. The bulk of the documents suggest
that the desire to sell to the Iraqi military was primarily trade-driven.
However, minutes of a meeting of top Whitehall officials in March 1989,
marked 'secret', say guidelines for sales of arms to Iran and Iraq should be
more 'flexibly' applied to Baghdad.
Matrix was one of a dozen British companies secretly allowed to supply
Saddam with arms-related technology.
In March 1989 the DTI, with the backing of the Foreign Office and the MoD,
approved the export to Iraq by Matrix of spohisticated lathe equipment
which, the documents show, officials knew could be used for developing
nuclear weapons.
A February 1989 note from the private secretary of Mr William Waldegrave
when he was a foreign office minister says the Matrix 'machinery in question
has legitimate civil uses - but could also be employed in munitions
manufacture, or even uranium enrichment'. The letter said Mr Waldegrave was
inclined to support the applications.
According to the documents released yesterday, the DTI and Customs allowed a
final order of machines for making fuses to be sent to Iraq on July 27 1990
 -less than two weeks before the invasion of Kuwait.
The ostensible reason for the collapse of the trial was that the evidence
given by Mr Clark contradicted the case brought by Customs.
It is now clear that his evidence was only part of the story. Confidential
memos show the information on the sale of dual-use equipment to Iraq was
going all the way up to Mrs Thatcher.
A memo in June 1990 from Mr Martin Stanley, principal private secretary to
Mr Nicholas Ridley, then trade and industry secretary, to Customs makes it
clear that Customs action against Matrix would be discussed by Mrs Thatcher
and her ministers.
Whitehall concern had become apparent six days earlier in a memo from a
senior DTI official to Mr Ridley. 'The dirty washing liable to emerge from
the action proposed by Customs and Excise will add to the problems caused by
the gun (the Supergun). For the DTI the timing is extrordinarily
embarrassing given recent correspondence between ourselves, MoD and FO.'
A DTI memo intended for the prime minister warned of repercussions on more
than Pounds 1bn of export credit guarantees for Iraq.
Before the trial cabinet ministers Mr Kenneth Clarke, Mr Malcolm Rifkind and
Mr Michael Heseltine, along with Mr Tristan Garel-Jones, a Foreign Office
minister, all signed 'public interest immunity' certificates seeking to
prevent any documentary evidence from their departments being used in open
court.
A number of companies were encouraged to export arms-related equipment to
Iraq. But only Matrix was charged with evading DTI controls. That Customs
maintained its prosecution knowing what would emerge and the embarrassment
it would cause is intriguing. Some point to its independent role as a
prosecutor and to its frustration with the DTI at obtaining any convictions
over the Supergun affair.
