FT  01 OCT 92 / SFO man jailed over BCCI leak
AN ACCOUNTANT working on the Serious Fraud Office inquiry into the collapsed
Bank of Credit and Commerce International was jailed for three years
yesterday after being convicted of conspiring to pervert the course of
justice by trying to sell confidential papers from the inquiry to a
solicitor acting for a suspect.
Mr Mark Braley, 25, of Hayes, west London, a former Coopers &amp; Lybrand
Deloitte accountant, had committed 'a quite extraordinary and serious breach
of trust', Judge Rivlin QC told the Old Bailey.
His disloyalty and greed, when he had been warned of the need for absolute
confidentiality, had placed the SFO's massive BCCI investigation at risk,
the judge said.
Mr Braley's accomplice, Mr Bernard Lynch, a freelance accountant, of Forest
Hill, south London, was also sentenced to three years' imprisonment after
being convicted of the same offence.
The judge said Mr Lynch was the instigator of the conspiracy to sell highly
sensitive documents to Mr Michael Barrett, a solicitor acting for Mr Syed
Akbar, a former BCCI official arrested in France and now the subject of
extradition proceedings.
'You knew full well what you were doing and you relished the consternation
and damage being caused,' the judge told Mr Lynch. Although the two men had
received only Pounds 1,000 from Mr Barrett they had seen the SFO information
as a 'very rich gold seam' to be tapped.
During the trial, the court heard the two men had tried to sell 70 pages of
confidential documents to Mr Barrett.
However, after his first contact with Mr Lynch, Mr Barrett called the
police. He then assisted them in an operation to identify Mr Braley as the
source of the SFO leak.
After several meetings between Mr Barrett and Mr Lynch, secretly
tape-recorded by the solicitor, Mr Braley was lured to a meeting in a London
hotel, where he was arrested.
The two men were also given two-year sentences after admitting conspiring to
corruptly obtain a consideration from Mr Barrett. Mr Braley received a
further two-year sentence after admitting the theft of four bearer share
certificates from customs investigators. The sentences all run concurrently.
