FT  28 AUG 92 / Carmakers warn of fresh downturn
EUROPEAN car manufacturers yesterday warned of tougher times in the second
half of this year, writes Our Financial Staff.
Daimler-Benz of Germany referred to a 'subsiding boom' in the domestic
market and uncertainties in export markets. Renault of France warned of a
downward trend in the market which could accelerate in the second half.
Volvo of Sweden, which made a first-half operating loss of SKr835m (Pounds
82.5m) compared with a loss of SKr559m last year, said it expected no
improvement in the immediate future. Volkswagen of Germany, which recorded a
17 per cent fall in pre-tax profits in the first half, said it was not
ignoring the warning signs in the German economy, nor the likelihood of a
return to normal after the stimulus provided by reunification.
First-half results were mixed. Volvo said its unit sales of cars worldwide
had fallen 4 per cent, while Daimler's production fell the same amount.
Volkswagen of Germany reported unit sales up 6 per cent and forecast
full-year sales 12 per cent higher. Renault said its output of 767,000 cars
was the highest for 10 years.
Truck sales continued to be difficult. Volvo said its first-half sales by
value were down by 10 per cent worldwide, with European sales down 15 per
cent and US sales up 13 per cent. The division made a loss overall. Renault
said its sales of commercial vehicles were down 4 per cent by value.
However, Mercedes raised its truck sales 7 per cent by value and 4 per cent
by volume.
The only company among the four to raise its pre-tax profits in the first
half was Renault, with a rise of 465 per cent. Renault said it had increased
its market share from 9.9 per cent to 10.5 per cent in the period.
Volkswagen and Mercedes reported lower sales in the German market. Mercedes
said that while exports and sales of more expensive Mercedes-Benz cars had
risen, domestic demand had fallen. Volkswagen confirmed domestic sales in
the first half were down 11 per cent, while foreign sales were 19 per cent
up.
Volkswagen's pre-tax profits fell by 17 per cent, while Daimler's fell 3 per
cent.
However, the two companies increased their net profits by 3 per cent and 16
per cent respectively, chiefly because of lower tax charges.
Full results, Page 18;
Bourse rebounds, Page 29
