FT  18 JAN 92 / Travel: On the very edge of civilisation - To Americans, old
Quebec City is cute. Daniel Green is not so sure
J'ai quitte mon village
Par le premier bateau
 - Opening lines of a Quebecois rock song.
STAND ON a promontory on the left bank of the St Lawrence. You are just
downstream from the last bridge. Look north, past the rooftops of Quebec
City's old town. The first few miles of countryside in that direction are
cultivated. Beyond, a black forest rises up the slopes of the Laurentian
ridge. On the other side it dips down, out of sight, to another country: a
dimpled plain of wood and water.
Four hundred miles north of Quebec City, the sub-arctic taiga starts and the
moose die of cold. It is another 800 miles to the few Inuit settlements on
the crinkly coastline opposite Baffin Island, where visitors can arrive only
by seaplane or kayak. After that? A desert stretching to Siberia.
Quebec City is at the edge of civilisation. But it thinks it is at its
centre.
Five million French-speaking Quebecois adore their city. Their taxes pay for
a gilt-encrusted parliament building and smart suits for the MPs. Some of
their most talented sons and daughters cannot bear to leave.
To Americans, old Quebec City is cute. Its fortifications, chateau, winding
streets and son et lumieres are picturebook Europe. Wise old-worlders might
more easily see a city hooked on tourist dollars and politicians' expense
accounts. The money has bred self-satisfaction. Add nationalism (and
Catholic guilt?) and you have paranoia: languages other than French are
banned from public notices. Bienvenue, yes. Wilkommen, no.
Out in the countryside, among the 5m, the phenomenon of French North America
is more beguiling. In the farming and fishing towns, adorned with the
belvederes and verandahs of New England-style summerhouses, les anglos seem
far away.
The south shore of the St Lawrence is peppered with mean sounding towns like
Trois Pistoles and Riviere du Loup. They are actually sweet little
agricultural and tourism centres. The loup in Riviere du Loup is not a wolf,
but a fish.
The Auberge Mange Grenouille is a converted village general store by a small
nature reserve in the village of Bic. Its sloping floorboards were as shiny
and new as a Madonna hit record and the chambre nuptiale came complete with
brass bedstead and purple drapes. 'C'est un peu fou, je sais,' shrugged
Madame, a warm round woman with an all-embracing personality that seems both
American and French.
The chambre had no en suite bathroom. A creaking hallway, lined with
wood-framed vignettes of small animals curled up in pools of sand-coloured
light, leds to the loo. The awkward Victorian door knobs conspired to
frustrate any urgency in a stumbling dawn patrol, but the auberge's giant
electronically-controlled whirlpool bath was as seductive as plumbing can
ever be.
The Mange Grenouille is on the south shore of the St Lawrence. The American
shore. Part of a civilised, settled, comfortable continent. The landscape is
farmland. The US is a few miles away, through a panhandle of Nouveau
Brunswick, Canada's only officially bilingual province.
Sept Iles is on the north shore, where the climate is like Mont Blanc's. It
is the last town on the road going east. The frontier.
No one speaks English. Why should they? None of their ancestors spoke
English. Nor do relatives, neighbours or visitors. Les Anglos are further
away than the Shetlands are from Paris. The welcome is warm, if a little
surprised.
There is one maple leaf, on a flag outside the town's hospital. Everywhere
else the fleur de lys flutters: from apartment blocks, schools and the
dozens of video rental hypermarkets.
Fifteen feet of snow fall each year in Sept Iles, by the salt water of the
St Lawrence estuary. In late May, just before the blue whales arrive, the
air still freezes at night. The tourist kayaks stand idle, waiting for the
last ice on the lakes to break up. Renting videos is still big business.
There is a railhead at Sept Iles. The single track line goes north, inland.
It leads to a settlement called Fermont, whose literal translation,
Ironmountain, describes one of the land's natural riches. Like Quebec City,
Fermont has fortifications; unlike Quebec City, the defensive wall was built
before the houses. It keeps the wind out.
I missed the train to Fermont by eight hours. The next one was six days
later. Maybe I was lucky.
Daniel Green was a guest of the tourist offices of the provinces of Quebec
and Ontario. He travelled with Air Canada (London tel: 081-759 2636) to
Montreal.
Return fares range from Pounds 258 and Pounds 368, for east and west coasts
respectively, to Pounds 3,288 and Pounds 4,126.
