FT  27 JUN 92 / Farewell for Scotland's men of steel: The closure of
Ravenscraig and the 800 people made redundant this week
ALLAN RODGERS looks angrily back at the Ravenscraig steel plant. 'It's
criminal to close it,' he says. 'It's the best steel plant in Europe. I
committed myself to British Steel when I left school and though people told
me I was crazy I thought I really had a secure job.'
Rodgers, 30, is one of the men who this week have walked out of Ravenscraig
for the last time. The final batch of steel slabs was poured on Wednesday.
The plant no longer casts a red glow in the night sky outside Glasgow. Today
800 of the plant's last 1,200 workers become redundant. The remaining men
will all have left by the end of the year after helping close down the
plant.
The closure ends the 35-year life of one of the best-known and most
controversial industrial plants in Britain. As the strong, fit men, mostly
in their 30s or early 40s, walk out, their first emotion is anger rather
than anxiety about their future.
'Tell Black Bob Scholey (British Steel's chairman) he's a bastard,' says one
of the plant's maintenance crew. A man from the drawing office says: 'This
is only happening because it's in Scotland.'
Many still seem baffled that British Steel should want to shut the enormous
complex which dominates Motherwell. They see a plant with skills and
equipment to make types of steel which, they claim, cannot be produced in
British Steel's other plants.
In the past few years the labour force has done everything asked of it and
repeatedly won company medals for breaking productivity records. One middle
manager says: 'They've done the dirty on us.'
The plant is closing because British Steel needs to make savings in a severe
downturn and is concentrating production at its three larger plants in south
Wales and Teesside.
'Get on with the future? Aye, but what future?' asks George Quinn, a senior
union convener at the plant. 'It's not as if there's some great employer out
there waiting to employ the men.'
That is true, but the Lanarkshire Development Agency, set up last year under
the umbrella of Scottish Enterprise, is now leading a big recovery
programme. Last year it spent Pounds 50m on environmental projects, training
and business development, most of it in the north Lanarkshire area worst hit
by the closure of Ravenscraig and the nearby Clydesdale tube mill. It will
spend the same this year.
The EC recently approved the creation of an enterprise zone on 500 acres of
land around Motherwell where incoming companies will receive tax allowances
and exemption from business rates. Archie Bethel, LDA chief executive, says:
'These are prime sites smack in the middle of Scotland.'
British Rail is locating its Scottish terminal for Channel tunnel freight at
Mossend, just north of Motherwell. It will employ 150 people and 2,000 more
jobs should be generated in the adjoining freight village - a complex of
warehouses and handling facilities.
Some 4,400 steel workers will have lost their jobs by the end of the year
and the knock-on effect of the shutdown is expected to cost a further 5,500
jobs. But as a newly paid-off electrician from Ravenscraig admits coyly
outside the Era Bar, just across from Ravenscraig: 'There's no one that
hasn't done very well out of British Steel. In fact I'm glad it's over: it's
been a bombshell hanging over us for years.'
The men are receiving redundancy pay averaging Pounds 20,000 with a few
getting more than Pounds 30,000. More than half of them have applied for
retraining in an EC-financed programme operated by the LDA, which offers
them full pay for a year.
They are being launched into a Scottish economy which, although hardly
flourishing, is doing better than many parts of England. Unemployment in
Lanarkshire was 13.9 per cent last month, lower than that of Glasgow but
well above the Scottish average of 9.3 per cent.
David Ivey, a 33-year-old electrician who worked at Ravenscraig for 17
years, has already taken a job with ScotRail in Glasgow. Another electrician
has found a job in a factory in Livingston. But Ivey points out that, being
tradesmen, they are easier to employ than the production workers, who need
to be retrained. 'As you reach 50 you can forget it; you're on the
scrapheap,' he says.
Sean Patton, a 32-year-old steelmaker, looks cheerful as he heads for a
course as a heavy goods vehicle driver. John Mackie, 43, and Ken Hanlin, 44,
both senior supervisors, are enrolling on courses in total quality
management at a college in Hamilton.
The unanswered question is what happens to the 1,000-acre Ravenscraig site.
British Steel and Scottish Enterprise are co-operating over a study of how
to reclaim the site and devise uses for the severely contaminated land. The
LDA believes reclamation may take 10 years and Pounds 200m. British Steel
has given no commitment to meeting all or part of the cost.
