FT  15 APR 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Sterling holds centre stage
STERLING was riding high yesterday on the back of better than expected UK
statistics, reports Peggy Hollinger.
February manufacturing output, forecast to have been flat, jumped by 1.1 per
cent.
This helped sterling to nudge the DM2.92 level in the morning, although it
closed 50 points down at DM2.9125, due to profit-taking late in the day.
Traders said, however, that a strong underlying demand remained for
sterling.
Demand was fuelled by the strong market sentiment that British authorities
would not rush to cut rates, at least not before sterling moved above
DM2.95. This is the point at which sterling moves into the narrow band of
the exchange rate mechanism.
Noises coming from European central bankers meeting in Basle helped to
reinforce this view on UK rates, said Dr Gerard Lyons, economist with DKB
International.
The Committee of European Central Bankers had supported the Bundesbank's
efforts to maintain a tight monetary policy, encouraging the view that
German rates would remain high for some time to come. Since German monetary
policy is often cited as the key to European rate moves, the 'message for
sterling is that rates will remain firm', said Dr Lyons.
The D-Mark slowed its slide against other currencies supported by the views
on stable German rates.
The currency held steady against the yen at Y80.45 per D-Mark and fell just
one pfennig against the dollar to close at DM1.6445.
The dollar had an uncertain day, with depressed retail sales figures
bringing a recent strong run of economic indicators to an end. The market
was beginning to take the view that economic recovery in the US would be
sluggish, said Dr Lyons. This was likely to be reflected in further
statistics due out this week, such as industrial production.
Dollar trading was muted ahead of the Easter weekend, said Mr Nick Parsons
of CIBC. He added that there was no incentive to have a strategic position
on the dollar vs D-Mark, given the uncertainty surrounding events in Russia.
The yen continued to enjoy a measure of stability despite the Nikkei's
troubles. The markets appear to be taking the view that Japanese banks will
have to repatriate foreign assets to meet capital requirements. Although
this is not yet happening, said Dr Lyons, the market view was having some
effect. The yen closed slightly stronger in London at Y132.75 against the
dollar, compared with Y133.25.
Within the ERM, sterling kept its distance from the floor at the expense of
the Danish Kroner. The peseta continued to rise on the coat tails of
sterling, and strengthened against the D-Mark from Pta 62.62 to Pta 62.57.
