FT  07 SEP 92 / Survey of Reinsurance (1): Sailing into calmer seas -
Reinsurers meet in Monte Carlo this week with the damage caused by Hurricane
Andrew in America still fresh in their minds / A look at an industry that is
struggling to recover after several years of turmoil
ORDER OF A sort appears to be returning to the world's reinsurance markets
after several years of turmoil. Between 1987 and 1991, fierce rate
competition, over-capacity and a sharp increase in the number and cost of
catastrophes combined to depress the profits of larger companies and pushed
many smaller players out of business.
At this week's annual rendezvous in Monte Carlo, therefore, reinsurers -
their minds freshly concentrated by the damage wreaked by hurricane Andrew
in the southern US last month - are certain to be spelling out the same
message to reinsurance buyers: premium rates must be set at levels that take
into account the level of risk.
That is likely to mean a further hardening in the market when reinsurance
buyers renew their annual policies towards the end of this year.
The bargaining will be simplest in the proportional market, in which giant
companies such as Swiss Re and Germany's Munich Re reinsure an agreed
percentage of the potential liabilities in exchange for the same proportion
of the original premium, less a commission payment.
In the wake of poor results in 1990 and 1991, reinsurers may continue to
press direct insurers to increase rates and will seek reductions in the
commission paid to insurers to offset the costs of acquiring the original
business.
But it is in the non-proportional market, where reinsurers obtain cover
providing protection above a set level of claims, that the impact of the
recent losses is being felt most strongly.
After nearly a decade in which the brokers who buy reinsurance on behalf of
insurance companies have held the upper hand in setting rates, terms and
conditions, power is returning to the biggest and best capitalised
reinsurance companies in Europe and North America, including Munich Re, and
Swiss Re.
Mr Patrick Peugot, chief executive of SCOR, France's biggest reinsurer and
now the seventh biggest reinsurer in the world, says that the main groups
now have the oppor-tunity to enforce greater discipline in the market at a
time when the demand for catastrophe reinsurance is increasing.
'We should be able to set rates that will provide cover for the medium and
long-term not go up and down all the time. That is one of our aims - to
stabilise the market,' he says.
One of the critical factors in this shift in power has been the impact of
rate competition and catastrophe in London, the world's biggest reinsurance
market.
The effect has been particularly severe in an esoteric corner of the market
known as London Market Excess or LMX, a reinsurance of reinsurance, or
retrocession market, which has trad-itionally provided high level
catastrophe protection for the world's insurers and reinsurers.
During the 1980s several dozen syndicates and com-panies specialised in
reinsuring each others' reinsurance exposures.
By 1991 the market had been destroyed by a series of catastrophes, beginning
with the UK storms of October 1987.
Reinsurance companies such as Victory, now part of the Dutch group NRG, and
the UK's Mercantile and General Re have also suffered heavily from these and
other large losses sustained by the market between 1987 and 1991.
At Lloyd's of London the losses cut a swathe through the market, sending
dozens of syndicates, and thousands of the individual Names whose wealth
provides the market's capital base, spinning out of business.
In 1989, when the market was hit by hurricane Hugo, the Exxon Valdez oil
spill, the San Francisco earthquake and a Dollars 1bn plus explosion at a
petroleum plant in Texas, 401 Lloyd's syndicates sustained record losses of
Pounds 2.06bn, but nearly half that amount was borne by fewer than a dozen
syndicates, which specialised in retrocession business. Specialist
retrocession syndicates managed by Gooda Walker agency sustained losses of
nearly Pounds 500m, for example.
By 1992, the number of Lloyd's syndicates had fallen to 278. Between 1988
and 1992 nearly a third of Lloyd's Names resigned, reducing total membership
of the market from over 30,000 to 22,300.
As a result of the collapse of the retrocession market, companies and
syndicates specialising in non-proportional reinsurance have found much
greater difficulty in offsetting their own exposures.
Forced to retain more risk on their own books, reinsurers have had to
examine their exposures more carefully, increasing rates to more realistic
levels and often making cover available at much higher levels than hitherto.
Under these pressures many companies have retreated from the market.
Companies such as Yasuda have withdrawn from London, and many larger players
 -such as Skandia, Sweden's biggest insurer - are seeking to reduce their
involvement altogether.
Mr Peugot says that the inability of many smaller companies to meet
reinsurance claims has been an important factor in purging the market.
'Reinsurers, who - if I may say so - were playing reinsurance, didn't like
the play much and have with-drawn.'
Mr Alan Bedanes, managing director of Chase Manhattan's insurance unit in
London, says that the part of the reinsurance market dependent on
retrocession capacity is of 'diminishing relevance. In a way you could argue
the retro market didn't represent true capital.'
Mr Ron Iles, chairman of Alexander Howden Reinsurance Brokers, the
reinsurance broking arm of US brokers Alexander &amp; Alex-ander, believes that
capacity in the non-proportional market could fall by at least 30 per cent
this year, putting further upward pressure on rates. In the US market, where
rates have been softest, the impact of Hurricane Andrew will add to the
upward pressure.
Other reinsurers think rises will continue in the 1992 renewal season. UK
insurance companies which have drawn on their reinsurance contracts to pay
losses from storms in October 1987 and January 1990, paid increases of up to
400 per cent at the end of 1990 and further rises of 25 per cent at the end
of last year.
According to Mr John Wetherell, underwriter of syndicate 190, which
specialises in non-proportional catastrophe cover at Lloyd's, further
increases are on the cards this year. 'High level excess of loss covers will
see significant increases.'
The collapse of the London retrocession market, combined with the increased
emphasis on security, is leading many smaller insurers and reinsurers to buy
financial reinsurance, which contains elements of both finance and
reinsurance.
The financial reinsurer guarantees that a claim will be paid but assumes the
risk that over time the sum of premiums paid, plus investment income, will
not equal the size of of the agreed payout (the interest rate risk) and/or
that claims will emerge before the agreed payment date.
Lloyd's syndicates with exposure to long tail liabilities - in which claims
arise many years after the inception of policies - have been buying time and
distance policies, which are similar to financial reinsurance transactions,
for some time. But over the past 12 months the use of financial reinsurance
has become more common.
This is because, the collapse of the LMX market has exposed some of the
difficulties faced by syndicates, which are effectively one year joint
ventures, in building reserves to cover against the risk of disasters which
might occur once in every ten years.
Zurich Insurance, the giant Swiss company, is the world's leading financial
reinsurer and its Centre Re subsidiary has already been involved in two of
the biggest financial reinsurance deals with Lloyd's, reinsuring syndicates
190 and 417.
Last year Zurich bought Pinnacle, the Bermuda-based financial reinsurer,
which has underwritten dozens of time and distance policies for Lloyd's
syndicates.
In addition, Lloyd's syndicates have also been given clearance by the
market's authorities to make more use of traditional reinsurance.
Observers believe that net result is likely to further increase the power of
the larger European and North American reinsurers.
