FT  19 OCT 92 / A face-lift passing for emergency first aid: The Birmingham
summit did little to resolve the mounting pile of problems facing the
Maastricht treaty
The Birmingham summit was supposed to give a shot in the arm to Mr John
Major, but it may go down as the day the British government shot itself in
the foot.
The government's panicky handling of the coal industry crisis has unsettled
Britain's European Community partners as much as Tory backbenchers. Last
Friday's surprise 1 percentage point cut in UK interest rates was a damaging
blow to the prime minister, renewing doubts about his judgment and political
strength at home.
As one senior member of an EC delegation remarked of Britain's apparent solo
dash for growth. 'Your government has learnt nothing. It is repeating the
same mistakes of the past 20 years.'
In the past four weeks, Mr Major and Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary,
have laboured mightily to rebuild Britain's standing in Europe after the
withdrawal of sterling from the exchange rate mechanism and the ensuing row
with the German government and the Bundesbank.
The efforts to banish the mistrust surrounding the British presidency of the
EC have met with some success, mainly because Mr Major managed to unite his
cabinet behind the one goal which matters most to his European partners -
early ratification of the Maastricht treaty on European Union, without
renegotiation.
In this sense, the coal industry crisis could not have come at a worse time.
Having placed their faith in Mr Major to deliver ratification of the treaty,
EC leaders now see the risk this week of a parliamentary defeat for Mr Major
on the pit closure programme - a defeat which could leave him gravely
weakened in the forthcoming battle with Tory Euro-sceptics to push
Maastricht through the House of Commons.
Before the coal crisis, British diplomats were arguing that Mr Major had
exploited his domestic problems to his own advantage. Thus, the Tory party
conference in Brighton, highlighted by a minor revolt of Euro-sceptics led
by Lord Tebbit, had underlined the difficulties in securing Maastricht
ratification. The question which EC leaders now want to know is whether Mr
Major will be weakened to the point where he dare not submit the treaty to
the Commons before Christmas.
European leaders headed by Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany and President
Francois Mitterrand of France are adamant that there is no alternative to
the ratification of Maastricht by all 12 member states. In their view,
treaty ratification is vital to end the crisis of confidence in the
Community, its leaders and its institutions which erupted last June when
Danish voters narrowly rejected the treaty.
What was striking about the one-day Birmingham summit was how little time it
devoted to the issues which many believe lie at the root of the current
problems facing Europe - the accelerating economic downturn which in turn is
raising questions about the common drive for economic convergence and future
European monetary union laid out in the Maastricht treaty.
Nor was there are any attempt to put pressure on France, the lone hold-out
on a Gatt world trade agreement, which now appears within reach and which
many leaders present in Birmingham believe offers the best prospect for
world economic recovery.
Instead, leaders focused on the need to give the EC what amounts to a
face-lift. In contrite mood, they acknowledged that the Community had failed
to explain in simple language what it was doing and why; and they drew up a
list of ideas aimed at selling the Maastricht treaty to the sceptical
citizens of Europe.
In future, the heads of government pledged that the Community will be more
open and more democratic. Among the ideas put forward by the British
presidency and the European Commission are: British-style green papers
inviting public comment on proposed EC legislation; the dispatch of
individual commissioners to liaise with national parliaments to explain the
Commission's annual work plans; and the partial opening-up of EC foreign
ministers' sessions to the public.
The more important tinkering involves the application of 'subsidiarity', the
concept of maximum devolution of power to national, regional and local
government. But here again, there may be less to the ideas currently under
discussion than meets the public eye.
Mr Jacques Delors, president of the European Commission, has staged an
effective counter-attack against British and German efforts to rein back the
power of Brussels.
In Birmingham, he argued that the Commission would become less active now
that the big burst of legislation tied to the creation of a single European
market was virtually complete. He also secured British agreement that the
introduction of subsidiarity would not change the balance of institutional
power in Brussels, adroitly playing on the fears of smaller EC states which
view the Commission as their traditional protector against the bigger
members.
Even more striking, Mr Delors noted that subsidiarity could only be truly
applied in a federal system. As the Commission's latest working paper on the
subject suggests, the obvious model is the 10th amendment to the US
constitution, which enumerates the balance of powers between the Federal
government and the states.
Yet federalism is anathema to the UK government, which views subsidiarity as
a means of increasing the purview of national parliaments at the expense of
the Community-wide approach, under the wider goal of enhancing co-operation
between EC governments.
'What we have are two completely different schools of thought,' says a
senior EC official, 'and the British need to make up their mind on what they
want to do.'
In the six weeks leading up to the next EC summit in Edinburgh, the British
presidency must attempt to bridge these gaps on subsidiarity. For it is at
Edinburgh that decisions must be taken which ought to produce the form of
words which the governments of the UK and Denmark will use to win support
for the treaty, first in the House of Commons and then in a second Danish
referendum late next spring.
What Birmingham showed was that leaders found it far easier to agree on
declarations of intent than to support concrete action. Yet at the same time
the problems continue to pile up. Negotiations on the Delors II budget
package to increase 'cohesion funds' for the poorer member states have
barely begun, though the respective bargaining positions are clearly
identified; and talks between Denmark and its partners on modifications to
Maastricht are only due to start early next month.
Delay in agreement on any of these issues could be fatal, because it would
foster the impression of drift currently afflicting the Community. It could
even encourage others states, notably France and Germany, to press ahead
with their own plans for political and monetary union based on an 'inner
core' of federally minded, stronger economies. At present, neither country
wishes to create a mini-Europe; but neither intends to leave the EC in
limbo. Mr Major, facing the gravest political crisis of his premiership, is
not in much of a position to argue.
