FT  24 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Contractors consider action over Canary
Wharf
A GROUP of about a dozen contractors is considering pursuing legal action
against Olympia &amp; York in a bid to free money owed for building work on the
failed Pounds 1.5bn Canary Wharf development in London's docklands.
The project was placed into administration at the end of last month after
Olympia &amp; York, the developers, ran into financial trouble.
Administration is designed to prevent creditors, such as contractors, from
pursuing claims while attempts are made to reorganise the business.
Partners of Ernst &amp; Young, the accountancy firm, who were appointed
administrators to Canary Wharf at the end of May are today due to reveal to
bankers in Toronto their initial findings and outline a strategy for dealing
with the troubled project.
About Pounds 60m is estimated to be owed to construction companies which
have worked on the project.
The group of contractors, in a bid to recoup some of this money, is
considering starting a class action against Olympia &amp; York. This would allow
them to sue the developers direct and avoid becoming ensnared by the
administration procedure.
The companies - which are thought be owed more than Pounds 10m - have been
taking legal advice from Davies Arnold Cooper, a large firm of City
solicitors.
The solicitors said last night that a decision on whether to proceed with
legal action could depend upon what Canary Wharf administrators might
announce today.
Mr Nigel Montgomery, partner in the firm's construction insolvency unit,
said: 'An administration places a ring fence around a business which keeps
creditors out.
'This action would enable contractors to claim that assets on the other side
of this fence belong to them and therefore should be handed over and not
used to the benefit of other creditors. A class action enables companies
which might not be able afford it on their own to group together and share
costs.'
The action concerns contractors' plant and equipment which remains on site
as well as money owed to them which has been retained by the developers
against the possibility of defects arising after completion of the building.
Developers can retain up to 2 1/2 per cent of the cost of the works for up
to 12 months after legal completion of construction.
Contractors will argue that retention money and plant legally belongs to
them and therefore cannot be held back by Olympia &amp; York or the
administrators.
