FT  23 JUN 92 / Survey on A-Z of Computing (7): Chasing the copycat
criminals - Fast
THE TROUBLE with software theft is that it doesn't look like theft at all.
The original title holder of an application package suffers no loss and can
continue using the package just as before. The 'thief' simply makes a copy,
leaving the original untouched. Yet according to estimates produced by FAST,
the Federation Against Software Theft, the loss of revenue to software
producers created by such copying totals around Pounds 300m, (Dollars
531.00) and the amount is growing.
FAST has been in existence since the mid-1980s, when it was formed to
counter the blatant copying of applications programs. Its formation was
partly a consequence of the increased copying that followed the penetration
of personal computers into business and corporate markets. Individual PC
hobbyists copying and exchanging programs between themselves was annoying
but companies copying applications on which to run their businesses was
significant.
As the volume of copying and theft has grown, FAST and its chief executive,
Bob Hay, have become more vocal. While the underlying idea that copying an
application does in fact equal theft has been acknowledged by many, it has
fallen to FAST to make the lesson more readily understood by business users.
Over the past two years it has increasingly used the law to protect its
members' interests and expose the 'felons'. The most widely publicised
example was the case it brought against Mirror Group Newspapers following a
raid it conducted on MGN's offices last November. This found over 800 items
of software in use, of which only 97 were legal copies of applications. It
would appear that MGN staff also fell into the trap of assuming that simply
deleting a file from a hard disk would hide the copying.
In the event, FAST investigators used a package called Norton Utilities to
examine the drives and locate evidence of the deleted applications. Taking
this idea further, FAST has now come up with a Software Auditing package.
This can recognise over 650 important business applications, and is intended
to help corporate users build an inventory of applications currently in use.
This can then be compared with the list of those officially purchased. To
ensure the legal veracity of its investigations and claims, the Federation
has built up a support structure of legal advisers which has been called
FLAG - the FAST Legal Advisory Group. This consists of representatives from
some 25 firms of solicitors, all of whom have an active interest in the they
way the law relates to software. They are also joined by the legal
representatives of several big computer companies.
The pressure to curb illegal copying and software theft is a worldwide
phenomenon. The UK is by no means the worst offending country in the world,
and FAST has become closely associated with the Business Software Alliance,
a US-based organisation aiming to combat software theft worldwide. Among the
biggest offenders, according to the BSA, is Germany, where the losses caused
by theft are estimated to have totalled Dollars 1.86bn in 1990 alone.
Other countries with poor reputations on software theft and copyright
protection are said to be Italy and Taiwan, which together cost the software
industry an estimated Dollars 1.5bn. The European Community is also taking
the issue seriously, having approved a Software Directive a year ago.
FAST executives are happy with its contents, for it allows software
licensees to decompile applications to find out what the source code is,
allowing them to write another program that will interoperate with it - a
potentially important move towards achieving practical open systems.
But the directive does not specify what constitutes an interoperable
program, leaving scope for the experienced to use the directive to obtain an
applications source code and, from that, write their own version. While
individual copiers may not think they are depriving the software companies
of much revenue, the revenue not made is also money not available for future
applications development or - more important to users - support for existing
ones.
