FT  23 APR 92 / Threat to Kabul dismissed: Afghan leaders seek to isolate
Hezb-i-Islam fundamentalists
AFGHAN guerrilla and military leaders yesterday expressed confidence that
they could ward off a threatened attack on Kabul by the Islamic
fundamentalist Hezb-i-Islam movement.
Speaking at Charikar, some 50 kms north of Kabul, Mr Ahmed Shah Masood, the
mujahideen commander whose alliance controls the north of the country,
confirmed that units of the Hezb were advancing towards Kabul through Loghar
province to the south. He said they were about 25kms from the city.
But he was dismissive of the ability of the forces led by Mr Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar to launch a successful attack on the capital. He condemned Mr
Hekmatyar - who has threatened to begin an offensive against Kabul on Sunday
if an Islamic interim government has not been established by then - as a
'warmongerer' . Mr Masood, a gaunt, self-confident guerrilla leader, was
speaking before talks here yesterday with Mr Benon Sevan, the UN special
envoy on Afghanistan.
Mr Masood said he did not think the forces were large. He said: 'If Mr
Hekmatyar had the forces to come into Kabul he would have done so by now.'
As we drove back from Charikar across the plain to the north of Kabul,
several hundred of Mr Masood's Jamiat-i-Islam guerrillas were marching
towards the capital. They appeared to have been sent to reinforce security
around the city. Around Charikar tanks and armoured personnel carriers were
being kept in a state of readiness - apparently to move on Kabul if
necessary.
None the less the strategy of Mr Masood, of the military government in
Kabul, of the UN and of Pakistan seems to be to attempt to neutralise the
Hezb so as to avoid a fight for the city.
Mr Sevan went out of his way to praise Mr Masood for not so far marching on
Kabul himself and for seeking talks with other mujahideen leaders to
establish an interim mujahideen government to administer the country. He
said: 'I welcome the fact that he has taken a very judicious step in
deciding not to march into Kabul except peacefully.'
Mr Masood, while dismissing the original UN concept of a neutral interim
government, said 'we want to talk with others' over the setting up of a
transitional Islamic administration.
On the two-hour drive to Charikar, there was virtually no sign of army or
paramilitary forces - confirming the complete mujahideen domination of the
north of the country. Until 10 days ago this road - which climbs through the
Salang pass to the Russian border - was officially controlled by government
forces which banned it to foreigners.
We drove through numerous checkpoints manned by both the Jamiat-i-Islam of
Mr Masood and by Hezb guerrillas. On either side of the road villages had
been flattened by Russian bombing. The small town of Serai Khoja -
surrounded in the bright spring sunlight by pink and white apple and almond
blossom - looked like Dresden after the second world war.
Mr Masood, who seems certain to play a dominant role in postwar Afghan
politics, was alert and nimble in his replies to questions. Educated at the
Lycee Istiklal in Kabul, he spoke good basic French - but said he had not
used it for years. He was adamant that former President Najibullah should
stand: 'His head belongs to the people of Afghanistan.'
Mr Rashid Dostan, the powerful Uzbeck militia commander and an ally of
Masood's told Mr Sevan on Tuesday that there was no question of Mr
Najibullah being released. Mr Dostan's troops control Kabul airport and are
manning the southern defences of the capital.
Mr Jan Karlsson, an Icelandic Red Cross nurse, was shot dead in Maydan
Shahr, 30km south of Kabul, yesterday. A man in a crowd of onlookers shot Mr
Karlsson as he and two Swiss colleagues were evacuating two wounded men from
the town.
UN special envoy Benon Sevan and mujahideen leader Ahmad Shah Massood before
their talks yesterday on forming an interim government
Mr Benon Sevan, UN special envoy for Afghanistan, yesterday asked Pakistan
for help in providing transit for Mr Najibullah, the former Afghan
president, into exile - probably in India - according to a senior government
official, Farhan Bokhari reports. Mr Najibullah is believed to be hiding in
a UN office in Kabul. The request came only a day after earlier reports that
Mr Sevan had failed in his efforts to secure safe passage for Mr Najibullah
during his meetings with mujahideen. Mr Najibullah's hiding place has
affected the UN's credibility in the eyes of the Mujahideen, diplomats say.
