FT  30 DEC 92 / Think tanks halted in battle for ideas: The fight to lead
the Conservatives' political offensive in the 1990s
WHEN the prime minister gathers close advisers at his Chequers country house
the weekend after next for a summit on domestic policy, the contributions of
'think tanks' that aim to direct Tory party thinking will be noticeable by
their absence.
Such a meeting would have been unthinkable in the 1980s without the
influence of the Centre for Policy Studies, the Adam Smith Institute and the
Institute of Economic Affairs.
'There is a battle of ideas going on,' said Lord Skidelsky, chairman of the
Social Market Foundation. 'There is a Darwinian struggle. I wouldn't like to
say that it was a battle of organisations as such, or that we wished anyone
ill. It is just: who can come up with an agenda for the 1990s that can
work?'
The foundation was set up to protect the ideas of the defunct Social
Democratic Party but now leans towards mainstream Conservative thinking.
Local government minister Mr John Redwood, head of Downing Street's policy
unit when Lady Thatcher was prime minister, said the influence in Whitehall
of outside thinkers had declined markedly. 'No single think tank is
currently having a golden run or making the incisive contribution to the
political debate as, for instance, the Centre for Policy Studies did in its
heyday,' he said.
The vacuum partly arises from changes in personalities. The Institute of
Economic Affairs split in 1991 after factional clashes. Mr Graham Mather,
the general director, refused to become a repository for the Thatcher
legacy. He set up the European Policy Forum, with support from Mr John
Major, to develop policies in a European context. The forum hopes to become
more influential in the run-up to the 1996 inter-governmental conference
that will review Europe's future post-Maastricht.
Similarly, the No Turning Back Group of backbenchers and ministers - once
Mrs Thatcher's praetorian guard - has been divided. Many members are loyal
to 'Majorism'. Others, particularly the Euro-sceptic members, want to
protect its original Thatcherite instincts. One rightwing minister said: 'It
would be helpful if they turned their attention to domestic agenda rather
than agitating on Europe.'
Perhaps more influential has been the style of politics and thinking
associated with Mr Major's premiership.
Mr Mather said Conservatism was less about factionalism, more about a search
across the political spectrum for fresh, practical ideas. He added: 'The
trench warfare and the political flag-flying are over because there has been
a convergence in politics. The differences are less stark. The market is the
starting point for most policymakers whichever political party they are in.'
That has not tempered the argument but has made the likely impact on future
Conservative thinking less clear. Lord Skidelsky said think tanks 'are like
entrepreneurs - they see the market changing'. This week he proposed using
Keynesian discretionary economic policies to compensate for failures of
monetarist economics.
Much debate has been postponned because of Westminster's preoccupation with
Europe. But the No Turning Back Group decided before Christmas to start
publishing pamphlets again.
Housing, unemployment, and pensions are possible topics. Mr Michael
Portillo, chief secretary to the Treasury and a group member, is one likely
author.
The Social Market Foundation plans papers on retirement and education. The
Adam Smith Institute has contributed to developing Mr Major's Citizen's
Charter.
Mr David Willets, the former director of the Centre for Policy Studies who
is now MP for Havant and a board member of the foundation, said: 'More
activity is good for the Conservative party and, to be a bit pompous, it is
good for public policy.'
A CRISIS in accountability is looming as an unelected elite assumes
responsibility for many public services, according to a report published
yesterday by the European Policy Forum, an independent think tank, Alison
Smith writes.
Professor John Stewart of Birmingham University warns in the first of two
studies in the report that a 'new magistracy' is taking control of services
such as health and education. Its members are virtually unknown to the
public and may not be required to provide information about their activities
as local authorities are.
The second study, written by Professor Norman Lewis and Ms Diane Longley of
Sheffield University, warns that the new education quangos are 'notoriously
unregulated by administrative law'.
It says education reforms have done little to enhance the role of parents.
