FT  01 JUL 92 / World Stock Markets: Political victory brings Greek equities
to life - Kerin Hope on the latest developments in Athens
It took a political victory to bring life into the Athens stock market this
week, after Greek investors had ignored normally encouraging signals such as
a fall in inflation and impressive 1991 earnings from listed companies.
The Athens general index surged 7.9 per cent on Monday to 876 in response to
unexpected European Community backing for Greece on the sensitive issue of
recognition for Macedonia. At the Lisbon summit, Prime Minister Constantine
Mitsotakis finally persuaded other Community leaders that the former
Yugoslav republic should change its name, in order to avoid implying a
territorial claim on part of northern Greece.
The Macedonian dispute, together with the spectre of a wider Balkan
conflict, had been blamed for a steady decline in share prices this spring.
On May 29, the index reached an 18-month low at 776, before recovering to
hover around the 800 mark. Turnover also shrank, averaging only about Dr1bn
(Dollars 5.26m) daily.
Mr Alexander Moraitakis, managing director of Nuntius Securities, says: 'The
market was reacting to every political twist and turn, not to economic
developments. As a result, we now have some of the lowest price/earnings
ratios to be found anywhere.'
Improved productivity, assisted by wage restraints, has spurred a healthy
increase in profits for many listed companies, particularly in the banking,
construction and food and beverages sectors. While continuing recession is
expected to keep domestic demand low, a much increased flow of tourists is
boosting the outlook for food-processing and service-sector companies.
Although only the most optimistic forecaster is willing to predict that the
Greek economy may be on the road to recovery, inflation has at last started
to drop. It is expected to stabilise at around 15 per cent over the summer,
the lowest for more than two years.
Yet with tax-free government paper still being offered at interest rates of
up to 21 per cent, brokers are uncertain about the market's prospects for a
sustained improvement. A rally early this year, which brought the index to a
1992 high of 1,009 in February, quickly fizzled out as individual investors
pulled out.
Ms Mariella Porfyratos, an analyst with Midland-Pantelakis Securities, says:
'What the market needs is steady growth over the next few months, which will
attract institutional investors from abroad, not another short, sharp
rally.' Yesterday the index fell 1.9 per cent to 842.8.
However, Stock Exchange officials are hopeful that a catalyst for
improvement is at hand, in the form of screen-based trading, due to be
introduced over the next few weeks.
Banks of computers now fill half of the trading space inside the Stock
Exchange building. They will operate at first alongside the floor, so that
brokers can make a gradual switch from old-fashioned open outcry to the new
system.
The Dollars 3.8m system is being set up by Femcon Associates, a US company,
which computerised the San Francisco stock exchange and the New York
commodities exchange. It is being paid for mainly through EC funding.
The initial stage will be computerised trading of bank shares, which account
for about 50 per cent of total market capitalisation. By the end of the
year, the remaining 150 listings will be included in the system and brokers
should start moving away from the floor to trade from their offices.
According to Mr Nikitas Niarchos, the bourse president, daily volume is
likely to quadruple once automated trading is fully under way. 'I do not
anticipate that it will take more than a few weeks for the brokers to get
accustomed to the new system and start trading at much higher volumes. But
it will be a while before we start introducing new products,' he says.
For investors, a large part of the new system's attraction will be the
increase in transparency. Confusion and delays over execution of orders has
contributed to individual investors' reluctance to return to the market
after its volatile performance over the past two years, according to
exchange officials.
Mr Costas Galanis, technical adviser to the bourse, says, however, that if
the new system is to operate efficiently, computerisation must be extended
to include settlement and depositary arrangements. 'The next priority for
automation is the settlement system. Then we can start thinking about
introducing options and futures,' he adds.
