FT  13 JUL 92 / UK Gilts: Long-dated issues hold up well
STERLING's decline caused some nervousness in the gilt market, though
long-dated bonds held up relatively well due to a promising outlook for
inflation over the next year.
While prices at the short end fell slightly, long-maturing bonds benefited
from further signs that demand in the UK economy is extremely weak.
This point was rammed home by news that the retail prices index increased in
the year to June by 3.9 per cent, from 4.3 per cent in May. The June figure
is the lowest since last October and underlines how inflationary pressures
are being squeezed due to weak demand linked to the recession.
Last week's fall in the pound against the D-Mark - it closed on Friday night
at DM2.8725, or more than 2 pfennigs down on the week - unsettled some
sections of the gilt market. It also effectively ruled out for the immediate
future a cut in base rates, held at 10 per cent since early May. Many would
like the government to reduce rates to revive the economy.
Reflecting the lack of likely movement on short-term borrowing costs, the
benchmark short-dated 10 per cent Treasury bond maturing in 1994 was quoted
on Friday night down nearly  1/2 point on the week at 100 9/32 . Its yield
was 9.24 per cent.
Long-dated gilts, however, performed better. This was on the basis that the
longer base rates stay high, the sharper will be the disinflationary
pressures, and the more obvious will be the value to investors of holding on
long-term to fixed interest-rate securities. Accordingly, the long-dated 9
per cent stock due in 2008 gained  1/8 on the week, closing on Friday at 101
13/16 , for a yield of 8.79 per cent.
On the basis of the inflation prospects, it is possible to make out a good
case for buying gilts, a view which appears to have been accepted by many UK
institutional investors in recent weeks. That may also be the case for many
overseas investors, even with sterling looking fragile. If the point is
accepted that the pound will soon rise from close to the bottom of its band
in the European exchange rate mechanism, then anyone buying gilts using
D-Marks or any of the other relatively strong European currencies will find
UK bonds relatively cheap.
As for inflation, the retail-price figures showed how service-sector
inflation - which was relatively high for much of last year - is dropping
fast. Between January and June, year-on-year price increases for leisure,
household and personal services have fallen from 11.3 per cent to 8.1 per
cent, from 7.8 per cent to 5.9 per cent and from 8.8 per cent to 6.4 per
cent.
More indications about the modest upward pressure on prices in the UK
economy are likely tomorrow when the Central Statistical Office releases the
latest data on the prices of manufactured goods at the wholesale level.
Producer prices are expected to have risen by 3.5 per cent in the year to
June, from 3.6 per cent in May, underlining the difficulties many companies
face in increasing margins.
