FT  18 SEP 92 / The ERM and Maastricht: Turmoil fuels French campaign
RIVAL campaigners in the French referendum on the Maastricht treaty were
yesterday quick to exploit the European monetary turmoil to bolster their
respective cases, with the Yes camp calling for the stability of a single
Euro-currency and the No group casting new doubt on the feasibility of such
a unit.
Most, however, seemed agreed that the outcome of Sunday's vote was as
important as ever for France and Europe.
Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the Socialist prime minister, warned that a No verdict
in Sunday's referendum on Maastricht would create fresh 'difficulties' for
France and other European countries.
For the RPR, the largest opposition party, Mr Edouard Balludur, a former
conservative finance minister, said the crisis on the money exchanges 'shows
we have even more need of Europe, of greater co-ordination among us, without
which we are condemned to disarray'.
Le Monde said in an editorial that 'the bursting apart of the European
Monetary System indicates that a certain number of countries - grouped
around Germany and France - could rapidly create a unified monetary zone' in
a two-speed Europe.
Mr Jacques Barrot, parliamentary leader of the 40 centrist UDC deputies,
said that approving Maastricht would give a new push towards economic and
monetary union, which was needed 'to bolster an EMS which was becoming more
and more battered'. By forging a common Ecu, the Community would have a 'bar
of steel' to replace 'the chain of the EMS, whose links can always snap'.
But Mr Philippe Seguin, a leading No campaigner within the RPR, said the
currency turmoil had shown 'before our eyes' that Maastricht was 'an
historic misconception'. Differing economies could not be put into a
monetary straitjacket, he suggested. He was due last night, at one of the
few big rallies in a campaign that is now winding down, to develop this
theme at Versailles' Palais des Congres.
Echoing Mr Seguin from the other end of the political spectrum, Mr Charles
Fiterman, a leading Communist, said that developing a single currency would
not resolve the differences between EC economies. A French defeat of
Maastricht would allow 'a rapid re-discussion' of the treaty to develop a
new European policy. This would be better than simply 'waiting for crises
which will be inevitable if we advance along the lines laid down in the
(Maastricht) treaty,' Mr Fiterman added.
However, Maastricht's opponents yesterday displayed some nervousness that
financial fears might tip the balance on Sunday in favour of the treaty. Mr
Max Gallo, a Socialist Euro-MP, said it was 'scandalous propaganda' for many
commentators to suggest that the uncertainty surrounding the French
referendum was the cause of this week's 'monetary storm'.
The currency market upheavals underlined the importance of monetary and
economic convergence as an insurance against further shocks, the Patronat
employers' organisation said.
Mr Michel Albert, chairman of AGF, the state-owned insurance group, warned
that a No vote would hit savings and property values. The financial markets
would see 'a fall, the size of which no one can foresee.' Dealers would test
the franc to the limit, which would be 'tantamount to a devaluation,' he
said.
