FT  13 FEB 92 / Pressure increases to solve problems of fraud trials
PRESSURE on the government to find a solution to the problems of complex and
unmanageable fraud trials increased last night when the Labour party
announced that it would streamline the role of agencies responsible for
dealing with fraud.
A Labour government would consider appointing specialist legal advisers to
juries involved in complex fraud cases. It would also consider giving
prosecuting authorities the opportunity to choose between civil and criminal
proceedings, Ms Marjorie Mowlam, the party's City affairs spokeswoman, said.
However, it would not move to end jury trial in fraud cases, she said, as
this would undermine 'basic civil rights'.
Ms Mowlam argued that there was much duplication of effort among the various
bodies with fraud responsibilities. These include the Serious Fraud Office,
the Crown Prosecution Service, the Department of Trade and Industry, the
City self-regulatory organisations and the Stock Exchange.
The Serious Fraud Office confirmed that it was pressing the government for
its officers to have interviewing powers consistent with those of DTI
inspectors. Some of the biggest SFO prosecutions, including the Guinness and
Blue Arrow cases, have had to rely heavily on DTI inspectors' reports.
Giving these powers to the SFO could reduce the time spent preparing cases
for trial.
Mrs Barbara Mills, outgoing director of the SFO, is also known to believe
there is scope for improvement in the use of preliminary hearings before
fraud trials.
In the Commons, Mr John Redwood, corporate affairs minister, said Lord
Mackay, the Lord Chancellor, was reviewing court procedures.
Mr Redwood assured the House that the government would take 'every action to
bring villains to book'.
Earlier, Lord Mackay had acknowledged the need for urgent attention to be
given to the issue but had warned that there was no easy solution. He agreed
with comments made by Mr Justice Henry, the judge in the second Guinness
trial which collapsed on Tuesday, about the need for cheaper and quicker
serious fraud trials.
He said he would resist pressure to scrap juries in complex fraud cases  - a
recommendation of the 1986 Roskill Fraud Trials Committee.
Pressure on the government to act is likely to increase further later this
week when the year-long Blue Arrow trial ends. The jury is still considering
its verdicts, having been sent out on Tuesday morning.
With costs estimated at about Pounds 40m, Blue Arrow is by far the most
expensive criminal prosecution brought in the UK.
