FT  20 FEB 92 / International Company News: UA cinema chain changes hands in
Dollars 680m buy-out
TELE-COMMUNICATIONS Inc (TCI), the largest operator of cable television
systems in the US, has agreed to sell the United Artists cinema chain to a
management buy-out, backed by Merrill Lynch Capital Partners, for around
Dollars 680m.
The chain comprises 2,398 screens, spread over 502 locations in the US and
Puerto Rico, making it the nation's biggest cinema operator.
No financial details for the cinemas were disclosed, but the price is
thought to represent around seven times cash flow.
The sale follows the acquisition by TCI of all of United Artists
Entertainment's stock last year.
UAE, ranking number three in the cable TV industry, was formed by the merger
of United Cable and United Artists Communications in 1989. After long
negotiations, TCI - already a 54 per cent shareholder in UAE - agreed to buy
out the remaining equity for Dollars 1.1bn in stock and cash.
Since the TCI/UAE merger became a strong possibility, Mr Stewart Blair,
former chief executive of UAE, has been attempting to acquire the
Denver-based cinema chain which, TCI acknowledged, was peripheral to its
cable business.
News of his negotiations first became public last August.
Under yesterday's deal, Mr Stewart - with more than a dozen other members of
the movie theatre chain's management - will be backed by Merrill Lynch
Capital Partners, which manages two leveraged buy-out funds. It is a
wholly-owned subsidiary of the Wall Street investment bank.
The deal envisages Dollars 112m of equity funding, provided by management
and the LBO backers; Dollars 92.5m of preferred stock to be issued by the
buyer to TCI; and then a layer of debt financing. Closing of the deal is
subject to financing and certain other conditions.
Yesterday, parties involved in the deal said the plan was to run the cinema
chain on existing lines, and that only a few extraneous pieces of real
estate might be sold off.
The Merrill Lynch LBO funds hold more than 20 investments. The second of the
two funds will be about 50 per cent-invested after this deal.
