FT  07 JAN 92 / German parties' asylum deal faltering
GERMANY'S four leading parties have called new talks tomorrow to deal with
the soaring numbers of asylum-seekers in the country, amid signs that their
previous compromise is falling apart, Quentin Peel writes from Bonn.
The issue threatens once again to explode politically, after an arson attack
on a refugee hostel in the Black Forest on Sunday left a Lebanese immigrant
critically ill.
At the same time, publication of statistics for 1991 showed the number of
asylum-seekers in Germany reached 256,112, almost 33 per cent higher than a
year earlier.
The latest talks between the ruling coalition and the opposition Social
Democrats (SPD) come amid reports that their previous agreement, to protect
refugees by gathering them in big camps and to speed procedures for dealing
with asylum claims, cannot be put into effect for months, if at all.
The Christian Democrats (CDU), senior partners in the ruling coalition,
maintain the vast majority of asylum-seekers are, in reality, economic
migrants seeking work. They want an amendment to the German constitution to
allow immigration officials to stop such applicants at the border and send
them home.
The SPD and the Free Democrats in the ruling coalition reject changes in the
constitution as too drastic and insist the problem can be dealt with by
improving procedures to process asylum-seekers.
Only one state - Baden-Wurttemberg - has adequate capacity to house refugees
in the proposed 'collection camps', according to a spokesman for the
Interior Ministry.
The asylum issue remains acutely sensitive at a time of rising discontent
over higher taxes to pay for German unification, and the inflow of
immigrants of both German and non-German origin.
The latest attack was on a hostel housing some 40 refugees at Waldkirch in
Breisgau, near Freiburg in the country's prosperous south-west.
Yesterday saw a spontaneous demonstration by about 400 people in Waldkirch,
protesting against 'hostility to foreigners'.
Publication of the latest asylum statistics seems certain to heighten
debate, however. They show that almost 77 per cent of applications were
rejected as unfounded, 16 per cent more were withdrawn, and only 6.9 per
cent were deemed to be genuine cases for political asylum under Germany's
liberal laws.
Of the total, 74,854 came from Yugoslavia, 40,504 from Romania, 23,877 from
Turkey and 12,056 from Bulgaria.
