FT  08 SEP 92 / Technology: Safer plug for electric appliances
A new invention could mark the death knell of one of the most tedious chores
in the British home - the fiddly pursuit of fitting a plug to an electric
appliance.
Long regarded as the basic test of any do-it-yourself enthusiast, the
standard electrical plug has been the downfall of many budding electricians,
often with tragic consequences. Twenty-eight people were electrocuted in
their homes in 1990 and a further 2,000 treated in hospital as a result of
wrongly-wired appliances.
Concern at the dangers this year prompted the government to announce
legislation - due to come into effect next summer - requiring manufacturers
to fit plugs to domestic appliances.
In turn, the manufacturers have increased calls for a fail-safe plug which
can be fitted quickly and easily, thus protecting them against insurance
claims for faulty wiring and avoiding increased labour costs involved in
fitting appliances.
The result is the Rotaplug: a plug wired in seconds - without a screwdriver
 -which has passed the stringent British Standard tests and is about to be
launched on the UK market.
Hugh Gilbert, the designer, claims the invention could revolutionise the
methods used to connect electrical appliances and envisages strong demand.
More than 60m plugs are sold each year in the UK.
His design is simple. The wires of the appliance are inserted into a socket
at the base of the three-pin plug. The whole centre of the plug, where the
pins protrude, twists through 90 degrees locking the wires into place.
The fuse is fitted in a separate pop-up container and can be replaced
without opening the plug or exposing the wires.
The plug, which can be wired in less than 10 seconds, has taken about seven
years to develop. 'The Rotaplug is aimed at both the retail and the
appliance manufacturers market,' says Gilbert.
'The appeal to appliance manufacturers is partly due to the significantly
decreased labour costs in fitting the plug, but also providing consumers
with the flexibility of a plug that can easily be unwired and refitted.'
