FT  07 JUL 92 / Russia plans to cut deficit and inflation
RUSSIA has undertaken to make sharp cuts in its projected budget deficit and
its inflation rate by the end of December to secure a deal unblocking its
first International Monetary Fund credit of Dollars 1bn (Pounds 500m).
Mr Alexander Shokhin, Russia's foreign economic relations chief, revealed
the agreement in an interview with the Financial Times yesterday.
In a warning to the leaders of the Group of Seven leading industrial nations
meeting in Munich, he stressed, however, that Russia would be unable to
achieve the IMF's proposed reduction in the budget deficit to 5 per cent of
gross domestic product unless it was allowed to reschedule its foreign debt.
The deficit is believed by western experts to be heading towards 17 per cent
on present trends.
The agreement also commits the government to reduce the monthly inflation
rate, presently estimated at 20 per cent, to no more than 10 per cent by the
end of the year. Government subsidies including spending on state
procurement of grain and fuel are also to be limited.
The conditions attached to the Dollars 1bn deal were finalised after a
lightning visit to Moscow at the weekend by Mr Michel Camdessus, the IMF's
managing director.
He managed to rescue negotiations which had all but broken down between the
government of Mr Yegor Gaidar, the acting prime minister, and IMF experts on
such issues as the raising of energy prices and the size of the permitted
budget deficit.
'I think Mr Camdessus was rung up not just by Gaidar but by other heads of
government,' Mr Shokhin said, referring to pressure by G7 leaders for the
two sides to reach an agreement before the G7's meeting with President Boris
Yeltsin in Munich tomorrow.
In Munich last night, Mr Camdessus spelt out what other conditions had been
agreed: a single rouble exchange rate, strengthened fiscal policy,
maintaining tight constraints on monetary policy, and continuing structural
reforms.
In particular, he mentioned land reform, bankruptcy legislation and an
accelerated privatisation programme as critical to the process.
'We decided that if all that were put in place, we would extend our
financial support,' he said. He rejected suggestions that the Fund was
prepared to relax its traditional conditionality. 'The IMF does not extend
credits without conditions,' he said. 'We need a package of reasonable
measures to be able to extend our support.'
The short-term programme to which the Dollars 1bn is tied represents the
first stage in a three-step approach for releasing Dollars 24bn promised by
the west to support Russia's market reforms.
The second step, on which talks will begin this month, is to reach agreement
on a full IMF standby programme. This would unblock further fund resources
and western credits for Russia.
Mr Camdessus said this should be finalised by October. It would depend on an
agreement on future co-operation in the rouble zone, and 'clean
arrangements' for all those former Soviet republics wishing to leave the
zone.
The third stage relates to a Dollars 6bn fund to stabilise the rouble as
part of plans to turn it into a partially convertible currency. Mr Shokhin
said Russia would only be ready to take receipt of this fund at the end of
the year or the beginning of 1993. 'We know quite well we are not yet ready
for stabilisation,' he said.
