FT  15 APR 92 / Management: Long and short of being a director
Abraham Lincoln, the 6'5' American president, was once asked by a heckler
how long a man's legs ought to be. 'Long enough to reach the floor,' he
said, providing the proper reply to such a question.
In an ideal world, a director's contract should also be long enough to reach
the floor - that is, long enough to get the job done. But 'just how long is
long enough?' is a question that has become central to the debate over how
to make directors more responsible to shareholders.
The Committee on Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance, the panel headed
by Sir Adrian Cadbury, is expected to recommend that directors' terms be
limited to three years.
While that is too short for some of the panel's members drawn from industry,
it is far too long for those who represent investors.
Institutional shareholders have found the problem particularly worrisome
when they have tried to fire directors whose performance has been poor. A
sacked director with five years to run on a contract is an expensive
ex-director indeed, as shareholders have too often found.
Consider the case of Lasmo, the oil services company, which last year paid
Pounds 6.7m to the board of Ultramar which it acquired in a hostile bid. At
Ultramar, not only were the directors highly paid. They were also on
five-year rolling contracts, the maximum allowed under the UK Companies Act.
Contracts longer than that require special shareholder approval.
'It rather grates on shareholders that we have to pay through the nose to
get rid of incompetent management,' said Paddy Linaker, chief executive of
M&amp;G, the unit trust company and chairman-elect of the Institutional Fund
Managers Association.
'In this business, five years is not unusual and that is too long,' Linaker
said. He argues that directors should not generally be on contracts longer
than a year.
There might be exceptions: a chairman brought in to salvage a company
believed to be on the verge of bankruptcy, or one who had been poached from
a competitor, might merit a longer contract, he argues.
IFMA wants shorter contracts, not only because of cost, but because they
arguably provide greater protection against complacent directors. The group
argues that while contracts should be short-term, incentives should be
long-term. That way, good directors would have to stay longer to take
advantage of stock options and other perks that make their jobs so
attractive.
But not all shareholders take a hard line on directors' terms of office.
Some fund managers have coyly suggested that those of their colleagues who
take a softer view are themselves the beneficiaries of long-term contracts.
'You will find that the shareholder-owned companies take an easier view,'
said one fund manager at a mutually-owned life insurer. The fund manager,
who is on a one-month rolling contract, adds that his own situation is
typical of Scottish fund managers. Similarly, Linaker is on a one-year
contract while Charles Nunnelly, managing director at Robert Fleming Asset
Management and the current chairman of IFMA, is on a six-month contract.
But the Institutional Shareholders Committee, which shares offices with the
Association of British Insurers, has been far more cautious in suggesting
limits on directors' terms of office.
'We say that directors should offer themselves for re-election periodically
and we suggest that a third should be up for re-election every year,' said
one ISC member. 'And if you think that sounds thin, then I agree with you.'
Meanwhile, the ISC is arguing for greater disclosure of directors' service
contracts generally. Currently, companies are required to make the contracts
available to anyone who comes to their premises to view them during an 'open
period' lasting a few weeks each year.
But few institutional shareholders take up the offer.
