FT  10 FEB 92 / UK Gilts: Prices rise as solid run continues
A BUMPER week for gilt funding ended with prices moderately higher,
continuing the solid run of recent weeks for the UK government bond market.
The Bank of England took the opportunity of a firm market to announce gilts
funding worth a total of Pounds 1.8bn. The move seemed aimed partly at
raising money for the 1992-93 public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR),
which could total some Pounds 24bn, roughly twice the figure for this year.
With sterling undergoing few signs of strain in the European exchange rate
mechanism and with recessionary conditions likely to continue for some time,
gilt yields continued on a downward path.
Since the start of 1992, yields have come down faster than for all the other
important types of government bonds, illustrating the attraction of the
securities for investors both in the UK and overseas.
The prospect of a large amount of new gilt issues in the financial year
beginning in April continues to worry some investors, as it might depress
prices. But even allowing for the nervousness that may affect the market
ahead of the general election, the outlook for gilt yields seems fairly
positive.
The firm state of the market was underlined when three tap stocks totalling
Pounds 550m announced by the Bank on Tuesday sold out the day afterwards, as
a result of considerable pent-up demand for securities maturing around the
end of the century. The instruments comprised Pounds 150m of the 9 1/2 per
cent Treasury loan due 1999, Pounds 150m of the 12 1/4 per cent exchequer
stock due 1999, and Pounds 250m of the 9 1/2 per cent conversion stock due
2005.
This was followed on Friday by news of an issue of Pounds 1.25bn of 9 per
cent cent Treasury stock due 2012, available for dealing from today. The
Bank set an issue price of 99.25 per cent, with 50 per cent payable up front
and a redemption yield of 9.08 per cent.
Including Friday's issue, the first new gilt to be unveiled by the Bank for
four years, total announced funding by the Bank so far this financial year
comes to some Pounds 15bn. Allowing for gilt redemptions of Pounds 6.5bn and
some Pounds 3bn of gilts thought to have been sold by the Bank unannounced,
the authorities appear to have already funded the estimated Pounds 11bn PSBR
for this year.
Last week, prices rose for gilts at all parts of the yield curve, apart from
extremely short-dated bonds. On Friday night, the 10 per cent Treasury bond
maturing in 1994 closed at 101 1/32 , up from 100 7/8 the week before. The
yield crept down to 9.48 per cent.
Since the start of the year, according to figures for annualised yields
worked out by UBS Phillips &amp; Drew, 10-year gilt yields have come down by 44
basis points (0.44 per cent). That is in contrast to a reduction in yields
for German and French 10-year government bonds of 15 and 22 basis points
respectively, while Japanese and US bonds of an equivalent maturity have
seen yields respectively unchanged and 47 basis points higher.
Over the next few weeks, more heavy funding by the Bank seems likely, given
the possibility that as the date of the election draws nearer, nervousness
about the outcome may well depress prices in the gilt market. With the
likelihood of a rise in yields closer to the poll (which many think will be
in April or May) it is probably in the Bank's interests to sell gilts sooner
rather than later.
The economic data due to be announced over the next week are likely to do
little to puncture the expectations of a slow recovery from the recession,
with inflationary pressures extremely small. Figures for UK credit business
due to be announced today are thought likely to show that consumers repaid
borrowing worth a net Pounds 50m last month, underlining the weak state of
demand. On Friday, the headline inflation rate is expected to be 4.4 per
cent, against 4.5 per cent in December.
