FT  20 FEB 92 / Pressure grows in Dublin for new abortion vote
IRELAND'S new prime minister, Mr Albert Reynolds, faces growing pressure to
hold a referendum on the 'right-to-life' amendment in the constitution
invoked this week by the High Court to prevent a 14-year-old rape victim
from having an abortion in the UK.
Acutely embarrassed by the controversy, he yesterday sought all-party
support to review Ireland's strict anti-abortion legislation, but appeared
to be finding it difficult to reach consensus even within his own Fianna
Fail.
He is being pressed by his coalition partners, the Progressive Democrats, to
hold a referendum on the 1983 constitutional amendment but many in Fianna
Fail are reluctant to face a re-run of that debate which one deputy
described as 'extremely bitter and divisive'.
Having just got the party off to a fresh start through the ousting of Mr
Charles Haughey from the leadership last month, he will not want to open new
wounds.
The opposition Labour Party is recommending that the Law Reform Commission
prepare 'an urgent report' on the issues raised by the High Court ruling,
but this was rejected yesterday by the main opposition Fine Gael, whose
spokesman said: 'That will take years. Action is needed immediately because
the status quo cannot continue as it is.'
Mr Dick Spring, the Labour Party leader said: 'I do not see how we can have
a public policy which says to children - to victims of sexual violence - you
have a right to life, but you don't have a right to sanity, to health, to
emotional stability, to begin to repair a life that has been shattered.'
The Irish constitution can only be amended by a referendum, but if the
political parties cannot agree to hold one, it may have to be left to the
courts to back the country out of this legal dead-end that puts Irish
legislation in contradiction with EC law.
An appeal could now be made to the Supreme Court, but given the closely
argued reasoning of the High Court judgment there is no guarantee its
injunction would be overturned. The case would then have to be taken to the
European Court of Human Rights.
According to one legal expert: 'There is a strong case to argue that Ireland
is in breach of Community law, by preventing the free movement of its
nationals within the EC.' The girl's family has given no indication that it
intends to appeal, however.
The politicians fear that a referendum would unleash the intimidating power
of the Roman Catholic church and its pro-life lobby group, the Society for
the Protection of the Unborn Child. The society was instrumental in 1983 in
getting the unborn child's right to life enshrined in the constitution.
Since then, it has successfully prevented the spread of abortion advice in
Ireland through court injunctions against pregnancy counselling services.
Last year the SPUC prevented Irish student unions from advertising or giving
information on UK abortion clinics to their members.
Ireland's anti-abortion law dates back to the 1860s, but it has been
accepted practice for Irish women to travel abroad to terminate unwanted
pregnancies. According to UK statistics, more than 4,000 Irish women obtain
abortions in Britain every year. Until now, no legal action has been
attempted to stop this practice. The 1983 constitutional amendment, however,
created a means for the state to intervene which it has now done.
In effect, any Irish woman who now seeks an abortion abroad, faces possible
prosecution regardless of the circumstances of her pregnancy.
According to Ms Rita Burtenshaw, the director of Dublin's Well-Woman Clinic,
Ireland's largest non-directive pregnancy counselling clinics, many women
come to her in a near-suicidal state, unable to obtain abortion advice -
since 1986, her clinic has been banned from giving it.
She said that many Irish family doctors refuse to prescribe contraception on
religious grounds 'particularly to unmarried women'. That, together with the
lack of sex education in schools, 'means that many Irish women are
appallingly ignorant about their bodies, sex and sexuality. The UK abortion
clinics are picking up the pieces.'
Her clinic, which counsels 40,000 women a year, is presently challenging the
government's ban on abortion counselling through the Court of Human Rights.
A further complication is the protocol to the Maastricht Treaty which
Ireland negotiated last December, and which excludes Ireland from any EC
legislation which would contradict its constitutional 'right-to-life'
amendment. Before signing, the treaty will have to be approved in Ireland by
a referendum. Many women may now oppose it on the basis of that protocol,
which would potentially deny them the right to legal recourse through
European courts, if further injunctions are sought against women travelling
to the UK for abortions.
