FT  23 MAY 92 / US and EC prepare Serbian sanctions
THE US and the European Community were yesterday preparing to adopt
diplomatic and economic sanctions to force Serbia to end ethnic fighting in
the breakaway Yugoslav republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The Serb-led federal Yugoslav army, meanwhile, was reported to have agreed
to withdraw from its barracks in the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo. The federal
troops, who have been pinned down at their bases by Moslem gunfire, are to
begin the pull-out today, according to the official Belgrade-based
newsagency, Tanjug.
In a memorandum sent to EC governments, the US said it was 'appalled by the
actions of the Yugoslav national army and the Serbian leadership in
Belgrade'. It would therefore shortly expel Yugoslav military attaches from
Washington and close two Yugoslav consulates, a measure matched by the
withdrawal of Washington's own military attaches and the closure of two US
consulates in Yugoslavia.
These moves follow the recall of all EC ambassadors from the Serbian capital
and US termination this week of landing rights for JAT, the Yugoslav state
airline now run by Serbia and its ally Montenegro.
Mr James Baker, US secretary of state, discussed the Yugoslav crisis with Mr
John Major, Britain's prime minister, in London last night. The US hoped for
co-ordinated action by countries 'unwilling to sit back and watch what
really is a humanitarian nightmare taking place', Mr Baker said.
Mr Gianni de Michelis, Italy's foreign minister, said the EC would approve
further economic sanctions against Serbia 'in a matter of hours or days' and
diplomatic pressures could eventually lead to Belgrade's exclusion from the
UN.
In a report to be discussed by EC foreign ministers in Lisbon at the
weekend, the European Commission recommended an embargo on Serbian and
Montenegrin exports and freezing of the extinct Yugoslav federation's IMF
assets.
Emphasising that more than half of Serbian and Montenegrin exports in 1991
went to the EC, the report said an EC embargo would have a big impact even
if not backed by Serbia's other trading partners.
The report was much more pessimistic, however, about the likely impact of an
oil embargo. Such an embargo would have to be supported by the two
republics' leading suppliers - Russia, China, Iran and Romania.
The extent of Belgrade's isolation was underlined by admission to the UN
yesterday of the three former Yugoslav republics of Croatia, Slovenia and
Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The UN agency for refugees said yesterday it was suspending operations in
Bosnia, until it got Serb assurances that it could conduct its work without
hindrance and in safety. This follows the seizure by Serb irregulars of 12
UN relief trucks.
Meanwhile, Germany opened its frontiers to children and sick and wounded
from Bosnia-Hercegovina, and urged other western European countries to
accept more refugees.
Bonn to lift barriers against Bosnia refugees, Page 2
