FT  29 MAY 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Price hopes brighten outlook
for Brazilian producer - Paranapanema, the world's biggest tin exporter
PREDICTIONS OF further rises in tin prices are brightening the outlook for
Paranapanema, the world's largest tin exporter and Brazil's largest private
mining company.
Last year, the company posted losses of Dollars 30.6m. The poor showing was
mostly due to its decision to write off, during 1990 and 1991, nearly
Dollars 70m in unpaid accounts payable by the government to its construction
division, said Mr Samuel A. Hanan, director-vice president. Of course,
prices in the region of Dollars 5,500 a tonne for tin, responsible for about
80 per cent of receipts last year, did not help.
Mr Hanan cited several factors to support his expectations of higher tin
prices: lower wild-cat output at Brazil's Bom Futuro mine, the stabilisation
of Chinese production at the 15,000 tonnes a year, and the return of Russia
to the consumer market, with estimated needs of about 8,000 tonnes a year.
He noted that the Russians had approached major international producers for
price quotes, signaling their intention to begin importing again after a two
year hiatus.
Global production is slowed because many mining companies practised
selective extraction during the period of lean prices over the past seven
years, going after high grade deposits, partly to hold down costs. 'Those
high grade deposits are depleted,' said Mr Hanan, 'and it is not easy to
increase production when you are working with lower grades.'
Mr Hanan expects a supply shortfall of 12,000 to 16,000 tonnes this year,
even after adjusting for the release of 12,000 tonnes from strategic
reserves by the US.
Brazilian production should drop from 29,000 tonnes to 25,000 tonnes, with
Paranapanema accounting for about 17,000 tonnes. Brazil gave up little when
it pledged to the Association of Tin Producing Countries, of which it is not
a member, to hold output to 25,000 tonnes in 1992, because it was unlikely
to be able to produce more than that anyway, said Mr Hanan.
Lower yields from wildcat mining at Bom Futuro are primarily responsible for
the lower Brazilian figures. Mr Hanan believes that output there should
reach 8,000 tonnes this year, down from 10,000 tonnes in 1991. The mine
produced 33,000 tonnes as recently as 1989.
Paranapanema is involved in a court battle over rights to Bom Futuro. Ebesa,
a seven-company joint venture headed by Paranapanema, holds the necessary
government permits to operate there, but wild-cat miners have obtained an
injunction to delay start-up. A three-member Supreme Court panel delayed an
expected ruling this month when one of the justices asked for more time to
study the case. The other two justices were prepared to rule in favour of
Ebesa.
A final decision is expected in the coming weeks. If favourable to Ebesa,
the company would be primed to begin operations within two or three months.
While Ebesa's extraction operations are prohibited by the injunction, the
company is carrying out research to re-evaluate the potential of the
open-cast site in the Amazon state of Rondonia. Mr Hanan predicts that
output would remain about the same as the 8,000-10,000 tonnes now extracted
by the wild-cat miners. They extracted 81,500 tonnes between 1987, when
operations began, and last year. Ebesa expects to invest between Dollars 20m
and Dollars 25m in Bom Futuro if it gets the nod from the courts.
Paranapanema plans about Dollars 20m of new investment in Brazil this year,
split between its construction and mining divisions, now united under a
unified management structure, the most evident change after Mr Octavio
Cavalcanti Lacombe bought out his former partner Mr Jose Carlos de Araujo
last month.
