FT  08 FEB 92 / Motoring: The Scandinavian way to avoid ice follies - Stuart
Marshall travels to Norway to take a spin on a frozen lake
BOTH Saab 9000s fired-up instantly after a sub-zero night in the open
outside my hotel in Lillehammer, Norway. But one of them shed the frost from
its windscreen and side windows much faster than the other, and created far
less air pollution in the critical first few minutes of operation.
The secret was under its bonnet - a device Saab is pioneering and plans to
offer customers on its 1994 models. Technically, it is a heat accumulator
but think of it as a giant vacuum flask. It stores surplus heat so
effectively that, 72 hours after the engine has been switched off, the
coolant inside the flask is still at 78'C.
At the next 'cold' start, there are several benefits. The pre-warmed engine
reaches working temperature very quickly and the catalytic converter is soon
cleaning the exhaust gases. (Normally, there are several dirty minutes
because a catalyser has to be hot to work properly). Engine wear is reduced
and, as I saw in Lillehammer last week, the car heater defrosts the windows
quickly.
The accumulator will be an optional extra, costing not more than Pounds 500.
Environmental benefits apart, it saves petrol - enough, Saab reckons, for
typical Swedish owners to see their money back after three years.
Driving on icy roads is something at which the British are not very good
because they do it so rarely and their cars are not prepared for it. In
Scandinavia, most motorists have to cope with conditions that would keep UK
drivers at home for about five months each year.
The first thing they do is fit the right tyres, with treads made of a rubber
compound that stays flexible and reasonably grippy at low temperatures. They
also have more than 100 tungsten carbide studs protruding far enough from
the tread rubber to bite on ice.
On surfaces the British would consider as having zero grip, studded tyres
make driving quite easy providing you are sensible about it. They are
certainly not a licence for the speed you might use on wet roads with summer
tyres.
Outside Lillehammer, I drove two Saabs on a lake: a veteran 900 with a
turbo-charged 16-valve, two-litre engine, and the latest 2.3-litre 9000CS,
also turbo-charged.
The 9000 was easier to drive in the snow-packed and slippery conditions
because it had another aid to winter motoring. TCS stands for
traction-control system. It uses the electronic sensors of the ABS brakes in
combination with electronic throttle control to stifle wheel-spin. As soon
as a tyre loses grip, power to that wheel is reduced until it stops
spinning.
Not only does TCS increase traction so that you can re-start on an icy hill
 -it also makes the car handle more stably by curbing wheel-spin even when
accelerating round a bend. In effect, TCS, which is offered on both manual
and automatic 9000s, provides many of the benefits of full-time four-wheel
drive without its cost, complication and fuel consumption penalties.
So far this year, there has been no winter to speak of in the south-east of
England and Norway's snow was the first I had seen this year. But there is
still time for an Arctic spell; last year's main snowfall in the UK was in
February.
What can motorists do to make driving on ice or snow-covered roads safer and
less frightening? Obviously, having the right car is a help (although not
all of us can afford Saabs with their heated seats, TCS and ABS systems).
Saab's former rally ace, Erik Carlsson, now in his 60s, is still faster and
safer on ice than many of us are on dry roads. His tips include:
Take off heavy outer garments as soon as the car has warmed-up - they
restrict a driver's natural movements.
Change gear as smoothly as you can; jerking could start wheel-spin.
Stay in the ruts formed by other traffic on snow-covered roads. They could
be slippery, but it is safer to be in them.
Be very careful when changing lanes, especially in cars with rear-wheel
drive which do not have so much traction as those with front-wheel drive.
Slush and deep snow on either side drags on the car when you pull out to
overtake and can cause loss of control.
If you do get stuck, turn off the radio, open the side windows and listen to
the engine as you engage first or reverse and apply minimal throttle. Do not
let the wheels spin through excess power. The car might move only an inch or
two, but let it roll back and then try again. Gradually, the distance you
move will increase and there is every chance the vehicle will rock itself
free.
Take breaks. Driving in winter demands extra concentration and is more
tiring than in summer. Stop now and again, have a short walk, a snack or
just a breath of fresh air.
