FT  05 MAY 92 / Volvo thwarted in bid for Procordia
THE Swedish Government is to press ahead with its plan to privatise its
large minority stake in Procordia, the Swedish pharmaceuticals and food
group, thwarting a controversial bid by Volvo, the Swedish automotive group,
to merge the two companies.
The sell-off of the state holding in Procordia is expected to raise between
SKr16bn (Dollars 2.7bn) and Skr17bn.
However, under an agreement released last night Volvo will become the
largest single shareholder in Procordia and will be free to acquire a
majority stake by buying shares on the market.
In January Volvo, Sweden's leading industrial group, announced a SKr38.7bn
(Pounds 3.66bn) plan to merge with Procordia, in what would have been the
country's largest corporate takeover.
The proposal ran into opposition from the conservative-led government, which
is an equal shareholder in Procordia and had planned to make the sale of its
stake the first step in its privatisation programme.
Volvo holds 42.7 per cent of the votes in Procordia and 39.5 per cent of the
capital, while the state holds 42.7 per cent of the votes and 34.2 per cent
of the capital.
Last night's agreement between Volvo and the government is a blow to the
prestige of Mr Pehr Gyllenhammar, Volvo's autocratic chairman, whose
pre-emptive move to force through a merger clearly under-estimated the
strength of Swedish government opposition.
Under last night's agreement Volvo will raise its holding in Procordia from
42.7 per cent of the voting rights to 45 per cent in an exchange of some of
its low-voting B-shares for some of the government's high-voting A-shares.
The government stake will be reduced to 40.4 per cent and Volvo will pay
cash for any difference in the value of the shares exchanged.
The Swedish government is then committed to selling its remaining stake in
Procordia 'as soon as possible' in a broadly based Swedish and international
offering.
Volvo will have first right of refusal, if the government reaches agreement
with any large single investor or with a group of investors acting in
concert for the sale of a stake of 5 per cent or more.
