FT  02 JUN 92 / Survey of The Earth Summit (3): A puzzle of fiendish
complexity - Pollution of the atmospher / Predictions are fraught with
uncertainty
THE THREE most serious pollution threats to the world's atmosphere are
global warming, destruction of the ozone layer, and acid rain.
Each would be a fiendishly complex scientific puzzle in its own right. In
fact they interact - making it almost impossible even for the brightest
research groups armed with the most powerful supercomputers to disentangle
the effect of individual pollutants.
For example, much of the industrialised world is cloaked in a man-made haze
of sulphate aerosols - microscopically small droplets and particles that
contribute to acid rain. But, according to the latest scientific evidence,
this is moderating global warming because the particles reflect some
incoming solar radiation back out to space.
Scientists are not even sure about the effect of chlorofluorocarbons on
climate change.
CFCs are undisputed environmental villains because they destroy the ozone
layer in the upper atmosphere, which protects life on earth from the sun's
harmful ultraviolet radiation. They also contribute significantly to global
warming by absorbing solar heat (infra-red radiation). So the international
agreement to phase out CFC production will not only save the ozone layer but
also help to fight the greenhouse effect. Right?
Not necessarily. Recent studies show that the warming effect of CFCs over
the past decade has been counterbalanced by their ozone destruction, because
a thinner ozone layer traps less heat. The scientists concerned emphasise
that their findings are tentative, and even if CFCs turn out to have no net
impact on global warming, it is still vital to phase them out as soon as
possible because life depends on the earth's ozone shield. The example does,
however, illustrate the scientific uncertainties about global warming.
There is no doubt that the greenhouse effect is real, in the sense that
carbon dioxide and other gases in the atmosphere absorb solar heat which
would otherwise be radiated back into space. Human activities have increased
the amount of CO in the atmosphere by about a quarter since 1850, mainly
through burning fossil fuels and to a lesser extent through deforestation.
According to the best estimates, CO represents about 55 per cent of total
man-made additions to the greenhouse effect. Other significant contributors
include CFCs, methane, nitrous oxide and ozone. (Low-level ozone, formed in
a photochemical smog as a result of vehicle emissions, is an environmental
menace - ozone's proper place is in the upper atmosphere.)
Scientists can show that greenhouse gases are accumulating in the
atmosphere. What they cannot prove yet is that global warming is already
happening as a result. Although the past decade has been the warmest
worldwide since meteorologists began keeping reliable weather records in the
1850s - and the average global temperature has risen by 0.5 deg C over the
last century - the current warmth could be due to a natural fluctuation in
the climate, rather than the greenhouse effect. We may have to wait another
10 years before the effects of man-made change stand out unequivocally from
random climatic variations.
However, several different supercomputer models of the global climate
predict a warming of several degrees over the next century, if industrial
activities continue to change the composition of the atmosphere at the
present rate. The average temperature is likely to rise by somewhere between
1.5 deg C and 4.5 deg C if the atmospheric concentration of CO doubles. That
would raise sea levels by something between 30cm and 1m.
The best estimate of the UN-sponsored Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change is that the average global temperature will rise by 1 deg C by the
year 2025 and 3 deg C by 2100, if nothing is done to restrain CO emissions.
Sea levels would rise by 6cm per decade - enough to inundate low-lying
countries such as Bangladesh fairly early in the 21st century.
These predictions are fraught with uncertainty, particularly since the
supercomputer models, such as the one at the UK Meteorological Office are
only now being adjusted to take realistic account of the key role played by
clouds and oceans in climate change.
Increasing cloud cover at low levels would reflect more solar radiation back
into space and counteract global warming. 'The uncertainties are large and
all-pervading,' comments Professor Keith Browning, a specialist on clouds at
the Met Office. 'They severely limit the reliability of climate
predictions.'
And the latest evidence suggests that the oceans may absorb heat from the
atmosphere more effectively than climatologists had realised previously. If
so, they could delay the full impact of global warming by several decades.
In Japan, Dr Hajime Akimoto, a director of the National Institute for
Environmental Studies, says: 'The theory of global warming is quite correct.
What we cannot predict is the speed at which it will happen.'
If the climate change is uncertain on a global scale, the regional
variations it will cause in temperature and rainfall are even more
speculative. Some meteorologists believe the British Isles could be one of
the few parts of the world to escape without any warming, because the
exceptional pattern of ocean currents in the North Atlantic would absorb the
extra heat. Conversely, continental interiors such as the great
grain-growing regions of North America might suffer exceptional warming -
with potentially dire consequences for world food supplies.
All the uncertainties about climate change and other consequences of
atmospheric pollution do not mean that the world should postpone measures to
tackle them, scientists say. Most climatologists support vigorous
international action to curb fossil fuel burning; to wait for proof of
global warming would be too late.
Meanwhile, a few imaginative scientists are dreaming up grand 'environmental
engineering' projects to repair some of the damage done to the atmosphere.
The best-known proposal is to seed the southern oceans with iron, a nutrient
that would stimulate marine organisms to grow more vigorously and absorb
more CO from the atmosphere. And a group at the University of California is
investigating a concept to 'close the ozone hole' by injecting thousands of
tons of alkanes (simple hydrocarbon gases such as ethane or propane) into
the stratosphere over Antarctica for about a month every year.
'There are many uncertainties underlying this idea,' the California
scientists admit, but they say the time has come to start thinking seriously
about large-scale technical fixes for the environment.
