FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (19): Out of the cold into the sun -
The call of the wild in a tourist's paradise
I do not believe there are many more impressive sights than a city man's
first glimpse of a live, maned lion loose on a plain in a strange country.
Robert Ruark
FOLLOWING a recent visit to Sabi Sabi, one of the luxury game lodges in the
Eastern Transvaal, I can unequivocally endorse the comments of the famous
American hunter and novelist. The spectacle of two lions roaring at each
other, literally yards away from our open Jeep, was one of such primal power
and immediacy as to defy adequate description.
Likewise, the sight of a leopard cleaning her two cubs in a sandy river bed
and, later, the massive, tank-like menace of the white rhino. But it is not
only the big animals which constitute the appeal of the bush. The sights,
sounds and smells are so distinctive, and the locations so remote, as to
allow for the sort of relaxation not easily found elsewhere.
Robert Ruark would not have been familiar with the modern phrase
'eco-tourism', but those who now make heavy play of the 'eco' prefix are
essentially making a similar appeal about the call of the wild in an age
when the quality of city life is widely perceived as deteriorating. Already
80 per cent of visitors to South Africa come to see its fauna and flora.
Mr Clem Sunter, South Africa's leading scenario guru, has predicted that
conservation is the area where the smart money is heading and he is
enthusiastically supported by people such as Mr Dave Varty who is associated
with the Londolozi and Phinda eco-tourism developments. Mr Varty comments:
'We see eco-tourism as being the next major growth industry in South
Africa.' The reasoning is simple: wildlife is a finite resource, for which
there is an increasing tourism demand.
It is also an area, of course, in which South Africa has a competitive
advantage. Only a handful of other countries in Africa can offer a similar
product, and South Africans believe they offer a more sophisticated wildlife
product than East Africa and a better balanced destination overall. In
support of his claim, Mr Varty cites the high occupancy rates achieved by
places such as Sabi Sabi, Londolozi and Mala Mala through the sanctions
period.
Although eco-tourism is seen as probably South Africa's main marketing
feature, enthusiasm in the tourism industry is more widely based. Mr Pieter
van Hoven, chairman of the South African Tourism Board (Satour), notes:
'We've come out of the cold era into the sun. For many years we had to deal
with South Africa's moral unacceptability as a tourism destination. Now all
this has changed. Effectively the country can market itself on equal terms
with other competing destinations.'
South Africa markets itself, not unreasonably, as 'a world in one country'.
From game parks in the east, to the Drakensberg mountains in Natal and fine
beaches along the coast, there is a lot of variety to offer the tourist.
Aside from intrinsic merits, however, Mr van Hoven believes the tourism
industry has a good future merely in catch-up terms. He notes that the
industry at present only constitutes about 0.7 per cent of gross domestic
product, compared to a world average of about 10 per cent.
In 1990, South Africa attracted about 1m visitors, making it the fourth most
popular destination in Africa behind Tunisia, Morocco and Algeria, all
short-haul destinations. Mr Org Marais, minister of tourism, talks in terms
of South Africa attracting 3m foreign visitors by 2000.
Mr Van Hoven says any post-apartheid benefit in 1991 was obscured by the
detrimental impact of the Gulf War. He says, however, that for the first
quarter of 1992 quite a few European markets showed growth of 45-47 per cent
compared to 1990 and he forecasts overall growth of 30 per cent in foreign
visitors for 1992.
The government has recently shown a new-found enthusiasm for the economic
potential of tourism. A White Paper in May outlined a policy for assisting
the industry, including financial assistance for new tourist accommodation
projects and a commitment to deregulate the industry to assist the private
sector.
A recent liberalisation of international aviation policy should also make
South Africa a considerably cheaper destination to fly to. Last year saw 16
international airlines start new scheduled flights to South Africa.
There is not yet much indication of additional investment from the private
sector, because there is considerable spare capacity following a few lean
years in the hotel industry. That said, industry consensus is that up to
five foreign hotel groups are likely soon to announce investments.
In a category of its own is the R730m Lost City project being developed at
Sun City by Mr Sol Kerzner. For the faint-hearted worrying about whether the
country has a future, there could be no greater gesture of faith.
