FT  07 JAN 92 / Leading Article: Early steps in education
THE FIRST tests administered to all seven-year-olds in England and Wales
last year revealed considerable cause for concern. After two years of
compulsory schooling, more than a quarter were found to have had difficulty
with reading and basic mathematics. There was considerable variation between
education authorities, with barely half those tested in some areas reaching
acceptable levels, compared with over 80 per cent in others.
The Labour party blamed 12 years of Conservative government for such low
achievement. The education secretary, Mr Kenneth Clarke, blamed poor
management by local education authorities (many of them Labour-controlled)
and decades of 'progressive' teaching methods (and by implication previous
Labour governments). Neither response does much to rectify what appears to
be serious weaknesses in the first stage of Britain's education system. A
child who does not learn to read, write or add up while at primary school
will gain little from the rest of his or her compulsory education.
The primary school teaching methods now blamed by Mr Clarke for poor
standards once enjoyed bipartisan support. The Plowden Report, which gave
official approval to the child-centred approach, was published in 1967,
during a Labour government. But it was set up by a Conservative secretary of
state and chaired by the Tory Lady Plowden. Mrs Thatcher, education
secretary in the early 1970s, did at least as much to implement its findings
as any Labour minister.
Essential knowledge
Nonetheless, Mr Clarke is right to question the teaching methods encouraged
by Plowden - necessary though they were as an antidote to learning by rote.
Encouraging pupils to learn through group work on topic-based projects can
all too easily neglect the acquisition of essential knowledge. And there is
evidence that it fails to challenge sufficiently many children of both below
and above average ability.
Mr Clarke's preferred solution is to encourage more formal teaching methods
('whole class teaching'), greater subject specialisation by teachers and
streaming of older children according to ability. He has commissioned an
inquiry into primary school teaching methods from a team which seems likely
to endorse his views and which has been given less than two months to
report. This deadline suggests that there will be none of the research or
consensus-building which made the Plowden Report so influential.
Co-operation
Such haste could be a serious weakness in Mr Clarke's admirable desire to
sharpen up teaching methods in primary schools. The UK education secretary
rightly has no power to dictate teaching methods. He does have some power to
influence the teacher training system, but it would take many years to
create a new generation of teachers to implement his reforms. If he wishes
to change teaching methods, therefore, Mr Clarke must win the co-operation
of teachers.
That may not be easy as schools struggle to digest a series of reforms from
the national curriculum and testing to the local management of school
budgets. And teachers are unlikely to be impressed with a report prepared in
under eight weeks to justify overturning 20 years of classroom practice. If
Mr Clarke is serious about raising standards in primary education, he will
need a more persuasive touch with the professionals than he exhibited as
health secretary.
One of Mr Clarke's strengths has been his ability to tell powerful
professional groups that they must do better, without demanding endless
increases in their budgets.
His weakness is that in combative pursuit of this insight, he is sometimes
less than thorough in identifying places where funds are genuinely needed.
The teaching methods he favours require different classroom designs and
equipment. Intensive remedial reading programmes call for more teachers and
large-scale retraining. And if teachers are to be better motivated in a
period of dramatic change, he will need to view with a sympathetic eye the
forthcoming pay review body report.
This is the second of a series on British education policy.
