FT  26 SEP 92 / Kanemaru slips off the hook
MR SHIN KANEMARU, powerbroker of Japan's ruling Liberal Democratic Party,
yesterday ended a curious two-week stand-off with the public prosecutors'
office by formally admitting that he violated the country's political
funding laws in accepting a donation of Y500m (Pounds 2.36m).
For the past two weeks, prosecutors have demanded that Mr Kanemaru, 78,
appear before them to answer questions, but he settled the issue yesterday
by dispatching a written statement in which he admitted receiving the money
from a scandal-tainted parcel delivery company, Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin.
Mr Kanemaru's willingness to ignore the prosecutors' requests had angered
ordinary Japanese, who were treated to nightly news broadcasts from outside
his Tokyo home. The 'godfather,' as he is known, has remained inside his
home for the past month, receiving guests and refusing to comment.
LDP officials have apparently received an assurance from the the Tokyo
district public prosecutors' office that Mr Kanemaru will not face a public
trial, but will be summarily fined Y200,000, the maximum penalty under the
Political Funds Control Law.
The likelihood that Mr Kanemaru will not face a trial has also angered many
Japanese, and has prompted television commentators to brandish copies of the
constitution, to point to the section stating that all are equal under the
law, and to suggest that the 'godfather' is a bit more equal than most
people.
Passed in an attempt to control 'money politics,' the funds law limits to
Y1.5m annually the amount an individual politician can receive from a single
company. Mr Kanemaru virtually admitted a month ago that he violated the law
by announcing that his office had received the Y500m, but he presumed that
he would not be pursued by prosecutors.
At that time, he resigned as the LDP's vice-president, but his real power
lies in his control of the party's largest grouping, the Takeshita faction.
Mr Kanemaru's troubles have prompted a power struggle within that faction,
and several of his supporters apparently negotiated with prosecutors to
ensure that his political future will be safe.
While Mr Kanemaru intends to remain as head of the faction, his power has
been weakened, if only by the fact that the scandal may limit his ability to
raise funds. In his statement yesterday, Mr Kanemaru said the Y500m was
distributed among his faction's members, many of whom are dependent on his
largesse.
Mr Kanemaru has previously said that the money was received from Tokyo
Sagawa by his staff in early 1990, but he now admits to having received the
money himself from Mr Hiroyasu Watanabe, the former president of Tokyo
Sagawa Kyubin.
Japanese commentators have drawn a stark comparison between the treatment of
Mr Watanabe, who is now on trial for breach of corporate trust, and Mr
Kanemaru, who appears set to avoid the ignominy of a public trial.
Several supporters have apparently negotiated with prosecutors to ensure
that his political future will be safe
