FT  15 MAY 92 / Domestic gas price cut fails to quell row with regulator
THE ROW between British Gas and Ofgas, the industry regulator, grew
increasingly bitter yesterday as the company insisted its decision to cut
gas prices by 3 per cent was not a climbdown after threats of legal action.
Mr Robert Evans, British Gas chairman, said that when British Gas froze its
prices in March it indicated a future price cut was likely. It had waited
until the economic outlook could be more accurately predicted before taking
action.
Last week, Sir James McKinnon, director-general of Ofgas, told British Gas
to cut prices to its 18m domestic customers or face 'enforcement action'.
Mr Evans attacked Ofgas's statement as a 'stunt for the press' and
complained that the demands of the regulator and the government in their
efforts to open the gas supply market to competition sometimes gave the
impression that British Gas was being 'set up to fail'.
The price cut of 1.7p a therm will mean an average reduction of Pounds 13
for domestic consumers on bills for the year from July. It brings the
company into line with a tough pricing formula imposed by Ofgas in April
which limits price rises to 5 percentage points below the rate of inflation.
But it was clear yesterday that the move had done little to improve the
frosty relations between the utility and its regulator. Sir James said the
cut was only just sufficient for him to put the threat of legal action 'on
hold', and he would continue to monitor prices on a month-by-month basis. He
repeated that British Gas could have cut prices sooner.
'They knew on April 10 that we had a Conservative government and the likely
economic consequences. There is no reason why they could not have announced
a price cut then, to take effect from June, so that the consumer felt the
benefit much sooner.'
Mr Evans complained that Sir James had made his statement to the media last
week without consulting British Gas and without responding to its request
for a meeting to discuss the matter.
'It sends signals around the world, in places we look to for investment,
that there is interference in the business in a continuing and aggressive
way.'
Mr Evans said Sir James's comments also gave the impression to customers
that British Gas was failing to comply with price regulations, when in fact
the opposite was true.
The cut will cost the company about Pounds 225m, although British Gas said
that Pounds 56m of this was accounted for by an overcharge in the first
quarter which could now be refunded.
If the refund element is subtracted, the cut is equivalent to less than 1.3p
a therm.
British Gas yesterday disclosed an 11.5 per cent drop in first-quarter
profits, due largely to subdued demand during the mild winter.
Mr Evans warned that any drop in what was normally the most profitable
quarter was likely to be reflected in the full-year figures. He also warned
that British Gas's management faced a 'monumental challenge' in maintaining
profit levels while fulfilling requirements set by Ofgas and the Office of
Fair Trading aimed at increasing competition in the gas market. He admitted
he thought some of the demands were 'unfair'.
British Gas warning, Page 26
