FT  07 MAR 92 / What price the old school tie now?: The FT-500 schools
survey, out today, is the widest analysis of private education yet
published. Full and controversial details in out special supplement
WHATEVER its social cachet, the old public school tie is no longer a
reliable guide to top-notch academic performance. Eton, Winchester and
Westminster vie with the leading independent grammar schools in Birmingham,
Portsmouth, Chester and Manchester for the top slots in the FT-500 survey of
independent schools. Famous names languish far below: Rugby 94th,
Marlborough 108th, Lancing 178th, Stowe 271st.
Ties apart, the FT survey shows single-sex and day schools largely
outstripping their boarding and co-educational partners, and a poor
relationship between fees and results at all levels.
The FT-500 survey of independent schools, published today in a special
supplement, is the most comprehensive analysis of the private education
sector yet published. It includes almost all institutions belonging to the
Headmasters' Conference and the Girls' Schools Association. It features a
ranking of schools by all A-level results, not just top grades. But it is
far more than a league table: a mass of information is given on each school,
from fees to teacher: pupil ratios and broad subject specialisation.
To that extent, readers can make their own estimate of 'value added.' The
tables are arranged by county, with a separate listing for Scotland.
Our survey shows the top 50 independent schools in England and Wales
(Scotland's separate exam system prevents direct comparison) achieving
outstanding academic results. The top 50 secured an average A-level grade of
'B' or higher and/or the point-equivalent of at least three passes at grade
'B'. In the country as a whole, only 27 per cent of passes were graded 'A'
or 'B' last year.
Among the next 200-odd, competition is fierce, with A-level results good and
tiny gaps separating school scores. Differences between them have more to do
with fees, facilities and ethos than rankings in the exam scoreboard. At the
bottom, however, about 60 institutions turn out poor or indifferent academic
results. Some have compensating strengths, but many face an uncertain
future.
It should come as no surprise, then, that the independent sector's grip on
the leading universities is so tight. And tightening. The proportion of
Oxford university's admission for this October coming from independent
schools is up from 48.2 to 48.6 per cent - while the state sector, which
educates three-quarters of the nation's sixth- formers, has to make do with
42.8 per cent (the rest were mostly from overseas). Three-quarters of next
year's Oxford entrants gained at least 2 'As' and one 'B' at A-level. At 14
independent schools the average A-level score per pupil was thereabouts or
higher.
Father Dominic Milroy, headmaster of Ampleforth and chairman of the
Headmasters' Conference, told his fellow HMC heads recently of his
'suspicion of the invasion of education by the language of the market'. A
school leaver was neither a client nor a finished product - comments on
which he elaborates in an interview in the supplement.
In reality, however, he or she is both, so far as a school is concerned. The
corollary is equally clear. As Martin Stephen, Headmaster of the Perse
School, Cambridge, puts it: 'We have to look very hard at ourselves, work
out clearly what it is we are offering that is worth Pounds 3,600 a year,
and then make sure that parents and pupils know what it is.'
What is it, then? Stephen had no doubt: high-quality teaching and results,
first and foremost; but discipline, facilities and extra-curricular
activities - sporting, musical and cultural  - not far behind.
Developing and marketing such wares is now the preoccupation of the typical
independent school head. Some go about it more energetically than others.
David Pardey, an educational marketing consultant, tells his clients that
the first essential to selling a school is 'SWOT analysis': an audit of the
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats within a school, leading to
a 'marketing plan' complete with targets and strategies. SWOT or not, most
schools are doing it all the same.
The strengths of particular schools are not always clear from the FT-500
table, since facilities and extra-curricular activities are missing. It
nonetheless offers some interesting correlations between what you get and
what you pay for.
First, results bear little relation to pupil-staff ratios. Across the
sector, schools are generally within the 8:1 and 14:1 range. But most day
schools are nearer the 14, whatever their A-level performance - which puts
them not far behind the 15:1 average for state secondary schools. It may be
that the typical private school teacher is more committed than his or her
state counterpart; but it is selectivity, buildings, equipment and
extra-curricular activities, not more staff, that most parents are paying
for.
Typically, 60 per cent of a school's budget goes on teaching staff, and the
impact is clear when comparing fees and staff ratios in day schools. It is
less evident among boarding schools. Taking five boarding schools with fees
of around Pounds 11,000 a year at random, the pupil:teacher ratio is 9.3:1;
selecting five with fees around Pounds 7,500 yields a ratio of only 9:1.
There is, therefore, no straightforward link between what you get and what
you pay for: neither in terms of results, nor of facilities (given the
unequal endowment of institutions). The FT-500's three top schools, all day
grammar schools, have fees of around Pounds 3,300 a year; the day fees of
their more prestigious 'public' counterparts like Winchester, Westminster,
Shrewsbury and Charterhouse lie between Pounds 7,000 and Pounds 9,000. True,
of the top 20 boarding schools, 15 have fees higher than Pounds 9,000 a
year, while of bottom 20, 14 have fees lower than Pounds 9,000. Yet average
fees in the top four schools taking day pupils are only three-quarters as
high as those in the bottom four to do so.
The tables might also lead you to question another piece of conventional
wisdom: that if only the state system would pull up its socks, private
schools would be the preserve of 'snobs and eccentrics,' as Labour's
education spokesman Jack Straw puts it. Consider Kent. It has clung on to 28
grammar schools, and has one of the highest state-sector university entrance
and achievement rates in the UK. Yet it also sustains 26-plus independent
secondary schools and, according to the tables, most are far from
high-flying. By contrast, comprehensive Avon and Lancashire manage only 19
and 22 respectively. Even if state schools improve, a substantial private
sector is with us for the forseeable future.
There is, at all events, no political threat to it - certainly not from
Straw, who is these days as likely as Kenneth Clarke, education secretary,
to be the star speaker at gatherings of independent heads. If anything, the
threat to the sector comes not from independence, but excessive dependence
on the state. The assisted places scheme, set up by the government a decade
ago to pay fees for children from low-income families, now pays all or part
of the fees of 7 per cent of private pupils. It has become bread and butter
for a significant minority of schools. Our survey shows the dependent to be
mostly the big city day schools - and the likes of Dulwich, Manchester and
Newcastle grammars could fill their places without them. But a fair few are
less favourably placed, and if Labour cuts their lifeline later this year,
expect to hear cries of woe - or worse.
By then, they may have been brought on by the recession anyway. Stories of
retrenchment, redundancies - even pupils being withdrawn  - are legion,
particularly among boarding schools, for whom demand is falling steadily.
But all schools face difficulties in deciding whether or not to meet a state
teachers' pay settlement at twice the rate of inflation. A study earlier
this year by Monmouth School revealed almost two-thirds of its parents as
having pre-tax salaries of Pounds 40,000 or less. There may not be much fat
left.
Rationalisation is starting: Malvern College, facing declining rolls and
little prospect of improving them in rural Worcestershire, is about to merge
with both a local girls' school and a prep school - giving it a tied-entry
and co-education in one bound. Joint ventures with local businesses to
improve sports facilities are common; so are commercial activities in the
holidays. Marlborough is marketing a summer school offering more than 70
courses from art, Anglo-Saxon and architecture to woodcrafts.
However, private schools are concerned not only about the recession,
marketing and investing in marketable facilities: relations with the state
sector are also a high priority. Even without assisted places, other changes
are working to blur the state/independent divide more than at any time since
the end of the direct-grant regime: the national curriculum; pupil testing;
changes to teacher training, which will allow private schools to take state
trainees; a new inspectorate likely to embrace both sectors. Across the
trenches, local management of state schools, plus a near-certain increase in
real state school spending, are set to make the private sector's
independence and privilege appear ever less exceptional.
'We are moving into a new era,' says Father Dominic Milroy. 'The whole trend
is towards a mixed system: public and private working together, and parents
mixing as never before.' Who knows, a few years hence it might seem quaint
to publish tables comprising only schools which charge fees.
 ------------------------------------------------------------
                  FT-500 TOP TWELVE*
 ------------------------------------------------------------
1  King Edward's School (for boys), Birmingham
2  King Edward VI's High School for Girls, Birmingham
3  Portsmouth High School (for girls)
4  Winchester College
5  The King's School (for boys), Chester
6  The Queen's School (for boys), Chester
7  Eton College
8  St Paul's School
9  Haberdashers' Aske's School (for boys), Elstree
10  Westminster School
11  St Pauls' Girls School
12  Manchester Grammar School
* for ranking formula, see supplement
 ------------------------------------------------------------
