FT  08 OCT 92 / Survey on Denmark (12): Wide range of products - Profile of
Novo Nordisk
'NOVO NORDISK is a strange company. It just doesn't fit into any
categories,' says Mr Kurt Anker Nielsen, its chief financial officer. 'Its
products range from insulin to enzymes for household detergents. Basically
we're a fine chemicals company, linked together by microbiology which we
apply in different areas.'
The group's strength is based on insulin, the essential treatment for
diabetes. It generated about DKr5bn of the group's total turnover of
DKr9.8bn last year.
The number of patients diagnosed each year with type one diabetes - the type
automatically requiring insulin - is growing at only between 2 per cent and
3 per cent, says Mr Nielsen. However the overall market is growing at about
45 per cent in the western world, including Japan, because doctors are
increasingly prescribing some insulin for type two diabetes which has
traditionally been controlled through exercise and diet.
Further growth is being added by the increased use of medicine by newly
industrialised nations.
The division created the Novopen, an insulin injector that can be carried
around in the pocket like a pen. Since its launch four years ago, about 10
per cent of the world's insulin is sold in cartridges for such pens. Novo
Nordisk controls 80 per cent of the cartridge market and is planning further
developments in delivery systems such as a nasal device.
Diabetes care represents about 75 per cent of the healthcare division's
DKr6.3bn turnover. The company has focused its research in three additional
therapeutic areas. These are human growth hormones, hormone replacement
therapy (HRT) and central nervous system diseases.
Norditropin, the division's human growth hormone, has been highly
successful, increasing its sales last year by 74 per cent to DKr869m, says
Mr Nielsen. The company hopes to add further indications for the drug, such
as chronic renal failure, fertility and wound healing.
Novo Nordisk's hormone replacement therapies are also growing rapidly - last
year sales increased 52 per cent to about DKr400m. Mr Nielsen attributes the
growth to the additional marketing muscle generated by the merger of Novo
and Nordisk Gentofte which created Novo Nordisk in 1989.
Much of the company's attention is focused on its central nervous system
(CNS) products. It is looking at selected areas, primarily stroke,
schizophrenia and epilepsy.
Novo Nordisk realises its limitations as a medium-sized pharmaceuticals
company, says Mr Nielsen. It has signed co-development deals with SmithKline
Beecham, the Anglo-American group, Schering of Germany and Abbot of the US.
Mr Nielsen explains that with eight to 10 development projects with
partners, the group has far more chance of bringing remunerative drugs to
market.
The company has set up research and development facilities in the US and
Japan. Such developments appear far removed from the bioindustrial group,
which with its detergents and plant protection businesses generate sales of
DKr2.6bn - about a third of Novo Nordisk's turnover.
Novo Nordisk dominates the industrial enzymes market with about 55 per cent
of the world market. The sector has grown rapidly over the past four years
at a rate of about 18 per cent by volume, says Mr Nielsen. But intense
competition from Gist-Brocades of the Netherlands, Genencor of the US and
Solvay of Belgium has been undermining prices.
The leading sector is enzymes for detergents where prices had been falling
by about 3 per cent a year until 1991. They have now stabilised, says Mr
Nielsen. Meanwhile, Novo Nordisk's new fat-busting enzyme - Lipolase - has
been growing fast, capturing about 20 per cent of the world market. The
success of Lipolase was an important factor in the 22 per cent growth in
volume achieved by the bioindustrial group last year. Sales increased last
year nearly 20 per cent.
Novo Nordisk has recently made the unfashionable step of entering the plant
protection business. Most companies are trying to leave the sector because
of the high risks and low returns involved.
Mr Nielsen is adamant, however, that the move is the right one. The company
aims to develop bio-pesticides - products based on bacteria which are toxic
to pests but harmless to everything else. He believes bio-pesticides are
capable of revitalising the agrochemicals market.
The company is also targetting high value crops such as fruit and vegetables
rather than cereal crops. Presently the business has sales of about Dollars
15m a year.
Novo Nordisk's stated aim is to achieve earnings growth of 15 per cent a
year. Mr Nielsen believes the group has the right portfolio of products to
achieve its target, although he admits the company can be driven off course
by external events.
One such event that has created problems is the recent turbulence in the
currency markets. More than 80 per cent of sales are not in Danish Kroner.
Last month the group warned that currency instability would have a
considerable negative impact on its third-quarter earnings.
Mr Nielsen is confident, however, that the company is sufficiently robust
that expectations for the full - year will remain unchanged.
A strange company, but not an unprofitable one.
