FT  26 AUG 92 / Leading Article: Cost challenge for Germany
THE WORLD of German industry is starting to look ruffled. Pessimists have
been forecasting for years that high labour costs, extensive subsidies and
market rigidities would eventually undermine many of the country's
advantages as an industrial powerhouse. During western Germany's
reunification-induced growth spurt between 1989 and 1991, it seemed as
though the pessimists had been proved wrong. Now, however, the western part
of the country is in a period of economic stagnation, while the recovery in
the east seems temporarily to have come to a halt.
Some fundamental difficulties affecting Germany's industrial structure have
worsened during the past two years. Chancellor Helmut Kohl says he will
fight the 1994 general election with the campaign slogan Standort
Deutschland - safegarding Germany's standing as an industrial base. He has
read the diagnosis, but has yet to find a cure.
The Bundesbank's tight monetary policy has hitherto had its chief impact
among Germany's neighbours, but the spores of recession are now blowing back
across Germany's borders. A series of announcements of job cuts by some of
Germany's largest corporations - Volkswagen, Mercedes-Benz, Hoesch, BMW and,
last week, Siemens-Nixdorf - has indicated how retrenchment may be on the
way. Rising domestic costs, together with the need for a physical presence
closer to foreign markets, have already led to a sharp increase in corporate
investment abroad. Last year, German companies invested a net DM29bn outside
Germany; foreign companies' capital investment in Germany was only DM1.9bn.
If the US currency remains at DM1.40, the incentive will grow for companies
to transfer manufacturing offshore.
Limited influence
Much of the problem lies in production costs. During 1979-88, Germany
achieved the third-smallest increase in unit labour costs of any member of
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Last year, it
slid down to ninth in the table. In 1992, according to the OECD's
projections, it will fall to 16th place. Wage rises in industry during the
last two years - above all, in east Germany - have been too high for the
nation's health. On this, the government has only limited influence. Mr
Kohl's administration should, however, do all it can to encourage those
realistic sections of the German trade union movement which are pondering
the option of longer working hours and pay cuts in companies facing
particular economic difficulties.
Financial hand-outs
One area where Mr Kohl does carry direct responsibility is in the
proliferation of subsidies, above all for east Germany. The Bundesbank
calculates that overall public sector financial hand-outs rose 70 per cent
between 1989 and 1992. Many of these subsidies are supporting consumption
rather than investment. They contribute to the malfunctioning of the market
economy in both east and west. Additionally, the government has not done
enough to cut the excessive share of non-wage costs - in particular,
companies' social security contributions - in the overall burdens on
employers. These make up 45 per cent of industry's overall labour costs. In
one important example, the government must press on with its latest efforts
to reduce health spending by DM11bn a year.
Overshadowing all else have been policy errors over German unity. The
government has failed to put the financing of unification on to a sound
footing. Rather than using the opportunity of unity to prise open the more
protected parts of the German economy, the federal republic has exported its
solid but rigid economic system to the east. Financial transfers from west
to east of around DM100bn a year will probably be necessary until the end of
the decade to fulfil Mr Kohl's promise of a 'flourishing landscape' in the
east. Organising this resource shift without hampering its productive
capacity is certainly within Germany's grasp. It would, however, be ironic
if, in order to escape the country's self-generated cost pressures,
industry's main reaction to Germany's territorial enlargement was to move
increasing slices of manufacturing to cheaper and more productive sites
abroad.
