FT  12 JUN 92 / Bonn and Lander hit Maastricht deadlock
THE German government and the 16 federal states have reached virtual
deadlock in their negotiations to change the German constitution and clear
the way for ratification of the Maastricht Treaty on European Union.
The country which was the prime mover behind the drive for European
political union and for a single currency is now itself facing uncertainty
and long delays in its own ratification process, leading participants in the
negotiations said yesterday.
The issue at stake is how far the states will be given an effective veto
over any future transfer of sovereignty to the European Community, and how
far they will be given co-decision-making rights with the Bonn government on
EC legislation.
The demands of the 16 Lander have caused horror among other EC states,
fearing for a new level of prevarication and complication in EC
decision-making. They are also being resisted by the German Foreign Office
and the foreign policy establishment.
The fear is that no agreement will be reached in the negotiations before the
summer break, thus delaying the ratification process for the Maastricht
treaty. That in turn would give further opportunities for the
anti-Maastricht lobby to exploit an increasingly sceptical public opinion.
Mr Florian Gerster, European affairs minister for the Rhineland Palatinate,
said yesterday that the 16 states were in close agreement on their strategy,
and warned that if the government did not make further concessions, then the
whole ratification process for the EC treaty in Germany would be called into
question.
The main public concern over the EC treaty is the prospect of losing the
D-Mark in favour of a single European currency. On that issue the 16 states
are demanding that the steps to economic and monetary union (Emu) should not
be automatic.
However their main concern is to win more control over EC policies from the
central government, to compensate them for what they see as a steady drain
in their federal responsibilities in recent years.
The next opportunity for an agreement will be the meeting of the
constitutional committee of the Bundestag and Bundesrat, the two houses of
the German parliament, on June 25.
A working group bringing together the federal government and representatives
of the 16 states, has abandoned efforts to bridge the gap between them.
One of the main problems is that the government side cannot agree on a
common line.
