FT  20 AUG 92 / Hawkers against hedonism
THE LATE President Calvin Coolidge once said: 'The business of America is
business.' Mr Coolidge was a Republican.
This entrepreneurial thinking is much in evidence at the American Spirit
Pavilion, a hall next door this week to the convention site, where traders
hawk a great range of political paraphernalia, leftward leanings excluded.
The most popular items, of course, are things to be pinned or put on. The
pins, buttons and T-shirts this year are deeply derisive of Governor Bill
Clinton, who is portrayed as a womanising, draft-dodging scoundrel.
But negativity does not rule the whole roost. One trader said his
hottest-selling button was a pink badge reading: 'Year of the Woman '92',
price Dollars 1. Be that as it may, one of the more noticeable buttons at
the convention itself says: 'If Hillary Can't Trust Him, How Can We?'
For the erudite, a publisher in the pavilion is offering the best-selling
'Millie's Book', Barbara Bush's diary of the White House's most renowned dog
(Dollars 9.75 paperback, Dollars 17.95 hardback).
Another hot book is 'What's Cooking With The Republicans' (Dollars 9.98),
which is full of GOP luminaries' favourite dishes. Vice-President Dan Quayle
reveals his romantic strain with Shrimp and Wine Spaghetti Sauce for Two.
The right-wing Congressman Newt Gingrich, the 'Georgia Bulldog' himself,
shares his Newt's Fruit concoction.
Supping across the party divide for a change, there's 'What's Cooking with
the Democrats', featuring the secret recipe for Beer Roast provided by the
former House Speaker Mr 'Tip' O'Neil, an Irish-American liberal whom
Republicans still love to hate.
The Republicans say they won the Cold War, and they have brought back
trophies: Next to pieces of the Berlin Wall (Dollars 5 a time), there is a
classic Russian Matrushka doll - for Dollars 125, the lucky consumer can
discover, one within another, the last five Republican presidents in the
same doll. Even Richard Nixon is included, but can be found nowhere else in
Houston, except as a facemask on some demonstrators.
Succeeding convention sessions so far have been less eventful than the
first, but wordsmiths still can find plenty to chew on.
The trick is to come up with as many turns of phrase to describe Democratic
profligacy as possible and not sound redundant. Governor Tommy Thompson of
Wisconsin punched home: 'The only change the Democrats want is the change in
your pocket.'
Mr Gingrich, the House whip, wields a broader brush. He blamed not only high
taxes but also violent crime, decadent moral values, the welfare state,
Fidel Castro, and declining competitiveness on Democratic 'multi-cultural
nihilistic hedonism.'
