FT  10 SEP 92 / Campaign calls for action to reduce unemployment
ACTION by the government to stimulate growth is not constrained by the
Public Sector Borrowing Requirement, the TUC yesterday argued. It said that
a targeted increase in public spending would reduce the PSBR as a percentage
of national income.
Launching a three-year campaign for full employment and debating the
economy, the TUC said the Treasury's computer model shows that an increase
of Pounds 2bn in public spending would increase employment by more than
100,000. 'The government is not helpless to act. There are projects up and
down the country which could be started very quickly', says a TUC report on
unemployment.
The projects include Pounds 480m in building projects identified by
Birmingham City Council, releasing the Pounds 9m in unspent capital receipts
that a local authority is prevented by the government from using in spite of
having 5,500 families on its housing waiting list, and a school maintenance
programme identified by Lothian Regional Council.
The TUC argues that the government should have two priority objectives - to
secure a co-ordinated cut in interest rates across the European Community
and to stimulate the domestic economy through targeted public spending. It
accepts that unemployment of between 2 per cent and 3 per cent is
unavoidable and that inflation must also be kept under control.
Mr Norman Willis, TUC general secretary, said that Mr Howard Davies, CBI
director-general who addressed the TUC on Tuesday, made a 'serious
underestimate of the mess we're in'. He questioned the enthusiasm of some
union leaders for devaluing sterling, warning that it might lead to higher
interest rates.
One of the motions carried commits the TUC to a new policy on takeovers
which would require companies to demonstrate the positive benefits of a
merger rather than just the absence of negative effects.
LABOUR yesterday high-lighted the difficulties in finding a job that face
people who are unemployed, with a survey of job vacancies compared with the
numbers of those without work, Alison Smith writes.
In some areas of London, there are more than 280 people registered
unemployed for every job vacancy, while in the worst-hit areas more than 100
people chase each vacancy.
