FT  13 NOV 92 / The Autumn Statement - Details: Public sector pay ceiling
applies to all settlements - The Treasury
THE CEILING of 1 per cent on public sector pay rises will apply to all
settlements regardless of whether pay is usually set by negotiation, a pay
review body or a formula tying pay to another settlement.
The chancellor said that the prime minister wrote yesterday to each of the
review body chairmen and asked all except the school teachers' review body
(because of its statutory basis) not to recommend basic pay increases for
1993.
However, the review bodies had been invited to continue work on performance
pay and other specific issues as appropriate to their remit groups.
In a statement, the Treasury said the school teachers' review body had been
directed 'to have regard to the government's general policy that increases
in public sector pay should be restricted to between 0 per cent and 1 1/2
per cent in the coming year'.
The statement continued: 'The government intends that groups covered by the
doctors' and dentists' review body, the nurses' pay review body and the
armed forces pay review body, should receive an increase in pay of 1 1/2 per
cent from 1 April 1993. In common with ministers, top salary review body
groups will receive no pay increase for 1993.
For TSRB groups, the government intends to honour the second stage of the
1992 award, under which these groups will receive an increase of 2.9 per
cent from 1 April 1993.
The government sees a continuing role for the review bodies, whose advice it
has greatly valued, although there must be changes from time to time to
reflect developments in their remit groups.
Policy on public-sector pay for future years will depend on a wide range of
economic and other factors, including the development of performance pay and
more decentralised arrangements.
The government could not accept that a year of pay restraint should be
followed by a series of catching-up settlements which would dissipate the
benefits achieved.'
The chancellor said pay restraint 'will release sums of the order of Pounds
1 1/2 bn in 1993-1994 with similar effect on the pay bill in future years'.
He added: 'The constraint will apply to all offers made by public-sector
managers from yesterday.
Any formal offers which have already been made will be honoured.
The constraint will last for one year until it has been applied to all
public-sector groups.
Those groups which have already settled this year, or where offers are
outstanding, will have their 1993 settlement constrained instead. No group
will be caught twice.
The private sector is already subject to strong downward pressure on pay and
pay increases are now lower than for a generation.
The recent depreciation of sterling has given a significant boost to the
competitiveness of British producers.
It is essential that this is not eroded by rising labour costs.
The government has a particular responsibility to ensure that the public
sector is subject to the same rigorous discipline.
The government will continue to pursue its long-term objectives of
increasing flexibility within public-sector-pay systems and of strengthening
the link between performance and pay.
There should be no reason for lower settlement levels to stand in the way of
progress towards the decentralisation of pay bargaining and the extension of
performance pay.
Where more flexible arrangements are already in place, increases for
individuals will be both higher and lower than the overall figure.
A figure of 1 1/2 per cent does not represent an entitlement and
public-sector managers will continue to negotiate pay increases which are
consistent with the need for their organisation to deliver agreed levels of
service within an agreed provision.'
