FT  02 DEC 92 / Maastricht looks good deal to business
THE MAASTRICHT treaty is supported by a large majority of top European
executives. British respondents are most sceptical.
Most businesses take a highly pragmatic line on how governments should cope
with the treaty's ratification difficulties. They see the need for national
flexibility rather than rigid Community-based policies in running the
exchange rate mechanism.
And, as further evidence of a strongly pragmatic streak, there is strong
support for national solutions in employment legislation.
Most company chiefs would prefer to renegotiate or redraft Maastricht rather
than to go ahead without Denmark, which rejected the treaty by a narrow
margin in its referendum in June.
On the question of where to place an institution meant to take a central
role in the Maastricht arrangements - the European central bank -
Euro-idealism appears to take a back seat. Executives show distinct
preference for sites in their own countries. Among German companies, 73 per
cent supported Frankfurt, while 59 per cent of the British favoured London.
Among Belgian corporations, 44 per cent preferred Brussels, while 16 per
cent of Spanish business people wanted Barcelona.
In employment law, 55 per cent of European companies believe such
legislation should be drafted, passed and implemented by individual
countries, with only 43 per cent saying this role should be played by the
EC.
This is felt most strongly in Britain: 83 per cent, with only 16 per cent
arguing in favour of an EC role. Next comes Germany: 67 per cent and 32 per
cent respectively.
Concerning the question of Maastricht acceptance, 79 per cent of executives
in the seven countries say they would - or (in the case of France) did -
back the treaty in a referendum. Only 16 per cent declared opposition. UK
executives are most cautious about Maastricht, only 55 per cent saying they
would vote in favour in a referendum, and 38 per cent declaring they would
vote against. Eighty-two per cent of French executives say Yes to
Maastricht, with only 12 per cent rejecting the treaty. The approval rating
is even higher in Italy (93 per cent), Belgium (88 per cent) and the
Netherlands (87 per cent).
Although the treaty is supported by 77 per cent of business people in
Germany, a sizeable majority (21 per cent) say they are against it. A
majority in each country surveyed (including France) said, however, they
believed referendums were unnecessary to allow the treaty to be ratified.
The survey shows clear divisions on how to operate the ERM.
An overall majority of 63 per cent to 33 per cent believes countries should
tailor interest rates to their own needs rather than to maintaining ERM
parities. This figure masks a sharp split within the EC, corresponding to
the 'hard' and 'soft' currency groups in the ERM.
In businesses in Belgium and the Netherlands, large majorities (61 per cent
and 63 per cent respectively) think ERM rates have to be maintained even at
the cost of higher interest rates. A strong minority (39 per cent) backs
this notion in France.
However, among the 'soft' currency countries which have recently devalued or
left the ERM, companies support a more flexible policy.
In Britain, 81 per cent of respondents thinks interest rates must move in
line with countries' economic requirements rather than to maintain exchange
rate stability.
This view is backed by 73 per cent of companies in Spain and 64 per cent in
Italy, as well as by 64 per cent of those in Germany, whose central bank,
the Bundesbank, is the dominant institution managing the ERM.
