FT  29 SEP 92 / PowerGen prepares step into German electricity supply
POWERGEN, the UK privatised generator, is preparing a bid to buy part of
east Germany's lignite mining industry, with a view to generating power
there.
The move would be PowerGen's first step into the German electricity supply
industry.
The generator has signed a letter of intent with NRG Energy company, a
division of Northern States Power of the US, to take over the Mitteldeutsche
Braunkohle company (Mibrag) - one of two lignite producers being offered for
sale by the Treuhand, the agency responsible for privatisation in eastern
Germany.
'We are still at an early stage,' PowerGen said, but added that it expected
any bid to be made 'fairly soon'.
The Treuhand has said it hopes to sell east Germany's huge lignite industry,
which employs 65,000 people, by the middle of next year.
PowerGen and NRG are understood to be looking at acquiring at least part of
Mibrag's open-cast mines in the Leipzig area, with a view to constructing a
two-block power station at Lippendorf with a capacity of 1,600 MW.
Although the size of the bid is undisclosed, German press reports have
referred to likely investment of DM5bn (Pounds 1.98bn) in the power plant.
Lignite, or brown coal, has a high sulphur content requiring costly
pollution control equipment to be fitted to plants which burn it.
PowerGen/NRG is expected to face competition in its bid for Mibrag from a
consortium of German energy companies RWE, Bayernwerk and Preussenelektra.
The German consortium has already lodged a letter of intent to buy Laufitzer
Braunkohle, the other lignite producer being sold by the Treuhand.
German electricity suppliers had initially ignored Mibrag because of its
poor-quality coal. But a study carried out for PowerGen's partner NRG
concluded that at least two of Mibrag's open-cast mines could be competitive
even taking into account the high cost of desulphurisation of the brown
coal.
A successful bid by PowerGen for Mibrag would strengthen the presence of
privatised UK energy companies in eastern Germany. British Coal, the former
monopoly supplier, already has stakes in gas distribution companies in
Leipzig and Halle, and in a regional gas transportation company.
