FT  03 JAN 92 / Revolutionary underground movement: David Goodhart visits a
pit where roof bolts hold the key to increased productivity
THE FIRST thing to strike a visitor to Asfordby pit in north Leicestershire
is how eerily empty it is underground.
Asfordby is in its Pounds 290m development stage and will not be fully
operational until the end of next year. That, however, is not why there are
so few miners in its dark tunnels; the workforce has almost reached its
full-production level of 400.
It feels empty because it is the testing ground for a revolution in British
deep-mining technology which is intended to triple productivity, cut the
number of underground workers and make British Coal more competitive.
The key to this revolution is a 3-metre-long steel roof bolt. Such bolts are
used instead of pit props and expensive and labour-intensive steel arches to
support tunnels. They are smeared with adhesive resin and rammed up into
tunnel roofs at regular intervals.
This system has long been used in the US and Australia, which now have only
one back-up worker underground for every one digging coal. In Britain the
ratio is closer to four to one - with two of the four usually transporting,
setting up and maintaining steel arches.
Bolts are quicker to install than steel arches after the coal has been cut
away. At Asfordby that means coal can be cut at a rate of 7 metres a shift
against the average in Britain of 2 metres to 3 metres.
Asfordby is the first British pit to have started virtually from scratch
with roof bolts. It hopes as a result to produce about 1.8m tonnes a year
with 400 workers. That target would be spectacularly better than average
British productivity and has been greeted with scepticism by union
officials.
British Coal hopes each Asfordby miner will produce 18 tonnes of coal per
shift compared with the UK average of 5 tonnes. The cost of production will
be rather more than half British Coal's average of Pounds 1.75 per gigawatt
(the measure of heat value) and will compete even with some open-cast coal.
Asfordby was originally planned as a conventional pit producing about 4m
tonnes of coal a year with 1,400 workers. But British Coal's Nottinghamshire
group decided, in the light of advances in roof-bolting technology and the
squeeze on capital spending, to opt for a mini super-productivity pit
instead - working one seam with four teams - cutting development costs from
Pounds 480m.
When fully operational, it will have three 'continuous miners' - giant
US-made coal-cutters rare in British pits - and one long wall-shearer. It
will also be Britain's first pit to start with a six-days-a-week, 7 1/2
 hour shift pattern in which workers alternate between early, late and night
shifts and have every fourth week off.
This arrangement has been made possible because the Union of Democratic
Mineworkers negotiates for workers at Asfordby. At pit level the differences
between the UDM and the National Union of Mineworkers are not great, but the
six-day week is a matter for national officials. The NUM would not have
accepted it, as it showed at Margam in south Wales where opposition to
six-day working led to the shelving of a plan to invest Pounds 90m in a new
pit which would have created 830 jobs.
Asfordby's new shift system will cut overtime and allow teams of managers,
supervisors and workers to stay together - at least it will do so if Nacods,
the supervisors' union, joins the managers and the UDM in accepting the new
system.
There were grumbles about the shift system at first, says Mr Mick Buck, a
chargeman at the coalface. But most now prefer it, and top-earners can still
make Pounds 30,000-plus a year. Absenteeism, usually a good guide to morale,
is only 3 per cent.
Mr John Longden, group director of Nottinghamshire, says roof bolting cannot
be used in all pits, but Asfordby represents the future for British Coal.
Some critics complain that pits like Asfordby should have been developed
years ago. Others, though, still doubt whether roof bolting is safe.
Mr Neil Greatrex, president of the Nottinghamshire UDM, says British pits
are deeper than those in the US or Australia. 'It looks fine now, but will
it be safe in 30 or 40 years?' he asks.
The Mines Inspectorate has been slow to accept roof bolting, but is
gradually relaxing its objections.
Wooden pit props are still used at Asfordby, but the inspectors have said
they can go. They have also agreed that coal cutting can extend 5.8 metres
(currently 3.8 metres) beyond the last roof bolt.
If the quality of its coal were better, Asfordby might be a prime candidate
for a single-pit sell-off, an idea which does not go down well with the
local managers. 'You buy a car from a company, Ford, not from a particular
Ford plant like Halewood,' says one.
In spite of their pride in what Asfordby should be able to achieve, the
managers and workers cannot escape the gloom that hangs over British Coal
ahead of the difficult contract renegotiation with its main customers, the
electricity generators.
'We kept the lights burning in the strike and we've doubled productivity
since then - what more do they want from us?' asks one disillusioned
manager. The answer is lots of Asfordbys.
