FT  06 JUL 92 / Spanish chemicals group seeks protection
SPAIN'S largest chemicals company, Ercros, will today file for protection
from its creditors. The company failed last week to renegotiate its Dollars
2.15bn (Pounds 1.12bn) debts with bankers and suppliers or to persuade its
main shareholder, the Kuwait Investment Office (KIO), to give it any more
money.
Both the Ercros holding company and its deeply troubled fertiliser divisions
will make protection filings, probably in Barcelona, today. The move will
mark the biggest corporate collapse in Spain since the country became a
democracy in 1977.
It will also be the first time KIO, the Kuwaiti government's international
investment arm, has been so closely associated with a failure to repay
creditors.
A statement by the group said that KIO, which owns at least 39 per cent of
Ercros through Grupo Torras, its Spanish investment arm, was directly
responsible for the decision to seek protection from creditors. It said the
agency had insisted on the filing 'to define its contribution to the final
consolidation of the affected companies and so to confront existing
obligations in framework of co-responsibility'.
That means that KIO has refused to pump in an immediate Dollars 250m to save
Ercros unless it is assisted in some way by the government. Madrid, in turn,
insists it cannot inject any more funds into the group.
Ercros, which employs 10,500 people and lost Dollars 160m last year, owes
more than Dollars 200m to the Spanish state-owned Banco Exterior, and owes
money also to Banco Santander, Banco Central Hispanoamericano and Banco
Bilbao Vizcaya. About Dollars 30m in credits from Barclays and Bankinter are
understood to be guaranteed by KIO's wholly-owned Spanish holding company,
Torras.
Some bankers suggested at the weekend that by forcing Ercros into a
suspension of payments, KIO might be placing its international credibility
as a borrower at risk. Torras has a large convertible bond outstanding
which, if the Ercros payments suspension were to trigger any default
clauses, might be threatened. But KIO appears to be safe from default as it
is a shareholder in Ercros and so not directly liable for its debts.
