FT  01 APR 92 / UK Company News: Too deep a hole to dig itself out of easily
 -How Speyhawk has fallen prey to the property market collapse
SPEYHAWK's huge losses are further confirmation of the forces that have
pushed the UK commercial property industry into the worst decline since the
1930s.
Its pre-tax loss of Pounds 217m for the year to September 30 may not be a
record for stricken UK developers - Rosehaugh produced a pre-tax loss of
Pounds 227m for the year to end-June. It is however a remarkably steep
decline. A year ago, it announced a pre-tax loss of just Pounds 2.86m and
net assets of Pounds 140.5m.
Nonetheless, many City commentators saw Speyhawk's fall as merely a matter
of time. As a developer with a large number of unlet buildings under
construction, it was badly exposed to the property slump. Its only hope of
avoiding the consequences was in attracting a partner with deeper pockets.
This prospect crumbled in August 1990 when Nordstjernan, a Swedish property
company, pulled out of of deal to buy Speyhawk after the invasion of Kuwait.
Speyhawk encapsulates two of the worst problems in the UK property market,
the parlous state of the City office market and the plummeting values of
development sites. Over half of its Pounds 205m provisions are due to two
City buildings, which are worth around half their construction costs. One,
at St Mary Axe, is 155,000 sq ft; the other, built over Cannon Bridge is
195,000 sq ft, of which 100,000 sq ft is let to Liffe, the financial market.
In a City market, where nearly one in five office buildings are empty, it
could take years for Speyhawk to fill its buildings. Even if Speyhawk
succeeds in securing a tenant, it is likely to be for significantly less
than the asking rent of Pounds 45 per sq ft. Worse still, tenants are
insisting on rent-free periods of at least two years, leaving a large hole
in Speyhawk's cash flow.
The next largest contributor to Speyhawk's huge losses are its development
sites such as Weymouth town centre and the old ITN building have been
slashed to a quarter of their former value. Development site values are
particularly sensitive to market conditions as their worth lies in the
difference between the buildings' potential value and their potential cost.
Speyhawk's task in digging itself out of this hole is a large one. Its 30
properties are half empty on average. Unless it can let the buildings, it
cannot hope to sell them. Last year it made just Pounds 75m of sales,
compared with Pounds 200m.
Mr Osborne is upbeat about the prospects of an increase in values. 'We have
agreed a four-year period with the banks so that we don't need to sell at
these levels.' He reports a 'healthy level' of enquiries at Thames Business
Park and reckons that in two years time, the City rental market will have
improved.
The idea that they would be selling at the bottom of the market is the main
reason for the banks' decision to support Speyhawk. A forced sale would send
prices down into another downward spiral. In any case, there is no obvious
market for unlet buildings.
That said, it is still no mean achievement to get agreement between so many
banks. The final agreement, which has taken since last August, has yet to be
signed. Speyhawk has 46 banks worldwide, led by Barclays and Citibank, and
debts of Pounds 303m.
This total includes Speyhawk's off balance sheet loans, as their covenants
were broken and they had to be considered with the rest of the debt. 'I have
come to the conclusion that non-recourse debt is a concept rather than
reality,' says Mr Osborne.
After a standstill on debt repayments since last August, Speyhawk has agreed
with its banks to reduce its debts over a four-year period. The banks will
not need to put new money into the company.
Shareholders will receive information on the restructuring, which will
include a reorganisation of share capital, when a final agreement is reached
with the banks. Liabilities exceed assets by Pounds 70m but the banks have
agreed to subordinate part of their debt to keep the company solvent.
The pre-tax losses of Pounds 217m were struck after provisions of Pounds
205m. Turnover decreased by 71 per cent to Pounds 76.4m. The loss per share
was 829.7p (27.8p).
In some ways, Speyhawk's decline marks full circle for the 1980s development
boom. Speyhawk was first of a wave of property developers to join the stock
market during the 1980s. Now, nearly all of them have either been taken
over, or have run into severe difficulties.
A remarkable aspect of the end of this era is how few have been put in
receivership. For all the severity of the decline, the boom is ending not
with a bang but a whimper.
