FT  02 SEP 92 / SmithKline plans R&amp;D shake-up: Group to cut jobs, invest in
new facilities and end research into gastro-intestinal drugs
SMITHKLINE Beecham, the Anglo-US pharmaceutical group, is to to make
far-reaching changes in research and development. They involve 150
redundancies among UK research staff, a Pounds 200m investment in new R&amp;D
facilities and, most surprisingly, withdrawal from long-term research in
gastro-intestinal drugs - the field that provided its best-selling product,
the ulcer medicine Tagamet.
The 'strategic realignment' of R&amp;D is the final phase of cost cutting and
rationalisation that followed the merger between Beecham of the UK and
SmithKline Beckman of the US in 1989. Savings in manufacturing, marketing
and administration have already cut the group's workforce by about 2,000 and
helped raise pre-tax profits 18 per cent a year.
'Resources must be focused on drug discovery with the highest potential for
return,' said Dr George Poste, R&amp;D chairman. 'As a result SB has decided to
discontinue several research programmes.'
The most striking casualty is gastro-intestinal drug discovery, which led to
Tagamet, with sales exceeding Dollars 1bn (Pounds 500m) in each of the past
six years, and more recently to Kytril, the anti-nausea drug launched last
year as a competitor to Glaxo's Zofran.
'We feel that basic research in this area has proceeded more slowly than in
others and it's more difficult to identify rational candidates for drug
discovery,' said Dr Poste. But he emphasised that development work on SB's
existing gastro-intestinal compounds would continue.
The realignment will leave SB with drug discovery programmes in five areas:
central nervous system; heart and lungs; anti-infectives; inflammation and
tissue repair; and vaccines.
UK R&amp;D sites will be cut from eight to six. SB will close its medical
offices in Reigate, Surrey, and the small research facility at its
antibiotics factory in Worthing, Sussex. The 150 redundancies - including
scientists, technicians and office staff - will be spread across the eight
sites.
The Pounds 200m investment in new buildings and equipment over the next four
years will concentrate on Brockham Park and Great Burgh in Surrey and
Mundells in Hertfordshire. SB will continue to divide its R&amp;D effort equally
between the UK and US.
Dr Poste said SB planned to devote about 15 per cent of pharmaceutical sales
to R&amp;D. This year's R&amp;D budget is about Pounds 410m. Its A shares closed 13p
down yesterday at 443p.
