FT  25 SEP 92 / UK Company News: Philip Green quits as Amber Day's Pounds
7.53m disappoints
THE CONTROVERSIAL career of Mr Philip Green as chairman and chief executive
of Amber Day ended yesterday when the discount retailer announced
unexpectedly poor results.
Mr Green, 40, said he had resigned from the board and would cease all
executive functions within the group, which reported annual pre-tax profits
of Pounds 7.53m. It was well below the forecast of at least Pounds 10.1m
made as recently as mid-June, when downgrading analysts' expectations of
Pounds 14m-Pounds 15m.
Amber Day's shares collapsed from a peak of 129p last November following a
series of bear raids and newspaper stories about Mr Green's business
associates and commercial deals. The shares yesterday closed 1p higher at
35p.
Mr Green said all the claims had been investigated by the company's advisers
and found to be groundless. However, the board announced in June that Mr
Green intended to split his role with an independent chairman, after the
resignation of the group's finance director and only non-executive director,
both within a year of joining the group.
Amber Day's advisers, including bankers Samuel Montagu and stockbrokers
Smith New Court, insisted on the quality of the group's underlying business,
the Glasgow-based discount chain What Everyone Wants, which it bought in
1990 for Pounds 46.7m.
The line that Amber Day's problems were merely to do with corporate
governance could not stand the strain of the surprise drop in sales and
profits, which proved the last straw for the group's advisers and main
shareholders.
One adviser said the board, including Mr Green, recognised that he would
have to go in order to salvage any of the group's hugely diminished
credibility. Mr Green still owns 10 per cent of the group, which has seen
its market value drop from Pounds 158m to Pounds 43m at last night's close.
Mr Green said the company had suffered from a lot of undeserved publicity,
which was causing management of the business such distraction that he
believed it was right for him to stand down.
Mr David Thompson, who joined as finance director in July, has temporarily
assumed the roles of chairman and chief executive. The board said it
intended to appoint a new chairman, chief executive and at least one
non-executive director as soon as possible.
Total group turnover fell from Pounds 103.1m to Pounds 96.5m in the year to
August 1. The group blamed the profits shortfall on over-optimistic sales
forecasts which required markdowns to clear stock. Sale of the mens' wear
division caused an extraordinary charge of Pounds 5.99m.
Earnings per share fell from 6.81p to 3.87p. The final dividend of 2p gives
a total for the year of 3.1p, compared with 2.7p.
