FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of Courier and Express Services (5): On track for a
faster service - Operators have found it costly to develop pan-European
coverage
RECENT moves by giant United States-based parcels carrier Federal Express to
pull out of all European domestic and regional operations highlight a more
general problem for the international express industry.
Basically, it centres on the desire of carriers to develop full pan-European
delivery systems in a market where the traffic volumes are generally not yet
sufficient to support their large and costly service infrastructures.
That shortfall between capacity and freight volumes has been particularly
evident in the air express sector. During the 1980s, leading operators such
as Federal Express, TNT, DHL, United Parcel Service (UPS) and Emery
Worldwide all built up their own dedicated air networks in Europe. But in
many cases, their aircraft were either under-utilised or carried freight at
rates well below those necessary to make such operations economically
viable.
With the advent of economic recession at the end of the 1980s serving to
accentuate those problems, express companies realised they could not afford
to go on running so many different air networks. Increasingly, they started
looking at sharing line-haul capacity in an attempt to reduce costs.
The first big move in that context came towards the end of last year when
Australian-based integrator TNT Express Worldwide announced the formation of
a joint venture with postal services organisation GD Net. As part of that
venture, the five post offices belonging to GD Net are now putting their
express traffic on TNT's European fleet of British Aerospace 146-QT
freighters.
TNT claims it is already seeing significant cost savings as a result of that
co-loading and other features of the joint venture. The company says that in
northern Sweden, for example, where the local post office is now delivering,
the unit cost of delivery has been halved. And similar savings are expected
in rural areas of Canada, Germany and France.
The TNT/GD Net venture and the subsequent demise of the Brussels-based
International Post Corporation linehaul system - which had been used by some
20 post offices - at the end of last year has also led to a general shake-up
and restructuring of other post office express distribution operations in
Europe.
'We are in a period of transition at the moment as the whole market waits to
see how the TNT/GD Net system develops,' commented the director and general
manager of Brussels-based wholesale organisation Air Bridge Express (ABX),
Richard Johnston.
ABX, a division of UK-based airline Air Bridge Carriers, last year signed a
contract with the UK Post Office to linehaul Datapost traffic all over
Europe and has other similar contracts with the Irish and Portuguese post
offices.
Less dramatic than the TNT/GD Net and Federal Express developments but also
very much a sign of the times was an agreement earlier this year between air
express organisation DHL and airfreight company Emery Worldwide to atlantic
airlift.
Apart from sharing air linehaul capacity, express companies are also now
paying greater attention to the development of road transport operations in
Europe. In fact, many industry observers believe the pan-European road
freight market, a business now reckoned to be worth around Pounds 14bn a
year, will soon become the main battleground for express delivery companies.
Some of the opening salvos have already been fired. Late last year, UPS
launched a ground-based European delivery operation which, it claimed,
offered rates 'between 25 and 40 per cent lower than those of other
carriers'. And TNT relaunched its European road operations with two new
services.
Express industry executives admit their increased interest in European road
service development has been prompted by both negative and positive factors.
On the negative side is the realisation that operating aircraft is now so
expensive that air express services are really only viable for carrying
genuine premium-rated traffic. Shipments which do not attract that sort of
rate should therefore be transferred to road vehicles.
More positively, express industry executives say many of their leading
customers have indicated that while fairly fast delivery times are
desirable, reliability is more important. A reliable road delivery at a
lower price than air express is often better suited to their needs.
Looking further ahead, certain express industry companies are also beginning
to give more serious consideration to replacing - or at least supplementing
 -some of their expensive intra-European air capacity with rail operations.
DHL, for instance, plans to re-introduce a nightly Paris/Brussels train link
in the autumn. The company suspended a trial operation at the end of January
because of problems with French customs over documentation procedures for
higher value dutiable goods and for economic reasons.
The six-wagon, 60-tonne capacity train used by DHL cost Dollars 11,000 to
run, about the same as a 12-tonne capacity aircraft on the same route. Now,
says DHL, it has resolved the Customs difficulties. That means it can put
more traffic on the train, so improving the economic viability.
Meanwhile, British Rail parcels delivery organisation Red Star is firming up
its plans for the opening of the Channel Tunnel next year.
First new development will involve a same-day service between London and
Paris/Brussels. City-to-city transit time will be around 3.5 hours, with the
full door-to-door movement projected to be five to six hours.
Looking further ahead, BR is considering the introduction of dedicated
parcel trains running overnight between London and Brussels. BR will run the
train as a wholesale operation for Red Star and other parcels industry
users.
Predictably, much of the express industry's European market development
effort has been focused on the European Community and EFTA countries.
However, larger companies have also been strengthening their presence in
eastern Europe.
Mr John Monaghan, general manager network development for TNT, said his
company planned to develop a 'mirror image' of its Western express
operations in eastern Europe. 'Our aim is to introduce on an increasing
scale, scheduled overnight movements to the east with same morning
deliveries,' he added.
Facts and figures on the actual present size of the eastern European express
market, as opposed to much hyped projections of potential future business,
are difficult to come by.
However, DHL estimates that as far as the air express sector is concerned,
daily total volumes for eastern Europe, inbound and outbound, carried by all
operators towards the end of last year, were only averaging around 12.65
tonnes.
Biggest individual market in that region, says DHL, is Hungary which was
averaging around three tonnes a day, followed by Yugoslavia (2.5 tonnes),
Poland (2.4 tonnes), the then Soviet Union (two tonnes) and Czechoslovakia
(1.7 tonnes).
