FT  20 JAN 92 / Right-wing parties plan push for power: European extremists'
high hopes
EUROPE'S expanding far-right parties are preparing a springtime blitz to
carry forward their assault on the bastions of political power. Elections in
France, Germany and Italy in March and April seem likely to deliver fresh
gains for the ultra-right, following successes in Austria, Switzerland and
Belgium at the end of last year.
Support for radical parties in the prosperous half of Europe has been fed by
problems caused by immigration, high unemployment and housing pressures, as
well as by disillusionment with the established parties.
It is a social as well as a political malaise - and it looks unlikely to
disappear quickly. 'People are rebelling against a world which turns them
into mere helpless consumers, and where immigration makes them feel
strangers in their own land,' according to Mr Michael Sturmer, head of the
Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik, the German government-backed think-tank.
The treaty for European union agreed at the Maastricht summit could in some
cases give the right an additional boost when it goes to parliaments for
ratification this year. The deal is likely to raise hackles among voters
concerned about the effects of opening borders and diluting national
decision-making.
The exact mix of issues behind increased right-wing strength varies between
regions. In Italy, the Lega Lombarda (Lombard League), with its roots in the
north, has now spread its organisation across the whole of the country under
its energetic leader Mr Umberto Bossi. He suffered a heart attack before
Christmas but is now back in action. The party looks set to garner a
sizeable protest vote in Italy's general election in April - profiting above
all from voters' exasperation with the established parties' squabbling.
Similar protests at bickering by traditional parties were the main reason -
with immigration concerns - behind the surge in support for Vlaams Blok, the
Flemish nationalist right-wing party, in Belgium's general election in
November. In Switzerland and Austria, the radical right has also profited
from dissatisfaction with the established government parties to deal with
problems like immigration, housing, crime and inflation. The Swiss
government recently voiced fears that the rising tide of protest voting
could disrupt its efforts to join the EC in the mid-1990s.
In the Netherlands, another well-off country where right-wing resentment has
bubbled to the surface, Mr Hans Janmaat, the member of parliament for the
far-right Centre Democrats, cites the Vlaams Blok victory to justify
confidence about his own party's prospects: 'Our present support level is
around 5 per cent, which would give us eight or nine seats in parliament.'
Mr Janmaat has done his best to puncture satisfaction in the Dutch
parliament about the results of the Maastricht summit, hitting out at
'reckless' European integration which threatened to submerge Dutch national
interests.
The Maastricht accord is looming particularly large in the strategies of
right-wing parties in France and Germany. It is in these countries that
potential for a right-wing backlash against the EC deal appears greatest.
This could severely hamper the traditional role of the Paris and Bonn
governments as sponsors of European integration.
In France, Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen, the one-eyed former paratrooper who heads
the National Front (FN), has been shrugging off attacks from Mrs Edith
Cresson, the prime minister, claiming he is an 'enemy of democracy'. Opinion
pollsters say he stands a good chance of winning the region of
Provence-Alpes-Cote d'Azur for his party in the regional elections in March.
The FN is fielding candidates in all 22 French regions. Victory for the FN
on the Cote d'Azur, which would propel Mr Le Pen to the position of
president of the regional council, would give him a prestigious new
platform.
The FN is doing well in industrially depressed suburban areas north and west
of Paris, and in southern towns, which can be highly exposed to immigration.
Mr Le Pen has promised a vigorous campaign against the Maastricht deal,
which he complains will lead to a European 'super-state' signifying France's
'political suicide'.
Success on the French Riviera would increase the chances that the
established parties on the right will adopt policies similar to Mr Le Pen's
to prevent voters turning to the fringes. This could herald a tougher French
line in defence of national sovereignty. Mr Alain Peyrefitte, the Gaullist
former justice minister, warned pointedly at the end of last year that
pressing on towards a 'Europe without frontiers' could spark 'aggressive
nationalism' as a counter-reaction.
In Germany, the last few months have seen a spate of attacks on immigrants
by far-right youths, as well as 1930s-style marches by neo-Nazi groups. The
Bonn Interior Ministry registered 950 attacks against foreigners in October,
534 in November and 187 in December. As well as taking aim at the
government's failure to lower the inflows of asylum-seekers into Germany,
the far right has hit out strongly at the Maastricht accord. In particular,
they have lambasted Chancellor Helmut Kohl's assent to monetary union later
in the 1990s, which effectively delivers the death sentence for the D-Mark.
The neo-Nazi National Democrats (NPD), the xenophobic German People's party
(DVU) and the slightly less extreme Republican party are separately fighting
the state election in Germany in Schleswig-Holstein and Baden-Wurttemberg on
April 5. Mr Bruno Wetzel, one of the DVU's top organisers, promises efforts
to combat the abolition of the D-Mark and transfer of sovereignty abroad.
'If you mix together strong currencies and weak ones, you give up
stability.'
After gaining six parliamentary seats in the northern state of Bremen in
October, the DVU is confident of passing the 5 per cent hurdle necessary for
parliamentary representation in Schleswig-Holstein. In Baden-Wurttemberg, Mr
Gunter Deckert, the NPD's national leader, says he believes the NPD together
with the Republicans will comfortably exceed the 5 per cent score.
Mr Deckert, a schoolteacher sacked three years ago because of his right-wing
tendencies, likes to spend his holidays at Worthing on England's south
coast. But he has no great love of foreigners in his own country: the NPD
campaigns to send them home, as well as to protect the environment and
maintain the sanctity of the D-Mark.
Mr Deckert calls German unification simply 'partial' because Germany has not
yet won back its former territories in Poland. Somewhat ominously, he claims
the NPD is picking up a significant amount of youthful support.
An intensified debate in Germany about the future of the D-Mark will almost
automatically add to the NPD's following, Mr Deckert says. In a remark
indicating the political problems which could ensue for Mr Kohl in the event
of a full-scale German recession, the NPD leader adds: 'Once there are
anxieties about the economy, we gain support from middle-aged people, and
not just the young.'
