FT  16 MAR 92 / Management: Fresh start to be made in China
How do you go about introducing concepts such as productivity, marketing and
incentive in chronically inefficient industries within a centrally planned
economy?
China's state-owned industry is hugely overmanned, churns out products
regardless of whether there is a market, and is enmeshed in bureaucracy. It
is one thing for the communist government in Beijing to say that it is bent
on economic reform, but quite another to implement change in the factories.
This should be fertile ground for management consultants - but only those
willing to put up with frustrations to earn their fee. One now learning the
ropes is Knight Wendling, which is Swiss-based but part of the Lester B
Knight &amp; Associates group of Chicago.
Knight Wendling won a two-year contract, supported by a World Bank loan, to
help restructure Shanghai's electronic components and scientific instruments
sectors. Since last November, it has had a team operating there under the
direction of Robert Mackenzie, who is based in London but travels to China
frequently.
The industries provide life-time employment. Sales and marketing were
unknown since their entire output was handed over to the state, which dealt
with any exports.
Plants typically ordered stock requirements for the year ahead. The concept
of competition was also unknown, though poor planning has in recent years
led to products competing with those of other Chinese factories.
There was little co-operation between plants, so that one factory had a
modern sheet metal press operating only four or five hours a day while its
neighbours within the same corporation either sought to make do with
inferior technology, or bought in their needs from outside.
A number of levels of bureaucracy - the factory management itself, the
corporation of which it is a part, the Shanghai bureau which oversees the
industry, and the Shanghai municipal authorities - have been free to
interfere in the operation of plants.
Knight Wendling's task is to help the Chinese to correct all of this and
more in factories producing a wide range of products, some of which  - like
microscopes and camera lenses - are of good quality and have a reasonable
potential market, and some of which do not.
It is working with the Shanghai bureaucracy to establish a simpler
organisational structure and chain of responsibility. But it must always
ensure that structural changes are understood at every level. Within the
plants, Knight Wendling has to accept that employees cannot simply be made
redundant, even though the factories already employ thousands where hundreds
would do, and upgrading of technology would reduce the required workforce
further.
Part of its approach is to designate a model factory and, within it, a model
cell. In them, it attempts to demonstrate best practice and to set proper
manning levels, so that financial results of model units can be produced
without accounting for unnecessary employees, even though the results for
whole plants will still reflect them. A key element is the attempt to
introduce incentives, another unknown concept.
Every small step requires a round of meetings, which tend to be attended by
many officials. 'One-on-one meetings are virtually impossible,' says
Mackenzie. This can make it difficult to get over ideas about management and
responsibility. However, workshops are organised to develop management
skills and Mackenzie says some managers have real potential.
