FT  21 OCT 92 / Checkland says Hussey is too old to lead the BBC
SIR Michael Checkland, the BBC director-general, yesterday accused his
chairman, Mr Marmaduke Hussey, of being too old to lead the corporation into
the next century.
In an unprecedented public attack, for which he later apologised, Sir
Michael, who leaves the BBC in February, said the government had been wrong
to give the chairman a second five-year term. 'It is a mistake to have a
chairman of this organisation for 10 years. That is a mistake. I believe
that when you are leading the BBC into the next century at the age of 73 it
is bizarre,' Sir Michael told the leaders of the UK broadcasting industry at
a Royal Television Society conference.
Last year Mr Hussey, now 69, became the first BBC chairman to win a second
term. The director-general, who is 56 and who was given only a one-year
extension to his five-year contract, added that at a time of rapid change
younger leadership was needed.
'When we are talking about FM (radio) I want to be talking about frequency
modulation not fuzzy monsters,' Sir Michael said in an interview session at
the conference with broadcaster Jon Snow.
Later Sir Michael said one governor was already over 70 and two others were
approaching it. 'There should be a wider range of governors and a wider age
range,' he added. He wanted governors who had FM radios and satellite
dishes. The row over Radio 4 being broadcast only on FM to make way for a
24-hour news service on long wave has been fuelled by elderly people not
having FM radios.
Sir Michael also criticised Mr Hussey for the way the handover to his
successor, Mr John Birt, the deputy director-general, had been handled.
'It is a most ludicrous way to operate, in my view, to have a 21-month
handover. If the changeover had happened this autumn that would have been
more orderly,' said Sir Michael, who insisted he had no policy differences
with Mr Birt.
Sir Michael, in a later statement apologising for his remarks, said: 'It was
certainly not my intention to make a personal attack. I have apologised to
the chairman and expressed my regret if it was seen as that.'
Mr Michael Grade, the 49-year old chief executive of Channel 4, once
described by Mr Hussey as 'a Bourbon in red braces' commented after the
conference that a 10-year term gave a BBC chairman too much power of
patronage. Mr Grade did not think, however, that Mr Hussey was too old.
'I've got an 85-year old uncle (Lord Lew Grade) who is very active,' he
said.
A green paper on the future of the BBC is expected next month.
