FT  15 JUN 92 / Survey of Greece (7): Big income growth forecast - Tourism
WHEN it comes to tourism, Greece would seem to have two identities. At least
half the 9.5m tourists expected this year will descend by charter flights on
just four islands - Crete, Rhodes, Corfu and Mykonos. That leaves another
150 or so islands and much of mainland Greece, still relatively unexplored,
for everyone else.
The pressure to accommodate as many tourists as possible, encouraged until
recently by generous government grants, has led to ribbon development of
hotels and apartment complexes along the coasts of Crete and Rhodes, the
most popular islands. Villages along the way have been transformed into
tourist service centres complete with pubs, pizzerias and Chinese
restaurants and ranks of jeeps and motorbikes for rent.
In theory, dozens of smaller islands have been opened up for mass tourism
through construction of airports that can handle charter jets. But there are
relatively few with a reliable water supply and enough sandy beaches for
large numbers of tourists. Instead, special interest holidays are
proliferating on small islands, partly as a result of European Community
nationals being able to set up businesses more easily in Greece under single
market rules.
Although it is still still on a small scale, the advantages of alternative
tourism, from mountain-biking to observing marine turtles, lies in its
resilience to external factors and its capacity for bringing income to more
remote areas. In Macedonia and the northern Aegean islands, for example, the
hotel occupancy rate is normally about 45 per cent, compared to 85 per cent
for Crete. But unlike the biggest tourist destinations, there was no decline
last year.
Greece, like other eastern Mediterranean countries, suffered as a result of
the Gulf war. Fears of terrorism proved unfounded but tour operators
cancelled bookings early in the season, charter flights started several
weeks later than usual and there was little demand for Aegean cruises.
Once recovery began in July, things rapidly improved, with demand for
package holidays on Rhodes and Crete remaining high throughout October.
Although tourist arrivals fell by 11 per cent in 1991 to 8.2m, the decline
was not reflected in earnings.
Official foreign exchange receipts from tourism dropped by 0.8 per cent to
Dollars 2.57bn, but overall income from tourism, which includes visitors'
credit card purchases and funds retained abroad by Greek travel agents, rose
by 12 per cent to Dollars 4.6bn, according to the Greek Tourist Organisation
(EOT).
While room rates have risen by only a small margin, the result of Greek
hoteliers' worries about staying competitive with Turkey and Cyprus, EOT
predicts a large increase in earnings this year.
Mr Costas Pylarinos, secretary-general of EOT, says that tourist arrivals
are expected to rise by 14 per cent this year, generating a 30 per cent
improvement in income.
One reason for his optimism, is that American visitors, who spend much more
lavishly than Europeans, are returning to Greece. Bookings for cruises,
where the majority of passengers are American, are at their highest levels
since the early 1980s. Moreover, the shake-up in the US airline industry has
brought an increase in flights to Greece by American carriers expanding
their networks in Europe.
But the figures also hint that Greece may at last be starting to attract
more of the up-market visitors on whom the tourist industry stakes its hopes
for the future. One problem has been a lack of luxury and first-class hotels
compared to the thousands of third-class establishments used by tour
operators at the cheaper end of the market.
Most of Greece's hotel stock dates from the 1970s but until recently little
attention was paid to refurbishing regularly, providing additional
facilities or improving service. As a result, tour operators from France,
Germany and Scandinavia are starting to buy Greek properties and carry out
full-scale renovations.
However, several Greek hoteliers who have developed professional management
operations as a result of working closely with European operators, together
with a few offshore Greek operators, have built luxury resort hotels over
the past three years and more are being planned.
Mr Pylarinos says he is looking for investors who will build conference
centres, golf courses and even casinos. All of these would help extend the
tourist season by at least three months from its present seven months, as
well as attracting more affluent tourists.
'We have no shortage of organisations wanting to hold congresses in Greece
at the start or the end of the season. But we're restricted to small affairs
of a thousand or so people at a hotel because we don't have a purpose-built
centre,' he says.
Golf courses are proving hard to develop, mainly because large tracts of
suitable land are hard to find, while farmers raise objections to losing
scarce pasturage. In the meantime, two of the four existing golf courses are
to be improved.
EOT also plans to expand its Dr12bn programme for building marinas. After
long delays caused by protests from local environmental organisations and a
squeeze on public investment funds, six marinas have been completed and
another eight are due to open by 1993. Altogether, they will have space for
20,000 yachts.
The marina programme was EOT's first move to make Greece more attractive to
better-off tourists. In fact, the existing marinas serve the rising number
of Greeks who are able to afford yachts and power boats, rather than
foreigners who find that berths are cheaper across the Aegean in Turkey. The
next stage of EOT's marina programme will be designed to lure them back.
