FT  09 JUN 92 / Rio talks face clash over targets for development aid
EFFORTS to resolve the impasse over the financing of a global environmental
action plan were stepped up yesterday as the Earth Summit moved into its
final phase.
A new north-south clash seemed inevitable over the level and timing of
financial commitments to the programme.
With only two days to go before the arrival of heads of state, European
Community countries and the Group of 77 developing countries held separate
meetings yesterday to discuss a new Brazilian compromise proposal on
financing, the most crucial conference issue. Further talks were planned
last night.
The G77 repeated its demand for industrialised nations to commit themselves
to a target for overseas development aid of 0.7 per cent of GNP by the year
2000, a level and date rejected by many of the richer, industrialised
nations. The US is one of the main opponents of setting a 0.7 per cent
target. Its current overseas development aid (ODA) level is 0.13 per cent
compared with a European average of 0.5 per cent. A US official described
the G77 demand as 'completely unrealistic - it would mean an enormous
increase in aid'.
The US delegation is concentrating efforts on securing agreement on finance
in an apparent attempt to divert attention from its isolation over the
treaty on species protection, which it refuses to sign.
The delegation also hopes to improve the atmosphere at the summit before
President George Bush arrives on Thursday. Mr William Reilly, head of the US
Environmental Protection Agency, said he was optimistic the issue of finance
would be resolved quickly.
The new proposal, drawn up by Mr Rubens Ricupero, Brazilian ambassador to
Washington, calls for countries already committed to achieve the 0.7 per
cent level to do so 'as early as possible' while other developed nations
should agree to 'make their best efforts to increase their levels of ODA'.
Mr Ricupero said yesterday: 'I hope this wording will resolve the problem.'
But the G77 insists on firmer commitments. Mr Kamal Nath, the Indian
environment minister, said: 'The document merely affirms the 0.7 per cent
target but affirmation is not enough. We need a time frame. Without that the
conference is just laudable rhetoric.'
Baroness Chalker, head of Britain's Overseas Development Administration,
said Britain refused to be 'tied down to either figures or timetables.'
However, she pledged to raise UK development aid from the current levels of
0.3 per cent of GNP.
Earth Summit reports, Page 6
