FT  31 MAR 92 / Egypt falls into line on censure of Libya
EGYPTIAN officials, who have led a rearguard action to save Libya from
international censure over the 1988 bombing of an American airliner,
appeared to have resigned themselves last night to the passage of UN
sanctions.
Officials were last night signalling that Cairo would reluctantly fall into
line with some of the sanctions provisions, such as an arms and air embargo,
but they were vague as to whether Egypt would also downgrade diplomatic
links with Libya as required by the proposed Security Council resolution.
'My understanding is that we will comply with the resolution,' said a
well-placed official. 'Egypt supports international legality and the role of
the United Nations.'
However, there is no doubt that western determination to press ahead with
sanctions in an effort to force Libya to yield two of its nationals accused
of bombing Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie is causing acute discomfort in
Egypt whose diplomacy has, for the past six months, been fully engaged in
efforts to head off just such a development.
Egyptian uneasiness, and indeed misgivings among the pro-western Arabs
generally, stems from a fear that western pressure against Libya will be
portrayed throughout the region as another example of the west seeking to
bully a weak Arab state under the so-called 'New World Order', weighted
heavily towards US interests.
'To Arabs, it appears like the strong imposing its will on the weak under a
new Pax Americana,' said Professor Saad Ibrahim of the American University
in Cairo. 'People are unhappy about the precedent that is being established
and ask where will it end, not that anyone has much sympathy for Gadaffi
himself.'
One western official believes that one of the main problems in what he
described as a 'messy situation' stems from Arab misunderstandings of what
is involved in the due process of law in the west. 'No matter how hard we
try to explain the situation, reactions are emotional,' he observed. 'People
believe what they they want to believe.'
Mr Gamil Mattar, a former senior Arab League official, voiced a common view
among Arab intellectuals when he said there was 'no precedent' for demands
to extradite the Libyan nationals. 'What's the point of delivering these two
people to the US?' he asked. 'This kind of humiliation of the Arabs will
only lead to more violence and terrorism.'
Arab commentators are suggesting the west may be in danger of painting
itself into a corner over the issue of sanctions. Dr Gehad Auda of the
Centre for Political and International Development Studies in Cairo said
that just as the Arabs faced a dilemma over Libya, so did the west.
'What can the US do to oblige Libya to comply?' he asked. 'It cannot use
force. In fact, the US does not know what to do to uphold the norms of the
new international order.'
Egyptian officials say they are hoping for a last-minute compromise before
the sanctions package is due to come into effect on April 15. They are
pinning hopes on the International Court of Justice, which has been asked by
Libya to rule on who might have jurisdiction in the case. But they hold out
little hope of a quick resolution.
