FT  02 JUN 92 / Survey of Investment in Quebec (2): Clusters hold key to
markets - Industry
MR GERALD TREMBLAY, Quebec's industry minister, stands behind his desk
energetically spreading a sheaf of brightly coloured charts in front of him,
like a croupier dealing baccarat cards,
These are the road maps, he explains, to Quebec's latest initiative to draw
government, business, labour and academia together in a concerted industrial
strategy. 'Can you manage a company without a business plan?' Mr Tremblay,
who has an MBA from Harvard University, asks rhetorically. 'Why should a
government be different?'
Each diagram, with a complex pattern of lilac, orange and pink boxes (some
of the boxes are multi-coloured) represents one of 13 industrial clusters.
These are the sectors which Quebec believes have the best chance of being
competitive in world markets.
The aim is to encourage manufacturers in these industries to co-operate
closely with suppliers, government, trade unions, university researchers and
with each other, to create efficient and technologically advanced
industries.
Corporatism has been a cornerstone of Quebec economic policy for the past 30
years. Contracts for Hydro-Quebec's big James Bay power projects put muscle
into the Quebec engineering and construction industries.
Government direction and financial support have helped attract
pharmaceutical and aerospace companies to the province.
Getting everyone to pull in the same direction has been relatively easy in a
province with a tightly-knit, homogeneous population. There is far more job
hopping between the senior ranks of business and government in Quebec than
in other parts of Canada.
However, implementing a far-reaching industrial strategy is less simple than
it used to be. The ability of the government to use financial support as a
tool of its industrial policy is constrained by its CDollars 4bn budget
deficit.
Furthermore, Hydro-Quebec's construction programme will slow down sharply in
the second half of the decade, forcing many local companies to look
elsewhere for contracts.
Mr Pierre Fournier, research director at Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion,
Quebec's leading securities firm, predicts the government will be able to
give little more than moral support to the new industrial cluster concept.
'I like it, but it's going to take a long time,' Mr Fournier says.
The 13 clusters fall into two groups. Five sectors - aerospace,
pharmaceuticals, information technology products, power generating equipment
and metal processing - are well-established both in domestic and
international markets.
According to Mr Paul Lussier, director of investment services in the
ministry of industry and commerce, Quebec has reached a point where 'no
major pharmaceutical company does anything in North America without
considering Quebec as an option.
'If we could do that in five or six sectors, we'd be in great shape'.
The second group includes transport equipment, petrochemicals,
agri-business, textiles and clothing, forestry, housing, environmental
products, and cultural industries.
Several of these sectors have faced severe competitive pressures in recent
years, and will need a shake-up if they are to fulfil the hopes being placed
in them. Their inclusion as clusters is partly a recognition of the
province's natural resources and of these sectors vital importance to
regional development.
Each group of industries has set up a task force to identify its strengths
and weaknesses. In addition, the province's 16 regions have been asked to
submit a cluster wish-list within the next few months.
Mr Tremblay sees the government's role as a catalyst. 'It's a big puzzle and
we put all the pieces together,' he says. For example, vigorous arm-twisting
by Quebec has persuaded the federal government to locate a new Canadian
space agency in Montreal. A forestry technology centre has moved from Ottawa
to Quebec City.
Among the products of collaboration with business taking shape is an
institute for pharmaceutical research in Montreal. Twenty-one brand-name and
generic drug makers have each contributed CDollars 100,000.
The federal and provincial governments have chipped in another CDollars 6m
between them.
In spite of budget constraints, some government money is available for
individual companies too. Since 1987, the government has provided over 1,000
businesses with CDollars 519m in loans. While the loans are repayable, the
terms are generous.
Principal repayments on a modernisation loan, for example, normally start
only in the seventh year.
Numerous tax incentives are available. Research and development expenses
enjoy tax credits of up to 40 per cent. But in an effort to nudge academics
towards practical research, the credits are doubled for R&amp;D undertaken in
partnership with a university.
Foreign investment is an important part of Quebec's industrial strategy. US,
European and Asian companies have large stakes in many of the 13 clusters,
as well as other parts of the economy. Two of South Korea's biggest North
American investments are in Quebec, in the form of a Hyundai car plant in
the eastern townships and a Sami Steel factory in Montreal.
Much of the emphasis in the years ahead will be on attracting more Asian
capital. The government has just opened a trade and investment office in
Vancouver, with a mandate to try and divert to Quebec some of the money
flowing into Canada's western provinces from Hong Kong, Taiwan and
Singapore.
