FT  11 MAR 92 / Business and the Environment: Greeks battle to defeat the
'nefos' - Kerin Hope finds the air in Athens stifling / Urban Air Pollution
On a warm, still morning the 'nefos' or pollution cloud that plagues Athens
is all too visible: a streaky, yellow haze masking the western suburbs and
the sea.
The nefos first appeared in the early 1970s, after a steady migration to the
capital by villagers and islanders triggered a speculative building boom
that left little room for parks and gardens. For each Athenian there is only
2.5 sq metres of green space, the lowest in any European capital.
The warnings of a few prescient city planners, who called for large-scale
planting of trees on barren hillsides around the city and construction of a
network of ring roads, were ignored by successive governments. The result
was a steady growth in atmospheric pollution levels.
The nefos is caused by temperature inversion, in which polluted air trapped
between the sea and the mountains enclosing the Attica basin is prevented
from escaping by the presence of a warmer layer above. After 36 hours
without any wind, a severe pollution episode may ensue: admissions to
hospital rise, people with respiratory problems are warned to stay indoors
and the environment ministry imposes a traffic ban.
However, the composition of the nefos has changed over the years. From being
a Third World cloud containing high levels of sulphur dioxide and smoke, it
has become a California-style photochemical smog, rich in ozone and liable
to spread over a wider area of the city.
Initial efforts to combat air pollution by reducing sulphur levels in petrol
and domestic heating oil and curbing industrial emissions proved moderately
successful. Meanwhile, the population of greater Athens stabilised at around
3.2m, while government investment incentives encouraged industries to
relocate outside Attica.
But the number of cars and vans circulating in Athens rose from 175,000 in
1970 to 1.34m in 1991. Vehicle emissions are now held responsible for about
75 per cent of the air pollution.
A severe shortage of parking space adds to the problem. With over 40,000
cars parked illegally on an average weekday, traffic congestion worsens,
increasing emissions of carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons and nitrogen dioxide.
For the past decade, half the city's cars have been banned from weekday
driving in a 25 sq km central district, according to the final digit on
their number-plate. Although the odd and even driving restrictions help to
ease the traffic problem, they have only a small impact on pollution levels.
Instead of using public transport, many Athenian families acquired an
appropriately numbered second car, usually an elderly vehicle liable to emit
thick, black exhaust fumes.
'Athens was becoming a graveyard for cars. The average age of the fleet was
11 years, compared with six for the rest of the EC. Only 7 per cent of it
was being renewed annually, again a very low rate,' said Nikos Patsatzis, an
urban transport consultant.
The picture has changed in the past year, with the introduction of tax
breaks for purchases of new cars equipped with catalytic converters,
available to owners who turn in an old-technology vehicle.
Yet, the capital still lacks a co-ordinated long-term plan for coping with
air pollution. City planners, epidemiologists or meteorologists are rarely
consulted by environment ministry experts. Even the methods used to measure
air-pollution levels around the city are not consistent from year to year.
One development, a scheme to fit the bus fleet with Greek-designed smoke
traps which eliminate more than 95 per cent of smoke and soot emissions, is
being delayed. Although the devices have operated successfully on 100 buses
for the past two years, the transport ministry says it cannot come up with
Dr1bn (Pounds 3m) needed to equip the other 1,700 city buses.
Athenians blame the nefos for a host of ailments, from headaches and nausea
to eye irritation and chest pains, and even inability to concentrate. But it
is only in the past three years that epidemiological studies have managed to
pinpoint a connection between pollution episodes and increased mortality
rates, mainly among older people already suffering from respiratory
complaints.
The government pins its hopes on eventually reducing pollution levels on two
much-delayed projects, construction of an extension to the Athens
underground system and of a pipeline to bring Russian natural gas to the
capital.
The Dr 250bn Metro project will add two new lines crossing the city centre,
which are expected to carry 350,000 passengers daily from 1997, many of whom
now travel by car or taxi. The gas project should enable both households in
the city centre and factories to stop using diesel fuel altogether after
1994. But only the most optimistic of Greeks believes the nefos will ever be
dissipated.
Next week's article will focus on Los Angeles.
