FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (6): Bundesbank steels its nerve - Central
bank has faced intense domestic and foreign scrutiny
AMID the brouhaha over the Bundesbank's tight monetary policies and their
impact on other countries, it is easy to forget the tremendous esteem in
which the institution is held in its own country.
Even trade unions have an uneasy respect for the Bundesbank. Usually,
central banks and unions are well apart in the economic spectrum, with the
policies of the former often aimed at curbing the demands of the latter.
This certainly applies also in Germany, as witnessed by the Bundesbank's
constant warnings against the inflationary dangers arising from excessive
pay claims.
But there is an important difference with many other countries, since union
leaders and their members share with the vast majority of German citizens an
innate dislike of inflation and a firm belief in the need to dampen it down.
This has not stopped union officials from berating the Bundesbank for its
high interest rates and tight monetary policies. Nor did it prevent unions
from asking for double-digit increases this year, though they did not get
them.
But when IG Metall, the big engineering trade union, agreed a 21-month
settlement with a lower wage increase for next year than in 1992, one of its
top officials made clear that the Bundesbank was now expected to fulfill its
job of keeping down inflation. In other words, the union trusts the bank to
ensure that its members' purchasing power is not eroded.
More recently, Mr Franz Steinkuhler, the union's fiery president, has
offered a five-year wage pact under which increases will only keep pace with
inflation and tax increases. This was his response to the government's calls
for a 'solidarity pact' with unions, regional states, and industry to sort
out the tangled problems of Germany's post-unification finances and economic
sluggishness.
Whatever the outcome of such efforts, it is clear the German public's regard
for the Bundesbank goes far beyond that of, say, the British for the Bank of
England. So however strongly the Bundesbank may be attacked abroad - and it
was criticised very sharply in the UK over the latest currency upsets
leading to sterling's devaluation - its domestic position is secure.
There are clear historical reasons for this, lying in the dreadful
inflationary experiences of the early 1920s and the aftermath of the Nazi
evils which caused the Second World War and left the German economy
shattered.
Both have left their mark on the German psyche. Inflation is regarded as a
virus to be eliminated before it becomes too threatening. It is this strong
public backing, coupled with a legally enshrined independence that is the
envy of other central banks, which steels the Bundesbank's nerve when it
comes to dealing with governments, unions, and employers.
The bank has crossed swords a number of times with Bonn. Chancellor Adenauer
was put out when the Bank deutscher Lander, the Bundesbank's predecessor,
put up interest rates in 1950. He called a later rise six years later a
'guillotine' for the economy.
In 1972, Karl Schiller, heading both the economics and finance ministries,
resigned over a Bundesbank proposal for temporary capital controls. A decade
later, Chancellor Schmidt pleaded in vain for lower interest rates.
Today, the immense financial, economic, and social strains caused by
unification - both by the speed of the event and the scale of the challenge
 -have put the Bundesbank under domestic and foreign scrutiny as never
before. For the sentinels of the D-Mark who work in the Bundesbank's
austere, unappealing headquarters at the edge of Frankfurt, the glare of
publicity has been disturbing and disruptive.
Imbued with the stability ethos of the Bundesbank, its policy-makers are
used to thinking medium and long-term and acting accordingly.
Underlying their policies is a commitment to steady and manageable growth,
with the Bundesbank providing the monetary conditions to support an economy
which is not subject to 'stop-go' jerkiness.
Its money supply targets, now the subject of numerous analyses, are designed
to permit rising production without additional inflation. The fact that its
latest target is being dramatically overshot has led to the Bundesbank's
high interest rates, these reflecting its dislike of the government's fiscal
inertia and of inflationary pay deals.
Since the Bundesbank is not an arm of government, though it is obliged to
support Bonn's economic policy as long as this does not conflict with its
own duties, it acts under its own responsibility. This may mean that, as at
present, bolstering a weakening economy takes second place to countering
inflationary trends.
At one stage this year, the annual rate of inflation approached 5 per cent,
a level that would be met with equanimity in many countries but not in
Germany. The Bundesbank, led by Mr Helmut Schlesinger, 68, a resolute
defender of price stability who has spent four decades at the central bank,
is determined to bring it down to 2 per cent.
This will certainly not be achieved this year, nor probably in 1993. But it
is worth recalling the Bundesbank's record in assessing whether it will
eventually succeed. In the inflationary 1970s, west Germany was the only
country to keep its annual increase in single figures. In 1986, it actually
had a minus inflation rate, the first since 1953.
With Germany's finances strained by the high costs of unification, the
Bundesbank is under the most extreme pressures it has ever experienced.
Even Mr Karl Otto Pohl, whose resignation as head of the Bundesbank last
year reflected differences with Chancellor Kohl over post-unity policies,
never had to face the unfavourable publicity barrage that has descended on
the courteous but stubborn Mr Schlesinger.
As the Anglo-German rumpus dies down, with the UK searching for a new
economic policy and Germany struggling to make unification work at a time of
slackening growth, the Bundesbank obviously hopes to stay out of the
spotlight.
But every time an interest rate change is rumoured or European currencies
look like being pulled apart again, the German central bank will be at the
centre of attention. Uncomfortable it may be for Mr Schlesinger and his
colleagues, but the strength of the D-Mark has its price.
