FT  10 JAN 92 / Palestinians seek to build on Israel's unpopularity
THE Palestinians, who have succeeded in securing international condemnation
of Israel's deportation policy, are trying to build on this gain by moving
to the offensive in the next round of Arab-Israeli talks in Washington next
week.
Delegates will press for separate representation and the inclusion of
Palestinian national rights on the agenda.
They believe that unless the agenda is expanded to address national rights,
the outcome of the talks will be reduced to administrative arrangements
falling short of ending the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza and
block Palestinian national sovereignty.
According to the letters of the invitation, forwarded by the US and (now)
Russia, co-sponsors of the talks, the Israeli and Palestinian delegations
were to focus on arrangements for Palestinian self-rule during an interim
period which would be followed by negotiations over the permanent status of
the occupied territories.
The Palestinians hope that the suggested five-year interim period - which
they want to reduce to two years - will lead to the establishment of an
independent Palestinian state, a goal opposed by Israel and not endorsed by
the US.
The Palestinians fear that unless self-rule is linked to a final settlement
involving an Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank and Gaza Strip, the
interim arrangement will turn into a permanent status.
The co-sponsors have asked both sides to present their own models of
Palestinian autonomy. Palestinian negotiators do not expect the Israelis to
present a more advanced form of their previous proposals.
The Palestinians will put forward a self-rule plan based on United Nations
resolutions that call for an Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank and Gaza
Strip and the fourth Geneva convention which is aimed at forcing Israel to
stop activities that might alter the identity of the occupied Arab
territories, such as building of settlements and deporting Palestinians.
They are unlikely, however, to start the battle over the agenda and
self-rule in the coming round unless the issue of Palestinian representation
is resolved.
(In the last round of talks, the Israelis, Palestinians and Jordanians spent
six days in the corridors of the State Department because they could not
agree on a formula for separate talks between Israel and each of the two
halves of the joint delegation.)
Israel suggests that negotiations over Palestinian self rule should be held
between technical sub-committees from the Israeli and the joint
Jordanian-Palestinian delegation.
The Palestinians see the Israeli proposal as marginalising the Palestinian
political role and has pressed Jordan practically to speak on behalf of the
Palestinians. Jordan, which fears that such an arrangement will substantiate
claims that Jordan is the substitute homeland for the Palestinians, has
backed the Palestinian position.
Ironically, the Palestinians derived new strength to press the demands when
Israel's campaign to curb Palestinian resistance temporarily backfired when
the UN Security Council strongly condemned Israel's orders to deport 12
Palestinian activists earlier this week.
They are apparently hoping for Arab backing and that Israeli policies will
lead to its isolation and will drive a wedge between Israel and its ally the
US - three hopes that in the past have failed to bring them very close to
their goals.
