FT  16 MAY 92 / Finance And The Family: Pay rises can be less costly
IF YOU are an employee, you will know that one of the main effects of the
recession is to depress salaries. Unfortunately, most employers look at
cutting costs in this area. However, there is a way that an astute employer
can introduce a pay rise without incurring much additional cost on his part.
By introducing profit-related pay (PRP) as part of remuneration your
employer may encourage you to take an interest in the business in which you
work, together with other employees. In exchange for the risk, as employees
you will receive an exemption from tax (but not national insurance) on the
profit-related element of your salary. As an employee, you will benefit from
the tax relief which may amount to Pounds 1,600 annually for a higher rate
taxpayer and up to Pounds 1,000 for a basic rate taxpayer.
What perhaps has not so far been considered in detail by advocates of PRP is
that the profit-related element may be introduced as a substitute for part
of an employee's wages. The employee should not lose out because the
employer can make PRP-related monthly payments in advance on the profits
actually being announced.
The employer will of course be taking a risk. In PRP schemes, if more PRP is
paid out than is strictly due (because of, for example, an unexpected fall
in profits) the Inland Revenue could cancel the registration of the scheme
retrospectively and all tax relief may be recovered from the scheme
employer.
Your employer has to do his sums correctly and take the right professional
help. But how can he predict profits in these uncertain times? It depends on
several factors. Obviously, the employer has not got a crystal ball but he
can minimise his risks under the scheme as it stands. There are two methods
of calculating the amounts of distributable profits under the scheme rules:
A and B.
Although Method A is much easier to use and generally recommended, the
profits are distributed according to a formula based on the profits in the
current period. This is not possible to predict accurately so it is not
recommended in this particular case.
The use of Method B reduces the employer's risk as the employer works out
his distributable profits based on the concept of a notional amount (say,
Pounds 10,000) which he fixes for the first year in which he runs the
scheme. If he keeps the length of the scheme as one year only, the rules
offer him the scope to set up a new scheme the following year.
The rules allow the effect of profit swings to be dampened. In addition, a
lower percentage limit can be introduced below which profits will not be
distributed. Your employer can therefore make PRP payments in advance with
far greater certainty. However, if there is a loss the Inland Revenue may
recover the excess tax relief from him so he must be relatively confident
that some profits will be produced.
What your employer cannot do is guarantee a percentage of profits in
advance. It appears that the Inland Revenue is automatically rejecting such
schemes. If, for example, your employer tried to convince his employees to
take a fixed guaranteed payment from the PRP scheme in exchange for a salary
cut - the scheme would be unlikely to be registered by the Inland Revenue.
It does appear that the Inland Revenue requires some element of risk from
the employees as being in keeping with the spirit of the scheme.
If your employer is a limited company, introducing PRP involves little
additional cost other than agreeing the scheme with the Revenue and the
administrative expenses. If he is a sole trader or partnership he will have
to make his results public for the first time, and undergo an audit for the
purposes of the scheme. In exchange he may obtain a more committed
workforce.
If introduced at the right time PRP may well contribute to the business as
well as giving the employees a sense that they are participating in the
profits of the company. As there is a move out of recession, employers may
be able to make use of the above method of introducing PRP to the advantage
of both the business and their employees.
Lois de Lord is a tax consultant and author.
