FT  05 MAR 92 / Building a dream on drug marketing: Medeva's two-year growth
to become the world's fifth largest vaccine maker
Two years ago Mr Ian Gowrie-Smith scribbled a mission statement on a table
napkin over lunch with financiers from Credit Lyonnais; before the end of
the century he would build an FTSE-100 pharmaceutical company.
At the time Medeva, the vehicle for this dream, had still to shed the image
of being a speculative stock losing money in its search for a cancer cure;
it was out of favour with the City and its shares languished at half the
price of a heavily under-subscribed 16-for-5 rights issue.
Today, Medeva is the world's fifth largest vaccine maker and the UK's
largest unbranded generic pharmaceuticals manufacturer.
Mr Gowrie-Smith, managing director, has put together a team of
pharmaceutical executives led by Mr Bernard Taylor, former chief executive
of Glaxo, that includes Mr William Gerard, former chief executive of Hoffman
La Roche UK. In 1991, Medeva is expected to have made Pounds 15m profits
from sales of Pounds 80m and the share price has already risen this year by
a third to close at 297p yesterday, a multiple of 34 times 1991 earnings.
What is unique in the UK about Medeva is its attempt to become a significant
pharmaceuticals force without the kind of research and development
programmes undertaken by drug companies such as Glaxo and SmithKline
Beecham.
Its approach is to buy portfolios of drugs, or whole divisions from larger
companies - Medeva's purchase in January of 30 drugs from Glaxo is the
latest example. Medeva then re-markets the drugs, boosts prices and develops
or improves their delivery system.
This marketing-led formula is well-tried in the US by companies such as Ivax
and Forest Laboratories. Ivax was the second best performer on the US stock
exchange last year. Yet some analysts wonder whether Medeva can sustain
growth by simply buying and developing larger companies' older product
lines.
The larger Medeva becomes, they say, the more difficult it will be to find
portfolios of drugs large enough to have earnings impact but small enough
for the likes of Glaxo to be willing to sell. Medeva would increasingly need
to rely on organic growth from its acquired products and that record is
relatively untested.
Medeva's future depends to a large extent on the management continuing to
make sound judgments about what drugs and companies to acquire. Many
analysts believe the Gowrie-Smith/Taylor team can easily run a company with
market capitalisation substantially larger than Medeva's Pounds 580m.
But Medeva's longer-term strategy to exploit international markets and
develop its own products is more troublesome. Mr Gowrie-Smith admits
international growth will be hindered by national regulations and will not
fuel rapid earnings growth for Medeva over the next two years.
Medium-term growth, he argues, will come from the development of its own
products - for example, Medeva acquired the intellectual copyright of an
oral cholera and typhoid vaccine from Wellcome and Mr Gowrie-Smith says this
drug could be registered and in the market in two years.
This strategy moves Medeva and its research team into uncharted territory.
Mr Taylor heads a team that in pharmaceuticals terms is more experienced
than when Medeva's predecessor, Medirace, tried and failed to develop
Contracan, the cancer cure. Mr Gowrie-Smith accepts Medeva is still building
its drug development skill; he says Medeva will have to buy it as part of
its acquisition programme.
Medeva's supporters argue that the company's strategy is as valid now as
when it bought Evans Medical, a maker and distributor of vaccines and
generic pharmaceuticals, in 1990. The purchase turned the company from a
speculative drug developer into a drug manufacturing company with an
earnings stream. The purchase appeared all the more inspired last year when
Contracan was withdrawn from trials, after the US National Cancer Institute
said it demonstrated too little activity to justify further development.
The Evans acquisition also persuaded Mr Taylor to join Medeva. Replaced as
the chief executive of Glaxo by Dr Ernest Mario, Mr Taylor saw Medeva as a
vehicle to exploit opportunities too small for the large Glaxo.
Also in 1990, Medeva bought Thomas Kerfoot, a bulk unbranded pharmaceuticals
producer. Generic pharmaceuticals are the least rewarding of Medeva's
divisions because of intense competition. But had Medeva not made this
defensive acquisition it would now be facing a large cash drain, says Mr
Gowrie-Smith.
Adding Wellcome's vaccine portfolio in 1991 gave Medeva half the UK's
vaccine market by value; MD Pharmaceuticals of California, bought last May
for Dollars 77m, added methylphenidate, an anti-obesity drug. Then last
October, Medeva spent another Dollars 77m on Adams Laboratories, a producer
of of branded generic respiratory drugs.
The strategy, the quick purchases and Medeva's promise of big paper-financed
deals in the next two years has quickened investors' pulses. Yet a few think
Medeva has arrived too late; the US biotechnology and healthcare stock
bubble, on which companies such as Ivax rose, may be about to burst. If it
does, US institutional disenchantment might spill over into Medeva.
There again, Medeva may by that time have used its paper to make another
acquisition, taking the company a step closer to FTSE-100 status.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                              MEDEVA
                           GROUP HISTORY
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
DATE      EVENT                                  VALUE
                                                (POUNDS)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Jul 1987  Quoted on Third Market as Medirace
Jan 1990  Acquisition of Evans Healthcare        85.4m
Jan 1990  Change of name to Medeva PLC            2.4m cash
Jun 1990  Acquisition of Micralax &amp; Coracten
          from Smithkline Beecham                 2.4m cash
Sep 1990  Disposal of Evans' OTC Products        18.5m cash
Sep 1990  Acquisition of Thomas Kerfoot          20m
Feb 1991  Acquisition of Wellcome vaccines       20m
Jun 1991  Acquisition of MD Pharmaceuticals      77m dollars
Oct 1991  Acquisition of Adams Labs              77m dollars
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
