FT  23 SEP 92 / Zero to 130,000 in weeks: The implications of Nissans' rapid
production of cars
THE NISSAN car assembly plant at Sunderland will reach its planned full
production of 130,000 Nissan Micra cars a year by mid November, only 14
weeks after the first Micra was completed.
The Japanese car maker says that is the fastest production build-up for a
new model achieved in the motor industry in Europe.
Nissan's rivals Honda and Toyota start up their first European plants in
coming weeks - also in the UK. Nissan lags behind Toyota and Honda in north
America and behind Toyota in Japan, but it has stolen a significant march on
its Japanese rivals in Europe.
While Honda and Toyota will still be feeling their way at their Swindon and
Derby assembly plants next year with slow rates of climb in output, Nissan
is planning to raise its UK production to 270,000 cars in 1993 from 175,000
this year and 125,000 in 1991.
European car makers are watching the development of the Pounds 900m
Sunderland plant with a mixture of fascination and trepidation. Nissan is
setting new standards for productivity and efficiency, which are unmatched
in the European industry and already bear comparison with some of the best
plants in Japan.
Mr Ian Gibson, managing director of Nissan Motor Manufacturing (UK), claims
that 'on quality we are as good as any volume car plant in Japan. On
productivity we are around the middle of the Japanese league table, but we
are in the top half.'
International comparisons of car plant productivity offer a minefield of
complications - no two plants are the same, model specifications differ
widely and the level of integration in the manufacturing operation can vary
hugely.
But, step by step, the motor industry is becoming more used to shared
definitions for the 'hours per car' expended in the production process.
Whatever the argument over details, Nissan's claimed achievements are
alarming for its European competitors.
Mr Gibson says Nissan requires 12.5 hours per car for its Primera large
family car and 10.5 hours for the new Micra supermini. The hours measure
so-called direct labour in the body welding, painting and final trim and
assembly parts of the operation, a group of processes that are becoming
established as a standard definition in measuring car plant productivity.
However car makers differ on how they measure hours in their own plants, the
size of the competitive gap is startling for European producers trying to
catch up on Japanese rivals.
Mr Gibson says the 'best of the Europeans' need about 20 hours a car for the
Primera's competitors - such as the Vauxhall Cavalier, Ford Sierra, Peugeot
405 and Volkswagen Passat. The average in Europe may be closer to 30.
The start-up of production of a second car range at Sunderland shows that
Nissan's European facilities are much more sophisticated than the
'screwdriver plant' once feared by the European industry.
In addition to a fully fledged car plant with metal stamping, body welding,
paint shop and final assembly, the Sunderland site includes engine machining
and assembly, an aluminium casting plant and a plastics blow moulding plant.
Nissan's workforce has climbed to 4,600, but the total at the site,
including suppliers for components such as seats and some pressed metal
parts exceeds 6,000.
Component suppliers have begun to cluster around the facility - Nissan lists
27 automotive suppliers in the north-east of England, compared with three
when it arrived in 1986. The proximity of suppliers allows Nissan to take
'just-in-time' supply of components to the plant a stage further to what it
calls 'synchronous supply' - some parts are only delivered to the assembly
line just as they are needed.
For example, supply of carpets for the Micra has been cut to a stockholding
of just 10 minutes - carpet pieces are delivered by Sommer Allibert, the
French supplier, from its nearby plant to the Nissan assembly line in
sequence for fitting to the correct model. There are only 42 minutes between
the part being ordered to it being made, delivered and fitted to the car.
Nissan claims that Sunderland has shaved its average inventory for
European-originated parts to 1.6 days, five times better than the next best
in Europe and well ahead of the industry average of 20 days. The target next
year is to get the figure down to one day.
All carmakers are buying a growing share of components from outside
suppliers, but the Nissan plant is already at a high level, with 75 per cent
of the cost of the car going on outside component makers.
Nissan expects to spend Pounds 850m in Europe next year on component
purchases - compared with Pounds 240m worth of components (including freight
and insurance) to be bought largely from suppliers in Japan. Transmissions,
engine blocks and fasteners are the most important items still imported from
Japan. Nissan's component purchases in Europe have climbed from Pounds 220m
in 1990 to Pounds 575m this year.
It now has a network of 195 suppliers in Europe of which only 12 are wholly
owned Japanese companies or joint ventures with Japanese producers.
The Micra will have a European content - by the government's formula of
factory gate price minus the value of non-European components - of more than
80 per cent.
The original Micra design concept came from Japan, but Mr Gibson claims that
more than half of the design and development for the car to be built and
sold in Europe was carried out by the company's European R&amp;D operation and
Nissan expects that by 1996-97 about 60 per cent of its forecast European
passenger vehicle sales (cars, four-wheel drive leisure vehicles and
multi-purpose vehicles) of 700,000 will be built in the UK or Spain. It
forecasts that vehicle sales this year will be 550,000 to 560,000.
