FT  04 AUG 92 / BR widens telecom link: Eurotunnel lease agreement bolsters
international plans
BRITISH RAIL has advanced its plan to supply UK and international
telecommunications services. It will lease from Eurotunnel the rights to use
the Channel tunnel for a communications system, initially for its private
use.
British Rail Telecommunications (BRT), BR's telecommunications subsidiary,
will use Eurotunnel's transmission system for its international
telecommunications service, which it plans to start at the end of next year.
BRT, which operates the largest UK private telecommunications network,
linking it with its trains and stations, applied to the Department of Trade
and Industry in March for a Public Telecommunications Operator's licence for
both UK and international telecommunications traffic. It plans to invest
Pounds 500m over the decade and hopes to capture about 7 per cent of the UK
market by the year 2000.
Such a service would be based on its existing network, and it is exploring
the use of a system of fixed aerials to extend its network's link.
BRT is also examining the possibility of linking its telecommunications
network with that of SNCF, the French national railway concern. It has
ordered a powerful international gateway trunk exchange from GPT
Communication Systems, to link its exchange network to SNCF in Paris.
Mr Peter Borer, BRT managing director, said the development 'paves the way
for more international traffic in the event that we are awarded an
international PTO licence'.
The company has reserved further capacity to cope with expansion, although
if that were to include a public service it would require a separate
agreement with Eurotunnel, as the lease agreed provides only for a
telecommunications service for BR.
The deal with SNCF similarly relates only to BR's private telecommunications
needs. But the talks could form the basis for wider discussions between the
French group and BRT, which is talking to potential partners about a joint
venture in public international telecommunications services.
