FT  24 APR 92 / Leading Article: Overhauling the aid agencies
THE THIRD WORLD is confronted by a hotch-potch of agencies anxious to
provide funds to encourage its development. But this ad hoc system of
development lending looks increasingly ill-equipped to meet the challenges
posed by the fall of communism and the shift to more market-friendly
economic policies throughout the developing world. Rationalisation is
required; what is needed is not fewer agencies but more clarity over their
respective roles.
The many institutions in this business were created at different times for
different reasons; their roles have been fine-tuned over the years to deal
with newly-perceived problems. Together they are responsible for loan
commitments of around Dollars 40bn a year, about 60 per cent of them made by
the Washington-based World Bank.
Beside it are the regional development banks for Asia, Latin America, Africa
and, as of last year, Europe. Since the World Bank can only lend under
government guarantee, a sister institution, the International Finance
Corporation, was created to encourage private sector development in part by
lending to private companies.
Most of the banks operate concessionary lending arms for the poorest
countries and other funds for special purposes. So does the International
Monetary Fund which offers cheap long-term loans for countries undergoing
structural adjustment of their economies.
Net recipients
At present, these institutions are getting more from the developing world
than they are giving - they are net recipients of resources as borrowing
governments pay more in interest and repaid loans than they receive from
them. Increasing the amounts to be lent would be desirable, but only under
the right conditions.
These would include an improved ability on the part of the lending
institutions to channel money to the private sector in developing countries.
The current system discriminates against governments wishing to use the
private sector to develop their run-down infrastructure. That the World Bank
and some of its partners can only lend to governments - and the IFC and
other private-sector lending affiliates have insufficient capital - reduces
the incentive for Third World states to privatise their utilities.
The institutions should also play a bigger role in the alleviation of
poverty and in improving the environment. The World Bank is too big and
remote to address the points of detail that are crucial to the success or
failure of anti-poverty programmes, such as getting the money to the people
who need it.
New questions
There are new questions too about so-called 'conditionality', the terms
under which loans from the institutions are granted. The ending of the Cold
War has raised the question of how much 'political' conditionality should be
introduced. Whether the existence of democracy, however defined, is an
appropriate condition for lending by the IMF and World Bank remains
controversial. But whatever the right answer, this conditionality should not
bite too deeply. It is, for instance, not sensible for the Inter-American
Development Bank to be lending for balance of payments support to a country
where the IMF and World Bank are not lending; but there is no reason why it
should not lend for a road or poverty-alleviation project.
The regional banks do have a distinctive role to play in offering specialist
and informed assistance to private sector activities, many of them quite
small in scale, and in helping to promote social welfare programmes. In many
fields the World Bank is already too big adequately to monitor the results
of its lending.
But to perform these tasks the regional development banks must strengthen
their intellectual resources (an area where they compare most unfavourably
with the World Bank) and move ahead with administrative reforms.
The reform that is definitely not needed is the replacement of the current
fractured system by one overweening development lending institution,
whatever some in the World Bank may believe. There is no monopoly on good
ideas or good practice.
