FT  03 OCT 92 / Schlesinger airs public relations skill
THE Bundesbank president's Bavarian charm was not entirely lacking
yesterday.
Asked by a reporter from England whether he had given thought to
strengthening the central bank's public affairs activities after the
misunderstandings of recent days, Mr Helmut Schlesinger quipped: 'Am I to
take this as an application for a job in our public relations department?'
His comment came after the bank's press conference, at which he was,
however, pointedly subdued.
He made no direct mention of the controversy over the Bundesbank's own role
in the currency market upheavals of recent weeks, at least during the formal
part of his speech.
When asked about it afterwards, he referred questioners to the bank's
statement of Thursday calling for calm and the resumption of 'trusting'
relations with London.
He devoted a large part of his speech to an assessment of economic
conditions in the former East Germany.
As always, he was at his happiest discussing technical matters.
He feigned complete ignorance when asked to respond to a question in English
about recent events, saying that he had read and heard so many words in
English recently, which he simply had not understood, that he had no wish to
say anything in this language.
Alluding to his surroundings in the 19th-century castle at Schwerin, which
used to be the seat of the dukes of Mecklenburg, he said he could not speak
English here as 'up until two years ago English was not everybody's second
language', and he wanted local people to understand what he was saying.
The core of his speech was devoted to a defence of the Bundesbank's interest
rate policy.
He said the council yesterday had decided that there would be no lowering of
interest rates under present circumstances, repeating the view that domestic
circumstances gave no scope for an easing of interest rate policy.
He insisted, however, that German interest rates were not as high as often
perceived, particularly long-term interest rates.
He said that interest rates on long-term government bonds at around 7.5 per
cent were actually lower than before German unification and that these rates
were no higher than the average for Germany over the last 25 years.
Moreover, only three other countries had lower long-term interest rates  -
Japan, Switzerland and the US. 'Really, our interest rates are not so high
as often portrayed.'
He also pointed to the fall in money market rates over the last month,
saying that at just below 9 per cent the overnight money market rate was
0.8-0.9 percentage points lower than at the beginning of September.
He said he was satisfied with the current orientation of monetary policy.
The aim was to keep money market rates below 9 per cent in order to
encourage a reversal of the massive flows into the D-Mark over recent weeks.
The inflows had amounted to DM92bn (Pounds 37bn) in September; but with
rates at current levels there had been a noticeable but as yet
unquantifiable outflow in the last week.
Asked whether he had considered resigning before his term expires next
summer, Mr Schlesinger said 'No - why should I so long as God grants me good
health and I retain the trust of my colleagues?'
It was all very low-key. Indeed, the Bundesbank's presence in the town of
Schwerin yesterday provided less excitement than the preparations for
today's German unity celebrations. Tents were being erected everywhere and
portable loos brought in by the lorry-load.
