FT  11 FEB 92 / Merits of muddle
If political instability does affect investment planning, this could be a
grim year. The 'if' is there because I do not believe that many chief
executives maintain a project file marked 'pending the outcome of the
election'. They will invest when they think it will be profitable to do so.
The course of the economy is set. While we remain within the exchange rate
mechanism and all parties swear to abide by it, a change of government is
unlikely to make much difference - except to the little matter of the chief
executive's net take-home pay after tax. A bagatelle.
The counter-argument is that uncertainty about government policies damages
confidence and therefore business prospects. If you buy this line, get your
head down. An election on April 9 is unlikely to decide anything for
certain. Before explaining, let me record that not everyone agrees. One
distinguished psephologist privately forecasts a Conservative majority of
100. If so, goodbye British democracy; hello Japan. More seriously, some
senior ministers predict a majority of about 40. If they achieve that, we
may have stability, but even 40 is difficult to believe given the opinion
polls and gloomy reports from the Confederation of British Industry.
The polls still suggest that there will be a hung parliament. Last week's
Gallup in the Daily Telegraph gave the Conservatives a five-point lead,
while Sunday's NOP in the Independent put Labour four points ahead. But the
Financial Times monthly average of all polls had the two larger parties neck
and neck in January and so far it is the same in February. The budget might
edge up the March and April scores for the Tories.
That could help. Dr John Curtice of the University of Strathclyde postulates
a post-spring improvement in the perceived economic outlook and a consequent
Conservative lead of 2 per cent in a June contest. His arguments are set out
in a paper published by Shearson Lehman. Even with regional swings favouring
the government the best his model can offer is a Conservative majority of
10. This falls to - 3 if the Liberal Democrats keep only 13 seats (as
against 22 won by the Alliance in 1987). Note that Dr Curtice assumes that
the election will be delayed until June. It could be, but expectations for
an early April ballot are now so widespread that the prime minister is just
about boxed in.
My guess is still that it will be a very close call, with the Tories likely
to come out ahead. If they have a majority of 15 or less then just seven
by-elections (the number they have lost in a row since May 1989) would wipe
them out. They would be in nearly the same weak-to-unstable position as was
Labour in 1974-79. The government would function but it would be obliged to
tread carefully. The Ulster Unionists, who in 1977 successfully blackmailed
the then Mr James Callaghan into Only politicians really believe in the
beneficence of strong government
granting Northern Ireland an extra five constituencies, know how to exploit
such a situation. Perhaps they would try to get Stormont back, on their own
terms.
Enter Scotland. Some senior ministers argue that even if the Conservatives
dwindle to a taxi-ful of MPs north of the border, they can still maintain
Whitehall rule. They would try to run Scotland with ministers elected in
English constituencies, as they do Northern Ireland and Wales. If they did
they would soon learn the meaning of the word instability. Others in the
government would grant full independence if a referendum demanded it. 'I
would expel them,' says one minister. Yet others believe that after the
election the Scottish Conservative party will become devolutionist, as it
was before Mrs Thatcher turned it, and that, if re-elected, Mr John Major
would then legislate for a Scottish assembly with tax-raising powers.
Never mind the consequential reduction in Scottish seats - and therefore
Labour MPs - in Westminster. That is a detail. The Welsh would quickly be
stirred up and suddenly the three main Celtic countries would be trying for
varying degrees of disentanglement from direct rule by the English. The
minister who put all this in my head believes that for these reasons
constitutional debates will take up most of the new government's time and
energy if the Tory majority is low.
In a hung parliament there would be more urgent constitutional
preoccupations. Say the Tories are the largest party. Mr Major stays prime
minister and presents a Queen's Speech. Mr Paddy Ashdown says his Liberal
Democrats would vote against it unless it contained a promise of
proportional representation and a four-year alliance. Mr Major rejects the
bait. All now depends on Mr Neil Kinnock and the Ulstermen.
If they both voted alongside Mr Ashdown in the 'no' lobby Mr Major would
fall and the Queen could call for the Labour leader to try to form a
government. Mr Ashdown might try the same deal with him, and get the same
response. But then again Mr Kinnock might accept a pact on PR. Then . . .
The Liberal Democrat leader has all this on his 'war games' computer. Yet
the arithmetic suggests that the only sure winners are the Ulster Unionists.
So I prefer to put backgammon and gin rummy on my own laptop. Either is more
soothing to the mind.
In any case, I would welcome a period of instability. Only politicians
really believe in the beneficence of strong government. If you draw a line
down the middle of a foolscap page, as Mr Major is wont to do, and write on
one side the gains from strong government (with privatisation and
Thatcherite trade union legislation at the top) and on the other the losses
(start with the poll tax) a pattern emerges. Most of the items on the gains
side merely undo what previous strong governments contributed to the list of
losses - eg, nationalisation begat privatisation, laxity with the unions
begat Thatcherite laws, the poll tax begat its own abolition. Curious, is it
not?
