FT  07 FEB 92 / Fear and loathing on streets of Belfast / A report on the
aftermath of recent revenge murders by the paramilitaries
ON THE street corner adjoining the Belfast bookmaker's shop, where five
Catholics, including a 15-year-old boy, were murdered by Loyalist gunmen on
Wednesday, a sign says 'Hatfield Street - best kept street 1990.'
Yesterday flowers had been taped to the shuttered front of the shop, facing
the Ormeau Road. More ominously, an IRA symbol had also been painted.
A cousin of 18-year-old Mr Peter McGee, one of the five killed in the
attack, sat in the nearby Rose and Crown and sipped a lager with some
friends. 'We are all just numbed,' he said. 'He was a lad who liked to bet
on the greyhounds and loved football. None of these people were Provos.'
Photographs are passed around showing Mr McGee and Mr Jack Duffan, an
elderly man who was also killed in the attack, holding up a trophy won at
last year's All-Ireland Gaelic Football final.
The streets off the Ormeau Road are home to a Catholic enclave, bordered by
several Loyalist neighbourhoods. It has been the scene of numerous
paramilitary killings over the past 20 years.
On Tuesday an RUC officer, who subsequently committed suicide, killed three
people in the Sinn Fein office on the nearby Falls Road.
Mr McGee's cousin said: 'We are afraid. There has been an RUC roadblock for
five months on the Ormeau Road. On the day of the attack, they were nowhere
to be seen.'
Such comments typify the heightened atmosphere of fear and suspicion in
Belfast. Among people on the street, the killings have created a sense of
shock even in a community which is hardened by two decades of violence.
There is a sense of foreboding about what will happen next, a climate in
which conspiracy theories flourish.
The fear of an uncontrollable escalation in violence is a real one in both
Catholic and Protestant communities, especially in the vacuum created by the
failure of Mr Peter Brooke, the Northern Ireland secretary, to get the main
political parties in Ulster to return to the negotiating table.
In a Loyalist bar a few hundred yards from Wednesday's massacre, a group of
people grimly watched the lunchtime television news in expectation of Mr
Brooke's Commons statement. One said: 'If he brings in internment, it will
be his biggest mistake. It will be chaos.'
In the past six weeks, 26 people have been killed in Northern Ireland by
paramilitaries of both sides. The Loyalist Ulster Freedom Fighters have
claimed responsibility both for the RUC officer's attack on the Sinn Fein
office and for the betting shop slaughter. They said they were in
retaliation for an IRA bomb attack last month which killed eight Protestant
workers.
The UFF warned that its attacks would continue. In Dublin yesterday, the IRA
claimed it 'will not be drawn into sectarian killings which suit only the
British'. Officials of Sinn Fein, the political arm of the IRA, said the UFF
was a 'Frankenstein monster' created by the British Army to counteract the
IRA but which had since got out of control.
They point to the case of Mr Brian Nelson, an army intelligence agent who
infiltrated the Ulster Defence Association, regarded as a front for the UFF,
and who was jailed for 10 years this week after admitting conspiracy to
murder five men and other terrorist charges.
The RUC is itself concerned that over the past year, the UFF leadership has
been reorganised and taken over by younger hardliners. In 1990, 18 killings
were attributed to the Loyalists, and 32 last year. In the past week alone,
they have killed nine more.
Mr Sean McKnight, a Sinn Fein councillor for Belfast, claimed that Tuesday's
attack on the Sinn Fein office was not carried out solely by the RUC
officer. He said: 'The people who followed his getaway car say there were
two people in the car.'
The RUC said that 'it has now been established that they followed the wrong
car. At this stage there is absolutely no indication that there was an
accomplice.'
Mr McKnight says there is a sense of insecurity in the Catholic community.
'It may sound paranoid, but a lot of people have begun talking about
conspiracy theories,' he said.
A friend of Mr McGee said: 'This is a Catholic community. Not a lot of
people would support Sinn Fein here, but people here are talking about a
smokescreen, a cover-up. I would feel safer with the IRA protecting us than
the RUC.'
A few hundred yards along the road, RUC officers manning a checkpoint were
keeping a wary watch. It was just one of dozens of checkpoints in the city
yesterday trying to cap the violence.
