FT  27 JUL 92 / Survey of New Zealand (14): Target trebled after visitors
top 1m - Tourism
IN VICTORIAN times, New Zealand's early tourists flocked to see the famous
Pink and White Terraces near Rotarua in North Island until this landmark was
destroyed by a volcanic eruption in 1886. Today, most tourists go to New
Zealand for its scenic beauty and the innumerable outdoor activities it
offers.
For the first time, in the year ending April 1992, visitors topped the
million mark with 1,016,589 international arrivals mainly from Australia,
the US, Japan, the UK and Germany. 'This puts the tourism board right on
track for reaching its target of 1.123m visitors by the end of 1992,' says
Mr John Banks, the country's tourism minister.
Last year, the government formed a private sector-managed tourism board. Of
its budget of NZDollars 60m, the government provides NZDollars 20m , with a
further NZDollars 20m to be awarded, so long as the commercial sector
matches the sum, which it is on target to do within the year.
'This is three times the amount we have previously had and it provides us
with a wonderful opportunity,' says Mr Norman Geary, chairman of the tourism
board. 'We are telling airlines, tour operators and others involved in the
New Zealand travel scene that we are going to put more money on the table to
help them, but they have also got to make funds available. The more costs
are shared, the more benefits there will be for those who contribute towards
them.'
Tourism currently generates NZDollars 6bn (around Pounds 3bn) a year, the
largest single amount of overseas income. In a comprehensive strategy for
growth, the board has set out its plans up to the end of the decade. Its
long-term aim is to attract 3m visitors by the year 2000.
That is a staggering figure since it is about New Zealand's present
population. But the benefits to the industry and economy generally of
achieving this target, says Mr Geary, would be NZDollars 5.7bn in foreign
exchange earnings with 270,000 jobs in tourism, double the present figure.
Was there not a danger that that many visitors would destroy the very things
they came to see? Mr Ian Kean, the tourism board's chief executive, admits
that if there is too much growth, the environment will suffer. 'Growth must
be managed carefully, sensitively and correctly,' he says. The board works
actively with the Department of Conservation and the national parks to
ensure visitors do not spoil any natural attractions.
Investment opportunities exist in abundance, says Mr Kean, and the tourism
board work as a catalyst 'with anyone to make things happen'.
The board has begun a series of investment seminars in some of the world's
main markets to promote opportunities in New Zealand. One has been held in
Singapore and others will follow in Britain, Japan and Korea. The campaign,
the board hopes, will help shatter the myth that New Zealand is clean, green
but boring.
This year, too, Auckland has broken a northern hemisphere grip on a million
dollar-a-day business by winning a bid to host the 1994 world conference of
the Society of Incentive Travel Executives. About 300 travel planners,
controlling budgets totalling more than NZDollars 17bn a year, will see what
New Zealand has to offer.
Ask most visitors what they like about the country and the answer is likely
to take in the unspoilt landscape, the cleaniness of the cities, the
unpolluted air, the friendliness of the people, the Maori culture. You can
find the scenery of the whole world in New Zealand, packed into a country
the size of Britain: snow-topped mountains, rainforests creeping to the feet
of glaciers, turquoise lakes and rivers, wide plains, fiords, fine beaches,
steaming mudpools and geysers.
Older people may like to experience these from the comfort of a car or coach
(there are many organised tours). But now, with the introduction of
lower-cost charter flights, more young people are able to get to New Zealand
and the 24-35 age group - who walk the long- distance tracks, swim with
dolphins, go whale watching, bungy jumping, river rafting and skiing, to
name a few of New Zealand's many sporting activities - has become an
important target market.
Uncrowded roads make for easy driving but InterCity coaches and trains are
comfortable (some have sheepskin seats), clean and punctual. Bus drivers and
train guards give cheerful commentaries; Devon cream teas are served on the
Tranz Alpine Express as it climbs the spectacular Southern Alps, and you can
reach the inter-island ferry at Picton by the Coastal Express that travels
up the east coast of South Island to the Marlborough vineyards.
New Zealand has its share of top hotels but more visitors are discovering
that Home and Farm Stays are good value. These are a fairly new development,
the equivalent of bread-and breakfast in the UK, and a first handbook about
them has recently been published.
For disabled visitors, the country has been called the most accessible on
earth. Every new public building and major reconstruction is required by law
to provide adequate access for people with disabilities and there is a a
guide available for 'the less mobile traveller'.
This year, Air New Zealand, which announced a consolidated net profit of
NZDollars 56.1m in its half-yearly results to December 31 1991 and won a
magazine 'Airline of the Year' award as Best Carrier to the Pacific for the
ninth year running, is adding a fourth weekly flight to Auckland with a
Boeing 747-400 aircraft which, says Mr Bruce Leonard, the airline's regional
general manager Europe, will boost accessibility to many Pacific islands.
Together with Jetset, the company is offering a 10-day fly-drive holiday
from Pounds 997 to include return flights from Gatwick and 10-day campervan
hire. A combination of flights and rental car for 10 days costs from Pounds
1,009 with accommodation vouchers available from Pounds 18 per person a
night.
For two people travelling together, British Airways offers, till the end of
October, one return ticket at Pounds 960, the other at Pounds 360. Several
tour companies have cut-price rates: one, Abta-recognised, quotes Pounds 599
for a return to Auckland. Courier rates, to deliver mail direct to their
destinations, are charged at a third of the full price on BA flights.
