FT  19 DEC 92 / Arts: Alston to leave Rambert
THE BOARD of Rambert Dance Company has just announced that the company's
artistic director, Richard Alston, 'will shortly be leaving his position.'
Alston joined the Rambert as resident choreographer in 1980 and became
artistic director in 1986. The announcement is tantamount to news that he
has been dismissed. The implications are shocking.
Alston, now aged 44, is widely recognised as the choreographer who has done
most to bring British modern dance to its maturity. He was an important
contributor to the repertory of London Contemporary Dance Theatre in the
1970s; his Rainbow Bandit (1977) is perhaps the only masterpiece ever made
on that company. He co-founded Strider, a group which established
experimental post-modern dance principles in Britain. But his use of
technical dance virtuosity marks him primarily as a modern-dance
choreographer, and since the late 1970s his works have also shown
exceptional musicality, most audaciously in response to new or recent
scores.
His work for the Rambert includes a number of artistic and popular successes
 -Rainbow Ripples (1980), Apollo Distraught (1982), Dangerous Liaisons and
Java (1985), Zansa (1986), Pulcinella and Strong Language (1987) and Hymnos
(1988). As soon as he became the company's director in 1986, it was plain
that the company acquired its most coherent artistic policy for many years,
and its work won several prestigious awards.
His recent choreography to Boulez's Le Marteau sans maitre for the Compagnie
Chopinot in La Richelle is exceptional, his finest achievement since at
least 1988; it will shortly be reviewed in these pages and may be shown on
the South Bank next summer.
The subject of present controversy is his artistic direction - or, more
likely, money. Alston's Rambert has been unique and invaluable among our
major companies for making no concession to populist notions of
accessibility. However, the company has not had a great box-office success
for seasons, and this summer had a financially disastrous season at London's
Royalty Theatre. Since then there has been high tension amid the company's
administration. The company's dancers even wrote to the board's director,
Angela Serrota, expressing their loyalty to Alston - to no avail.
The situation is an obvious parallel to that which English National Ballet
reached in 1989, when ENB's artistic director, Peter Schaufuss, was sacked,
and then its administrator, Richard Jarman, was allowed to depart soon
after. (In this case, the Rambert's administrator, Roger Taylor, is expected
to depart early next year.) Few spectators of ENB before and after 1989
could be convinced that the company's board made a wise decision then; few
regular spectators of the Rambert today could think that its board has been
well advised. The Rambert under Alston has had its recent doldrums; but
without him?
