FT  20 AUG 92 / Technology: Bar-codes take on a new dimension
From the talking cash resisters at Cannata's Food World in Louisiana to the
high-speed checkout at Sainsbury in London, bar-code technology has become a
standard feature of modern life.
The ordinary one-dimensional bar-code works by using a laser to scan a
pattern of parallel black and white bars and spaces which carry data along a
single line. The laser scanner reads the information and feeds it into a
computer.
Bar-codes have revolutionised inventory management, merchandise shipping and
parts tracking in industries ranging from general retail to healthcare. They
speed up the sales process and help businesses keep a tighter control on
inventory and data.
Yet the capabilities of today's bar-codes are minuscule when compared with
the possibilities of the two-dimensional bar-code, which holds so much
information that it would allow a cash register to play the William Tell
Overture.
Two-dimen-sional bar-codes are being tested by a number of companies, and
the imminent introduction of a new scanner by Symbol Technologies of
Bohemia, New York, will make them available commercially next month.
The original bar-code was developed by Joseph Woodland, a former IBM
employee and Drexel University researcher. Woodland came up with the idea of
using the rectangular format after seeing the black- and-white patterns of
motion picture sound tracks and the dash-dot-dash pattern of Morse codes.
Woodland and his associates started working on the bar-code in 1948, but it
was not until the 1970s, with the advent of lasers and the drop in computing
costs, that the technology became inexpensive enough to be commercially
viable.
The one-dimensional bar code is practical for processing fairly simple
information. But its usefulness is limited by the fact that only 20-30
characters per inch can be squeezed on to a standard label. Symbol
Technologies has developed a two-dimensional bar-code which can store
roughly 100 times more information in the same space.
The company's PDF417 bar-code works by reading the rows and columns. 'With
one-dimensional codes, the information in the height is redundant,' says Rob
Durst, senior director of PDF business development at Symbol Technologies.
'With two-dimensional codes, there's additional information in the height.'
Other two-dimensional bar-codes work by stacking a large number of
one-dimensional bar-codes on top of each other. A high-speed laser scanner
weaves through the stack until it has covered all the rows.
The PDF417 functions like a portable data file or disposable, paper-based
computer memory. It eliminates time-consuming manual data entry, and with it
an element of human error. In addition, Symbol Technology's two-dimensional
bar-code has an error correction formula to help recover a full message if
part of the code has been torn off.
'We started out inventing a bar-code which developed into a portable data
file, and now we have a full-blown data communications protocol for paper,'
explains Durst.
Symbol Technologies says its two-dimensional bar-codes will greatly increase
the speed of moving and receiving goods, but the possible applications for
the medical and hazardous waste industries are even more substantial.
In the case of hazardous waste, two-dimensional bar-codes could contain
warnings, storage details and disposal instructions, as well as
identification. They could also include emergency instructions, allowing
almost instant clean-up of a toxic waste spill.
For the medical community, doctors in remote regions would be able to get a
patient profile from scanning a bar-code, without needing access to a
central database.
'It's not going to be a revolution you'll notice in 1993,' says David
Nelson, an analyst at Lehman Brothers, 'but conceptually it's clear that
two-dimensional bar-codes will become very common over the next decade and
should nearly supplant one-dimensional bar-codes.'
