FT  03 JUN 92 / Danes say no to Maastricht Treaty: EC's big players likely
to get on with game - The dismay in Brussels is total, but the goals of
Maastricht will be pursued
THE DECISION of Danish voters in effect to kill the European Community's
historic treaty on political and monetary union was greeted with complete
dismay in Brussels last night .
'There is an insurmountable legal requirement that if any one of the 12
member states does not ratify it, Maastricht goes down the drain,' said a
senior EC official. 'We have made no contingency planning for this
whatsoever, because to do so would have further invited what has happened
tonight.'
Brussels officials had counted on history repeating itself in Denmark, which
had shown itself initially hostile to the 1986 Single European Act but
eventually approved it in a referendum by a fairly comfortable majority.
They had also counted on the 80 per cent pro-Maastricht majority in the
Danish parliament carrying the populace. Equally, however, they had rather
discounted as constitutionally impossible hints from the Danish government
that it might call a second referendum if the first went against the treaty.
But it is clear that several important EC governments will not take the
rejection lying down, particularly as the margin of defeat is so small.
Maastricht's opponents may rejoice - among them, those Germans too wedded to
the D-Mark ever to give it up, the far left and right in France, those Irish
who saw their neutrality being lost in plans for a common foreign and
security policy, and quite a broad spectrum in Britain's two main political
parties who considered Community integration was going too far too fast.
However, President Francois Mitterrand and Chancellor Helmut Kohl signalled
at their meeting last week that they would pursue the goals of Maastricht,
no matter what the vicissitudes of ratification. If they choose to try to
call another exhausting intergovernmental conference (IGC) to negotiate 'Son
of Maastricht', then they are sure to be supported by the three Benelux
countries, Italy, and probably Spain and Portugal.
It only needs a simple majority - seven of the 12 states - to set another
constitutional revision rolling, although, as last night's Danish referendum
dramatically underlines, it needs all 12 not only to agree to the final
negotiating result but also to ratify it into law.
If another IGC is called soon, its chairmanship will, iron-ically, fall to
Britain, which takes over the presidency of the EC council of ministers on
July 1. Mr John Major's government, which had managed to reconcile its own
Conservative party to Maastricht by winning opt-out clauses for Britain on
monetary union and social policy, would then have to play a neutral role in
trying to reconcile differing versions of political and monetary union.
While it could perhaps count on most member states tempering their ambitions
in the wake of the Danish setback, particularly if there was still an
attempt to keep Denmark within the full Community club, Britain would be
ill-placed, as holder of the EC presidency, to argue its corner anything
like as vigorously as it did in the 1991 Maastricht negotiations.
Danish leaders, notably Mr Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, the foreign minister, and
Mr Miels Ersboll, the Dane who is secretary general of the council of
ministers in Brussels, had earlier warned their countrymen, and especially
countrywomen (who seemed to have formed the hard core of the No vote), that
rejection of the treaty would force Denmark to seek second-class status as
an associate of the 'European union' which was negotiated at Maastricht. EC
officials see no precedent for such a partial disengagement.
Any Danish rejection of Maastricht will be greeted with very mixed feelings
by the fellow Nordic countries of Sweden and Finland, as well as
Switzerland, which have all now lodged applications to join the Community.
While these three neutral countries may breathe a sigh of relief that they
might not have to subscribe to an eventual EC defence policy, they will also
fear that Maastricht's rejection will jeopardise their chances of starting
entry negotiations next year.
The reason is that almost all 12 member states, even Britain to some extent,
have regarded some 'deepening' of EC integration as a basic pre-condition to
taking in new member states, particularly neutral ones. Indeed, the Lisbon
summit at the end of this month had been likely to agree, on the basis of a
forthcoming Commission report, that some further deepening of integration
like the introduction of more majority voting - beyond that already agreed
at Maastricht - would eventually be essential for a larger Community to
function.
The main elements of the Maastricht treaty provide for:
A phased move to economic and monetary union (Emu), with a European central
bank managing a common currency by 1997, or 1999 at the latest. With less
publicity, but just as concretely, Denmark won an opt-out clause, allowing
it to put its participation in Emu to a further referendum in 1996.
A wider scope of business for the Community, with more say in EC law-making
given to the European parliament. The Danish government in fact welcomed
moves to more majority voting in the areas of social and environmental
policy. But the Danish parliament, the Folketing, which exercises a very
tight control over its own government's EC decisions, has always been
jealous of more powers going to MEPs in Strasbourg.
A commitment for the 'European union' to have a common foreign and security
policy, with some limited provision for majority voting which Denmark, along
with Britain, Ireland and Portugal, resisted.
An eventual common defence policy, to be organised through the Western
European Union. Nine EC states already belong to this, but not Denmark which
has wanted to preserve the Community's civilian image.
Thus, the breadth of Danish reservations about Maastricht - similar in
range, though not exactly in nature, to concerns that Britain had - make it
hard to renegotiate the treaty to please Danes, without the entire package
deal falling apart.
