FT  11 JAN 92 / G-men take to the mean streets
THE end of the Cold War is yielding an unusual peace dividend to crime
fighters on American city streets.
The US Federal Bureau of Investigations has decided that the collapse of the
Warsaw Pact has so reduced the threat of eastern bloc espionage that it can
transfer 300 agents from its counter-intelligence forces to the war against
violent street gangs.
The policy shift will increase the number of FBI agents assigned to tackling
violent crime to 1,925, with special task forces to target gangs in
Baltimore, Dallas, Atlanta and Washington DC.
With a record 24,020 murders recorded in 1991, roughly one for every 10,000
Americans, violent crime has become a bitter everyday reality in the US.
Nowhere is the problem worse than in the urban battlegrounds where
drug-dealing street gangs fight each other to protect their turf.
The Justice Department estimates that there are 300,000 to 350,000 gang
members in the US. Some gangs are local, like Washington DC's R Street Crew
or New York's Vietnamese Born To Kill gang, but several, such as the
Jamaican Posse or the Outlaw Motorcycle gangs, have spread nationwide.
'There are 20,000 Jamaican Posse members; 50,000 Outlaw Motorcycle gang
members and associates; 26,000 Crips, 10,000 Bloods and 64,000 other street
gang members in the Los Angeles area alone,' says Mr Stephen Higgins,
director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, which has teamed up
with the FBI and state and local police forces to tackle the gangs.
Justice officials say task forces have successfully beaten a number of
individual gangs: after a 1989 blitz broke the El Rukns' control of
Chicago's south side, police last October arrested more than 60 leaders of
the Vice Lords, who dominate the same city's west side.
Officials claim success against Philadelphia's OK Corral, and this week a
federal task force led a series of raids designed to break up Atlanta's I
Refuse gang.
Attorney General William Barr says state and local law enforcement agencies,
which handle 98 per cent of violent crime prosecutions in the US, do not
always have the right legal weapons to tackle the gangs.
'They do not have appropriate pre-trial detention, they do not have adequate
sentences and they do not have prison capacity to incarcerate the prisoners
once they're convicted. As a result, many jurisdictions have revolving door
justice,' he complains.
The FBI and the ATF, on the other hand, can use tough federal firearms and
drugs statutes, as well as racketeering laws, to obtain long sentences.
Prisoners in federal prisons serve at least 85 per cent of their term, while
state prison inmates can be let out for good behaviour after serving only
half their sentences.
'Our message to gang members and leaders is this: when we throw the federal
book at you, it will be a knockout blow. There will be no bail, no
probation, no parole. You will be put away in federal penitentiary for a
long time,' Mr Barr thundered.
Federal agencies can also use conspiracy and organised crime statutes, and
the attorney general wants to introduce a new racketeering law tailor-made
to catch street gangs.
But critics charge that the 300 agents will be just a drop in the bucket in
a battle that falls essentially to state and local police forces.
'They, not former counter-espionage FBI agents, have to fight most of the
violent street crime in America,' complained Congressman Charles Schumer of
New York.
