FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (22): More pluses than minuses - Quality
of life in Germany: a personal vie - After six years in Germany, FT
correspondent Andrew Fisher is preparing to return to Britain. Here, in a
personal view, he presents his likes and dislikes about life in modern
Germany
ENVY, one of the most insidious of emotions, lies behind much of the
criticism of Germany which has flared up so unpleasantly in the UK and
elsewhere recently.
It was the impact of Germany's high interest rates and the consequences of
the Bonn government's fiscal laxity in adjusting to unification that sparked
off September's European currency turbulence. Sterling's forced exit from
the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM) led to a degree of bitterness
which laid bare what many foreigners feel about Germany.
Anyone on a short visit can gain a fair idea of what there is to be envious
about in modern Germany, at least in the west since the new eastern states
lag well behind in the prosperity league. But you need to live in the
country to be able to balance out the negatives and positives of life in
Germany.
Here is an attempt from someone who has spent six years in the country and
is returning to recession-dogged Britain. Certainly, there are more pluses
than minuses in Germany. It is prosperous, clean, efficient, and full of
attractive towns and beautiful scenery. Its beer is about the best in the
world, its cakes, bread, and sausages are delicious, and it is possible to
eat well and cheaply in restaurants as well as expensively.
The country's numerous wine and beer festivals - the Oktoberfest being the
most famous and raucous - add a flavour to life that is typically German.
So do the Bavarian beer gardens, where the drink is served in big litre mugs
for those who can manage them and succulent legs of pork (with crackling)
and dumplings are a tasty accompaniment.
In Hesse, the state which contains the financial centre of Frankfurt, apple
wine is the local tipple and the pork mostly comes without crackling.
What else marks out the quality of life in Germany? For one thing, getting
to work is not usually the hassle it is in the UK, where London is the
dominant centre.
Germany's prosperity is spread amongst a host of cities, towns, and regions
so that lengthy commuting journeys are less common. Also, the train system
is reliable; there is little of the overcrowding that often renders journeys
on the London underground such a discomfort and time-keeping certainly beats
that on Network Southeast.
Getting around by road is easy, too. But maybe this is the time to mention
some of the negatives. Traffic jams are becoming more common and that
scourge of modern roads, the tailgating driver, is a common and dangerous
irritant, especially at the fast speeds which many Germans love.
Tailbacks on the autobahns can reach horrendous lengths at holiday times and
weekends as Germans indulge what seems to be a mania for travelling near and
far - anything it seems, but staying at home.
What is certain is that they are not usually journeying to shop. One of the
most frustrating features of Germany is its restrictive shopping hours, the
product of an alliance between employers and unions which leaves out the
consumers' interests. Shops and stores close punctually on weekday evenings
(there is a late Thursday) and have limited Saturday opening. The UK debate
about Sunday trading might be happening on Mars for all the relevance it has
to Germany.
On the other hand, most Germans do not seem too bothered about such curbs on
their freedom. Rules and regulations are generally treated with awe or, at
least, respect as anyone who has had anything to do with bureaucracies can
attest. My wife, a German who has lived long in the UK, has come home fuming
from many of her visits to local officialdom.
Since Germans tend to admire order, discipline, and Leistung (performance,
or achievement), it is hardly surprising that spontaneity and gaiety are not
among their most prominent qualities. Perhaps that is why they migrate by
the thousands at holiday-times to sunnier, hedonistic places like Italy,
France, and Spain, or more distant spots in Asia, Africa, and the Americas.
Fun, it often seems, is to be found abroad and efficiency at home.
That is, of course, far too simplistic. Germans like to enjoy themselves,
and not just in Bavarian beer gardens. A favourite saying is: Man soll die
Feste feiern, wie sie fallen, loosely translatable as 'Enjoy yourself while
you can.' Many Germans are certainly well-off enough to do that, their
spending power bolstered by the inexorable strength of the D-mark.
So why is there a sort of reverse envy about other countries, including
Britain where the pound was worth DM11 when I first visited Germany in the
mid-1960s and now languishes at around DM2.50? It is not Germans who express
polite sympathy when told of our return to the UK - it is the British. Many
Germans like London for its liveliness and variety and the British for their
friendliness and relaxed way of life.
Germans are also uneasily aware that they are less likely to react sensibly
to crisis, based on their recent history, than people in countries like the
UK or Italy. With economic growth fading, social unrest in east Germany
manifesting itself in ugly attacks by mindless skinheads on foreign
asylum-seekers, and more tax increases likely to finance unification, there
is much about Germany that foreigners do not envy.
There are other consolations about returning to Britain. The television is
better, the newspapers more entertaining - disregarding both countries'
garish tabloids - the films are not dubbed, and the service usually more
willing. When these flag, there are always the antics of the Royal Family to
take the mind off recession.
Pity about the beer, though.
