FT  16 DEC 92 / Wanted - potent pair of eyebrows: The names of potential
Bank of England governors have been submitted by a firm of headhunters
The FT yesterday intercepted a fax intended for the prime minister. It is
from the headhunting firm, Sell-Ffone &amp; Crynge, which has been employed in
the search for a new governor of the Bank of England.
Dear prime minister,
This is the final report on possible candidates for the post of governor of
the Bank of England.
I suspect you will want to announce the appointment soon to allow for a
smooth hand-over of responsibilities before s/he takes up the appointment on
July 1. Your officials tell me that an announcement early in the new year is
planned.
Were you to decide to make a controversial choice - and I suspect that is
unlikely - you might wish to take a leaf out of your predecessor's book. She
announced the appointment of Leigh-Pemberton (the current governor) two days
before Christmas in 1982, which is not a time when the press tends to devote
reams of newsprint to a discussion of monetary policy or bank supervision.
As you know, whoever is chosen will face tremendous challenges, perhaps
greater than any governor since Montagu Norman (governor for a record 24
years between 1920 and 1944), who began the transformation of the
institution into a modern central bank. I therefore assume that the
chancellor was making a seasonal quip when he recently told me that it would
be 'helpful to have a turkey at the Bank'.
The magnitude of the job can best be seen from an examination of the Bank's
mission statement, drawn up two years ago by Leigh-Pemberton to introduce
good corporate governance into the Bank. It has three elements: the value of
the currency should be maintained;
the stability of the banking system should be preserved by the work of the
Bank's supervisory division operating under the 1987 Banking Act;
the competitiveness and efficiency of markets in the City of London should
be encouraged.
The way in which the Bank carries out these functions is likely to change:
indeed it is questionable whether it will continue to have all these
responsibilities.
It is difficult to predict how the Bank's responsibilities to maintain the
currency - and combat inflation - will develop. The chancellor recently gave
it a new task of making a quarterly public assessment of progress in the
battle against inflation.
Although this falls some way short of giving it independent powers to set
interest rates, I suspect from my chats with you that such independence is
not completely off the agenda for the duration of your government.
If members of the European Community move towards economic and monetary
union, the Bank's monetary role will inevitably be transformed. It would
eventually become part of a federation of independent central banks setting
European monetary policy.
The governor must also implement reforms to the Bank's supervisory
department, which are being introduced following criticism that it was
ineffective in its role as supervisor of the Bank of Credit and Commerce
International, the corrupt international bank.
I understand you are keeping under review the question of whether the Bank
should continue to be involved in bank supervision at all, or whether these
responsibilities should be hived off to a new independent regulatory unit.
Given that the structural changes at the Bank are likely to be far-reaching,
the governor must possess the ability to think strategically and adapt to
change. There are two other important qualities s/he must have. Governors
are increasingly expected to negotiate face to face with their peers on
complex EC directives or other highly technical issues, such as the linkage
of payment systems or rules governing banks' capital requirements. Technical
expertise and negotiating skills are essential.
We started with 10 possible candidates: Sir David Scholey, chairman of the
merchant bank, S G Warburg; Eddie George, Bank deputy governor; Sir David
Walker, deputy chairman of Lloyds Bank and former chairman of the Securities
and Investments Board; Bruce Patullo, governor of the Bank of Scotland; Sir
Christopher Hogg, chairman of Courtaulds; Sarah Hogg (no relation), the head
of your Policy Unit; Sir Peter Middleton, deputy chairman of Barclays and
former Treasury permanent secretary; Sir Dennis Weatherstone, chairman of JP
Morgan, the US bank; Sir Leon Brittan, EC competition commissioner; and Lord
Lawson, former chancellor. Two emerged as front-runners: Scholey and George.
There follows an analysis of how they match up to what we see as essential
traits for the new governor. PEDIGREE
Until recently, almost all governors have been drawn from the merchant
banks. Leigh-Pemberton was the first clearing banker to be offered the post.
Even after the Bank was nationalised following the second world war,
governors have usually been merchant bankers, including Lord Catto (a Morgan
Grenfell man), Lord Cobbold (in one sense the first career Bank man to
become governor, though he spent his early career in merchant banking), Lord
Cromer (from Barings), and Lord Richardson (from Schroders).
So the traditional choice would be to go for Scholey, who is already a
non-executive Bank director.
On the other hand, the Bank has become far more professional in the past 70
years and there is a precedent for the choice of a career Bank man such as
George. Lord O'Brien (governor from 1966 to 1973) joined the Bank straight
from school.
EYEBROW POTENCY
Traditionally, governors are expected to encourage City firms to act
responsibly by a mere twitch of the eyebrow. But in fairness to all
candidates, the governor's god-like power to influence City events has been
lessened by legislative changes.
A governor's ability to exert pressure by raising an eyebrow at the apposite
moment was greatest when there were few formal rules governing City
behaviour and the Square Mile was a club, with the governor as chairman of
the membership committee. But the 1987 Banking Act and the 1986 Financial
Services Act have provided a statutory framework for financial firms'
dealings. If the Bank wants to prevent a bank from behaving in a certain
way, its ultimate weapon is the law. If it wants to go further and close
down a bank, it must be certain that it is justified in doing so under the
terms of the banking act.
All of which has militated against the use of eyebrows. Nonetheless,
Leigh-Pemberton's eyebrows have twitched effectively over the past few
years. He encouraged Midland to appoint a new chairman and a chief executive
to replace Sir Kit McMahon (who held both posts) in early 1991. Similarly,
he forced the departure of Christopher Reeves from the post of chief
executive at Morgan Grenfell in 1987 and supported the appointment of Rodney
Galpin to the Standard Chartered chair in 1988.
There have been limits, however. His disapproval of Lloyds Bank's hostile
attempts to buy Midland last spring did not deter Lloyds having a go (and
failing).
Scholey's eyebrows may turn out to be authoritative - his dislike of
publicity has succeeded in sustaining an aura of mystique around Warburg.
Mystique is an essential prerequisite for the successful exercise of
influence outside the public domain. George's lower forehead is hidden
behind spectacles and a billow of smoke from an ever-present cigarette.
TECHNICIAN/NEGOTIATOR
The first task of the governor may be to negotiate the setting up of the
European Monetary Institute and the European Central Bank, if progress
towards European monetary union revives. The EMI is the intended precursor
of the European Central Bank and is to begin life in January 1994. It would
have no formal responsibility for making monetary policy, but it is supposed
to be a powerful forum for evaluating EC members' monetary policy.
It is vital, therefore, that the governor, as British member of the EMI
council, should have the stature to defend the UK's position. The governor
must also be comfortable grappling with highly technical issues, such as the
division of national currency reserves in a European Central Bank.
If such skills are the most important criterion, George is the leading
candidate. Since 1982, he has been responsible for monetary policy, market
operations and market supervision at the Bank. On the other hand, Scholey's
negotiating skills have been widely praised - and he is said to be adept at
mastering a complex brief. He also has political skills (I understand he was
lauding your abilities, long before you were considered a serious candidate
to succeed Lady Thatcher).
SANG-FROID
George has demonstrated his ability to keep his head in a crisis. I
understand you were impressed by his coolness during the currency turmoil of
the summer which led to the UK's withdrawal from the exchange rate
mechanism.
Scholey, however, can claim that much of the business of merchant banking is
crisis-management - especially the giving of advice on takeovers and
mergers.
JUDGMENT
This is particularly difficult to assess. It is arguable that George should
have been more forceful in advising you earlier in the summer of the risks
of trying to defend the pound's level within the ERM.
STRATEGIC THINKING
Scholey is probably the only candidate to have reorganised completely a
large international organisation. By merging his merchant bank with two
stockbrokers and a stockjobber - or share wholesaler - he created a new
breed of UK securities firm. On the other hand, the profitability of Warburg
has recently come under pressure and its success in becoming a truly
international business has probably been less rapid than he would have
liked.
On balance, I believe there are strong arguments in favour of both George
and Scholey. The overall thrust of my analysis is that your choice will be
decided by whether you want a technocrat, in which case you should choose
George, or a strategist, in which case Scholey should be picked.
You may be tempted by the idea of trying to persuade George to serve under
Scholey. A minor consideration is that, if George becomes governor, it will
not be easy to find a new deputy governor, since there is no obvious
internal candidate.
On the other hand, we would be more than happy to act in the search for a
deputy.
Yours most sincerely, Gavin Sell-Ffone PS: If you opt for a compromise
candidate, do get back in touch.
