FT  16 JUL 92 / Technology: Mainframes keep up the pace
Downsizing - the shift from proprietary mainframe computers to client-server
distributed systems - has become de rigueur in the computer world. The
trend, driven by the development of high-performance desktop computers and
the growing popularity of 'open systems' software, is used to justify dire
predictions of the 'death of the mainframe' and the impending downfall of
International Business Machines.
Putting the downsizing trend in perspective, a report published this week by
ECsoft, a European software and services group, suggests that downsizing,
although widespread, is not the overwhelming trend that many had believed.
Some 35 per cent of IBM mainframe computer users in the UK surveyed by
ECsoft have already downsized or plan to do so. Another 41 per cent said,
however, that they have no plans to downsize.
The survey also confirms the shift away from proprietary systems, towards
so-called 'open systems' which theoretically give users the option of
purchasing compatible hardware from several different suppliers. Again,
however, the trend is more moderate than advocates of open systems have
claimed.
Neither does downsizing necessarily mean that mainframe computers are
replaced. In most cases the old mainframe is incorporated in new distributed
systems.
Mainframes still have several advantages compared with minicomputers,
workstations or personal computer networks. 'The commercial robustness isn't
there,' in open systems, Steve Coussins, UK managing director of ECsoft,
suggests. Also inhibiting the open systems trend is the shortage of data
processing managers experienced in the use of open systems.
Still the lower prices of open systems are a big draw. Asked to explain
their decisions to downsize or move to open systems, most respondents cited
changes within their organisation - mergers, acquisitions or the arrival of
a new manager - that triggered a review of existing information systems.
'There has also been a shift of power in information technology from the
data processing centre manager to the end user community. Departmental
managers now have their own IT budget,' says Coussins.
The new holders of the IT purse strings have no loyalties to IBM or other
established computer suppliers and are more likely to explore alternatives,
he explains.
Among survey respondents who said they have or will downsize, one third are
planning to use open systems, another third have downsized to IBM's
mid-range AS400 computers, while a surprising 13 per cent switched to other
proprietary systems.
The researchers talked to more than 200 or approximately 20 per cent, of IBM
mainframe computer users in the UK. The sample was deliberately focussed
upon users of IBM's older but still widely used VSE operating system, which
has traditionally been geared towards smaller mainframe systems.
These VSE mainframe users face a dilemma when they come to upgrade or expand
their computer systems. They must either undertake a costly conversion to a
new operating system or make a break from the traditional mainframe and
become part of the 'downsizing' trend.
Not surprisingly, the rate of downsizing among these users is higher than
average. Indeed, the survey reveals that users of VSE are twice as likely to
switch to new types of systems as users of newer IBM mainframe operating
systems.
The survey results are hardly good news for IBM since they confirm that a
substantial number of its traditionally loyal customers are turning to
competitors' equipment. However, those who have labeled the mainframe an
endangered species clearly have a long time to wait for its extinction.
