FT  29 MAY 92 / International Capital Markets: Coventry Building Society in
Pibs issue
COVENTRY Building Society yesterday became the latest UK mutual savings
institution to raise capital through an issue of permanent interest bearing
shares (Pibs).
The deal comes amid growing concern that Pibs have been sold to retail
investors without a full understanding of the risks of holding such undated,
deeply subordinated, fixed interest securities - with unproven secondary
market liquidity.
Yesterday's Pounds 40m issue, lead managed by Kleinwort Benson, was the
eighth by a UK building society. The market now amounts to Pounds 460m
outstanding, but remains only a fraction its potential size.
If the top 20 building societies were to issue the maximum allowed by the
Building Societies Commission, the industry regulator, the market could
reach Pounds 4.4bn.
The Coventry paper carries a 12 1/8 per cent coupon and was re-offered to
investors at a fixed price of 100.749. At this level the paper yields 12.04
per cent, or 3.25 per cent more than long-dated UK government bonds.
Earlier Pibs issues have already offered holders a handsome capital gain as
the yield spread over UK government bonds has narrowed.
For example, the first Pounds 75m issue from the Leeds Permanent Building
Society was launched in June last year at a yield spread of 3.5 per cent
over long-dated gilts. It now trades at a spread of around 2.5 per cent.
The narrowing of yield spread is partly attributable to increased buying of
Pibs by retail investors. Building societies have taken advantage of this
interest by issuing Pibs in Pounds 1,000 denominations, the smallest face
value allowed by the Commission, to appeal to retail buyers.
Kleinwort Benson said yesterday that around 50 per cent of the Coventry
issue had been placed with retail investors.
But the commission is concerned that Pibs may be sold to individuals unaware
of the risks, despite an explicit list of risk factors in the offering
documents.  It has suggested the minimum denomination should be Pounds
10,000 to discourage unsophisticated investors from buying Pibs.
