FT  03 OCT 92 / Arts: Message for the minister - Off the wall
PETER Brooke undertook his first public engagements as Heritage Minister
yesterday. He visited the Yorkshire Sculpture Park and then drummed up
support for the northern branch of the Association for Business Sponsorship
of the Arts: a nice mix of avant-garde and commercial.
Brooke arrives with the advantage of low expectations from the artistic
mafia. His only known arty interest - he is a Trustee of Wordsworth's Dove
Cottage - hardly matches the encyclopaedic musical knowledge of David
Mellor. But the history of arts ministers suggests that the novices to the
field, like Richard Luce, often deliver more in actual results than the
panjandrums like Lord St John of Fawsley.
Brooke will keep a lower profile than Mellor, mainly for security reasons
(he served a stint in Northern Ireland). But while Mellor never got round to
making many decisions Brooke is carrying home bulging red boxes shrieking
with issues needing judgments.
The most important in the short term is the size of the arts and heritage
grant for 1993-94 which will be decided by Mr Portillo and the Treasury in
the next six weeks. Even Mellor, who had John Major's backing to boost
national well-being through a cultural revival, was warning against too much
optimism in the current financial climate. But Brooke, as a newcomer, should
qualify for a boost and could get a grant uplift slightly above the
inflation rate.
Then Brooke must decide his attitude to the Arts Council. Less than a year
ago the Council was on the ropes. The Arts Minister of the day, Tim Renton,
was keen to devolve most of its clients to new regional arts boards, and to
control the grants of the big companies direct. Suddenly this all changed.
Mellor was against devolution. He was also lining up the Arts Council to act
as the distribution channel for Lottery money when that comes on stream. His
disappearance is a bad blow for the Council. If the Whitehall bureaucrats
capture the ear of Brooke its future once again becomes uncertain.
As for the Lottery, this could be the key to it all. Mellor was a great fan,
keen to introduce the Bill before Christmas, and prepared to battle in the
Commons to make sure that the debilitating amendments expected to be tabled
were defeated. It will require a deep *something in here (HP) *
commitment by Brooke to ensure that the promised Pounds 1b from Lottery
proceeds actually comes through to fructify the artistic, heritage, and
sporting life of the nation.
Throw in the future of the BBC, the fate of the National Arts Strategy, and
the little matter of a home for the Heritage Ministry and Brooke would seem
to have no spare time to get embroiled in the long running saga of Covent
Garden. He should. If he knocked a few heads together there his reign could
get off to a spectacular start.
This week's two investigations into the travails of the Royal Opera House
took us back nine years to the Priestley Report and the last major
assessment of its strengths and weaknesses. Clive Priestley, like Warnock
and Price Waterhouse on Thursday, also praised Covent Garden's artistic
output, criticised its management, and said that if the bosses got a grip on
costs the government should give the ROH more money. As a result a little
extra cash was fleetingly provided, a few industrial practices were
reformed. Then both sides gave up the struggle.
There is a real danger that history will repeat itself. With Mellor, its
arch critic, gone, Covent Garden seems confident enough to ride out the
storm. The Board bowed imperceptibly to the critical wind by renewing
general director Jeremy Isaacs' contract for two rather than three years,
but it dug in its heels on its commitment to the Pounds 250m redevelopment
plan and persuaded the Arts Council to allow it to release a sanitised
version of the Warnock report.
So Warnock seems to be issuing the same old threats - if the ROH does not
clear its debts in three years time, well, awful things will happen. The
Council maintains that this time it is serious and wants heads to roll at
management level as soon as the Board makes its considered response to the
two Reports.
But the odds must be on a few cosmetic changes and the Arts Council
continuing to fund Covent Garden unwillingly with minimal grants. The real
issue was ducked again. It was extraordinary that Warnock did not confront
high seat prices, the cause of most of the antagonism to Covent Garden. They
are excessive because the ROH presents too extensive a programme on too
small a subsidy. Management reforms could save Pounds 1m a year but this is
only equal to the box office receipts of four gala evenings.
The report, or at least the brief summary released to the press, also dodged
the issue of the composition of the board. The alternative report, from
Price Waterhouse, recommended a much broader participation by expert
outsiders. The Lottery, and the Foundation for Sport and the Arts, as
potential sources of funding, also failed to get a mention.
Instead the reports got embroiled in the great redevelopment saga. You must
admire Covent Garden's determination to press ahead with a Pounds 250m
commercial project, involving at least two years closure, during an
unprecedented slump in the property market. Perhaps Isaacs does have pledges
for half the Pounds 90m the ROH must provide. If he could announce that,
say, Pounds 50m is in the bag the enterprise becomes viable.
Certainly Covent Garden is becoming the most slummy of the great European
opera houses. But if the recession continues ROH would be well advised to go
for the partial revamping of the back stage facilities, approved by Warnock.
The government (or the Lottery) might well be happy to put up Pounds 10m for
new wiring and some cosmetic front-of-house changes to ensure that the Opera
House has something to offer during the millennium celebrations in 2000.
Brooke could broker a package. A strengthened board and management will
promise to force through industrial changes. If they lead to strikes the
Arts Council would make good any financial loss. No decision on closure will
be made until 1994 when the financial situation could be very different. And
a successor to Isaacs should be appointed soon. After all he, or she, will
have to guide the Opera House though the really traumatic years after 1995.
