FT  09 DEC 92 / Management: NHS reform is a tricky operation - The radical
restructuring of Britain's health service has forced managers to balance
free market principles with public service ethics
Future management histories of Britain's National Health Service will devote
chapters mulling over whether the use of the term 'market' helped or
hindered last year's reforms.
Conservative politicians certainly took fright at it - even in its tamer,
modified variants such as 'internal market' and 'managed market'  - as
opponents drove home claims that the government was commercialising the
service.
The term had the benefit of signalling to the managers of Europe's largest
employer, with around 1m staff, that last year's restructuring went beyond
previous administrative reorganisations and involved a completely new way of
running the NHS.
But there remains confusion among many managers about precisely what sort of
market they are in and what the norms and limits of market behaviour ought
to be when managing a public welfare service. The answers to these questions
will determine how the reformed NHS develops.
Duncan Nichol, the NHS chief executive, addresses the issue by introducing
another variation to the lexicon of market themes.
'We are operating a social market,' he says, 'and while there is plenty of
information about how free markets operate, we know much less about social
markets. People from other public sector systems are already coming to us
and trying to learn from our experience.'
The NHS reforms have separated the functions of purchasing and providing
healthcare and, through the establishment of self-governing trusts, given
more decision-making power to local managers.
Many of the questions about the nature of Nichol's social market turn on the
extent to which these managers should be allowed to behave in a
free-spirited, competitive way.
'Regulating the market, developing purchasers and monitoring providers -
these are the issues and it is important to achieve the right balance
between them,' he says.
Nichol says he 'does not want to be crawling all over the thing', stifling
development and vitality. 'We don't want to over-regulate and lose all sense
of competition.' But the NHS social market exists to deliver a public
service, he adds, and his central management executive must retain enough
control to enable it to intervene if any local developments appeared to be
against the public interest.
The balance is not an easy one to achieve but the government will try to
provide a structural solution soon when Virginia Bottomley, health
secretary, makes decisions about the future powers of regional health
authorities and how they will fit into arrangements for keeping an eye on
trusts. Some of the more pioneering trust managers expect the government to
retain more involvement in the market than they would wish.
A survey published last month by Arthur Andersen, management consultants,
asked senior NHS managers what they saw as their most fundamental future
challenges.
While some of the responses - including handling next year's community care
reforms successfully and meeting the requirements of the government's
Patient's Charter - accord with Nichol's priorities for the coming year, the
managers also raised 'making the market function without undue influence
from the centre in the face of questionable political will' as a problem.
The market mentality may have already contributed to at least one
undesirable side-effect in NHS management. Last summer, Nichol had to warn
his management team away from adopting a 'You have an hour to clear your
desk' syndrome in their handling of staff changes arising from the reforms.
'It is an attitude that some people might think they are borrowing from the
private sector,' he told the Institute of Health Services Management
conference disapprovingly.
Since then, several other local difficulties in the NHS management have
received widespread publicity. John Wilby, chief executive of the London
Ambulance Service, resigned following the failure of its new computerised
control system.
A National Audit Office report has criticised serious shortcomings in
financial controls in West Midlands and Wessex regional health authorities -
in the former case over a consultancy exercise and in the latter an abortive
Pounds 43m information technology programme.
The NAO report added that the transfer of part of Wessex's IT function to
private companies, staffed largely by former employees, had not been in the
interests of the region.
Does Nichol feel the perceived pressure of the market is again encouraging
managers to believe they have to borrow values from the private sector,
taking risks and gambles and adopting management styles that are
inappropriate in a public service?
'I don't think it is a question of managers feeling they need to imitate the
private sector. But we have been working to a very crowded agenda during the
introduction of the reforms and NHS managers have to realise they must get
the basics right in order to earn the legitimacy to explore the bigger
agenda, he says.
'Sound management of public money and attention to administrative detail are
important components of getting the basics right. The normal ethics of
public sector management remain the entirely appropriate standards for
managers in the NHS.'
The team of front-line decision-makers in the NHS management is increasing
annually. A further 128 hospitals and other services will become third wave
trusts next April, taking the total to 284. Still more trusts will be formed
in a fourth wave a year later.
Many of the most competent exponents of the managerial freedoms offered by
trust status were among the first and second wave applicants and the sheer
size of the NHS makes patchy management quality an inevitable problem.
Nichol says the criteria for deciding whether a hospital's managers were
capable of taking on self-government were not lowered for the third wave. If
problems arose over the 1994 fourth wave, he would prefer to take an extra
year developing management skills rather than launching units into trust
status before they were ready.
Next year, the unwelcome terrain of a tight financial regime will be added
to the obstacle course in which Nichol's managers are trying to reach the
goal of a more efficient service.
For the past three years, health has benefited from more generous annual
funding settlements than most other Whitehall departments to help smooth the
introduction of the reforms. Next year will be different. The best prospect
 -if the government's inflation expectations hold good - is for a 1 per cent
real terms increase in funding.
This message has been communicated by Nichol to NHS managers, not as a
policy for containment but as one for growth. He expects his management team
in hospitals and health authorities to deliver a 2.5 per cent increase in
treating patients.
This will be possible only if they hit what he describes as the 'challenging
but achievable' target of augmenting the extra government cash with another
2 per cent in efficiency savings from achievements like treating more
patients with the same resources.
For seasoned managers, it will be just like old times. Although the
structure is different, the real test of an NHS manager has always been his
or her success at keeping the system running when the money is tight.
