FT  29 OCT 92 / Ambulance chief quits over delays: Allegations of deaths -
Bottomley orders external inquiry into computer system
THE CHIEF executive of the London Ambulance Service, Mr John Wilby, resigned
yesterday after claims that several patients may have died as a result of
delays in meeting emergency calls.
Announcing his resignation, Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, said
that the LAS would conduct 'an external inquiry' into its Pounds 1.5m
computer-aided system which was designed to allocate emergency calls more
efficiently.
She said the LAS would immediately establish a support system involving
'where necessary direct voice contact between the control centre and
ambulances' to act as an extra safeguard.
Mr Wilby last night defended the progress made by LAS's managing board in
modernising its services over the last two years, but acknowledged that
mounting public criticism had forced him to resign as a matter of honour.
He said: 'I am deeply conscious of the lack of public confidence which has
been expressed following service failures over the past few months . . . I
have decided that the honourable course of action is to offer my
resignation.'
Criticism by doctors and union officials about the confusion and
inefficiency of the emergency services provided by LAS has been growing.
According to union officials, the issue came to a head earlier this week
when the introduction of a computer system at LAS's central control in
Waterloo led to delays of up to three hours.
Some of Mr Wilby's colleagues suggested he may be an unwilling scapegoat for
government policy which it is claimed has led to underfunding and inadequate
staffing.
Mr Wilby began his career as an ambulanceman 22 years ago. He was appointed
chief executive of the LAS in August 1990 after holding a series of senior
regional posts. As director of the Scottish Ambulance Service he helped
co-ordinate emergency services after the Lockerbie disaster in December
1988.
Mr Wilby will be temporarily replaced by Mr Martin Gorham, deputy chief
executive of the South West Thames Regional Health Authority, until a
permanent replacement can be recruited.
Replying to charges from Labour that the LAS's problems were 'wholly
preventable', Mrs Bottomley said the system's failures had been caused by
'exceptional circumstances'. She said more thought would have to be given to
how the computer system's 'teething difficulties' could be overcome.
Mr David Blunkett, shadow health secretary, urged the government to draft in
'outside managerial expertise' for the service.
