FT  26 NOV 92 / Kohl hits out at far-right threat: Chancellor defends
contribution by foreigners in Germany
MR HELMUT KOHL, the German chancellor, yesterday strongly defended the 6m
foreigners living in the country, and said that rightwing extremists were
threatening democracy.
His warning came as the head of Germany's internal security service called
for an immediate ban on extreme rightwing organisations and the confiscation
of their property.
Mr Kohl was speaking in the parliament three days after neo-Nazis killed a
Turkish mother and her two daughters at Molln, near Hamburg. He said:
'Whoever falls in with this (wave of) xenophobia should consider that
without these foreigners, the affluence of this country would not have been
possible at all.'
He added that foreigners living in Germany had originally been invited by
the government to help rebuild the economy destroyed after the defeat of
Nazi Germany. 'They had contributed 9 per cent, or more than DM230bn (Pounds
95bn) to the gross national product of the reunified country in 1991,' he
said.
'We must not forget that we asked many of them to come here . . . and it's
also true that many of these foreigners are still in (menial) jobs that we
Germans did not want to take.'
However, in an attempt to avoid alienating the right wing, Mr Kohl said
leftwing extremists were also undermining the country's democracy. Interior
ministry officials have repeatedly said radical rightwingers were
responsible for most of the violence and attacks against foreigners.
In a violent incident yesterday, a gang of neo-Nazi youths attacked
prefabricated homes for foreign asylum-seekers in the south-western town of
Weisenheim am Sand, smashing the windows but causing no injuries.
In the city of Kiel, a 16-year-old was charged with arson and attempted
murder for allegedly throwing two Molotov cocktails at a house where
foreigners were thought to live.
Mr Eckart Werthebach, president of the federal office for the protection of
the constitution, warned of the danger that skinhead gangs might become a
'military arm' of neo-Nazi organisations if they were not outlawed.
Neo-Nazi groups had only a few hundred members, he said, whereas there were
an estimated 4,200 members of skinhead gangs.
He said the largest number of extreme rightwingers were the 40,000-odd
members of the Deutsche Volksunion (DVU) and National Democratic Party
(NPD), without mentioning the Republicans, who claim some 23,000 members.
In Berlin, Mr Yilmaz Karahasan, a leading member of the city's large Turkish
community, pleaded with his countrymen not to seek any revenge. Mr
Karahasan, a member of the giant IG Metall engineering union, said resorting
to violence would play into the hands of neo-Nazis.
An opinion poll showed 83 per cent of Germans were afraid of rightwing
terrorism.
Tax rise 'poison' rejected, Page 2
