FT  30 DEC 92 / Parting is such sweet sorrow: As Czechs and Slovaks
separate, their two states will be hard-pressed to maintain their identities
It all began with a war of words over a hyphen,' recalls Rudolf Filkus, who
will be Bratislava's first ambassador to Austria when the Czech Republic and
Slovakia go their separate ways on Friday. He was referring to the bitter
debate over the name of post-communist Czechoslovakia which followed the
brief euphoria of the 'Velvet Revolution' three years ago.
Czechs from the historic provinces of Bohemia and Moravia, who make up
two-thirds of the dying federation's 15.6m population, thought it would be
sufficient to drop the word 'socialist' from the official title of the
federal state and add a hyphen to create a simple 'Federal Republic of
Czecho-Slovakia'.
Months of anguished debate later, the hyphen idea was dropped and both sides
finally approved a renamed Federal Republic of Czechs and Slovaks. By then,
however, no one could ignore the depth, or at least the decibel level, of
Slovak resentment. It is the bitter fruit of centuries of subservience to
powerful Hungarians under the Habsburg empire, only to be followed by seven
decades of playing second fiddle as junior partner to the more populous,
richer, ethnically closer, but condescending Czechs.
It took the emergence of a stocky former boxer with a communist past to
channel Slovak resentments into a nationalist movement, the Movement for a
Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), which promised to make Slovaks master in their
own house and respected abroad. For Mr Vladimir Meciar, the HZDS leader,
victory in last June's general election was seen as a mandate to negotiate a
new and more equal relationship with the Czechs, and to pay off old scores
against Czechoslovakia's morally superior federal president, the playwright
Vaclav Havel.
But the general election which elevated Mr Meciar in Slovakia confirmed a
very different kind of politician as leader of the neighbouring Czech lands.
Many Slovaks identify Mr Meciar as the personification of 'Janosik' the
rustic hero of Slovak folk history. But no one could confuse Mr Vaclav
Klaus, the spiky, punctilious economist who won the Czech elections, with
Good Soldier Sveik, the obstinately dim-witted but good-natured scourge of
Habsburg officialdom in whom many Czechs see aspects of themselves.
Over the past six months these two men have sealed the fate of
Czechoslovakia. With legalistic precision they, and a handful of senior
officials, have worked out highly detailed divorce papers on 26 complex
subjects, ranging from the division of the federal army to apportioning the
foreign debt. They have also agreed to maintain a customs union and the free
movement of goods and people after independence. The two states will also
have separate central banks and ultimately separate currencies after a
probably brief initial period with a common currency.
Within months, possibly weeks, the old Czechoslovak crown will be split into
Slovak and Czech crowns. They will begin life with equal value but most
observers expect a substantial devaluation of the Slovak crown within a few
months. The general principle followed in these talks has been a division of
assets and liabilities on a 2:1 ratio, reflecting the population split.
Both sides appear proud of the unprecedentedly civilised manner of their
divorce arrangements, and both leaders have expressed nothing but mutual
respect and esteem in public. There is a nagging feeling, however,
especially in Slovakia, that the wily Mr Klaus caught the former Slovak
pugilist off-balance at their first meeting, and retained the psychological
advantage through subsequent sparring rounds.
From the start, Mr Klaus made clear that the Czechs had no intention of
bankrolling Slovak independence, and would consider only a strengthened
federation or a split. 'Better a quick divorce than a messy marriage,' was
the uncompromising message that Mr Meciar brought back from his first talks
with Mr Klaus. There was never any suggestion that Prague would emulate
Belgrade, which 18 months ago sent federal troops into Slovenia in a
half-hearted attempt to keep the small republic within the now defunct
Yugoslav federation.
Economically, there is little question that Slovakia's best hope for a
prosperous future lay in remaining firmly attached to the powerful Czech
locomotive. A glance at the map of central Europe explains why. Prague is
200km west of Vienna and the Czech lands were the most industrialised part
of the Habsburg empire. Between the wars Czech industry was as technically
proficient as Germany's.
After the divorce the Czech republic will be firmly anchored in western
Europe while Slovakia will retain only a narrow border with Austria and be
hemmed in by Poland, the Ukraine and Hungary.
The danger is that both halves of the soon to be divided federal state will
be hard-pressed to maintain their future identities. So linked is the new
Czech state with the German-speaking core of Europe that some Czech wits
suggest that their new state should be called East Germany. Mr Klaus Kinkel,
the German foreign minister, was reportedly not amused when a Czech
journalist shared the joke with him at a recent Czech-German summit meeting.
The spiritual fathers of the Czechoslovak state, mainly Czech and Slovak
emigres in Pittsburgh and other American industrial towns during the first
world war, sold the idea of the new dual nation to President Woodrow Wilson
as a Slav bulwark to reduce German influence in postwar Europe. Now the
Czech republic risks ending up as little more than an extension to the
German economy.
Northern Bohemia, with its busy industrial towns like Teplice, even looks
like Germany, with solid round-turreted houses and sturdy factories. This is
no coincidence. Until 1945 this area was the German-speaking Sudetenland
whose 3m inhabitants were used by Hitler in 1938 to justify the first
partition of prewar Czechoslovakia which, when ratified by the infamous
Munich Agreement, sealed Czechoslovakia's fate for 50 years.
While the new Czech republic will be surrounded by prosperous Germanic
Europe, and working full-out to fulfil the rising demand for cheap
industrial goods produced by Bohemian workers at wages roughly 10 per cent
of German levels, Slovakia, where unemployment at 12 per cent is already
four times the Czech level, will become Europe's new frontier with the east.
Nowhere is this uncomfortable reality clearer than at the Russian market on
the outskirts of Kosice, the principal city of eastern Slovakia. Here on a
frozen muddy field, thousands of Ukrainian, Russian and Vietnamese stand in
the bitter wind to display their pathetic wares  - grubby underpants, rusty
deodorant spray cans, used car parts, plastic flowers, cheap homemade
alcohol. Groups of Slav imitation Rambos indicate where, for the equivalent
of a few dollars, pistols, Kalashnikov rifles and ammunition are for sale.
The vulnerability of Slovakia to economic and political instability in the
countries to its south and east can also be clearly seen at the east
Slovakian Steel Works (VSZ), which is the main employer in Kosice and the
surrounding area. The Czech-built plant's output of cheap, high-quality
sheet steel has already attracted anti-dumping measures from the European
Community. Now its entire output is threatened by a shortage of
Russian-supplied fuel in Ukraine.
VSZ depends on a regular supply of enriched iron pellets from Krivoi Rog in
south-eastern Ukraine and Russian gas supplied by pipeline under Ukrainian
soil. Now, Krivoi Rog is short of diesel fuel and VSZ is having to send a
fleet of diesel tankers on a 2,000km round-trip shuttle service to the
Ukrainian city so that trucks can load railwagons with pellets for VSZ.
Without these pellets much of the downstream manufacturing capacity of
Slovakia would be crippled, including the big tank and arms factories. These
were hobbled by the federal government's virtual ban on arms exports but
have been given approval by Mr Meciar to compete for a 300-tank order from
Pakistan and other potential deals in Africa and the Middle East.
Kosice, with large Hungarian, Ruthenian and Ukraine minorities, is a city
which has traditionally looked to Prague to counterbalance what it sees as
the dangerous centralising tendencies of Bratislava, and retain links with
western Europe.
Mr Dusan Klinger, publisher and chief editor of Slovensky Vychod, the
principal local newspaper in Eastern Slovakia, was a dissident during the
Communist regime. He articulates the fears of many Kosice intellectuals
that, with independence severing these old ties, democracy, freedom of
speech and prosperity will slip away from a region which voted heavily for
Mr Meciar's opponents at the elections.
But the approach of independence is also being greeted nervously in the
Slovak capital, which, with its complement of newly refurbished foreign
embassies, government buildings and parliament, should be the main gainer
from Slovakia's new sovereign status. Bratislava's baroque old town,
dominated by its austere square castle overlooking the River Danube, is less
than 70km from Vienna and will soon be connected by improved road and rail
links.
Until now Slovakia has attracted less than 10 per cent of the Dollars 1bn
which has flowed into Czechoslovakia since 1990 and Volkswagen's new Audi
station-wagon assembly plant in the industrial suburbs is the main single
foreign investment. But joint ventures with Austrian companies are the most
numerous, and Mr Meciar's team hopes to build a Mexican-style industrial
free-port close to the Austrian border to attract inward investment.
The hope is that future links with Vienna will prove more fruitful than the
long and subservient connection with Budapest. But it is hard to escape the
conclusion that Slovakia, with more than 600,000 ethnic Hungarians, will
need to build friendly relations with Hungary, with whom it has been in a
bitter dispute over the Gabcikovo dam on the Danube river, as well as with
the Czech republic itself.
Just before Christmas, Poland, Hungary and representatives of the future
Czech and Slovak republics signed a free-trade agreement linking the
Visegrad 4. This is the grouping named after the Hungarian town where two
years ago the central European countries agreed to co-ordinate their
eventual entry into the EC.
Many Czechs and Slovaks hope that full membership of an enlarged EC by 2000
will allow both states to come back together, still as sovereign countries,
but within the over-arching compass of a wider EC whose eventual contours
still have to be defined.
