FT  18 FEB 92 / Arts: Simpson's Ninth, Osborne's 'Venice' - Royal Festival
Hall
Simon Rattle gave last week two concerts (sponsored by Commodore) with the
London Philharmonic - Nielsen, Robert Simpson and Beethoven on Wednesday,
Janacek, Lutoslawski, Berg and Sibelius on Sunday. British critics are
sometimes reproached for treating this young man's work with indulgence and
even favouritism; but after two such exhilaratingly communicative evenings,
so rich in their well-balanced variety, thoughtfulness and spark of
commitment, it's a charge to which one is happy to plead guilty. Any
conductor who succeeds in breaking into a South Bank winter season locked in
grey routine with as much vigour and verve as Rattle summoned up on these
two occasions deserves to be cherished.
The first concert was particularly impressive. Robert Simpson, a composer in
his early 70s passionately admired but still insufficiently widely
celebrated, wrote his Ninth Symphony in the mid-1980s; it was first played
in Bournemouth in 1987 and recorded there a year later, but until last week
it had not reached London (by which time Simpson's Tenth Symphony was
already a year old).
There are reasons, obvious if hardly admirable ones, why an orchestra might
fight shy of the Ninth. It is long (50 minutes), taxing (three movements
given without break), and entirely lacking in fashionable ear-tickling
devices or any manner of audience seduction. By adhering to a conception -
which some call conservative and others old-fashioned - of the symphony as a
vehicle for the intelligible and logical working-out of powerful artistic
ideas, Simpson's music demands attention at every moment. But he repays it,
generously, through the integrity of his vision, the muscular forcefulness
with which he addresses it in musical argument, and the intensity and
consistency with which that argument is carried through.
The Ninth takes the form of two slow-ish (marked maestoso) movements
enclosing a molto vivace scherzo, craggy in outline and stirring in its
climax. The development of the material - puritan-plain in melodic and
harmonic character, capable of being hammered out over mighty spans - will
hardly trouble those listeners at home with the symphonies of Nielsen and
Sibelius; and, given that Simpson is a noted Beethoven and Bruckner
advocate, the influence of those composers comes as no surprise. What makes
this work so fiercely concentrated and bracing an experience is the sweep,
the plain-spoken majesty accrued as the structures build up: it may not be
exactly a lovable work, but it is a hugely compelling one.
Rattle's command of its shape, size and temper betokened the fiery
conviction of a Simpson champion; the playing, though not free of passing
inaccuracy, was properly bold, broad and rhythmically hard-hitting. The LPO
is indeed at its most vital under his baton; the Beethoven Seventh Symphony
on Wednesday and the Janacek From the House of the Dead Prelude on Sunday
were particularly enthralling for the bounteous energy of their forward
movement, whether in large strides or small steps. There was equally
colourful, full-hearted orchestral execution in Sunday's Lutoslawski Five
Songs and the Three Pieces from Berg's Wozzeck - but in both, unfortunately,
Elise Ross's sympathetic personality and musicianly intelligence proved
inadequate compensation for a notably out-of-condition soprano voice.
On Saturday the Philharmonia under Claus Peter Flor played Grieg (a stiff,
poker-faced selection from the Peer Gynt music), more Nielsen (a brilliantly
pungent, characterful and sensitive account of the Clarinet Concerto from
Michael Collins) and Ravel's second Daphnis and Chloe Suite. For the first
London performance of Nigel Osborne's The Sun of Venice the composer himself
was the conductor.
The work, commissioned by and dedicated to the orchestra's president,
Vincent Meyer, is a 25-minute evocation of Venetian light, air and
atmosphere through the eyes of Turner (seven of whose paintings and
watercolours particularly influenced Osborne) and the ears of Gabrieli
(whose polychoral and polyorchestral compositions for St Mark's inspired the
layout for one main orchestra and two smaller groups spatially disposed).
The effect of the first half, as ringing, resonating sounds are passed
across the hall and vast confrontations set up, is pictorially vivid; but
thereafter the absence of any real motivic (as opposed to harmonic or
colouristic) interest, and the consequent lack of dramatic variety, becomes
worryingly apparent.
