FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (30): Ageing
pop-pickers still believe in yesterday - Alternative Investments / The
Beatles dominate a memorabilia market that twice a year draws the fans to
London's salerooms
IF, TUCKED away in your loft, you have that photograph of John Lennon that
he autographed in 1962, or a poster for a concert at Liverpool's Cavern Club
around 1960, or a fan letter signed by one (or ideally all) of the Fab Four,
you own a modern antique, with a value, a small value, at auction.
Sales of pop memorabilia are one of the few sectors of the art market that
have so far bucked the recession. When Sotheby's, Christie's and Phillips
held their annual summer sales in London in August (bunched in the same week
to lure over the big buyers in the US and Japan), they sold around 85 per
cent by value of the thousand-plus lots on offer. Prices, and demand, are
lower now for the more commonplace items, but star lots attract star prices.
This market is dominated by the Beatles. About 40 per cent of the lots on
offer this summer related to the band, and certain major buyers, like the
Japanese, are interested in no one else. There is a thriving replica of the
Cavern Club in Tokyo, to say nothing of an enthusiastic fan club; and many
rich Japanese have their own personal shrines to the Beatles.
Other pop idols are collected, notably the Rolling Stones, Michael Jackson,
Prince, Buddy Holly, Jimi Hendrix and Madonna; and, by dying, Freddie
Mercury has improved his retail value no end. But the Beatles remain
supreme. Elvis Presley material is rare in the UK, and the market for him is
concentrated in the US.
But the UK started pop memorabilia auctions, in 1981, and twice a year its
major sales attract the big players, in particular the various Hard Rock
Cafes, which, in their quest to decorate their dining-rooms with physical
reminders of the stars, tend to underpin the market. There is also a good
attendance by fans who, in the prosperity of middle age, can afford to buy a
memory of their youth.
Ask Hilary Kaye, of Sotheby's, who pioneered the concept and whose saleroom
still dominates (keenly chased by Christie's South Kensington), what items
she is most excited to accept from a mass of, usually rejected, material and
she answers: manuscripts of Beatles songs in the original hand of Lennon or
McCarthy.
In August, she had a wonderful selection, which neatly pinpointed the
commercial pulling power of the four - Lennon out in front, followed by
McCartney, with Harrison and Starr some way behind. John Lennon's lyrics for
A Day in the Life more than doubled their estimate in setting the top price
of the sale at Pounds 48,400, while McCartney's She's Leaving Home trebled
the forecast at Pounds 45,100. In comparison, the lyrics of While My Guitar
Gently Weeps, by George Harrison, sold for Pounds 9,350.
The salerooms go to great lengths to check the authenticity of the material
they offer, and a good provenance improves prices greatly. The late Mal
Evans was the 'gofer' of the Beatles, and film of the boys in India sold by
his family realised Pounds 23,100. In the same way, a sign for the Casbah
Club, where the Beatles played when they were still the Quarrymen, sold by
their former drummer, Pete Best, more than doubled its estimate at Pounds
13,750.
There are fashion cycles in pop memorabilia. At one time, merchandising
associated with the Beatles was very popular, and a pair of stockings
decorated with Beatles sold for Pounds 100. Then a warehouse was discovered,
packed with unsold stock, and this sector bombed out. Copies of the Beatles
fan magazine have also proved remarkably prolific.
But scrapbooks kept by adoring fans can still do well. One, whose enthusiasm
lasted from August 1962 to April 1963, accumulated enough rare photos,
letters, and signings to be worth Pounds 4,950 at Christie's. And, after a
period in the doldrums, gold discs made a comeback in the same sale - one,
from a set of perhaps 10, produced to commemorate the sale of 500,000 copies
of Sergeant Pepper, beat its forecast at Pounds 2,200. If it had been a gold
disc given to a Beatle it would have made much more.
Signed photographs and programmes, letters and fanzines, these are the stuff
of pop auctions. Most items sell for Pounds 500 or less. Only the very rare,
the extremely personal, or the obviously valuable momentos make high sums.
The top price ever achieved was the Pounds 1.77m, paid for John Lennon's
psychedelically decorated Rolls-Royce. The second highest is the Pounds
198,000 paid for Jimi Hendrix's Fender guitar.
One area that is growing in popularity is costumes. In August, Sotheby's
sold the gold basque worn by Madonna on her Blond Ambition tour for a modest
Pounds 9,900. By comparison, Elvis Presley's one-piece Shooting Star stage
outfit made Pounds 128,600 - and a pair of Buddy Holly's spectacles, Pounds
26,027. A stage outfit worn by Prince sold for Pounds 9,020 this year, and
even Bob Dylan, whose grumpy personality should scare off fans, saw one of
his jackets sell for Pounds 6,600 in August.
Only in recent sales has memorabilia been offered which is associated with
currently performing artists: the salerooms prefer to rely on the patina of
past reputations. Death also boosts prices, although a Marc Bolan archive
disappointed at Christie's in August. But so flamboyant are Madonna and
Michael Jackson and Prince that they have forced their way into the public
attention while still in full song.
On the back of pop, the auction houses have started to sell the flotsam and
jetsam of the cinema, with Charlie Chaplin's bowler hat realising over
Pounds 80,000 and a Marilyn Monroe dress almost Pounds 20,000. But momentos
of television personalities have failed to excite collectors.
Most treasured scraps from teenage crushes on pop stars are worthless, or
valued at Pounds 200 or less. Yet the auction houses are amazed at the
quality of goods still turning up, especially relating to the Beatles.
In just a few years they seem to have spewed forth memorabilia like a
catherine wheel. British collectors are well placed to turn up treasures
that will be highly valued in Japan, Germany and the US. And even the most
unlikely objects can find a buyer - this year Christie's sold a small piece
of toast left on his breakfast tray by George Harrison 30 years ago.
