FT  31 OCT 92 / Property: Stately homes saved from the ruins - Many owners
of listed houses do not look after them / A look at ways in which local
government can safeguard history
IT WAS an imposing village house, listed Grade II, in an awful state. After
thieves had stripped the lead from the roof valley, the rain poured in.
'I had never seen such virulent dry rot', said Mike Pearson, conservation
officer of South Northamptonshire Council. 'It was a textbook example'.
But the council thought the building worth saving. It tried to deal with the
elusive owner and eventually served a Repairs Notice in 1988, requiring him
to do the necessary work. When the time limit on that expired, they took a
deep breath and served the sequel - a Compulsory Purchase Order - deciding
to do the job themselves. It was a rare move in the fight to keep a fine
house, but they will soon be rewarded.
The Elms at Eydon, a pretty upland village between Banbury and Daventry, is
now safe and sound, and on the market at Pounds 225,000 with Savills
(0295-263535). The new owner will get a handsome family house, 17th century
with a smart 1830 front added to make a show on the main road to the
important village of Woodford Halse. There is also a large old bakehouse
that will make a fine place for grandmother, or a couple, and an overgrown
garden best decribed as an opportunity.
What matters is that the house is now rot-free, reslated, retiled, and
watertight. It is hard to guess what bad shape it was in when the council
decided that, as the planning authority, it should not just tell others what
to do but be seen to be doing it. 'An excellent example of a local authority
putting its money where its mouth is', said Charles Wagner of English
Heritage which gave a Pounds 60,000 grant under its Buildings at Risk
scheme.
The first job was to clear the rubbish fill from the cellar, revealing the
wine bins. Then architect Andrew Brookes of Rodney Melville in Leamington
Spa and contractors Marriott from Rushden, who both specialise in historic
buildings, set about undoing a rabbit warren of little rooms that the
reclusive owner had forced into the house. 'The partitions went up as he
retreated from the world.'
The house gradually returned to its proper self. As the smell of rot
dispersed, a diversity of spaces and heights appeared which will make it an
exciting place for the new owner to finish. the council has wisely left it a
shell building. All the important work has been done to the highest
standards, and checked by both the council and English Heritage. Now
completion and decoration await. It is an unusual opportunity to reclaim a
period house as you want it, rather than gamely enduring the previous
owner's notions.
Repairs Notices are rare, but councils are using them more under the
Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990. If you own a
deteriorating listed building, it is wise to know what is involved.
The philosophy is simple. Owners have a legal obligation to keep listed
buildings in good repair. If they let them fall apart, the council can issue
a Repairs Notice. This is two-fold: it requires specified works to be done
forthwith to restore the building to its state when listed, and it is the
preliminary in law to compulsory purchase. Usually the council does not
serve the Notice until after it has tried every other way of persuasion. The
threat of the Notice is an effective weapon. And if it is served, most
owners comply quickly for fear of losing their property, though they can
appeal to the magistrates court if the list of jobs seems excessive.
An alternative is the Urgent Works Notice, which does not lead to the
ultimate sanction of compulsory purchase. As it may mean a smaller
commitment and fewer legal costs for the council, some councils see them as
the better solution. Their intent is to provide essential repairs for vacant
buildings. Cherwell District Council is preparing one for Grimsbury Manor, a
superb building on the edge of a Banbury industrial estate near the M40,
which has planning permission to make it a corporate headquarters. But no
work has been done and vandals are wrecking the place. It is essential to
protect it now against the weather, or it will suffer as badly as The Elms.
If the council issues a Repairs Notice and the owner ignores it, the next
relentless step is a Compulsory Purchase Order which the Secretary of State
for the Environment must confirm, perhaps after an appeal (public inquiry).
The council then acquires the building at a market value determined by the
District Valuer on the basis of its use and condition. If the council shows
that it has been deliberately neglected, compensation is minimal. The owners
lose their building, and can do little about it, as the House of Lords
confirmed in the case of Willesborough Windmill near Ashford in Kent. In
1969 the owner bought this 100-year-old windmill, in use till 1938 and
listed in 1951, to turn into a house. By 1983 it had deteriorated so badly
that Ashford Borough Council issued a Repairs Notice. Little was left of the
sweeps and the catwalk round the base of the mill had gone. When it came to
the public inquiry, the owner said he was taking steps to preserve the
building. As the inspector concluded that that was not the case, the DOE
confirmed the Order. The owner went to the High Court, Appeal Court and
House of Lords, and lost each time.
If the council acquires a building in this way, it usually passes it on to a
Building Preservation Trust, or sympathetic developer or individual, as Bob
Kindred, Conservation Officer for Ipswich Borough Council, shows in his
recent report on Listed Building Repairs Notices.
the council may be unique in doing the whole course itself from attempting
negotiations, through Notice and Order, to repairs and sale. It is a lengthy
process which will not be able to cope if too many of the owners of the
37,000 listed buildings English Heritage sees as 'at risk' renege on the
obligations of ownership. But at present it is clear that the councils have
no lack of powers to safeguard listed buildings - though the money they need
may be another matter - and have the backing of English Heritage.
Neither the DOE nor National Heritage has ordered any copies of Kindred's
report, but National Heritage has issued a Repairs Notice, for a terrace
building that was part of the Baths at Matlock in Derbyshire.
Owners, be warned. Look after what you own.
Listed Building Repairs Notices by Bob Kindred Pounds 4 from the Association
of Conservation Officers, 4 All Saints Rd, Ipswich IP1 4DG.
