FT  12 MAY 92 / Survey of Angola (12): Atmosphere of hope / Interview with
Joaquim David, general manager of Sonangol, the Angolan state oil company
Southey: What are the prospects for Angola's oil sector?
David: It is a growing industry. . . and now the war is over there is an
atmosphere of hope in the future.
The companies that began with us in the initial years have stayed and new
ones have been drawn in. We have every reason to believe the upstream
development will continue to grow, and we are also exploring the country's
gas potential.
Sonangol, with its foreign partners, is looking actively into developing
refining capacity. We have one refinery and here in Angola production is
balanced with demand. Although South Africa seems to have excess refining
capacity, there may be other markets where environmental restrictions are
damaging the development of new refineries.
What about onshore developments?
We are in negotiations for onshore exploration. We are close to signing
contracts for two areas. Another is at a very early stage.
You have indicated you will privatise the distribution system, now a
Sonangol monopoly. Has there been any advance?
We are developing a price mechanism which we believe will attract foreign
sector investment down stream. The Ministry of Petroleum has approved the
proposed price structure and we are in the process of inviting companies to
invest. Within the next two to three months we expect some results.
Is there a review of production sharing terms?
No, although we review laws and where there are weak points we make
adjustments or proposals. We have a standard production sharing agreement
(PSA) but we negotiate on a case-by-case basis with investors. We also try
to standardise the fiscal terms so that we have more uniformity and a more
readily controllable system.
Are you reviewing price cap clauses (which give government the benefit
should prices rise above a certain level)?
We made a major change in principle in deep water contracts. Normally in
shallow waters we made a split between Sonangol and the contractor based on
accumulated oil production. In deep waters we are doing it based on cash
flow and rate of return after a certain time. It was a major change which
seemed to please both Sonangol and investors as it took into account higher
investments required for deep waters.
Is there a greater flexibility on Sonangol's part in negotiations with
foreign investors?
No, we have always been flexible. What we have now is that accumulated
experience which allows us to fine tune some aspects.
Has Sonangol sold oil forward?
We have had to commit some oil for the financing of the first big deep-water
development of Cabinda. But normally we make one-year contracts, most of
which are renewable and are linked to credit lines. We have one exception, a
contract that will end in 1994.
