FT  17 DEC 92 / Book Review: Mystery without thrills
THE MONEY CHANGERS By Charles Raw Harvill/HarperCollins Pounds 20. 520 pages
The Banco Ambrosiano affair ranks as one of the gravest and most complicated
banking scandals since the second world war. Prior to the more recent
unravelling of the BCCI and BNL/Iraqgate stories it was also accurate to
describe it as one of the biggest.
The outline of this particularly Italian affair is already known to many in
the financial community. The late Roberto Calvi, chairman of Banco
Ambrosiano, was a Milanese banker with close personal and business ties to
both the secretive P2 Masonic lodge and the Vatican bank (Istituto per le
Opere di Religione). The corpse of Calvi, who became known as 'God's
banker', was found in June 1982 hanging beneath Blackfriars Bridge in the
City of London as his bank was collapsing under the weight of a massive
fraud back in Italy. It has never been clear whether Calvi's death resulted
from suicide or murder. It was initially ruled a suicide, but a second
inquest resulted in an 'open' verdict.
Some Dollars 1.3bn of Ambrosiano money was missing at the time of bank's
crash, and was later found to have gone to 10 offshore dummy companies
controlled by the Vatican. In 1984 the Vatican paid National Westminster
Bank, Midland and other creditors of Ambrosiano the sum of Dollars 244m 'in
recognition of moral involvement' in the Ambrosiano fraud.
By the late 1980s Monsignor Paul Marcinkus, the golfing, Chicago-born
archbishop who ran the Vatican bank, was indicted in Milan on fraud charges
only to have his arrest warrant ruled null and void by Italy's supreme
court. Two years after the charges were set aside, he lost his job and
subsequently returned to America, denying any guilt and yet regretting: 'I
will be remembered as the villain in the Calvi affair.'
This, in abridged form, is the tale. It has already been articulately
summarised in God's Banker, a book written in the early 1980s by Rupert
Cornwell. Now, after eight years of investigation as both a journalist and
consultant to the Ambrosiano liquidators, Charles Raw has produced a
voluminous tome that tackles the story with a wealth of financial detail and
hitherto undisclosed documents.
Raw's main revelations concern how Archbishop Marcinkus and his colleagues
at the Vatican bank made it possible for Dollars 250m of funds to be stolen
by members of the P2 lodge. The author states baldly that for a time Pope
John Paul II himself 'joined in the cover-up' of the Vatican's involvement
in the Ambrosiano scandal. He also cites 'blatant evidence of a conspiracy'
between Archbishop Marcinkus and Calvi to deceive third parties about their
joint dealings through the exchange of a series of letters of 'patronage'
and 'indemnity'.
There are a few moments of light relief in this dense history, such as the
recollection by Calvi's widow of a visit by Archbishop Marcinkus to the
Calvi family's rented villa in the Caribbean, with the Vatican banker
singing Arrivederci Roma.
Raw employs impressive detail to convey the intricacies of the scandal,
whether he is giving the background of the collapse of the Franklin National
Bank, controlled by Calvi's associate Michele Sindona, describing Licio
Gelli, head of the banned P2 lodge to which Calvi belonged, or telling of
behind-the-scenes manoeuvering by Midland, Natwest and other creditor banks
to persuade the Vatican to pay compensation. But ironically, the technical
minutiae that give the book much of its authority also make it somewhat
inaccessible to ordinary readers. Some chapters are opaque, such as one on
the role of Rizzoli, the publishing group in which an Ambrosiano subsidiary
was an investor. Names, numbers and documents cascade through the book,
seemingly there for their own sake, rather than to provide the clarity
needed in such a complicated narrative.
The mysterious death of Calvi, however, is one of the few sections of the
book that is easily digestible. The latter chapters provide a remarkable
reconstruction of the final days of Calvi's life, spent in Austria and a
London hide-out. But they do not arrive at any persuasive conclusions about
his demise.
Freemasons, archbishops, shadowy bankers, spies and Mafia men . . . The
Calvi affair is one of the great real-life financial and political thrillers
of the past decade. So it is all the more disappointing that Raw -
undoubtedly one of Britain's most talented investigative journalists and the
co-author of Do You Sincerely Want to be Rich?, an excellent book written 20
years ago about funds manager Bernie Cornfeld  - has become trapped by too
much extremely well-researched, but rather microscopic, material. As a
result, he frequently loses sight of the big picture.
In addition, he might be expected to draw some analytical conclusions about
the Ambrosiano affair's wider implications for Italian politics and
international bank regulation. He does not.
Bankers, accountants, lawyers and followers of things Italian will probably
find this book fascinating. But the general reader is in danger of becoming
numbed by the endless detail. This is one for the aficionados.
