FT  22 DEC 92 / End of US embargo 'would revive Cuba': Position in Caribbean
holds great promise for export earnings, says Washington think tank
CUBA'S exports could recover quickly and strongly as soon as a market
economy was introduced and the US trade embargo lifted, according to a study
under way by the Centre for Strategic and International Studies, a leading
Washington think tank.
Mr Ernest Preeg, former chief economist of the US Agency for International
Development and author of the CSIS study, says Cuba has suffered terribly
from the cut-off in Soviet aid, which has reduced the island state's imports
from Dollars 8bn in 1989 to Dollars 2.2bn in 1992.
This has caused food and fuel shortages, but Mr Preeg says the most damaging
effect may be the strangling of machinery imports, which is causing a
cumulative crumbling of the Cuban industrial base.
Market reforms and a lifting of the US embargo could lead to a sharp revival
in export earnings, with little of the disruption that has accompanied such
reforms in eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
Tourism receipts and remittances from Cuban exiles, in particular, could
start to flow very quickly, Mr Preeg says, but Cuba's position in the
Caribbean basin holds great promise for earnings from other agricultural
exports as well as from assembly-type manufacturing.
Citrus exports, for example, could take off because Cuba has good trees, and
needs just one year's pesticides to upgrade its fruit from the lowest
concentrate quality to juice or even fresh fruit quality.
Mr Preeg warns that the US should not lift its embargo without human rights
and democratic reforms, since the end of the embargo alone would give the
Castro government between Dollars 800m and Dollars 1.1bn a year of
additional foreign exchange inflows, mostly from tourism and remittances.
However, he argues for a more active American diplomatic approach towards
Cuba, with the development of both carrots and sticks.
Critics of the US's Cuban policy complain that severe damage could be done
to Cuba's economic and social structures while Washington waits for the
Castro government to collapse.
Neither the Clinton administration nor the new Congress, however, is likely
to favour loosening the embargo. State television in Havana claimed a high
turnout in local government elections held on Sunday, news agencies report.
By mid-afternoon, nearly 94 per cent of the island's 7.5m registered voters
were said to have voted.
In the week leading up to the poll, the authorities launched a crackdown
against dissidents who said the elections left no room for opponents of
one-party Communist rule.
Voters in 13,865 constituencies in the election chose one municipal assembly
representative. The elections were the first stage of a new electoral
process which culminate in direct, parliamentary elections on February 24
within Cuba's one-party system.
