FT  21 JUL 92 / PM backs Mellor's media review role
MR JOHN MAJOR, the prime minister, was yesterday at the forefront of a
vigorous effort to rally behind the embattled national heritage secretary,
Mr David Mellor, in the wake of widespread press reports on the minister's
relationship with an out of work actress.
As MPs of all parties sought to underline Mr Mellor's right to personal
privacy, there remained considerable doubt at Westminster over whether he
would be able to continue as the minister charged with overseeing a new
review into intrusive media behaviour.
Sir David Steel, the former Liberal leader, was among many who publicly
condemned the reports of Mr Mellor's relationship as an 'unjustified
invasion of privacy'.
But he added: 'The prime minister would now be wise to shift responsibility
for this subject to William Waldegrave's (public services) ministry where it
belongs, thus removing any possible conflict of interest.'
Earlier, however, Downing Street officials insisted that Mr Major was
determined that Mr Mellor remain in his post with his portfolio of
responsibilities unchanged.
The prime minister wanted it made public that he regarded a minister's
private life as having 'nothing to do' with how he conducted his
departmental duties, they said. The officials firmly ruled out any
suggestions that handling of the new report, now being compiled by Sir David
Calcutt QC, into the workings of the Press Complaints Commission, might now
be passed to another minister.
Mr Major made a point of demonstrating his backing for Mr Mellor - a
personal friend - by making an unscheduled appearance at a celebration in
Whitehall's Banqueting Hall to mark the opening of the new national heritage
department.
It was also revealed that he had telephoned Mrs Judith Mellor, the
minister's wife, at the weekend to express his support.
The Press Complaints Commission yesterday announced it would hold a special
meeting tomorrow to look into media coverage of the Mellor case.
Fat chance of privacy, Page 14
