FT  21 DEC 92 / Survey of Japanese Industrial Review (11): Re-think on
robots - Factory automation
Consider the following coincidence: the two Japanese car companies boasting
the newest, most-highly-automated assembly plants in Japan are also facing
the most severe financial difficulties.
Nissan Motor is losing money this year and Mazda Motor will be lucky to
break even. Earlier this year both opened sparkling clean,
highly-sophisticated car assembly plants - Nissan in Kyushu and Mazda in
Hofu - that are packed full of the very latest computer-controlled equipment
for stamping out metal sheets and assembling cars.
Both companies are having trouble in part because they are now paying for
the new facilities by taking a depreciation charge on the profit and loss
account, at a time when car sales are slumping. Yet, more fundamentally,
questions are now being asked about whether the companies may have
over-automated and thereby unnecessarily jacked up the cost of producing a
car.
It is an open question and when car markets eventually recover the
production engineers from both companies may be fully vindicated. Even so,
it is plain that Japan's biggest and most profitable car company, Toyota,
has adopted a considerably more conservative attitude to factory automation.
Japan's car makers have over the years focused more and more on automation
both because of the rising cost of labour, and because of Japan's long-term
structural shortage of labour. This has been eased only temporarily by the
recession.
Yet Toyota, by some measures, may actually be moving backwards in production
engineering at its newest plant in Kyushu, which is scheduled to open early
next year.
'My basic policy is to make it simple,' says Mr Mikio Kitano, a Toyota
director until recently in charge of production engineering. 'The more you
make it simple, the more you need a lot of knowledge.'
Take, for example, the auto-guided vehicles (AGVs) originally designed by
Honda Motor and installed by Nissan and Mazda in their new plants.
The vehicles replace the traditional line in final assembly. In the
traditional line, vehicle chassis ride on platforms linked together by a
chain, so that all cars in a line move at the same speed and stop and start
together. By contrast, the AGVs allow cars under assembly to move at
different speeds, to go up and down so workers do not have to bend, and to
stop precisely to allow robot installation of everything from seats to
windscreens.
Yet they also raise the cost of installing the line by two to three times
without directly contributing to any increase in productivity. Higher
productivity only comes after spending more money on robots to replace line
workers.
Toyota experimented with AGVs at its Tahara plant which opened last year.
But it has decided against using the apparently more sophisticated
technology in its Kyushu plant and has gone back to the traditional
chain-linked line.
Honda was one of the first companies to achieve fully-automated mating of
the car body and chassis by robot, allowing for simultaneous, precise
bolting together of the car.
The higher precision led to improved ride and handling, yet exact
positioning of the car on an AGV was a key part of this critical assembly
process.
In the traditional line, workers put the car together one bolt at a time as
the vehicle moved slowly down the line, inevitably introducing small
positioning errors. Toyota has, however, decided to use fully-automated
mating while retaining the chain-linked line.
It does this by using two sets of lines, one for the body and one for the
chassis, moving in parallel at precisely the same speed, so that stopping
precisely is not an issue because these two key parts of the car are
attached to each other.
The benefit? A saving in capital cost of about 75 per cent. The machinery
for body-chassis mating in Tahara cost about Y1.5bn; in Kyushu Toyota is
spending only Y400m.
Mr Kitano has a straight-forward philosophy. He says: 'The real intention is
how to make work easy for people. We have not been successful replacing
people with machines.'
Mr Kitano believes that people, who are much more flexible than machines,
are the key to success in the final assembly process. Toyota, unlike some
other makers, is not trying to get rid of people on the final assembly line.
Rather, true to his word, Mr Kitano has focused on how to make final
assembly easier and more satisfying. And Mr Kitano is not overly worried
about the impact of the labour shortage.
He says: 'If we do not make the work easy, we will lose people. If we make
work more comfortable for people, people will stay at the plant.'
He scoffs, for example, at the complex and costly robots installed by
companies such as Mazda and Nissan to attach seats or windscreens without
human intervention. In part, Mr Kitano worries that such complex machinery
is unlikely to save labour because the machines must be maintained and
accuracy checked. Instead, he favours simpler, cheaper machines to help
workers install these parts of the car with a minimum of physical effort.
His engineers have, for example, designed a seat for line workers that
carries them in and out of car bodies to attach dashboard equipment.
He is also sceptical about some radical reorganisations of the production
line. Mazda, for example, has shortened the line by moving assembly of
modules, such as complete dashboards or nose pieces, elsewhere in the plant.
Final assembly-line workers then have only large pieces to install.
Mr Kitano warns, however, that the gains are elusive because: 'This only
transfers the burden to other places (than the final assembly line).'
Mr Kitano has supported one important change on the final line in Kyushu in
an effort to improve worker satisfaction. In the traditional line, bits and
pieces are attached all over the car, one-by-one as it moves along - a bolt
here, a knob there. In Kyushu, Toyota has divided the line into six distinct
sub-sections where a team of workers is responsible for putting together,
for example, a complete dashboard. Mr Kitano hopes this will give workers
more satisfaction, a feeling they are actually creating something.
The final test of Mr Kitano's ideas will not come until the Kyushu plant is
up and running for a considerable period. Given Toyota's enviable record of
innovative engineering, and its profitability, the odds must be that he is
onto something.
