FT  18 JUN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Cuban industry goes
international - The country's first licensing round
CUBA WILL offer eight or nine blocks for production-sharing contracts with
foreign oil companies later this year, and a British company,
Simon-Robertson (previously Robertson Research and now part of the
Stockport-based Simon Group) has won the contract to organise the country's
first licensing round. An official announcement of Cuba's new oil policy
will come on Sunday and presentations, probably involving senior Cuban
industry ministers, will be held in London and Calgary in November and
December.
A number of blocks have already been allocated to foreign companies in
separate bilateral deals. From next August a French consortium involving
Total and Compagnie Europeene des Petroles, which signed a contract with the
Cubans in December 1990, will begin drilling in its northern oil zone
blocks. Brazil's Petrobras, Canada Northwest Energy, and the Swedish
company, Torus, have also been allocated blocks.
The northern oil zone is more than 1,000 km (620 miles) long and between 80
and lOO km deep, running parallel to Cuba's northern coast and extending
into the promising and largely unexplored offshore area. It already accounts
for most of the country's domestic production (15,000 barrels of heavy crude
and and 1.5m cu ft of gas a day).
The southern oil zone consists of about 60,000 sq km, occupies practically
the whole of the onshore area and extends to adjacent offshore areas to the
south.
Cuba's state oil company Cupet was formed out of the amalgamation last
December of the upstream enterprise Union de Petroleo with the downstream
company Cuba Petroleo. At the same time a specialist subsidiary called
Commercial Cupet has been established to concentrate on dealing with foreign
partners.
The country previously depended for 95 per cent of its oil needs on the
Soviet Union, which gave gave its oil industry a distinctly downstream
character. A fourth refinery built by Cuban engineers according to Soviet
specifications has only recently been completed, giving the country a total
refining capacity of 11m tonnes a year. But there is a strong impression
that the upstream segment was tending to lag behind.
The main producing fields, Boca de Jaruco and Varadero, were discovered in
1969 and 1971 respectively. While their very heavy, high sulphur crude has
swelled Cuba's production considerably since then subsequent discoveries
proved disappointing until 1989 when a small new field, Pina, was discovered
in the central part of the southern oil zone.
It has 30m barrels of proved reserves of medium gravity, medium sulphur oil,
compared with the more than 80m barrels of proved reserves in Boca de Jaruco
and Varadero. Cuba has 20 distinct oil basins with in situ reserves
estimated at 1,100m barrels.
Ironically Cuba is now competing with its old ally the former Soviet Union
for foreign capital investment. Russia and the other states of the CIS
certainly have the oil but to date foreign companies have not always found
it easy to negotiate contracts in what is often an unpredictable and
turbulent political environment.
In contrast, evidence from recent visitors suggests that Cuba's commercial
relations with foreign companies are handled in a brisk and business-like
manner. Moreover the country has firmly established foreign investment laws
dating from 1982, which have already proved effective in attracting Spanish
capital into its rapidly growing tourist industry.
Asked if they would welcome US oil companies into Cuba, the unanimous answer
received from Cuban officials is 'yes - if their Government would let them
come'.
