FT  30 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Pay issue set high on agenda - Minimum wage
sparks scepticism - Job loss fears - Employers' concern over expense
THE POLITICAL battle-lines are firmly drawn over Labour's plan to introduce
a national minimum wage, but many observers in industry believe much of the
debate is sound and fury signifying little.
Supporters believe the minimum wage would lead to more equitable
distribution of income for the estimated 4.5m employees in the UK paid less
than Labour's proposed minimum of Pounds 3.40 an hour. Critics say it is a
sure-fire recipe for lost jobs and would lead to an inflationary wage
spiral.
Mr Michael Howard, employment minister, speaking on a BBC election phone-in
radio programme last week, argued that the minimum wage would not succeed in
helping those people it was designed to help and might destroy up to 2m jobs
if employers sought to maintain pay differentials.
'Is it better for someone to work at Pounds 3.06 an hour or not at all?' he
asked one caller.
However, a survey published last week by Industrial Relations Services, the
independent pay research group, found that most personnel managers seemingly
did not share such views and were 'not particularly hostile' to the plan.
Of 527 companies surveyed, 41.3 per cent were opposed in principle, 31.5 per
cent had no strong opinion and 27.2 per cent supported it.
The survey said job losses would 'probably be far more limited than the
government predictions would suggest'.
Not surprisingly, the trade unions are strongly in favour. Mr Pat Jones, a
spokesman for Usdaw, the shopworkers' union, said the suggestion that it
would lead to job losses was 'absolute rubbish'.
He said: 'The same argument was used before the introduction of the wages
council in the 1940s and there was never any evidence to support it.'
There is a widespread feeling in the City, at least, that the minimum wage
is a sop to the Labour left and may even be quietly abandoned. They point to
apparent back-sliding, with the suggestion that its introduction would be
deferred for a year.
'The Liberal Democrats are not in favour of the minimum wage and, if you
assume we will be in the grey middle-ground of coalitions after the
election, then it might be a issue Labour is prepared to give ground on,'
says Mr Alun Jones, head of quantitative research at stockbroker UBS
Phillips &amp; Drew and co-author of a study of Labour's economic proposals.
City analysts say the leisure, textiles, stores, brewing and food
manufacturing sectors would be most affected by a minimum wage.
Yet the effects of a minimum wage are probably impossible to calculate. It
would not immediately compel companies to sack droves of employees; there
would be more subtle attempts to adjust recruitment practices, trim working
hours, and review the grading structures.
Higher minimum wage, more hamburger-flippers, Page 5
