FT  17 JUL 92 / Wellcome Trust in share reinvestment offer
WELLCOME Trust, the medical charity, is offering to buy a range of shares in
other companies from institutional investors who apply for the shares in
Wellcome, the drugs group, that the Trust is selling. The Trust said
yesterday it would reinvest at least Pounds 500m (Dollars 955m) of the
proceeds of the Pounds 3bn sale of Wellcome shares in an index fund.
Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities, the stockbroker, is offering a special
dealing facility to institutional investors, in the UK or elsewhere, wishing
to sell UK shares which could go into the Trust's index fund.
BZW Securities will pay cash for the shares offered to it, at prices
prevailing when the temder offer of Wellcome shares closes. However,
institutions applying for Wellcome shares are likely to have priority in
selling to BZW Securities up to the level of their allocation of Wellcome
stock.
The news pleased the stock market anticipating the reinvestment of the cash
proceeds of the Wellcome share sale. The market reversed an early fall after
the Wellcome announcement, but dropped when German interest rates were
increased. Wellcome shares closed at 877p, down 1p.
The Trust is aiming to sell 330m shares in Wellcome, reducing its stake from
73.5 per cent to 38 per cent, raising about Pounds 3bn from the sale. This
will be reinvested to give a more diversified portfolio with a higher
income.
Mr Roger Gibbs, chairman of the Trust, said yesterday he was 'encouraged by
the indicated demand to date' for the Wellcome shares on offer.
An international tender which opened on July 6 is expected to close next
Friday, after which a strike price will be fixed. Estimates suggest that
bids made so far amount to around two-thirds.
The Trust's concern is over the difficulty of reinvesting Pounds 3bn in the
stock market without incurring large costs, or seeing the stock market move
against it.
By buying shares from institutions to put in the index fund the Trust will
be reinvesting some of the money immediately. Settlement for the sale to BZW
Securities and the Wellcome tender will be the same day.
Mr Simon de Zoete of BZW Securities, said the offer would 'create a
cost-effective mechanism for the Trust to reinvest its money. As a
by-product it will create liquidity for people who may or may not wish to
apply for Wellcome shares'.
The Trust has appointed BZW Investment Management to run the indexed portion
of its investments. BZWIM manages Pounds 11bn of indexed funds. The Trust
has appointed J. Henry Schroder Wagg to advise it on the selection of
investment managers.
The Trust, with the help of JHSW, is drawing up a shortlist of fund managers
for a 'beauty parade' in October, and is likely to appoint five or six
managers. The Trust's four existing investment managers - Morgan Grenfell,
James Capel, Henderson Administration and Fleming - will be on the
shortlist.
Lex, Page 18
