FT  30 MAY 92 / Letter: Cadbury code a diversion from more basic and
pressing need
Sir, The Cadbury 'Code of Practice' received wide comment in your columns
('Cadbury lays out new rules for directors', May 28). 'Proposals receive
boardroom backing,' you unsurprisingly report, with the Confederation of
British Industry and Institute of Directors in close harmony. Lex, more
incisively, sees it as the work of nice men who 'do not wish to be
inconvenienced by too much change'; though even Lex oddly welcomes the
notion of it giving shareholders more ammunition to 'insist on their rights
as owners'.
It was all a monumental irrelevance and diversion from the more basic and
pressing need of improving the strategic capabilities and performance of
British boards. Sadly, the committee seems to have failed to read its FTs
just two weeks ago when Charles Handy ('Priorities and purpose at the heart
of capitalism', May 12) went to the heart of the matter and explained why
'maximising shareholder value', elevated through the 1980s into the purpose,
rather than the conditional requirement, of a healthy, surviveable business,
had become the real impediment to progress. The purpose of a business, for
which its board, not its shareholders, has the prime responsibility, is - in
his words - 'to provide quality goods and services to its customers and
quality lives and work to its people'. The latter is not charity; they
happen to be its intellectual asset base and sole distinctive competence.
The 'corporate governance' debate is anchored in the past. Meanwhile, we
still have no mechanisms for the proper audit and accountability measures of
the medium-term strategic performance of British boards outside the narrow
financial area, against this more fundamental business purpose. Others will
debate whether, even in the narrower area of necessary financial probity,
anything short of regulation will do. Once again, however, the real issues
of strategic board performance were absent from the agenda.
Ralph Windle,
independent consultant,
Cheswell Cottage,
Standlake, Oxon OX8 7QN
