FT  28 JUL 92 / Spratly spat moves into murkier water: China's tactics set
Asean alarm bells ringing
THE conflicting territorial claims to the Spratly islands have been vividly
illustrated in photographs and television pictures released by the various
claimants. The most recent, from Xinhua, the Chinese news agency, takes on
an almost comical air.
It shows three men on a tiny rock in the middle of the South China Sea with
a Chinese flag, a concrete territorial marker and a hut - twice as big as
the rock itself - standing on stilts in the shallows.
Nothing could illustrate more clearly the nature of argument over the 100 or
more atolls, reefs and islets that make up the Spratly islands: few people
would want or be able to live there unsupported, but governments want to own
them to lay claim to the surrounding waters.
The islands - called the Nansha by China and the Kalayaan by the Philippines
 -are scattered along the shipping route between the Indian Ocean and
north-east Asia, and are believed to have oil and gas deposits under the
seabed.
The main protagonists in the dispute are China and Vietnam, but Taiwan,
Malaysia, the Philippines and Brunei also lay claim to all or some of the
Spratlys. With the exception of the small sultanate of Brunei, all have
troops stationed in the archipelago.
At a south-east Asian summit six months ago, nobody gave much thought to a
dispute which has simmered since the second world war and only occasionally
erupted into violence.
In February, however, China passed a law reaffirming its sovereignty over
almost the entire South China Sea and reserving the right to use military
force to defend its claims. Vietnam protested. So did Japan, because the
Chinese law also embraced a group of islands claimed by Tokyo in the East
China Sea.
In May, as if to underline the message that the South China Sea was not
called the South China Sea for nothing, the Chinese authorities signed an
agreement with Crestone Energy Corp of Denver to explore for oil between
Vietnam and Malaysia.
The concession area is regarded by Vietnam as part of its continental shelf
and lies about 1,000km south of the Chinese island of Hainan. Vietnam, which
says it lost 72 men and three vessels in a battle with China over the
Spratlys in 1988, protested again.
Japan and the six members of the Association of South East Asian Nations
(Asean) - Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and
Thailand - have watched China's forays into the Spratlys with growing alarm.
At a meeting of foreign ministers in Manila last week, Malaysia said it was
watching events with 'grave concern'; the Philippines said a solution should
be urgently sought to avoid 'perilous developments'; and Indonesia spoke of
the danger of 'mutually destructive confrontation'.
Although only the Filipinos were openly prepared to admit it, there was
considerable debate over the risk of Chinese expansionism and the
desirability of continued US and Russian military deployment in the region
to provide a 'balance of forces'.
Mr Qian Qichen, the Chinese foreign minister who was a guest at the meeting,
denied that China was seeking regional hegemony. China, he said, wanted to
shelve disputes and proceed with 'joint development' of the Spratlys.
However, Asean ministers were apparently unable to elicit an explanation as
to how China reconciled its 1991 rapprochement with Vietnam and its talk of
'joint development' with the planting of new territorial markers on the
atolls and the unilateral decision to award an exploration contract to
Crestone.
The region's optimists say it was inevitable that irritating disputes like
the Spratlys would surface once the cold war ended. They believe that China,
preoccupied with domestic politics and the strains of economic growth, is
testing the mettle of its neighbours with its recent activities in the South
China Sea.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the British foreign secretary, told the Asean meeting how
much the region had progressed since he first came to Manila as a young
diplomat in the 1950s.
The pessimists, despite claims by the US and Russia that each intends to
remain a Pacific power, view the end of the cold war and the closure of US
bases in the Philippines with foreboding. They see China as a potential
regional bully whose influence is already visible in Beijing's support for
the Burmese junta and the Khmer Rouge guerrillas in Cambodia.
'The Chinese will have the option to use 'gunboat diplomacy' as a means to
achieving their political objectives,' wrote Tai Ming Cheung in a paper on
the growth of Chinese naval power for the Institute of South East Asian
Studies. 'As the navy grows stronger, the chances of conflict over the
Spratlys becomes an increasingly real possibility, unless a satisfactory
diplomatic solution can be found in the next few years.' The paper was
published in 1990.
