FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Labour retains Welsh heartland
THE TORY dream of chal-lenging Labour superiority in its south Wales
heartland lay in tatters yesterday - while Plaid Cymru, the Welsh
nationalist party, was celebrating the fact that it now has more MPs than
the higher-profile Scottish National party.
From a record 14 of the principality's 38 seats in 1983, the Tories dropped
to six in 1987, a figure they could not improve on yesterday. 'A mixed bag,'
Mr David Hunt, Welsh secretary, called the results.
The six included retaking three by-election losses - Monmouth and the Vale
of Glamorgan from Labour and Brecon and Radnor from the Liberal Democrats.
The Tories lost Delyn, Pembroke and Cardiff Central to Labour.
The Brecon result, an-nounced just after lunch yesterday after a recount,
means that for the second election running Wales has the seat with the
smallest majority in Britain. Five years ago Mr Richard Livsey held the seat
by 56. Now Mr Walter Sweeney has a majority of 17.
If the Conservative dream has been badly dented Plaid has every reason to be
pleased. Although a minuscule force in terms of votes cast, the party
increased its number of seats from three to four by capturing Ceredigion and
Pembroke North from the Liberal Democrats and ran Labour a very close second
in Carmarthen.
Mr Dafydd Williams, Plaid secretary, said the party had 'now come out of its
Gwynedd fortress'. Plaid's three seats in the last parliament had all been
won in the one Welsh county where Welsh is very much the medium of
conversation.
Mr Dafydd Wigley, the party leader and MP for Caernarfon, pointed out that
Plaid still had to win substantial votes in the industrial valleys of south
Wales. Here its share of the vote was very small: 1,659 in Gower, 1,606 in
Mr Neil Kinnock's Islwyn, 716 in Newport East and 653 in Newport West.
With the Liberal Democrats losing two of their three seats, Wales remains
what it has been since the early 1920s - Labour territory. Labour made a net
gain of one seat, taking its total to 27 out of the 38 available.
Labour polled well in Wales and pushed up its majorities handsomely.
Mr Alun Michael, returned for Cardiff South and Penarth, and more than
doubling his majority, said: 'We have come out of the election with
increased authority. The result nationally was disappointing but we can be
satisfied with that in Wales.'
The question of devolution was never a real issue but whether it will recede
from the voters' minds is another matter. Mr Michael said there was 'a
consensus among all parties of a need for change'. Welsh secretary Mr David
Hunt would not necessarily agree with him.
