FT  21 AUG 92 / Reichmanns offer to cede voting control of O&amp;Y
CANADA'S Reichmann family is willing to give up voting control of Olympia &amp;
York Developments as part of a restructuring plan for the ailing Canadian
real estate developer.
Outlining proposals made to 27 different groups of creditors, senior O&amp;Y
officials also disclosed yesterday that the Reichmanns have offered to
contribute their directly held 20 per cent stake in O&amp;Y's US operations to
the restructured parent company, as well as a number of Canadian properties
owned by the family.
Further details of the offers to creditors will be submitted to an Ontario
court today, although in some cases only general principles will be
disclosed.
Mr Gerald Greenwald, O&amp;Y's president, and Mr Steve Miller, the company's
chief financial adviser, said that O&amp;Y is 'very close' to reaching
agreements in principle with lenders to five of the company's 11 major
projects in Canada.
They said that substantial progress had been made with another four groups.
Creditors have generally been less optimistic about the course of the
negotiations.
Mr Paul Reichmann has organised a group willing to invest Pounds 350m
(Dollars 668.5m) in the Canary Wharf project in London's Docklands.
Mr Greenwald said that discussions were continuing with the project's
administrators, lenders and the investor group.
Negotiations are also continuing with lenders to US operations, which are
not included in the court protection orders sought by O&amp;Y in Canada and the
UK last May.
Mr Greenwald said that completion of the US negotiations was likely to take
'several more months'.
The latest restructuring proposal envisages no new credit lines. Under the
plan, all creditors, other than those with loans to specific projects and
joint ventures, would participate in O&amp;Y's equity.
Initially, 49 per cent of the company's equity would be distributed.
This could rise to 80 per cent under a proposal that unsecured creditors
exchange their claims for bonds convertible into additional common shares
after five years.
A gruelling path, Page 19
