FT  14 SEP 92 / Shadow ministers challenge Smith on Maastricht
MR JOHN SMITH faced a direct challenge to his authority as Labour leader
yesterday when three members of the shadow cabinet joined forces to attack
his strategy over Maastricht and the pound.
The challenge, on the eve of today's meeting of the national executive, came
as Mr John Major faced pressure to announce a decision on the nomination of
Mr Neil Kinnock, the former opposition leader, as Britain's second
commissioner in Brussels.
The row will overshadow the launch at the NEC of Mr Smith's first formal
statement of his priorities for Labour in a policy document entitled Agenda
for Change.
The document, setting out a series of principles to guide the party's
policymaking, calls for a determined effort to win back the support of the
'aspiring' classes whose fear of a Labour victory cost it the last election.
The aim is to rid the opposition of its image as the 'party of the producer'
and cast it instead in the role of the champion of the individual against
all vested interests.
Divisions within the shadow cabinet over Mr Smith's support for the
Maastricht treaty and his refusal to back a devaluation of the pound have
been simmering for more than a week. But yesterday they turned into outright
rebellion.
Mr Bryan Gould, the shadow heritage secretary and the most outspoken critic
of official policy, was joined by Mr Michael Meacher and Mr David Blunkett
in public calls for a referendum on the treaty.
Mr Blunkett, the shadow health secretary, and Mr Meacher, the overseas aid
spokesman, said they would table amendments on the issues to the policy
document which the NEC will discuss in advance of the party's Blackpool
conference later this month.
In a blunt challenge to Mr Smith, Mr Blunkett told BBC radio that: 'The
unity expected of us in the shadow cabinet should not be the unity of the
graveyard'.
Mr Meacher said that the constitutional issues raised by the treaty on
European union were such that they could only be decided after 'direct
consultation' with the British people.
The three rebels believe that they are reflecting growing disillusion within
the rank and file of the Labour party with Mr Smith's apparent refusal to
attack the government's economic and European strategies.
Mr Gould signalled yesterday that he was not planning to resign on the
issue. But some of his colleagues believe that the shadow heritage secretary
 -who turned down the more important health and education portfolios in July
 -is ready to force Mr Smith effectively to sack him.
