FT  24 DEC 92 / UN still wrangling over Bosnia resolution
MEMBERS of the United Nations Security Council are still at odds over a
resolution on the enforcement of the no-fly zone the UN has declared over
Bosnia, and diplomats do not expect a text to be agreed before Christmas.
Main points at issue are the length of the deadline to be given to Serbia,
and how much force to use to enforce the ban on military flights, as well as
the traditional UN argument over who should be in command.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation yesterday agreed to forward
enforcement options to the UN, including combat aircraft patrols to deter
Serbian aircraft from taking off, downing aircraft infringing the no-fly
zone, and bombing Serbian airfields.
Some US officials have argued for this last option as the most effective way
of enforcing the zone - especially as fighter patrols would have limited
effect on the hedge-hopping helicopters which are the principal violators of
the zone. The US also wants a short deadline, possibly as little as 15 days.
France and the UK, which both have troops in Bosnia, want only the minimum
necessary force to be used, and argue for a substantial delay before any
enforcement action is taken against Serbian aircraft.
They question whether action as drastic as bombing airstrips is necessary
when the number of violations of the no-fly zone is diminishing and when UN
relief flights are once again getting into Sarajevo.
However, Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN secretary general, yesterday reported
that allied aircraft had last week spotted warplanes over Bosnia, whereas
the Serbs had previously been thought to be flying only supply aircraft into
the no-fly zone.
Complicating the debate is the question of sending UN peace-keepers into
Kosovo to head off any possible Serbian aggression there. Some diplomats
argue that it would be better to get these observers into Kosovo before
embarking on an open conflict with Serbia over the no-fly issue.
But these practical points, and the underlying concerns about the safety of
UN troops now on the ground in Bosnia, reflect a deeper philosophical debate
over the boundary between peace-keeping and peace-making.
Mr Boutros Ghali argues that if enforcement is to be undertaken the UN
peace-keepers must be withdrawn and the relief operation halted.
The UN's dilemma is that, barring voluntary compliance by the Serbs,
effective enforcement of the no-fly zone over Bosnia must go far beyond
simple policing and into military hostilities against Serbia.
