FT  03 AUG 92 / A strike at the heart of the democratic struggle: South
Africa is bracing itself for an unprecedented week of industrial action and
demonstrations
South Africa's struggle for democracy this week enters its most perilous
stage since Mr Nelson Mandela's release two and a half years ago.
Ravaged by political violence, its leaders at loggerheads, and the economy
deep in recession, the country is bracing itself for a 48-hour general
strike that begins today.
It marks the start of an unprecedented week of industrial action, partly a
protest against the slaughter that the government seems either unable or
unwilling to halt, partly an effort to jolt President FW de Klerk into an
acceptance of majority rule.
Mr Mandela, the African National Congress (ANC) president, however, may find
himself hoist by his own petard. The week ahead could prove to be less a
challenge to Mr de Klerk's authority than a test of his own leadership.
Within the ranks of the ANC and its main allies - the South African
Communist Party and the Congress of South African Trade Unions (Cosatu)  -
are those who question a strategy that may have been flawed from the start
and has since been overtaken by one development in particular: the emerging
role in South Africa's peace process of the United Nations, ten of whose
officials arrived yesterday to observe this week's events.
On the home front, government measures have helped prepare the ground for a
resumption of constitutional negotiations, called off on June 23 by the ANC
in the wake of the massacre of 42 residents of Boipatong township.
The government has responded to most of the ANC conditions for a resumption
of talks. It has agreed to disband three controversial security force units,
promised to reform migrant worker hostels which were implicated in much of
the violence. and agreed to tougher measures against carrying weapons in
public, including so-called traditional weapons carried by Zulu supporters
of Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi's Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP).
'Mr de Klerk must put promises into practice', comments one ANC official.
But he concedes that Mr de Klerk has taken significant steps towards
fulfilling an important condition: the demand for an international inquiry
into the massacre. Foreign experts have been assisting the Goldstone
commission, a standing judicial investigation ofpolitical violence.
But the most important development of all came at the Security Council last
month, which met to debate the South African crisis.
Its decision to appoint Mr Cyrus Vance, former US secretary of state, as
special UN envoy to South Africa marked the start of the international
body's direct involvement in the search for a settlement.
When Mr Vance reports this week, he will almost certainly suggest that the
UN send an observer team, whose members would be attached to existing local
bodies.
But he has already made his mark. While in South Africa on a ten-day visit
he played the role of broker, helping to arrange last week's meeting between
Mr Pik Botha, the foreign minister, and Mr Thabo Mbeki, his ANC shadow.
The official purpose of the meeting was to discuss the release of political
prisoners. But few observers doubt that more was discussed in a meeting that
effectively marked the resumption of bilateral talks.
Whether international intervention can save South Africans from themselves
is a moot point. But Mr Vance apart, outsiders are already making their
mark. For example, reports by the experts invited to join the Goldstone
commission have produced indictments of the South African Police.
What alarms members of Mr Vance's team, however, is the prospect of what ANC
and labour leaders have termed 'rolling mass action', with all the risks of
violent confrontation the policy entails.
The small number of UN observers envisaged - 'tens rather than scores and
certainly not three figures', says one official - will already be hard
pressed to monitor existing levels of conflict.
Thus UN officials will be eager to avoid extended industrial unrest in South
Africa.
This all adds up to a predicament for Mr Mandela in which he has little to
gain and much to lose.
If the week of action wins widespread support Mr Mandela will emerge with
his authority intact. But it will hardly be enhanced. What, it can be asked,
will have been achieved?
Anything less than a big turnout, however, will be a severe blow. With its
military wing all but inconsequential, trade sanctions a lost cause, and the
shortcomings of its industrial muscle demonstrated, the ANC will return to
negotiations with its limitations exposed.
As Mr Benny Alexander, secretary general of the radical Pan Africanist
Congress says: 'If they (the ANC) fail to come up with successful mass
actions Mr de Klerk will become more arrogant.'
Moreover, the divisions in black politics will have been exacerbated.
From Chief Buthelezi, strongly opposed to the mass action campaign, comes a
warning: 'If negotiations cannot get off the ground then violence will
escalate. We might be pushed into a situation in which violence will have to
run its course before we can again begin negotiations.'
Not only have relations between the ANC and Inkatha sunk to new and
dangerous depths. The Pan Africanist Congress, which used the funeral of the
Boipatong victims to resurrect the Patriotic Front alliance of
anti-government forces, is opposing today's strike.
Furthermore, the strike has revived the quarrel of the classrooms: with some
groups arguing that students should boycott their schools and others
(including the ANC) urging pupils to attend classes.
The greatest burden Mr Mandela carries is the danger that events this week
could set in train a process of radical change, but in a way that he does
not intend, and which he could find hard to control.
The threat of violence will be ever present. Potential flashpoints include;
hostels housing supporters of Inkatha who are determined to go to work;
factories where strikers confront the security forces; or wherever the
extreme right attempts to provoke conflict.
But de Klerk has his own burden of responsibility. The most fundamental
issue of all - who holds power in post-apartheid South Africa - remains
intractable. And nothing Mr de Klerk has said since talks broke down
suggests he is prepared to accept Mr Mandela's demand for a majority rule
constitution.
As positions harden and enmities deepen, the warning of Rhodesia (now
Zimbabwe) seems increasingly relevant: black nationalist leaders were
released (1974), a constitutional conference failed (Geneva 1976) and 30,000
people were to die before talks eventually succeeded in December 1979.
Certainly one prominent South African politician has said there is a lesson
to be drawn.
'I think great mistakes were made in Rhodesia. When the opportunity was
there for real, constructive negotiation it was not grasped.'
'Insofar as things went wrong, they went wrong because they (white
Rhodesians) waited too long before engaging in fundamental negotiation and
dialogue'.
These words are from President FW de Klerk, in an interview shortly before
Nelson Mandela's release. They seem all the more pertinent this week.
