FT  01 OCT 92 / Survey of The New Towns of Britain (1): From vision to
reality - Britain's biggest post-war initiative in social planning was the
creation of 28 new towns to rehouse people from the squalor of the large
city slums. Michael Cassell draws an end of century balance sheet of their
achievements and drawbacks
ALTHOUGH the last of Britain's new town development corporations was wound
up six months ago, the arguments rumble on over whether the planners'
original vision for giving millions of people a fresh start and a better
quality of life was inspired or misconceived.
To the supporters of the new towns movement, whose principles reach back
nearly 500 years to the urban squalor of Elizabethan England, its post-war
progress represents a triumph in humane planning which remains equally valid
today.
They argue that the new towns - originally conceived as safety valves to
relieve congestion in London and to reduce pressure for green belt
development - more than met their ambitious objectives. Their subsequent
spread to most parts of the nation provides, they say, further physical
proof of their value and appeal.
From Hemel Hempstead and Hatfield to Bracknell and Basildon, improved living
conditions and employment opportunities were extended to people previously
assumed to be inextricably bogged down in the grind of inner-city life.
In effect, many lower income families were able to swap run-down tenements
and filthy air for open spaces, greenery and smart new homes.
An ever-present guiding principle was that a better physical environment
offered not only visual and environmental advantages but could also help
determine the very well-being of the individuals concerned.
The theory was not always sustained by the reality, at least in the
short-term. The mass relocation of old, if disadvantaged, communities into
unfamiliar surroundings replaced established social problems with fresh
dilemmas.
There were no pubs or meeting places and many of the early pioneers quickly
began to pine for the noisy neighbours and the shabby streets.
A sense of alienation and dislocation often flourished as the planners
struggled to achieve their objectives. Their mistakes were invariably made
at the expense of those who were unwittingly participating in the planners'
bold experiment; many of the social problems indelibly linked with the inner
city were replaced by new ones in the countryside.
Financially, the first generation of new towns, such as Aycliffe, Corby,
Peterlee and Welwyn Garden City, were deemed to be a success, with surpluses
regularly generated from the subsequent disposal of property assets.
Later towns, such as Runcorn, Skelmersdale, Peterborough, Warrington and
Milton Keynes (the last new town development corporation to be wound up in
England), were less successful financially.
Some of them were less favourably located and also suffered from a shift in
government policy in favour of directing more funds towards the inner
cities. The cumulative impact of financing revenue deficits at high rates of
interest did not help. Neither did the towns always succeed in generating a
sufficiently large and diverse economic mix to sustain their expanding
populations. While some of the early towns were accused of having overlooked
the rising car population, the later ones were criticised for having
relegated human beings to second place behind the motor car.
Even so, there are those who persist in making out a well-constructed case
for the development of another generation of new towns to add to the 28
developed in England, Scotland and Wales.
They point out that the format, far from being exhausted or rendered
obsolete by fresh political priorities, could still provide a partial
solution to Britain's pressing housing and urban problems.
The 1991 census figures have led the Department of the Environment to
estimate that nearly 3m new dwellings will be needed in Britain by 2011, a
total equivalent to the number of existing homes in the greater London area.
Advocates of more new towns claim that such a requirement cannot possibly be
met from development within existing cities.
The Town and Country Planning Association supports those who claim there
remains a strategic necessity for some newly-established population centres.
It believes more new towns could relieve the heightening development
pressures on existing population centres and help prevent the blight of
continuous urban sprawl.
A revised new towns programme to continue their development into the next
century has been called for.
The only significant initiative intended to resurrect the new town concept
in recent years came from the private sector with the formation in 1983 of
the ill-fated Consortium Developments, backed by many of Britain's biggest
house builders.
The group spoke enthusiastically of a mission to develop up to 200 new towns
and villages offering a balance of housing and commercial life.
But in spite of encouraging noises from a succession of ministers, the
consortium failed to win approval for any of its proposals. The final straw
came at the beginning of this year when the Department of the Environment
overturned its inspector's recommendation that a new village of 1,500 homes
should go ahead in Cambridgeshire.
Consortium Developments withdrew, disillusioned with the planning system and
critical of a government which it said had completely abdicated
responsibility and left decisions to the vagaries of local politics. Some
organisations, such as the Council for the Protection of Rural England, were
glad to see it go.
The government may not have entirely closed the door on the prospect of more
new towns - Mr Michael Heseltine, the former Environment Secretary, has
hinted that a corridor of new towns could be developed to the east of London
as part of a strategy to revive the area's economy.
It is clear, however, that the thrust of government policy for the
foreseeable future will centre on the need for inner city revival, to be
spearheaded by the new Urban Regeneration Agency.
The agency will take over the administration of the DoE's Pounds 4bn urban
programme and will have extensive powers to develop tracts of derelict land
which have so far defied both public and private sectors.
As for the new towns, some have undeniably acted as local economic 'engine
rooms' and provided a magnet for many overseas businesses establishing
operations in Britain to gain access to EC markets.
The Commission for New Towns, which is responsible for disposal of new town
assets and for completing their development, says that more than 1,000
overseas companies have taken advantage of the conditions they offer.
The Commission is hopeful that any improvement in Britain's exporting
performance, brought about by the decline in the value of sterling, will
bring in still more overseas companies to the 21 English towns under its
temporary control.
The organisation now has a decade or more of life left in which it has to
oversee the orderly run-down of the new town organisations and to return the
assets left in their wake to the community which originally financed them.
With a booming property market for most of the 1980s putting a fair wind
behind it, the Commission took a pride in meeting, without fail, its
asset-disposal targets.
The remaining challenge of complete disengagement looks considerably more
daunting, given the recession and its damaging impact on values and
activity.
The Commission is in no doubt over the new town movement's historic success
or the attractiveness of the communities it leaves behind.
But critics are equally adamant that the legacy is an unwelcome one and that
any suggestion of another generation coming forward must never be allowed to
take root.
Opponents talk of a failed, discredited, experiment in social engineering
which cannot be repeated. Some support the views encapsulated in a leading
article published in The Times to coincide with the 25th anniversary earlier
this year of Milton Keynes, perhaps the most controversial of all the new
towns.
The Buckinghamshire new town was described as 'the last, desperate throw of
a generation of British planners who were distasteful of the traditional
British towns and cities and had the political power and public money to
fashion the environment to their will'.
According to like-minded critics, the new town movement was idealistic and
authoritarian and, as importantly, contributed directly towards the decline
and dereliction which today scars many of Britain's urban areas.
Residents, moved against their will into new environments with poor
services, were seen as being at the mercy of the architect, while the
countryside was despoiled and original settlements smothered.
The experts will doubtless continue to argue over the merits and drawbacks
of Britain's biggest post-war initiative in social planning.
But Sir Geoffrey Jellicoe, one of the original new town planners, may be
close to the truth when he says that, whatever the early failures, he doubts
if many people who left Britain's cities for a better life would now wish to
return to their old, inner-city slums or to a new high-rise flat.
