FT  11 JAN 92 / Gummer attacks retailers over food imports
MR JOHN GUMMER, the agriculture minister, yesterday accused British
retailers of acting against their own interests by buying imported French
poultry at what he claimed were artificially low prices.
Mr Gummer was speaking to a meeting at which 100 representatives of leading
supermarkets, food manufacturers and farmers agreed to work more closely to
increase supplies of British-produced food.
The initiative, the first of its kind to attract support from all three
sections of the food industry, is intended to reduce Britain's trade deficit
on food and drink. At Pounds 5.1bn last year it was about 80 per cent of the
total current account deficit.
The deficit has attracted growing political concern. Mr John Major, the
prime minister, met industry leaders to discuss the issue last month and it
is being investigated by the Commons agriculture committee.
A central aim of the plans announced yesterday is closer collaboration
between farmers and supermarket chains.
Mr Gummer said their relationship had been 'poisoned' by the widespread
belief that retailers were too ready to buy poultry from French suppliers
who sold below cost.
British supermarkets have sharply increased such purchases since the UK
poultry industry was hit by a salmonella scare two years ago. Mr Gummer said
there was no sense in switching sourcing, because low French prices would
disappear if leading UK poultry breeders were driven out of business.
Yesterday's meeting, organised by the Safeway supermarket chain, agreed to
set up a council of senior food industry representatives charged with
identifying concrete measures to stimulate the supply of UK-produced foods.
Future activities are expected to focus on bacon and ham, dairy products,
soft fruit and vegetables.
The council will be chaired by Sir Alistair Grant, the chairman of Safeway.
Other members include the chairmen or managing directors of J. Sainsbury,
Tesco, Northern Foods and Ranks Hovis McDougall, and Mr David Naish,
president of the National Farmers' Union.
