FT  09 JUN 92 / Former Soviet states accused of cultivating illegal drugs
MORE THAN 3m acres of mari-juana are being illegally cultivated in the
former Soviet Union, together with about 100,000 poppy fields in Russia
alone, according to a report produced by a United Nations fact-finding
mission.
The UN Drug Control Programme in Vienna, which has been investigating how to
help contain the problem, has also disclosed that a special aerial survey is
being carried out this month to check whether opium poppies have been
secretly sown in the contaminated area around Chernobyl. The poppies should
be starting to flower about now.
The mission says Russia's 'frantic race for capitalism' and its efforts to
make the rouble convertible will provide 'propitious terrain' for money
laundering.
In addition, newly opened borders are not being effectively controlled, so
that new routes are appearing which can be used for exporting drugs to
western Europe.
Some traffic has already been diverted from the increasingly better-policed
Balkan route to one through the Caucasus.
The mission, led by Mr Enrique Parejo-Gonzalez of the UN agency, included Mr
Robert Simmonds, former commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police,
and Dr Istvan Beyer, former director-general of the Hungarian National
Institute of Pharmacy.
Their report says the drug abuse problem in the countries of the former
Soviet Union 'is bound to develop exponentially in the near future', as
illegal supplies are pushed to fuel local demand.
The report warns that 'all the ingredients' for a drug abuse problem are
there: 'Unemployment, poverty, a phase during which freedom is carried to an
extreme, fascination with western modes of life, the appearance of new drugs
and 'business' in all its forms, which will encourage new dealers and
encourage proselytism.'
The report urges technical help and advice so that new governments can fight
the problems more effectively.
This includes better links with international drug control bodies, new
anti-drug laws to fill the legal vacuum in most republics, rehabilitation of
addicts, and laboratories and equipment to help catch traffickers.
All the new governments are taking the problem seriously but knowledge of
its extent is imperfect in the present phase of political and economic
upheaval, the report says.
New facts uncovered in the visit included 350,000 acres in Kazakhstan and
150,000 acres Kyrgyzstan where marijuana is growing wild.
This is used locally or exported and the authorities said it was impossible
to control or eradicate totally.
In Uzbekistan, poppies are being grown in mountainous regions but police
lack equipment to destroy the fields. The report says the same problem
occurs in Russia, where there are now an estimated 100,000 poppy fields or
plots and nearly 2.5m acres of marijuana under cultivation.
'The situation is similar in Belarus, particularly in the region near
Chernobyl, in Ukraine and in Tajikistan,' the report adds.
