FT  20 AUG 92 / The enigmatic endurance of a small potatoe: The political
past and future of Dan Quayle
IF THE truth be told, the political future of Dan Quayle does not lie in the
vice-president's own hands. It rests now, as it has for the last four years,
with George Bush, and the president's patronage is not infinite.
If the Republican ticket loses in November, Mr Quayle will be cut adrift,
just one runner, and not the antepost favourite, in the long race for the
1996 nomination. If it wins, the odds against him will be shorter but the
same contest, perhaps more covert, will be joined - and with an adversary
like James Baker operating under cover and with the president's ear.
Mr Quayle may have the most thankless job in government, but only one
outranks it. As it currently stands, the best chance he has of promotion is
if Mr Bush is physically unable to continue in office. Everything else is a
roll of the dice.
These have been four rough years for J Danforth Quayle, surprisingly plucked
from relative obscurity in the Senate to run with Mr Bush, horribly battered
in the 1988 campaign, and a butt for Democrats and the nation's comedians
ever since.
It has not helped that from time to time Mr Quayle has contributed to the
impression his intellectual capabilities might be lacking, of which the
inability to spell potato was just the latest in a fairly long line (he
encouraged a schoolchild to spell it 'potatoe'). Nor has it helped that Mr
Baker discreetly makes no bones of his belief the vice-president is as much
out of his depth now as he was in 1988.
The net result is found in the polls. A Washington Post/ABC survey last
month found him viewed negatively by 63 per cent, and positively by a mere
26 per cent. Its poll of delegates to this convention found 70 per cent
believing Mr Bush's chances would be improved by dropping him.
Yet Mr Quayle has endured, and not only because of the president's charity.
In an administration which increasingly seemed to be distancing itself from
the Reagan legacy, his office and his capable staff emerged as the back door
through which the true believing conservatives could still enter and hope to
influence policy from the inside.
The vice-president, long popular with grassroots conservatives, became
something of the darling of the Washington right-wing establishment. As
recently as last month it was commonplace to read columns that the real
weakness of the Bush administration was not Mr Quayle, whose place on the
ticket seemed uncertain, but the president himself.
A year ago, when a Bush-Quayle victory seemed so certain, a determined
effort was made to prove that the vice-president was indeed a man of
substance. Two of the most eminent journalists on the Washington Post, no
less, were given remarkable access to Mr Quayle, resulting in a series of
articles that indeed portrayed him in a rather flattering light, beyond a
tendency to lose his temper on the golf course.
Other interviews, including one with the Financial Times, were solicited.
The net result is that the vice-president seems more confident and is
obviously far better equipped to debate Senator Al Gore, the Democratic
running mate, than he was in 1988 to go up against Senator Lloyd Bentsen,
who cut him up ruthlessly with an unfavourable comparison of Mr Quayle to
John Kennedy. Yet that confidence often seems fragile. Last month he seemed
to equivocate on his opposition to abortion. Even his acceptance speech in
Houston is in part designed to redefine his own image by dispelling the
notion that he had a privileged childhood that, inter alia, helped him to
avoid military service.
And in the campaign itself Mr Quayle knows that he is again going to be
confined to second banana, playing the small-town conservative heartland,
securing Mr Bush's base. This is the dutiful role, and Mr Quayle is a
dutiful man, but it does not offer much chance to make more of an
independent name for himself.
Others are going for that shot on the right. Some, such as Jack Kemp,
William Weld and possibly Phil Gramm, have made their pitches to this
convention for conservatism with a less absolute face, while the Pat
Buchanan purity card has again been played. James Baker and Dick Cheney, to
name but two, lie in wait. Dan Quayle is indeed still playing in a tough
school.
