FT  09 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Ukraine's chance
WHILE politics appears to be halting Russia's move toward a market economy,
in Ukraine the transition has finally begun. If the words of Mr Leonid
Kuchma, Ukraine's new and reform-minded prime minister, can be translated
into actions then even cynical western observers have reason for modest
optimism.
The economic challenge facing the former Soviet Union's second largest
republic is immense. Mr Kuchma's task is first to repair the damage of years
of stagnation and mismanagement which, until recently, President Leonid
Kravchuk has appeared willing to tolerate. Increasingly irresponsible
government has left Ukraine with a budget deficit greater than a third of
the economy, an inflation rate of more than 30 per cent a month and a
quasi-currency, the coupon, which commands little respect from those forced
to use it.
Yet a market-oriented Ukrainian government could find an escape from looming
hyperinflation. Mr Kuchma, a reform-minded former rocket factory director,
is potentially able to command support from a wide coalition of interests.
He has been granted wide-ranging executive powers by parliament. He also has
much greater control over local officials than do his counterparts in
Moscow.
Moreover the past year's inaction allows Ukraine, and its western advisers,
to learn from Russia's mistakes. Whether Mr Kuchma can succeed where Mr
Gaidar has so far failed depends on whether they draw the correct
conclusions. Ukraine must move faster not slower - those siren voices
calling for a gradualist approach must be ignored. But it must move across a
wider reform agenda than the Russian government has tackled so far.
Ukraine's first priority is to curb inflation. It must stop net credit
creation by the central bank and cut deep into the government subsidies
which are responsible for the huge budget deficit. But an IMF-style
stabilisation programme has no chance of success unless accompanied by
measures to encourage private economic activity.
The government should end monopolistic state orders; auction state owned
trucks to permit goods to be brought to cities; announce a tax holiday and
automatic registration for new small businesses; and organise small-scale
privatisation auctions. Only then might stabilisation be sustainable.
Ukraine cannot succeed without western aid to finance imports and help fund
the budget deficit, preferably in return for decommissioning its nuclear
weapons and dangerous nuclear power plants. The aid needs to be conditional
on structural reform as well as macroeconomic targets; and should follow
tangible steps towards stabilisation and liberalisation.
At least the talk in Kiev is now encouraging. But only action can prove the
sincerity of the government's words.
