FT  03 NOV 92 / Ferranti linked to 1986 ISC missile project
FERRANTI, the British defence electronics company, was involved in a 1986 US
helicopter-and-missile project that led to the indictment of a former top
executive at International Signal and Control (ISC), the Pennsylvania
company that was found to have defrauded Ferranti after it was acquired in
1987.
Ferranti's involvement is described in a series of company documents
obtained by the Financial Times.
Mr Thomas Jasin, the former president of ISC Technologies, will stand trial
in Philadelphia tomorrow. . He is accused of having illegally imported into
the US components for the Striker missile, a South African weapon that was
to have been fitted on to US helicopters made by the Sikorsky division of
United Technologies.
Mr Jasin is also charged with transferring technical data and goods to South
Africa in connection with the project. US law prohibited both the import of
South African military technology and the export of technology to South
Africa.
Neither Sikorsky nor Ferranti has been charged in the Striker case. Mr Jasin
claimed yesterday he was innocent of any wrongdoing as the project was
'above board' and involved discussions with Ferranti, Sikorsky and the US
Army.
The documents obtained by the FT show the prospective customers for the
project  - which was to have used the Striker anti-tank missile on
Sikorsky's Blackhawk or Eagle helicopters  - were both the US Army and the
People's Republic of China. The transactions were not completed.
However, a US official said yesterday the US Army eventually tested versions
of the Striker missile.
The documents also show that as long ago as 1985  - two years before it
acquired ISC  - Ferranti agreed to provide a helicopter siting (missile
guidance) system for the Striker programme. An April 1985 document from
Ferranti's electro-optics department in Edinburgh showed the company
prepared a technical proposal for ISC Technologies on the siting system.
An August 1986 letter written by Mr Jasin to Sir Derek Alun-Jones, then the
Ferranti chairman, also discussed a memorandum of agreement between Ferranti
and ISC on the Striker project.
Ferranti declined to comment on the project yesterday except to say it had
made information on the Striker available to US and British authorities,
which was 'instrumental' in leading to the indictment of Mr Jasin.
A former senior Ferranti director said, however, that he recalled Ferranti's
participation in the programme. The director said: 'This was long before we
merged with ISC. They must have approached us, probably in conjunction with
Sikorsky, about a proposed programme and seeking the supply of siting
systems.'
In Connecticut, a Sikorsky spokesman confirmed the company's participation
in the Striker/helicopter project, but noted it did not proceed with the
project after Mr Jasin informed the company in October 1986 that US laws
would have prevented testing the missile in the US.
'Sikorsky recognises the foreign policy implications of importing and
exporting technology,' the spokesman said.
Mr Gaar Steiner, the lawyer representing Mr Jasin, said the entire
transaction was 'totally above board'. Available documents 'establish beyond
question that Ferranti was involved in the programme, as was Sikorsky and
the US Army'.
Mr Steiner said he did not dispute that the Striker missile components were
brought to the US, but said it was a legal transaction.
