FT  03 AUG 92 / Cadbury proposals prove unpalatable: Reaction to the report
IT SHOULD have been a story of apple pie and motherhood. After all, how can
you object to proposals intended to improve the performance of British
companies?
But, surprisingly, the draft report of the Cadbury committee on financial
aspects of corporate governance has in the main drawn reaction ranging from
little more than polite applause to a resounding raspberry.
At its heart, the committee's recommendations set out a code of best
practice to be followed voluntarily by corporate boards. The code covers
everything from the role of non-executive directors to the composition of
board committees to disclosure of important financial data.
While compliance is voluntary, the committee has recommended - and the Stock
Exchange has endorsed - a proposal for a listing requirement under which
companies will have to disclose the extent to which they comply with the
code. Where they do not comply, companies will have to explain themselves.
There is universal agreement with the Cadbury committee's goals, and indeed
widespread - although not unanimous - support for its recommendation that
government remain out of the picture. But a number of those most affected by
its recommendations feel the report either goes too far or not far enough in
trying to raise standards on boards of directors.
Those who set up the Cadbury committee were careful to include
representatives of every group that would be affected by its
recommendations. The brainchild of the Financial Reporting Council, the
Stock Exchange and the accountancy profession, the committee included
representatives of industry, shareholders, accountants, academia and the
Bank of England. Thus it should have had the endorsement of all those
groups.
Last week, though, the Confederation of British Industry said it opposed
proposals that would make the Cadbury committee's recommendations
enforceable. In particular, it objected to the proposed Stock Exchange
listing requirement, saying it would lead to more bureaucracy. The Stock
Exchange is said to have been privately dismayed by the CBI's reaction,
particularly since there was a CBI representative on the committee that made
the recommendation in the first place.
That the CBI has opposed the mild enforcement mechanism proposed by the
committee is also surprising, given the widespread view among committee
members that companies may bring new legislation upon themselves if they do
not voluntarily improve practices.
Further, the Institute of Directors said it objected to assigning a special
role for non-executive directors. Sir Peter Morgan, director-general of the
IoD, said: 'It sounds out the wrong signal that there should be two groups
on the board of directors - the doers and the checkers.'
Meanwhile, institutional shareholders have complained that the voluntary
nature of the committee's recommendations means they are unlikely to be
followed closely.
Sir Ron Dearing, chairman of the Financial Reporting Council and a Cadbury
committee member said the group had decided against radical reforms because
they were unlikely to be complied with and would therefore require
legislation. New laws, he said, would be likely to stifle innovation and
enterprise.
'We felt in the end the best way to go was the co-operative route encouraged
by the Stock Exchange,' he said, explaining why no new regulations are being
sought.
Investors have also expressed disappointment that the report did not urge a
greater role for them in certain areas.
Particularly, shareholders said they would have preferred to see shorter
service contracts for directors, improved disclosure of executive pay in
corporate accounts and better financial information. They also were dismayed
by the committee's refusal to question the so-called Caparo decision, which
ruled that auditors have no special duties to shareholders.
Indeed, the Institutional Shareholders Committee, the umbrella group of
shareholders that has been at the forefront of the corporate governance
movement, declined to give the Cadbury report a ringing endorsement at a
recent meeting.
The influence of accountancy groups on the committee's final recommendations
was considerable, but they have not been entirely satisfied.
The Chartered Institute of Management Accountants urged that the code of
best practice be made mandatory, and other accountancy bodies had pressed
for a recommendation that interim financial statements be audited.
Among the committee's greatest supporters, however, is the Stock Exchange.
In addition to giving the report an unqualified endorsement, the Stock
Exchange said it would consider adopting one of the recommendations - the
inclusion of balance sheet information with interim statements - as a new
requirement of listing. The Stock Exchange also said it welcomed the
suggestion that the code's effectiveness be reviewed after two years - a
door the committee left open for new regulation - and said it hoped to be
part of that review itself.
