FT  16 APR 92 / Zimbabwe economy under siege: Independence celebrations will
be low-key
ZIMBABWEANS will mark the 12th anniversary of independence on Saturday
against a background of food shortages, rapid inflation and increasingly
serious economic crisis.
The official celebration will be a low-key affair with the government having
wisely decided to limit ostentatious public spending at a time of mounting
food shortages caused by the worst drought in living memory.
Try though it may to blame events outside its control for the visible
deterioration in the country, President Robert Mugabe's government has
become the target of unprecedented public criticism.
Even the normally obsequious state-controlled media has sharpened its tone
and industry minister Kumbirai Kangai was given a rough ride by questioners
on a recent TV programme wanting to know why the government had not
anticipated the food crisis.
Agriculture minister Witness Mangwende was a target of bitter criticism in
parliament from his own backbenchers, deriding his earlier statement that
maize imports would not be required.
Current estimates suggest that with the near total failure of the maize crop
Zimbabwe will have to import at least 1.7m tonnes of maize along with
300,000 tonnes of sugar and wheat.
Mr Mugabe was forced to send his transport minister, Mr Denis Norman, to
Cape Town earlier this month to speed South African deliveries of food
imports.
The first maize trains left the port of Durban this week and while Spoornet,
the South African railways, is confident of getting the food to the border
at Beit Bridge, there are question marks over the capacity of the
Zimbabwean, Zambian, Malawian and Mozambican transport systems to cope with
food distribution.
Even before the drought Mr Mugabe's ruling Zanu-PF party was in trouble. Its
popularity ebbed at the end of the 1980s as unemployment rose five-fold to
1.5m, and as the government was forced to backtrack on promises to resettle
162,000 families, provide free schooling and better housing.
At the end of 1990, Mr Mugabe officially abandoned his commitment to
socialism and with considerable misgivings agreed to a World Bank-designed
structural adjustment programme, funded by western donors to the tune of
Dollars 1.5bn (Pounds 852m).
Implementation has been fitful and unco-ordinated, inflation surged above 30
per cent in February with low income groups experiencing 37 per cent
inflation.
The familiar pain without gain syndrome is now compounded by drought. GDP is
forecast to fall five per cent this year while the current account payments
deficit will reach 20 per cent of GDP.
Even if good rains fall next summer, it will take at least until 1994 to
regain current living standards. By then, the president will be close to his
70th birthday and facing a general election in 1995.
So unpopular is Mr Mugabe's government today that few analysts believe it
can win a fourth victory at the polls.
Until a few months ago, its supporters believed that economic reform coupled
with the land acquisition bill which will provide up to five million
hectares of white-owned land for black resettlement schemes could tip the
scales in their favour in 1995.
But the drought has put paid to all that and it is now a question of whether
the government - under its present leadership - will last until the next
election or whether Mr Mugabe, like Mrs Thatcher and Mr Bob Hawke, will be
replaced.
However, the president can take comfort from the fact that there is no
viable political opposition nor an obvious and acceptable successor within
Zanu. But he has very little else to celebrate this weekend.
