FT  08 OCT 92 / World Stock Markets: Kuwait marks symbolic return of equity
trading - But it may take six months before transactions return to former
levels
KUWAIT'S stock exchange, which closed with a bang in the Iraqi invasion of
August 1990, has reopened with a whimper.
Since its doors were reopened on September 28, the market has seen a little
under 80 transactions a day in no more than a dozen shares. So few stocks
are being traded that the Al-Shall agency, which provided the market's index
before the war, is publishing only a temporary index of the six most traded
shares. In the first week this showed a 22.4 per cent slump in prices.
According to Mr Jassem al-Saddoun, Al-Shall's managing director, it will
take six months before the market returns to an approximation of its former
self - the Gulf's biggest market with a capitalisation of around Dollars
3.4bn. 'It will take that long for the market to assess the new government,
the state of the economy and the social and political conditions in Kuwait,'
he says.
But it is likely to take far longer than that before trading on the exchange
does anything like justice to its setting: a cavernous brown marble edifice
which is among the most imposing of Kuwait's commercial buildings.
Although the building's fabric survived the Iraqi invasion essentially
unscathed, the havoc caused by the Gulf war to Kuwait's financial and
economic system meant that it took 19 months before it was able to reopen
its glass doors.
That is how long it took the 31 companies now quoted to produce acceptable
accounts. A further 21 companies are still untangling the financial mess
caused by the invasion and Mr Hisham al-Otaibi, the exchange's president,
reckons that it will be early next year before the full complement of
pre-war stocks are back on the market's board.
However, once all 52 companies regain their listing, Kuwait's stock exchange
will find itself on its firmest footing for a decade - the result of the
government's decision earlier this year to clear the financial system of
billions of dollars worth of debts resulting both from the Gulf war and the
disastrous 1982 collapse of the informal and unregulated Souq al Manakh kerb
stock market.
The collapse of the Manakh market, which had soared unsustainably on rampant
share speculation paid for largely by post-dated cheques, had left Kuwait's
banks and investment houses shackled with a total of KD1.9bn (Dollars 570m)
worth of unpaid debts on their books even before the Gulf war. The war
itself has made KD3.8bn worth of business and consumer loans by the
financial institutions go sour.
Earlier this year, the government agreed to take on all these debts, buying
them from the banks and investment companies in a massive one-off sale of
government bonds. The banks, and scores of other companies, were therefore
able not only to produce accounts, but more soundly-based accounts than they
had been able to publish since 1982.
Even so, it is likely to take years before the stock market recovers fully
from the double shock of the Manakh and the Gulf war. The Manakh crisis, in
particular, has left the market badly out of kilter.
For one thing, government bail-outs resulting from the crisis have left it
in possession of around 60 per cent of the total shares in issue. For
another, the only bank of Kuwait's six commercial institutions that remained
profitable after the Manakh crisis, National Bank of Kuwait, became such a
Goliath blue chip that its stock alone accounts for 30 per cent of the
market's capitalisation. Since the market's reopening, NBK stock has
accounted for 64 per cent of all transactions.
A full revival of the market will also await the recuperation of the
economy, the private sector of which has been crippled both by the direct
effects of the Iraqi troops' vandalism and the indirect effects of the
government's decision to try to halve the pre-war population of 2.2m.
Given the exchange's limping start and its dependence on a broader economic
recovery, many believe that reopening was essentially symbolic. 'Whenever
the stock market is working normally, Kuwait is working normally, is the
thinking,' says Mr Saddoun. 'It is more of a psychological event than an
economic one.'
A full revival of the market will also await the recuperation of Kuwait's
economy, the private sector of which has been crippled both by the direct
effects of the Iraqi troops' vandalism and the indirect effects of the
government's decision to try to halve the pre-war population
