FT  01 MAY 92 / Fisons disposals may raise Pounds 300m: Group acts to
concentrate on core businesses
FISONS yesterday announced it was offering its horticultural and consumer
health businesses for sale as part of a fundamental restructuring of the
group.
The move follows a four-month review of the company's operations and
represents a strategic decision by Mr Cedric Scroggs, the newly appointed
chief executive, to concentrate on the group's core pharmaceuticals and
scientific instruments businesses.
The sale of the horticultural business will be a final break from Fisons'
roots.
Analysts believe the disposals could raise between Pounds 250m and Pounds
300m. The consumer health operations, which made profits of Pounds 10m last
year on turnover of Pounds 84m, are likely to be easiest to sell. The
horticultural division, with units in the UK, North America and on the
Continent, made profits last year of Pounds 11.5m on turnover of Pounds
96.7m.
Mr Scroggs said the decision to sell was not because the operations were
poorly managed or unprofitable. 'We want to have global businesses, and that
goal was not achievable either in horticulture or consumer health without
significant investments.
'That investment would be better spent on the pharmaceuticals business,'
said Mr Scroggs.
He said the consumer health group, which employs about 1,000 people, was
only 10th in the UK market and 25th in the US, with turnover about 5 per
cent of the leading North American competitor. Both businesses needed
important expenditure on advertising, he said, and Fisons had no proprietary
technology to give it a competitive edge in either field.
Mr Scroggs expected more than one buyer for the operations and declined to
say when he hoped to conclude the disposals. The company was under no
financial pressure to conclude the sales and the businesses were not
bleeding cash, he said.
Within the pharmaceuticals division, Fisons would concentrate on
anti-inflammatory products and drugs for the central nervous system. The
company had some potentially interesting cardio-vascular medicines, but
wanted to package them and sell them to other companies for development and
marketing, said Mr Scroggs.
N M Rothschild, the merchant bank, will handle the horticultural division
sale, and S G Warburg and J P Morgan, the consumer health disposal.
Lex, Page 16
