FT  11 DEC 92 / Survey of Ecuador (10): Indians seek a united voice -
Poverty, discrimination and lack of land are the main concerns
INDIANS have become a significant social force in Ecuador, pressing for
solutions to 500-year-old problems such as land and cultural survival, but
also proposing reforms which would give them far greater autonomy.
The most controversial demand involves a change to the first article of the
national constitution to describe Ecuador as a 'pluri-national' state, on
the grounds that the different Indian groupings are in fact distinct
nationalities, each with its own history, territory, language and
institutions.
Not all the indigenous organisations agree with this change and many
non-Indians believe it could create an explosive situation. 'Indian demands
have got out of proportion,' said Mr Fernando Guerrero, a social democrat
congressman representing the highland province of Chimborazo, where over
half the population is Indian.
'They want to achieve in two or perhaps five years all they didn't get in
500. On the other hand Indians should have their own representatives in
Congress - they should be independent of the political parties, which only
use them.'
Between 25 and 45 per cent of Ecuador's population is classified as Indian,
depending on how an Indian is defined: a man from Otavalo who ties his hair
in the traditional long plaits but wears blue jeans and dark glasses may
call himself an Indian while a poncho-clad Quichua speaking herdsman may
not.
After centuries of exploitation as serfs and cheap labour most highland
Indians are poor; they live off tiny plots of the least accessible and least
productive land on the upper mountain slopes and, as population pressure
mounts, migrate to the cities to take occasional low-paid work.
The Spanish conquerors came soon after the Inca armies when some of the
Andean tribes were still resisting Inca rule. However, Quichua - a dialect
of the Inca language - spread throughout the highlands and down to the Napo
area of the Amazon lowlands.
Since 1988 bilingual education has been officially incorporated into the
education system and there are about 1,000 bilingual Indian teachers in the
countryside. Although Quichua is the most widely used of the eight Indian
languages - about 30 per cent of Ecuadoreans speak it - other Indian groups,
such as the Amazon Shuar, also have their own bilingual schools.
The Catholic church has played an important part in reaffirming Indian
languages and cultural values over the past 20 years, in contrast with its
early efforts to wipe out all indigenous beliefs and impose 'civilised'
Christianity on the people.
The stronger Indian organisations - including the Confederation of Indian
Nationalities of Ecuador, CONAIE - were originally Catholic influenced.
'They tend to have a more aggressive view and are fierce about preserving
cultural roots,' said Mr Guerrero.
Although both religious and political issues divide the Indians, their main
concerns - land, poverty and discrimination - are the same. Hundreds of
communities joined the Indian uprising of mid-1990, blocking roads, invading
haciendas and marching through the provincial capitals. The Indian movement
virtually took over the highlands, speaking with a united voice and forcing
the government to address the land problem.
Earlier this year over 2,000 Amazon Indians marched up from the Pastaza
forests to the capital and camped out in a central park. Once again, the
main issue was land. But while the highland Indians are fighting for the
redistribution of large, expensively farmed haciendas, the Amazon groups
want legal title to long occupied forest lands which are now being
infiltrated by new settlers, gold panning families and oil companies. The
Pastaza Indians won about half their territory and are drawing up a forest
management plan for the reserve.
The 100,000 Amazon Indians are unexpectedly well organised and were the
driving force behind the formation of CONAIE. Sedentary groups are trying to
develop survival strategies combining mixed farming with the sustainable
harvest of forest products. But much of the forest in the northern part of
the region has already been cut down and the Indians often take jobs with
the oil companies.
The new administration is taking the Indian question seriously, says Mr Jose
Quimbo, who is in charge of the Indian Affairs Office attached to the
presidency.
Clad in the dark blue wool poncho and felt hat that identify him as an
Otavalo Indian, he describes the thinking behind the government's Indian
plan. 'Land is a priority - not just the transfer of land because that
hasn't resolved many of the problems. Indians have to be trained to run our
own projects and be incorporated into the development process and not depend
on the state.'
Mr Quinbo's own area is relatively prosperous compared with, say Chimborazo.
Newly cobbled roads carry regular bus services and the houses are being
white washed. It is not the small, oxen-ploughed maize fields that
underwrite such improvements but a flourishing craft industry and a regular
flow of tourists.
Many of the highland Indian communities lack drinking and irrigation water,
health centres, power and above all adequate access roads. It is often
simply not worth paying the cost of transporting a few sacks of potatoes
down the mountain to market.
Last month President Sixto Duran Ballen set a precedent by meeting CONAIE
representatives. 'It gives importance to our problems,' said a member of
CONAIE, who is, however, critical of the government's plan. 'It seems to be
the same sort of thing as before, providing latrines and hand-outs and not
taking on the real difficulties.'
In spite of their success in drawing public attention, the Indians are not
considering taking on the political establishment as yet. The differences
between the organisations are not insuperable, said a Shuar Indian, but 'it
is too soon for a political party. We have to go slowly and learn how to
think ahead and how to work with each other'.
