FT  29 MAY 92 / Brazil attacks lack of backing for Amazon: FT writers on
prepartions for the Earth Summit next week in Rio De Janeiro
A PROJECT to protect the Brazilian Amazon, that was originally planned as
the centrepiece of the Earth Summit, may prove an embarrassment.
Brazil claims that the industrialised world is failing to take the project
seriously, and that too little money is being committed.
The Dollars 1.5bn Rainforest Pilot Project was approved by the Group of
Seven leading industrial nations in 1990 and declared by the World Bank to
be an 'example of co-operation between developed and developing countries on
global environmental issues.'
Yet, two years on, only Dollars 53.5m has been raised, and this only after
Brazilian President Fernando Collor had written an angry letter to G7 heads
of government. The US, which has been one of the leading critics of
Amazonian deforestation, gave only Dollars 5m.
'The first world is being very hypocritical - it annnoys me tremendously,'
complains Mr Jose Goldemberg, Brazil's Environment Minister. 'We get a lot
of advice and rhetoric but very little money'.
He also complains that multilateral institutions are forcing Brazil to
support projects in the Amazon of which he is 'very sceptical,' such as
extractive reserves - areas reserved for such activities as the gathering of
Brazil nuts and rubber-tapping which do not harm the forest but which many
analysts believe are condemning people to poverty.
'The maintenance of extractive reserves is very artificial in economic terms
 -we're having to make an enormous effort to subsidise these people,' the
minister said.
A senior World Bank official said that he was not aware of any complaints by
Brazil on this issue. But he admitted that international response to the
Amazonian Pilot Programme had been 'disappointing' and that the project
would be 'smaller and slower than planned'.
Of the money pledged so far, Dollars 19.5m is from Germany and Dollars 15m
from the EC. Canada has contributed less than Dollars 1m. The G7 has
promised a further Dollars 200m over the next three years, of which 10 per
cent must be provided by Brazil.
However, the official said 'most of this is bilateral aid already committed
by G7 countries. There is almost no additionality, if at all - it's just
consolidating old aid in a new account'.
