FT  05 SEP 92 / National Power in deal to sell gas
NATIONAL POWER, the privatised electricity generator, said yesterday it had
signed a deal with Bord Gais Eireann, the Irish Gas Board, to supply it with
natural gas in the event of unexpected shortfalls.
The generator is ready to supply BGE with up to 1.2m therms of gas a day at
short notice in times of high demand. The five-year agreement - the first of
its kind - begins in autumn next year.
Gas will be supplied from National Power's portfolio of supplies using
British Gas's transmission network to Moffatt, in Scotland, from where it
will be delivered through the interconnector pipeline being constructed
beneath the Irish Sea.
Mr John Baker, National Power's chief executive, said: 'This agreement is an
example of the value of international co-operation in relation to energy
supplies, which we believe could be enhanced by increasing liberalisation of
energy markets.'
The deal is further evidence of increasing crossover between the electricity
and gas sectors since the government's energy privatisation programme. Rival
generator PowerGen already has an interest in gas marketing through
Kinetica, a joint venture with oil company Conoco.
Several regional electricity companies have also formed joint ventures with
gas producers. Enron, one of the largest gas companies in the US, which is
part of a consortium building a gas-fired power station at ICI's Wilton site
in Teesside, signalled its intention last month to become an important gas
marketer by buying up gas interests in the North Sea.
National Power said yesterday it was 'looking at all opportunities' for
marketing more of its gas.
'We have a programme of building gas-fired power stations, and have built up
a strong portfolio of gas supplies, so the marketing opportunities are
there.'
National Power acquired a small quantity of gas in June through British
Gas's release programme - in which BG is selling off some of its contracted
gas to competitors to reduce its share of the industrial market. The
generator said it would use this to gain marketing experience.
Meanwhile, the gap between UK gas prices and those in Europe continues to
widen, according to the quarterly survey of prices carried out by
consultants Energy Advice and British Gas.
The UK's 18m household gas customers pay 8 per cent less than those in
Netherlands, 27 per cent less than in the former West Germany, and almost 50
per cent less than those in Italy.
The figures are based on prices at the beginning of July this year, and do
not take account of the further 2 per cent cut in prices that will come into
effect on October 1.
