FT  06 OCT 92 / Markets blow hot and cold: Yesterday was unsettled, but not
a hurricane
Strong winds in October are a worrying omen for stock market investors. They
remember the gales of October 1987, which caused widespread damage across
northern Europe - just as stock markets around the world began a crash from
which in real terms most of them have still not recovered.
London and Frankfurt, at least, were again seeing seasonally breezy weather
yesterday. And stock markets were again falling: down 4.3 per cent in
Switzerland; 4.3 per cent in France; 3.6 per cent in Germany; 4 per cent in
the UK; and 0.67 per cent in the US.
As in 1987, the damage was not confined to any region of the world. Markets
such as South Africa and Brazil dropped sharply too. And gloom was again
proving proving contagious: the European weakness helped contribute to Wall
Street's morning slide, which in turn helped to worsen the mood during the
European markets' closing hours.
Still, just as a few wind-strewn leaves don't amount to a hurricane, so
yesterday's declines don't necessarily indicate a stock market crash. Since
1987, the markets have learned to take such bumps in their stride: a
mini-crash in October 1990 was reversed promptly enough to leave little
trace in the monthly averages. And, in the US at least, some of the market
practices which arguably worsened the 1987 crash have been altered by
'circuit-breakers' which slow down the self-reinforcing downwards spiral of
equity and futures markets.
For some markets, this was nonetheless the worst one-day drop since 1987.
And for global equity markets as a whole it was one of those synchronised
downwards shift in valuation that only happen every couple of years.
What lies behind this abrupt collective loss of enthusiasm for shares?
Explanations range from the trivial to the profound:
The calendar. Autumn is the last plausible opportunity for stock-market
analysts to cut their perennially over-optimistic estimates of calendar-year
corporate profits. It also coincides with the government budget season in
many countries that sometimes leads to public musings over higher taxes.
Current examples: Germany, Italy, Britain.
Currency turmoil. The wide gap between German and US interest rates hit
currency markets a week or two ago, says Mr Paul Harrison of Salomon
Brothers in London. Now it has affected the equity markets too. 'Each
country's stock market has its own reason for falling,' says Mr Harrison,
'but they are linked by the lack of international co-operation on
interest-rate policy.' In some countries - such as the UK, France, Italy and
Ireland - potential or actual currency weakness had a direct impact on
shares yesterday. In others, the impact was more diffuse - but still
negative.
The German economy. A dire outlook for the German economy is starting to be
reflected in earnings forecasts for individual German companies - starting
with a general downgrading of Volkswagen a few weeks ago and spreading
across the whole of the corporate sector. Nikko Securities, for example,
said in January that it expected German earnings to grow 8 per cent this
year; its forecast is now for a 5 per cent decline.
Blue-chip German companies were among the worst of yesterday's losers:
Volkswagen and Mannesmann both fell 6 per cent, for example. When Germany
sneezes, other economies catch cold; so analysts elsewhere are cutting their
earnings estimates on the assumption that companies in other countries will
suffer from a lack of German orders.
Global portfolio shifts. The people who advise how US institutional
investment portfolios should be allocated between shares, bonds and cash
have made a switch away from equities in recent weeks. Yesterday, for
example, First Boston's investment strategist Mr Rama Krishna recommended
that investors cut the proportion of shares in their portfolios from 65 per
cent to 40 per cent. Other asset-allocators have been making similar
recommendations.
European bourses have been particular victims of a different sort of
portfolio shift: the end of Europhoria. International investors have been
disproportionately heavily invested in European equities since 1985, says Mr
Nick Stevenson of Warburg Securities. Now, with the single market and the
German reunification stories looking stale, 'some of the global funds are
going to start rotating out of continental Europe', he says.
There is one other possible cause for yesterday's market slide: a general
shift towards pessimism, as investors start to think that there is some
possibility, however slight, of a more general economic collapse. Certainly,
the turmoil of the past few weeks has helped to create a sense of markets
swayed by global forces beyond governments' control. But yesterday's selling
was neither heavy nor, in general, panicky; trading volumes in London, for
example, were well below the high levels seen in the upswing that
immediately followed the sterling devaluation. As long as that pattern
holds, the comparison with 1987 will remain an academic one.
Lex, Page 22; World markets, Page 42; London, Page 46
