FT  05 MAY 92 / Survey of Danish Shipping and Shipbuilding (7): Pilot on the
bridge - Integrated computer control
NEW COMPUTER simulations for the shipping industry are coming very close to
the advanced systems used by the aerospace sector. The simulations use a
complex mathematical model linked up to large screen with computer generated
images.
Standing on a 'bridge' the pilot uses a joystick or wheel to manoeuvre his
ship through a computer-generated harbour landscape projected on a 140
degree wide screen.
Tricky and sometimes dangerous situations, such as berthing a giant pleasure
cruiser or towing a 1.5m ton offshore platform, can be tried out on the
simulator in safety.
The simulations developed by the Danish Maritime Institute, which is one of
the best-known research institutes in northern Europe, are far ahead of
those usually found in navigational schools.
Normal simulators can offer only standard vessels and harbours. Using the
DMI simulation system, the pilot trains on an exact copy of the harbour and
the ship that he will be sailing, with the simulator ship reacting with all
the characteristics of the real vessel.
This is possible because of a special mathematical model which is built up
from data on the detailed properties of the specific vessel, harbour and
environment supplied by the customer and fed into the computer.
'Pilots from Singapore who came to Denmark to train on the simulator said
the computer-generated skyline and harbour of Singapore was so accurate that
it made them homesick,' says Mr Stig E. Sand, general manager of DMI's
Marine Simulations Department.
Features such as different lighting, because manoeuvring in daylight or at
dusk is very different, or changing the viewpoint, such as looking at the
bridge's side while checking on the distance to the berth during docking,
can also be built in to the simulation system.
Training of crews is only part of what the simulator can be used for. The
DMI simulator was used in studies of how a bridge over the the Great Belt in
Denmark, which is the main entrance to the Baltic Sea, would affect sea
traffic.
The waterway is used by about 18,000 north/south-going ships every year and
48,000 east/west-going ferry crossings parallel to the proposed bridge every
year. Surprisingly, tests on the simulator with pilots test-sailing ships
under the computer-generated bridge showed that the cable bridge planned
would be too narrow and dangerous for shipping traffic.
A suspension bridge is now under construction over the Great Belt which will
be the longest free-standing suspension bridge in Europe.
Detailed port studies have also been made on the DMI simulation system. For
example, at the busy Dover crossing, the simulating system was used to
develop the optimal placing of the ferry berths so ferries could sail in and
out efficiently and safely. In Singapore, which is the world's busiest
harbour, the simulator was used to evaluate the Pulau Brani terminal and the
channel configuration.
'The efficiency and safety benefits of our simulation system are obvious.
But another important advantage that is often overlooked is the
psychological impact of the simulations. They help the port authority, the
consulting harbour engineer and the navigators to see the problem more
clearly than they have ever done before so they can reach a solution which
can satisfy their conflicting interests,' explains Mr Arne Hasle Nielsen,
Director of DMI.
