FT  28 AUG 92 / Doubters of 'cold fusion' confronted: British Association
for the Advancement of Science
PROFESSOR Martin Fleisch-mann confronted those who doubt his controversial
'cold fusion' discovery on his home territory, Southampton University, at
the British Association meeting last night.
Prof Fleischmann showed a video of a cold-fusion cell, containing a
palladium electrode about 1 inch in diameter and 6in high, immersed in heavy
water. The cell was bubbling intensely and, he said, emitting 1 kilowatt of
excess heat per cubic centimetre - similar to the output of a fast breeder
nuclear reactor.
The experiment was filmed at the laboratory in the south of France where he
and Prof Stan Pons, his American collaborator, are working for a
Japanese-funded think tank.
Prof Fleischmann said technical factors made it impossible for him to
demonstrate a live cell at Southampton. 'It takes about a week to initiate
the process and then you have about 15 minutes to observe the phenomenon,'
he said. 'All we can really do at this stage is to make a video recording.'
Fleischmann-Pons cells have never been run for more than an hour, he said.
They are always shut down then 'for safety reasons' to avoid uncontrollable
boiling and a possible explosion. A cold-fusion researcher at SRI
International in California was killed early this year when a cell blew up.
Earlier, Prof Fleischmann said that the process needed to be made more
controllable and sustainable before anyone could think of building practical
cold-fusion devices to generate energy.
Most physicists have dismissed cold fusion as a delusion. But Prof
Fleischmann said: 'There are hundreds of people working on the topic and I
would say they are spending tens of millions of pounds on it.'
Japan is making a particular effort to pursue the dream of cold fusion as a
clean source of cheap energy for the next century. Early this year Dr Akito
Takahashi of Osaka University published evidence that his fusion cell was
generating considerable amounts of heat.
Prof Fleischmann and Prof Pons have cut all links with the University of
Utah, where their original work was carried out.
The most prominent British critic of Fleischmann and Pons, Prof Frank Close
of the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, made clear yesterday he remained as
sceptical as ever.
Editorial comment, Page 12
