FT  18 JUN 92 / Maastricht: Kohl tries to hold line on treaty
THE GERMAN government and opposition yesterday tried and failed to forge a
common line on the ratification of the Maastricht treaty on European union,
as Chancellor Helmut Kohl insisted that the document could not be
renegotiated.
In an important parliamentary debate intended to stem the growing tide of
public doubt over European integration, the opposition Social Democrats
(SPD) served notice that their approval of the treaty - essential for
ratification - was subject to tough preconditions.
At the same time, the minority Greens called for a national referendum
before ratification, a demand which is supported by some key members of the
SPD, and a by clear majority in recent opinion polls.
Speaker after speaker reminded the German chancellor of the growing public
'Euro-scepticism', and fears for the disappearance of the D-Mark in a future
European currency. They feared German voters were suffering from the same
basic mistrust of political leaders which caused a majority of Danish voters
to reject the Maastricht treaty in their national referendum.
'The policy of European union, which for decades has been taken for granted,
and was in danger of becoming merely boring, is suddenly facing criticism
which is rapidly gaining ground, and appears to be ever more fundamental,'
said Mr Gunter Verheugen, deputy foreign affairs spokesman for the SPD.
'The public was not prepared for European union,' he said. 'The details of
its contents, and above all the introduction of a common European currency,
came as a big shock,' he said.
The same message came from all sides of the house. While they accepted that
the treaty could not easily be renegotiated, several speakers said that it
should somehow be improved, or added to, or corrected with a second
full-scale treaty.
Mr Kohl himself was adamant, seeking to head off the doubts by going over to
the offensive. He rejected any hint of renegotiation, and gave a grim
warning of the dangers of rising nationalism in western Europe, parallel to
the trends in the east.
He warned that fears of the past, and memories of the misdeeds of the Nazi
regime, were still alive in other European countries. There was no
reasonable alternative for Germany than to seek irreversible integration in
a united Europe.
'In western Europe (as in the east) we are not proof against the temptation
of slipping back into nationalistic thinking,' he warned. 'Only with a
determined commitment to European union can we avoid a relapse into the
destructive nationalism of the past.'
Mr Hans-Ulrich Klose, parliamentary leader of the SPD, agreed that Germany
could not and would not be the country to block the Maastricht treaty. But
he also insisted that Germany must not enter the final phase of European
monetary union without a fully fledged parliamentary decision to do so.
That was a formal precondition for SPD support for ratification.
An acceptable deal must also be done with the 16 German Lander on their
future involvement in EC decision-making, the SPD said. The political
parties were largely agreed, but the government was delaying a deal, Mr
Verheugen said.
That is where the real stumbling block to German ratification remains.
