FT  14 FEB 92 / Letter: Insurance industry should tackle issues, says author
of SIB report
Sir, The debate in your pages about insurance office 'early' termination
rates has focused the concern this creates within the insurance industry.
Perhaps, as the person commissioned to produce the report for the Securities
and Investments Board, I can try to isolate what I feel are the underlying
problems that the industry should be concentrating on.
A long term insurance contract incurs the majority of the expense associated
with it at outset. This covers the cost of providing consumers, those who
buy as well as those who do not, with information and advice about the
products available.
Consequently early termination of a policy is a matter of concern to the
issuing company, because it represents a considerable investment on which
the anticipated return will not be obtained either by the company, or
policyholder.
Any shortfall in the company's expectations will largely fall on other
policyholders (in with profit funds), and shareholders. Therefore the level
of terminations of policies, and their impact, is a matter of concern to
advisers offering best advice.
For these reasons we were prepared to tackle an issue which had been
consigned to the 'too difficult' pile, despite the shortcomings in the
generally available data as the report made clear.
I would like to suggest that this debate could serve a useful purpose if it
led to better information being available on an office by office basis.
Clearly, from Mr Scurfield's letter (February 1), at least one office is in
such a position and therefore could take a leading initiative.
However, information is not enough on its own and it needs to be translated
in action. Examination of the practices and selling methods of the better
performing offices would help everyone within the industry to be more
effective, and the regulators to see what practices they should be
encouraging in the interests of the consumer.
The industry needs to take a positive attitude towards the value of
insurance and the professionalism of the large majority of advisers. Too
often criticism engenders negative reactions like trying to shoot the
messenger.
Nick Anderton,
managing director,
AKG,
The Old Dutch House,
134 High Street,
Dorking,
Surrey RH4 1HG
