FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Welsh Water Pounds 69m disposal - S Wales
Electricity sale brings smiles all round
WELSH WATER, which gained a reputation for aggressive expansion away from
its core business following privatisation in 1989, yesterday pulled out of
its most controversial investment when it sold its 14.9 per cent stake in
South Wales Electricity.
Welsh paid about Pounds 51m for the stake in 1990 and 1991 and argued that
the two companies could combine functions like billing to cut costs. But
South Wales saw the stake as hostile and refused to discuss co-operation.
Welsh sold the stake yesterday morning for Pounds 68.7m, or 460p a share,
via a placing underwritten by County NatWest. Welsh realised a pre-tax
capital gain of about Pounds 17.4m after expenses.
Mr John Elfred Jones, chairman of Welsh Water, said the sale reflected lack
of progress in discussing closer co-operation. 'Since the summer their share
price has been very good indeed so we decided to sell,' he said.
He telephoned Mr Wynford Evans, South Wales' chairman, yesterday morning to
tell him the decision. 'It's smiles all round,' Mr Jones said.
Welsh Water's shares jumped 16p to 529p, partly on relief the stake had been
sold.
The stock market was sceptical that savings could be made and some observers
feared Mr Jones was trying to build up a 'Wales plc' type of conglomerate.
Analysts also questioned Welsh's strategy and feared its expansion away from
core, or regulated, water and sewerage services could be criticised by
Ofwat, the regulator, during a 1994-95 periodic review.
Mr Nigel Burton, analyst at SG Warburg, welcomed the sale. 'It clears the
way for them to put forward a more focused core strategy,' he said.
South Wales' shares fell 8p to 473p but Mr Evans said he was pleased Welsh
was off his company's share register.
Welsh hinted that it was considering selling the stake last month when it
announced interim results.
However, since Mr Jones was seen as the driving force behind the investment,
no sale was expected before his retirement next year.
He said Welsh's other non-core businesses would not be affected. These
include a loss-making hotel company and an engineering company, both of
which have been hurt by recession.
Mr Jones said Welsh had 'no home' for the proceeds of the sale and further
investment in existing non-core businesses was unlikely.
