FT  14 JUL 92 / Clinton sets out policy of bargain with citizens
GOVERNOR Bill Clinton's call for a 'new covenant' between the US government
and the American people has left its mark on his party's policy platform.
Echoing the language Mr Clinton has used throughout his campaign, the
platform seeks a bargain in which the government promises to expand
opportunity but insists that its citizens accept greater individual
responsibility.
The covenant would:
Invest more in education, training and child care for people needing welfare
support, but insist that everyone able to work must do so, either in the
private sector or in community service;
Offer all students automatic loans to pay for their college education,
regardless of their family income, but require them to pay them back either
with a percentage of their future income or through some form of national
service;
Support family leave legislation and expanded child care facilities but
crack down on 'deadbeat parents' who do not meet child support obligations;
Raise teachers' pay but require them to maintain and prove classroom
competence.
In its rejection of 'both the do-nothing government of the last 12 years and
the big government theory that says we can hamstring business and tax and
spend our way to prosperity', the platform represents an attempt to appeal
to the centrist Democrats and independent voters who have deserted the party
in the last three presidential elections.
The platform also carries a message of 'no pain, no gain' in its warning
that the massive and rising federal government deficit will require 'fair
and shared sacrifice of all Americans for the common good'.
Dominated by Clinton supporters, the platform committee rejected specific
proposals from Mr Paul Tsongas, Mr Clinton's principal challenger in the
spring primaries, that would have expanded on the theme of necessary pain by
calling for a cap on federal spending and an increase in petrol taxes.
It does, nevertheless, insist on the need for an effort to address the
budget deficit by tackling discretionary spending, reforming entitlement
programmes and raising taxes on the wealthy - even though the platform
relies heavily on the assumption that its economic growth strategy will
generate more tax revenues.
In the critical area of health care system reform, the Democratic platform
falls well short of specifics. The Democrats have not resolved their
disagreements on the best way to overhaul a system in which costs are
spiralling far ahead of inflation, even though their commitment to reform of
some sort is stronger than President George Bush's somewhat half-hearted
tinkering.
The platform does not attempt to decide between the pay-or-play approach, in
which employers would be required to provide their workers with health
insurance or else contribute to a state fund, and the Canadian approach, in
which the government would take over as the sole payer.
Instead, it calls for a 'uniquely American reform' that will provide
universal access to quality, affordable health care as a right.
