FT  27 NOV 92 / Arts: A New Zealand 'Hamlet' - Ballet
The Royal New Zealand Ballet is making its British debut this week in
Northampton's lively Derngate Theatre. The company will mark its 40th
anniversary next year; the decades have been marked by hard slogging to
establish the troupe, but the result, as I saw on Wednesday night, is a
group of artists who work very well indeed. Forces are modest: 26 dancers;
two pianos and a small band of instrumentalists; design that offers wit and
ingenuity rather than egregious display. The effect is pleasing at every
moment, and in the case of a two-act Hamlet, much more than that.
The statutory calling card was a Faust Divertissement which uses Gounod's
adorable Walpurgisnacht romp (where the devil does have the best tunes) for
polite classic entries confected by Galina Samsova and Andre Prokovsky.
There are too many orange shifts for the girls, but the dances are pretty
enough, the company's academic style is well-mannered, and in the Chinese
danseur Ou Lou, we see a virtuoso of beautifully secure and even technique.
The point of the evening, though, is the Hamlet which Jonathan Taylor
(remembered as a dancer and choreographer with Ballet Rambert) has made for
the company. It has much to recommend it. Taylor's decision to follow most
of Shakespeare's action can be called into question, since he becomes
somewhat prisoner of his text. The piece is too long, and would benefit by
editing. But Taylor's mime-dance language is fluent, and no less so his
staging. He benefits from excellent design by Allan Lees. Large stone
obelisks are manoeuvrered to indicate locale. An opening at the back of the
walled set allows for additional scenes - Marcellus and Horatio on guard;
Claudius and Gertrude in state. Costume design offers strong shapes, a brave
use of fabric for clearly characterised identities, a vivid sense of
history.
Taylor is eminently successful in evoking a late mediaeval society as
setting for the drama. The play scene has the hurly-burly of a fair; the
darkness and menace of Elsinore itself is always present. Admirably lit, by
Ian Perkins, filled with the vitality of the New Zealanders' performance,
Hamlet also benefits from a brilliantly conceived and executed score.
William Southgate has turned to the music of the renaissance, adapting and
re-scoring melodies for an ensemble of seven musicians - playing a variety
of real and electronic instruments - which gives a secure and highly
atmospheric base for the action. The staging tells everywhere of what can be
achieved by taste and imagination when faced with the needs for economical
touring, rather than the twin demons of inane expenditure or cheapjack
flummery that we can see with other ensembles currently rattling round this
country.
The RNZB dancers play this Hamlet with tremendous will. They look serious,
gifted artists. Characterisations are clear - how good to see Harry
Haythorne again, as a fussy Polonius - and Taylor's sense of theatre suits
them well. Kilian O'Callaghan's Hamlet is a man of action; Kerry-Anne
Gilberd makes a touching Ophelia. The company's achievements - in
performance; in the artistic attitudes implicit in this ballet - deserve
every praise. And so do the seven musicians who accompany, and greatly
enhance, the production.
The Royal New Zealand Ballet: Derngate Theatre, Northampton until November
28.
