FT  28 APR 92 / Women's pioneer may want to play safe
NOT ONLY is Miss Betty Boothroyd the first woman to be elected Speaker, she
has perhaps the most consistently backbench career of those who have made it
to the Speaker's chair - a destination that has usually been reached via the
cabinet.
To that extent she is as representative of the vast majority of MPs as her
sex makes her unrepresentative of MPs in general - women make up less than
10 per cent of the Commons.
Her election to the Speakership is likely to be her most significant break
with tradition for some time.
Conscious that her performance will have a significant impact on how women
are viewed in political life, she may well settle for being safe rather than
sorry, at least in the immediate future. It is certainly difficult to
imagine her treating the advice of the House of Commons clerks with the same
dismissiveness as that shown by Viscount Tonypandy, when he was Speaker.
Miss Boothroyd is cheerful and approachable, and those Tory critics who have
commented that she might lack the gravitas for the role may be surprised.
She herself has commented that: 'I have an inclination to be schoolmarmish
in the old-fashioned sense'.
MPs have been encouraged not just by the good humour and common sense she
has shown as a deputy Speaker for the past five years, but also for the way
in which her speech yesterday matched the occasion and reflected common
backbench experience. She gave a warm tribute to her predecessor, and
recalled sitting in the Speaker's chair through some of the Commons' duller
and drowsier moments as well as the historic occasions.
Mr John Biffen, her proposer yesterday, reminded MPs that she had
longstanding experience of the endless frustrations of a backbencher's life
and was a member of that 'fraternity in suffering'.
Miss Boothroyd said yesterday that she had never sought or expected one of
the great offices of government. Instead her career has encompassed a
succession of jobs in her party and the Westminster establishment, such as
have been held by many of her colleagues.
After a brief spell in the Labour whips' office from 1974-75, she spent more
time with the European Assembly. She was on the national executive committee
(NEC), Labour's ruling body, from early 1981, and in a few months was on the
organisation sub-committee and urging an NEC investigation into Militant.
Her stance as an outspoken rightwinger, combined with her 'communautaire'
views led one of her supporters yesterday to describe her as on the 'Roy
Jenkins wing of the party'.
At Westminster, she acquired some of the unsung posts that senior
backbenchers seem to gain almost by osmosis - chairing committees looking in
detail at legislation, and serving on the House of Commons Commission, which
takes some of the staffing and 'housekeeping' decisions at the Commons.
Earlier she had also followed some traditional backbench pursuits, including
serving on the all-party foreign affairs select committee from 1979-81 and,
in 1985, successfully harrying the government over a constituency interest
in the Housing Defect Act.
Her arrival at Westminster in a by-election for West Bromwich West in 1973
came only after a long and unsuccessful trudge round various elections and
by-elections, after a Labour party career that had begun with the Labour
league of youth when she was 16, and included years working as a secretary
at Transport House.
Any remaining sceptics at Westminster who doubt that years of political
service can demonstrate the skills needed in the Speakership may find
instead the proof in the remarkable degree of cross-party support she
generated, while organisers for the Tory backbenchers seemed unable to
agree.
