FT  29 APR 92 / Yeltsin shuns 'western dictation': Critics in Russia condemn
Dollars 24bn aid package
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin said yesterday Russia did not share all the views of
the International Monetary Fund and would not allow it to dictate conditions
to Moscow, the Interfax news agency reported, Reuter reports from Moscow.
On Monday the IMF and World Bank approved membership for Russia and other
former Soviet republics, opening the way to a Dollars 24bn (Pounds 13.5bn)
western aid package.
'We do not intend to work to the direct dictation of the IMF,' Mr Yeltsin
said before leaving on a three-day tour of northern Russia and Siberia. 'We
do not share the views of this organisation on everything and we will stick
to our point of view.'
Mr Yeltsin's conservative critics say the aid package will tie the
government's hands and put the country under the west's effective control.
'We do not want to throw ourselves head first into the abyss and grab all
Dollars 24bn at once,' the president said.
Russia intended to work out carefully what to do with the money and in this
way should avoid the 'social cataclysm' which had enveloped some third world
countries after receiving IMF aid, he added.
Peter Norman adds from Washington: Mr Yeltsin's remarks caused no visible
concern at the IMF's Washington headquarters.
'It means that President Yeltsin has perfectly understood the methods of the
IMF,' said Mr Michel Camdessus, the organisation's managing director. That
is 'never to dictate but to agree with the country on a programme which is
basically the programme of that country'.
While some diplomats attending the spring meetings of the IMF and World Bank
dismissed Mr Yeltsin's remarks as political posturing, others looked ahead
to a difficult learning process after the initial euphoria associated with
IMF and World Bank membership for Russia and the other former Soviet
republics had died down.
The US Treasury has put forward a compromise proposal to permit Russia and
other former Soviet republics to join the International Finance Corporation,
the World Bank affiliate which promotes private-sector investment, as soon
as possible.
Membership has been snagged by an insufficient supply of IFC shares
available for Russia and the other republics to take up their full
entitlements in the corporation.
According to a senior US Treasury official, the US has proposed that the
states join the IFC by taking up shares available and be given access to the
IFC's resources. The shareholdings would then be topped up as and when new
shares became available.
