FT  26 MAR 92 / Technology: Outsiders move in - Private sector IT suppliers
are knocking on the doors of government ministries
Thousands of pink forms are rolling off printers at the Northern Ireland
civil service this month as the province prepares to quiz its farmers for
the annual pig census.
This year, for the first time, the job is being done by an outside
contractor following the privatisation of the civil service's IT division
last September. In a test case for the government policy of 'market
testing', the civil service handed over its four ICL mainframes based at
Stormont just outside Belfast to CFM, ICL's facilities management subsidiary
and the UK's second-largest IT contractor to the public sector. CFM's Pounds
20m fixed-price contract will last for five years.
The civil service's main aim was to cut costs and move to a more commercial
footing. But there were other factors as well. In particular, FM has
extricated the government from a tricky problem - how to respond to the
migration of work from the central IT service to the micros and
minicomputers installed by individual ministries.
'Because individual departments were doing more of their own computing, the
central bureau was showing a declining trend in its service over time.
Looking ahead two or three years, one would wonder what it would be like,'
says Derek Alexander, under secretary for IT at the Department of Finance
and Personnel (DFP), which used to run the province's in-house IT service.
In 1989 the IT centre started charging the departments for its service, and
this compounded the problem. 'Systems would drop off but we were stuck with
the same overheads,' says Alexander. 'In government you're expected to
recover your costs, and so we had to raise the charges to customers whose
requirements hadn't changed.'
During that same year the DFP started to think seriously about privatising
IT. After conducting a feasibility study which showed that substantial
savings could be made, it put the contract out to tender in December 1990.
Six bids were received including a proposal for a mangement buyout from the
in-house team.
'We pointed to value-for-money and cost as being major criteria,' says
Alexander. 'But we also emphasised the quality of the technical solution,
the ease of implementation, the plans each firm had to grow the business,
the credibility of the company and its previous FM experience, their
approach to personnel issues and their commitment to the province.'
Strong union opposition to the deal brought the personnel issue to the fore.
None of the bidders would have had the resources to carry out the FM
contract without persuading most of the staff to move. So it was in their
interests to offer an attractive package to DFP staff.
Alexander is pleased with the way things have gone so far. Since CFM took
over, the computer centre has cut its costs by about 15 per cent. Measuring
the saving is not easy because the department had been getting smaller and
would have cut costs on its own if a bid from the in-house team had been
successful. However, the centre is now saving Pounds 1.8m annually.
Some 110 of the 190 IT staff working for DFP were re-employed by CFM while
the rest were offered other civil service jobs. CFM took on 34 staff from
outside but there were no compulsory redundancies.
Perhaps the most visible discipline to be introduced since CFM's arrival is
that of service level agreements between the contractor and its clients
inside the civil service.
CFM has responsibility for providing Northern Ireland's six government
departments with more than 50 computer applications. Apart from the pig
census, there are systems for planning applications, benefit payments, road
maintenance, and the production of poll cards for the general election.
The company has drawn up detailed agreements with each government department
quantifying exactly what they are paying for. The help desk which serves all
departments, for example, is committed to resolving 75 per cent of all
users' problems within 10 minutes.
Service level agreements are a constant reminder of the commercial basis of
DFP's seemingly cosy partnership with CFM. At the moment both companies
share the same building. A harder edge to the relationship may develop after
next summer when CFM moves to its own multi-million pound computer site
currently under construction on a Belfast industrial park.
The move will be good for both parties, freeing 35,000 square feet of office
space for the civil service, and boosting CFM's identity in Northern Ireland
where the civil service contract is only a bridgehead.
CFM will chase further FM work from the civil service - perhaps winning back
some of the minicomputer-based systems that have migrated to individual
departments. However, its plans in the province extend far beyond FM.
Revenue from the civil service deal will help it break into other markets,
says general manager Robert Bailes. In particular, it wants to set up an
electronic data interchange network to facilitate trade between Northern
Ireland and the rest of Europe.
CFM may also undertake work for its parent, ICL. This is likely to be data
centre work and software development which will help reduce overheads for
the civil service.
The company already has 40 software developers dedicated to civil service
systems. Existing government software is always changing - after a Budget
for example - and new systems are usually in train. One current project is
the development of a grant system for small businesses trying to start up in
Northern Ireland.
Should an outside company be entrusted with systems that handle confidential
information? It's not a problem, says Alexander. 'The Ministry of Defence
runs plenty of non-IT operations on an FM basis that are just as sensitive
as anything we handle here.'
