FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (11): Staunch ally in
coldest times - Denmark was an early champion of Baltic freedom from Soviet
rule
MR UFFE Ellemann-Jensen, the Danish foreign minister, stuck his neck out to
help and encourage the efforts of the Baltic states to win back their
independence from the Soviet Union in 1990-1991, when the issue was still
very much in doubt.
His efforts generated an enormous fund of goodwill. The result is that there
are now very close and intensive contacts between Denmark and the Baltic
republics, at government, business and private levels. As a Swedish
businessman said, 'Wherever you go in the Baltic states you constantly run
into Danes.'
Interest in the Baltic states is not to the exclusion of activities
elsewhere, however. Poland ranked as Denmark's 14th largest export market in
the first nine months of this year, with trade at DKr2.2bn, slightly more
than exports to countries such as Austria, Greece and Portugal and much
larger than with any other East European country.
In the former East Germany, activity by Danish building firms is so high
that the phrase 'the yellow peril' has acquired a new meaning: it refers to
the yellow licence plates on Danish commercial vehicles.
At the time when the Baltic republics were still struggling for
independence, in 1990-91, Mr Ellemann-Jensen re-established contacts at
government level with the Baltic countries for the first time since 1940
(Denmark never withdrew its 1921 recognition of the Baltic states as
independent republics).
He ensured that they were present, unofficially, at the conferences which
led to the establishment of the CSCE, and the Danish government financed the
establishment in Copenhagen in December 1990 of a joint information office
for the three countries.
Popular support for the Baltic peoples was manifested by a collection
organised by the Copenhagen newspaper Politiken for the establishment of a
Danish cultural centre in Riga, which was opened in early 1991. The Danish
government doubled up the private collection. When, following the failed
coup in Moscow in August, 1991, the Baltics were finally able to declare
their independence, Denmark was the first country officially to re-establish
diplomatic relations with the Baltics.
Denmark's eager support for Baltic independence cooled relationships with
the Soviet Union to a level rarely reached during the cold war years, said
Mr Christian Hoppe, section head at the Ministry for Foreign Affairs in
Copenhagen. But it earned Denmark a place in the hearts and minds of the
Baltic peoples.
The symbolic high point of the new relationship was the visit to all three
Baltic states by Queen Margrethe and her consort, Prince Henrik, accompanied
by Mr Ellemann-Jensen, in August 1992. The Queen received an ecstatic
welcome. Mr Ellemann-Jensen took the initiative which led to the
establishment in March 1992, of the Council of the Baltic Sea States - a
milestone in cooperation in the region, as it was the first meeting of all
the states bordering the Baltic Sea.
Official plans to assist the redevelopment of the countries of East and
Central Europe were first made in 1989, when a total of DKr820m was
allocated for bilateral and international initiatives in Poland and Hungary
in 1990-91. A new programme was agreed in 1991, increasing the sums involved
to DKr2.1bn a year for the period 1992-94, with priority given to the Baltic
states, Poland and the St Petersburg region.
The government now has nine programmes in operation for support to East
Europe. They include a DKr60m 'democracy fund' (which is being used to teach
the Baltics how institutions are organised in a democratic state),
investment funds, an investment insurance fund, project finance funds, an
environmental improvement fund, and special export credit guarantees, as
well as contributions to Nordic, European and international initiatives.
Denmark's position at the entrance to the Baltic is seen by the Danes as
providing it with important opportunities as the former Communist countries
develop.
Mr Poul Nyrup Rasmussen, leader of the Social Democratic Party, shares the
enthusiasm now felt widely in Denmark about the importance of infrastructure
investments in Danish ports.
The reasoning was that the sea is by far the most efficient means of
transport to and from these countries, where it will take years to bring the
road network up to a satisfactory standard. The port of Copenhagen, which
has Denmark's only freeport, is publicising itself as 'the gateway to the
Baltic.'
Copenhagen, the Danes point out, is the first western port of call for
shipments using the Trans-Siberian railway, the western terminus of which is
Tallinn, Estonia.
The enthusiasm of both official Denmark and Danish business for establishing
links with the three Baltic republics has to do with other factors than
goodwill.
There is a feeling that a small country such as Denmark, with a
small-enterprise culture, can benefit by co-operating with other small
countries, even if their markets will always remain small. But when it comes
to actual investment, the big slices go to Poland and East Germany.
The government-supported Investment Fund for East and Central Europe, which
puts money into joint ventures between Danish and East European companies,
has 20 joint ventures up and running in Poland, four in Latvia, two in the
St Petersburg region and one in Lithuania (the fund does not support
investments in Germany).
Among some of the more outstanding Danish projects in the area are the
development by GN Great Northern and Teledanmark, the state
telecommunications group, of optical fibre cable links between Denmark and
Poland and Denmark and St Petersburg, and a north-south link through Poland,
which will be extended through Czechoslovakia and Hungary and a link
eastwards will be designed to hook-up the Baltic republics.
The St Petersburg link will eventually cross the continent to Russia's
Pacific coast, Japan and Korea.
One of the most successful joint ventures was established in Poland in 1990
by Nordisk Wavin, a plastic pipes manufacturer. The Polish company employs
almost 400 people.
Dansk Olie og Naturgas, the state oil and gas group, is helping the Baltic
republics with planning work for building up a natural gas distribution
network.
House of Prince, a division of Skandinavisk Tobacco, has gained control of
Latvia's state tobacco company, with 400 employees, and sees this is a
platform for future sales expansion in the region.
Danish civil engineering consultancy firms, which have a strong
international reputation, are involved in a variety of projects in east
Europe.
One of the smaller consultancies, Knudsen &amp; Sorensen, of Copenhagen, has
established a strong position in the Baltic republics.
One of its most intriguing projects is a plan for redeveloping tourist
facilities on the coast of Lithuania, a popular holiday resort for German
and Scandinavian holidaymakers in the inter-war years.
'Thomas Mann, the author, and Hermann Goering, Hitler's henchman, used to
have summer houses there,' says Mr Christian Bluhme, the managing director.
