FT  08 DEC 92 / Bonn parties find compromise to calm asylum row
THE German parliament is expected to pass controversial legislation aimed at
curbing the influx of foreigners and at the same time dilute the growing
influence of extreme-right groups which have exploited widespread concern
over the asylum issue to call for racist policies.
The draft proposals will go before the Bundestag when it reconvenes after
Christmas. They were thrashed out between the conservative government
coalition and the opposition Social Democratic Party (SPD) at the weekend
and still retain the individual right to asylum, as guaranteed in article 16
of the constitution. But draft amendments include the right to send back
'manifestly unfounded cases' to a third country. The third countries include
Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Austria and Switzerland, all of which
have borders with Germany.
Border guards, for instance, will be able to decide, often on the spot,
whether to prevent individuals from entering the country, even if they
invoke article 16.
Mr Walter Koisser, head of the Bonn office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, yesterday said that if any person was sent back
to Poland, the conditions for appeal, housing, infrastructure, and for
guaranteeing the safety of the applicant, do not yet exist.
'Poland, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia are young democracies. They have
signed the Geneva Convention on Refugees, but they do not have the
legislation which can translate the convention into practice,' he said. 'I
really do not think that they are geared up towards dealing with a massive
number of cases who will be turned back at the German border.' Germany, for
instance, has already a backlog of 450,000 cases.
A spokesman for the Interior Ministry said yesterday that Germany would
provide financial assistance for those sent to a third country. Over the
past year, economic refugees, and genuine refugees, particularly gypsies
from Romania and Bulgaria, have been repatriated.
'We want to make Germany a less attractive place for economic refugees,' the
spokesman said. But he admitted that it was unclear how the proposals would
stem illegal immigration, which exceeds 100,000 people a year.
The proposals, which are also designed to speed the administrative
procedures, will still allow the courts in Germany to decide if an asylum
seeker is a legitimate applicant. If an asylum claim is rejected, the
applicant will be returned to a third country, where an appeal can be
lodged. However, SPD and UN officials want assurances that those countries
will not repatriate asylum-seekers.
With the case of those fleeing civil war, the governing conservative
Christian Democratic Union, the conservative Christian Social Union, its
sister party in Bavaria, the liberal Free Democrats, and the SPD went some
way towards giving these people - many from the former Yugoslavia - a
special status which will entitle them to the right of temporary residence
in Germany without applying for political asylum.
The SPD and the FDP said the amendments to the asylum law were only part of
a long process towards integrating the country's 6.2m foreigners.
