FT  14 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Exceptionals help push Bimec Industries
Pounds 7.87m into the red
BIMEC INDUSTRIES, the engineering and waste treatment company where there
was a boardroom shuffle in September, has tumbled from pre-tax profits of
Pounds 3m to losses of Pounds 7.87m in the six months to September 30.
There is no interim dividend: last time 0.67p was paid and the final for the
year to March 31 was cancelled shortly before the August annual meeting.
Mr Roy Barber, the company doctor brought in to replace Mr Sam Smith as
chairman and chief executive, said yesterday that the final dividend shock -
coupled at the time with a 20 per cent fall in production and growing
liquidity problems - meant that he had had to do 'a lot of hard talking' to
staunch the flow of business away from Bimec. He also negotiated a further
Pounds 4m facility with Lloyds Bank for general working capital
requirements.
He said that his job now was to reduce gearing from its current 269 per cent
level - at the March year-end it had been 60 per cent - and that meant
taking the group back five years through a divestment programme.
He said he was in discussions with 'three operations interested in the aero
and industrial technology division'. He said the recent devaluation of
sterling had made it more valuable. Much of its turnover is in US dollars or
is dollar-driven; users of the technology include airlines and off-shore oil
companies.
Mr Barber is talking to two parties interested in the environmental
engineering division but said that the cash price would be low. It is
essentially a mechanical and electrical contractor in large buildings hit by
the downturn in the building industry and a general building maintenance
concern built up by Mr Smith. This latter includes Pearl Holdings, acquired
for 3.25m shares then valued at 19 1/2 p each.
These disposals would leave the core water and waste treatment division rump
which 'has considerable experience' and operates in legislation-driven
markets with 'substantial medium- and long-term potential'.
The division recently won a Dollars 2.25m (Pounds 1.49m) plant order from
Coca Cola for a canning facility in Poland. Mr Barber said Bimec would
pursue the soft drinks maker for more orders.
Turnover shrank to Pounds 35.1m (Pounds 53.1m), partly because of the
decline in the mechanical and electrical contracting side, but also because
of the timing of contracts and their completion. Mr Barber said he expected
second-half turnover to return to the Pounds 50m mark if no disposals were
completed.
Operating losses of Pounds 3.43m (profits Pounds 3.52m) were compounded by
exceptional charges of Pounds 3.69m relating to closure, redundancy and
reorganisation as well as provisions for stock deficits and work in progress
valuations. 'There's not much else to come,' said Mr Barber. Losses per
share emerged at 7.1p (earnings 2.6p).
Since the departure of Mr Smith, Mr Bernard Wheeler, a non-executive
director, has resigned and Mr David Dare and Mr Frank Edwards, both
non-executives, have tendered their resignations.
