FT  27 MAR 92 / People: Nabarro for Hambros Northern
William Nabarro, a 36-year-old corporate financier, must have set some sort
of turnover record. He has joined HAMBROS BANK for the third time and for
the second time has left MAI, the financial conglomerate headed by Labour
peer Lord Hollick.
Nabarro has been appointed managing director of Hambros Northern. Based in
Leeds, it will provide corporate finance advisory services and represents
the merchant bank's first move outside the Home Counties.
Hambros has strong links with Yorkshire, helped by the presence of Lord
Halifax on the board of its merchant bank; but Nabarro stresses that it was
his idea to set up shop in Leeds. West Yorkshire has a 'very strong economy'
and a heavy concentration of local company headquarters, so 'more strategic
decisions are taken around Leeds than one might think,' says Nabarro. The
Leeds Permanent Building Society is an old client of Hambros and the bank
also advises several other local names such as William Cook, Persimmon, and
Evans of Leeds.
Although Nabarro is reluctant to elaborate on his reasons for leaving MAI,
it seems as if he is probably better at advising companies than running
them. MAI is a long standing Hambros client and Nabarro has been involved
with the firm for more than a decade and advised on several of the company's
major acquisitions.
After a two-year spell as MAI's group development manager in the mid-1980s,
he rejoined the group in late 1989 and was given the task of building up a
specialist market research and business information operation. MAI spent
well over Pounds 50m acquiring NOP and MIL, two of Britain's best-known
market research firms, and a 25 per cent stake in Addison Consultancy. The
intention was to float these supposedly fast-growing companies on the stock
market at a fancy multiple which would improve MAI's own lowly rating.
However, the recession intervened, the profits of the new information
division slumped and MAI is left with what looks like some rather expensive
acquisitions on its hands. Nabarro is not retaining his seat on the MAI
board and has been replaced as chief executive of MAI's information division
by 31-year-old Graham Hill, previously managing director of Milpro, MAI's
international healthcare research company.
*****
Mark Archer and Nancy Curtin have been appointed directors of BARING
INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT.
*****
David Holcroft has been appointed md of Woolwich Unit Trust Managers, a
subsidiary of the WOOLWICH BUILDING SOCIETY.
