FT  12 FEB 92 / International Company News: SAS reclaims Linjeflyg control
SCANDINAVIAN Airlines System (SAS) yesterday bought 51 per cent of
Linjeflyg, the Swedish domestic airline, in a move to consolidate its
position in the Nordic market.
The deal involved SAS reacquiring a half-share in Linjeflyg that it had sold
only 17 months ago to Bilspedition, the Swedish transport company, while
gaining another 1 per cent from ABA, the other main shareholder in Linjeflyg
and one of the owners of SAS.
Terms were not disclosed, but Bilspedition said it would make an accounting
loss of SKr150m (Dollars 25.7m) on its share of Linjeflyg, which it had
purchased for SKr475m in September 1990.
Although Linjeflyg would remain an separate airline, SAS said it would
closely co-operate with it and appoint a project group to rationalise their
business activities.
SAS hopes that its takeover of Linjeflyg will increase its market share of
domestic flights within Scandinavia from the current level of 57 per cent to
at least 70 per cent.
Mr Jan Carlzon, the SAS president, said the airline needed to strengthen its
domestic market position in anticipation of the deregulation of European air
transport in 1993.
'In contrast with almost all of our European competitors, SAS competes with
a number of other local operators in its home market,' said Mr Carlzon, who
noted that KLM controlled all Dutch air traffic.
Domestic competition between SAS and Linjeflyg would have led to losses for
both companies if it continued, Mr Carlzon contended.
The government, which has promised to increase business competition, said it
approved the SAS deal, although it was criticised by the country's
anti-trust authorities. The government owns half of ABA, which controls 43
per cent of SAS.
SAS sold its half of Linjeflyg in 1990 amid predictions that deregulation of
Sweden's air traffic market would reduce the carrier's profits.
At the time, Bilspedition viewed Linjeflyg as a means to expand its air
freight services. However, a 25 per cent fall in domestic passenger traffic
and rising operating costs made the venture an unprofitable one.
In return for selling its share of Linjeflyg, Bilspedition will acquire the
Jet Pact express service for SKr30m. Jet Pact is owned by SAS and Linjeflyg.
