FT  13 MAR 92 / Retailers hope a breathing space will save them: John
Thornhill finds a cautious high-street response to Budget changes in the
uniform business rate
THE Budget gave 470,000 business ratepayers a welcome 'breathing space' by
freezing the increase in the uniform business rate in real terms for a year.
The benefits could be significant. Mr Richard Dixon, spokesman for
Storehouse, the retailing group embracing BhS, Richards, Blazer, Mothercare
and Habitat, estimated the change would add more than Pounds 2m to the
company's profits. He said: 'What the government has done is undoubtedly
very helpful.'
But more fragile retailing companies, particularly in south-east England
where the UBR burden has been heaviest, fear the breathing space may be
followed by the last gasp.
Several expressed disappointment that the government had still not tackled
the valuation difficulties that have bedevilled the rating system since its
introduction in 1990.
Mr Michael Horwitz, a commercial estate agent who represents many retailers
in London's West End, said: 'One hates to be a sourpuss and say 'thanks but
it's not enough' but the rateable values are still too high. They were
assessed at the peak of the market and are now out of line with commercial
reality.'
The pressures are most acute in the south-east, where property prices were
highest in 1988 and subsequent falls steepest. The rental value of Zone A
retailing space in South Molton Street in London was Pounds 235 a sq ft two
years ago but is now about Pounds 116.
The Department of the Environment accepts that problems with the UBR stem
from the revaluation exercise that accompanied its introduction.
Assessments of the rateable value of business properties were based on their
notional rental value - those valuations were made at April 1 1988, right at
the peak of the retail property market.
Companies complain that the appeals process against revaluations is slow and
cumbersome. In the meantime, they have had to pay bills in full.
Last October Mr Michael Portillo, junior environment minister, told MPs that
on September 30 there were 673,237 outstanding appeals concerning
non-domestic rates in England and Wales.
When the government introduced the UBR it made transitional arrangements to
allow businesses in the south-east to adjust to the rates increases by
phasing in the rise. However, these arrangements end when a new business
moves in.
In the Budget, new businesses were given the right to inherit transitional
relief. Mr James May, head of the British Retail Consortium, welcomed the
attachment of the rate to the property rather than the tenant. However, he
warned: 'If someone has taken on a new shop and already lost transitional
relief he may be faced with a rates bill twice as high as his neighbour.'
One example of that anomaly is the two Oxford Street shops of Jane Norman,
the fashion retailer. Its shop at number 153 opened before UBR, has a
rateable value of Pounds 237,500 and faces a nominal rates bill of Pounds
91,675. With transitional relief it will pay Pounds 44,173 this year. Its
property at 524 Oxford Street opened after the introduction of UBR with a
rateable value of Pounds 247,500 and did not inherit the phasing-in relief.
It has to pay the full rates bill of Pounds 95,535.
The DoE accepts there is a discrepancy but says retailers opened stores
knowing the size of bill they would face.
THE British Chambers of Commerce National Council yesterday welcomed Budget
measures to ease the burden of the uniform business rate.
It said it was 'delighted' with the decision to limit the increase in the
UBR to the rate of inflation and to improve arrangements on transitional
relief. However, some members felt it did not do enough to aid recovery.
