FT  29 OCT 92 / Arts: Body blow surprises and Monopoly for real - Cinema
THE CRYING GAME Neil Jordan
GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS James Foley
UNLAWFUL ENTRY Jonathan Caplan
BOOMERANG Reginale Hudlin
MON PERE CE HEROS Gerard Lauzier
In the cinema true surprises are rare, formulary plot twists ten-a-penny. We
all know the standards: the political conspiracy romp in which the nice old
senator proves to be an assassins' ringleader; or the spy movie in which Our
Man turns out to be Their Man; or, in this week's films, the cop thriller
with the handsome policeman unmasked as a fiend in blue (Unlawful Entry) and
the romantic comedy (Boomerang) with the girl next door beating the upmarket
glamourpuss to Eddie Murphy's affections.
Neil Jordan's The Crying Game has a surprise that truly surprises - a
body-blow surprise - and we critics are asked not to reveal it. Problem: the
film is unreviewable without doing so. Solution: you the reader, if planning
to see the film, should jump this review until you have done so. You Have
Been Warned.
In Ireland a black British soldier (Forest Whitaker) kidnapped by IRA
terrorists strikes up a nervous friendship with his guard (Stephen Rea). The
soldier recalls his girlfriend in London and asks the guard to look after
her if he dies. When the soldier does die the IRA man debunks to keep the
tryst. An initially chaste romance begins, disturbed only when the
girlfriend (Jaye Davidson) is revealed to be no girl at all. One night the
camera pans down the disrobing body to show the shock-horror evidence.
The message of The Crying Game seems clear. Nothing is what it appears to
be; nobody is glibly reducible to type. In war preconceptions are the
currency of cruelty. (By simplifying your enemy's identity, how much easier
to dispose of him). And in love sexuality has a runaway habit of defying
expectation and categorisation.
No recent film has boasted more intriguing themes and Jordan sets up his
story with skill. The rancid glitter of the fairground where the soldier is
captured; the sun-pierced forest where the IRA's unmerry men bait their
captive; the nervous swap-shop of stories and confidences between Rea and
Whitaker.
Early on, the story's minutiae as well as its main lines are luminously
precise: from the surreal tenderness of Whitaker's cricket-sweatered
flashback images of his beloved to the poignancy of the prisoner's hood that
conceals his face but amplifies his sorrow.
But when the film reaches London it becomes wrapped in a motivational
miasma. Either side of his pivotal surprise, Jordan's weakness for enigma
fogs the story and characters. How does our IRA terrorist turn so fast from
nerveless freedom-fighter to romantic softie? And how is it we know so
little about the emotions of Dil (the girl-boy), including his exact
reaction to an ex-lover's death?
Jordan either underdirected or overcast newcomer Jaye Davidson, who drifts
through his role's androgyne mysteries in a bewildered monotone. He might be
in a different movie from Miranda Richardson as the hero's IRA nemesis, a
high-gloss Mata O'Hari sweeping in from Ireland to play the film's devil ex
machina. And both might be in a different movie from Adrian Dunbar's
chilling low-key terrorist leader, born in the grainy intimism of an IRA
docudrama.
A film about the many-facetedness of human life ends up too many-faceted for
its own artistic life. The Crying Game reaches its climax in a flurry of gun
play and multiplying corpses. But long before that we have been lost in the
crossfire between mystery thriller and message movie, between Antonioni
enigma and mean-streets melodrama.
I never saw David Mamet's play Glengarry Glen Ross on stage, but on screen
it goes off like several dozen Fourth of July rockets. Each rocket cluster
is played by a famous actor - Al Pacino, Jack Lemmon, Alec Baldwin, Ed
Harris, Alan Arkin, Jonathan Pryce - and director James Foley goes around
lighting the blue touchpapers. Meanwhile the set, the offices of a
semi-crooked Chicago real estate firm, is lit from outside by hellish city
lights plus the odd storm.
This is Death Of A Salesman for the dying blaze of yuppie glorification: a
satire on confidence-trickster consumerism, with six characters in search of
the telephone deal of their lives. Can they con Mr and Mrs Middle America
into buying their half-developed slabs of land? And can they earn the
incentive prizes promised by the boss. First prize, a Cadillac. Second
prize, a set of steak knives. Third prize, 'You're fired.'
The talk is non-stop, yet the film is never non-filmic. If movie performing
is about acting between the lines, we gasps at the skill shown here by
actors inserting the swiftest visual subtexts into millisecond pauses.
Pacino is a human lizard batting reptile eyelids and hissing virtuoso
cadenzas of scorn. Lemmon is a modern Willy Loman, a crumpled jacket with a
crumbling ego gesturing somewhere inside. And the ensemble around them play
Mamet's game of Monopoly-for-real as if their lives depended on it.
'Being a policeman is all about helping people' says patrolman Ray Liotta in
Unlawful Entry. Ah yes. We the audience, of course, know better. We know
that if Mr Liotta is a helpful policeman Ross Perot is the next President of
the United States. Mr L has been investigating the case of the black prowler
who attacked pretty housewife Madeline Stowe before fleeing into the night.
One evening Liotta takes Stowe's husband Kurt Russell along for a patrol
ride and whom should they run into but the culprit? Liotta stands by with a
sweet smile and tells an unhappy Russell to beat the fellow up.
Things get worse. Liotta is soon chasing Miss Stowe, sabotaging Russell's
career and reviewing such extracurricular possibilities as rape and murder.
Jonathan Kaplan (The Accused) directed and Lewis Colick wrote this suave
little screamer, which only disintegrates into tin-whistle noises at the end
when too many coincidences are invoked to get Stowe, Liotta and a loaded gun
together in the same room.
Boomerang, the new Eddie Murphy comedy, has a plot that flies out
promisingly into the firmament and then returns to knock out the entire
cast. We are asked to believe that Mr Murphy, playing a marketing exec for a
cosmetics firm, is black America's most wanted man: wanted by man-eating
model Grace Jones, here resembling a sex-starved Easter Island statue, and
by Eartha Kitt, here resembling a caricature of Eartha Kitt. He is even
wanted, for the film's central on-off romance, by gorgeous but capricious
tycoon Robin Givens.
This trio of femme fatales keeps the film airborne for about half an hour.
Then the jokes run out and Mr Murphy is given flight descent instructions by
Hollywood romantic protocol. He must fall for the girl next-door, or
next-office (Halle Berry), and the film must fall headlong with him.
Reginald Hudlin, late of the shoestring comedy hit House Party, directed:
which only shows that enlarged budgets and enlarged stars guarantee no
enlargement of wit or invention.
What week would be complete without Gerard Depardieu? Having just discovered
America, the beefy star is back in Gerard Lauzier's Mon Pere Ce Heros. The
story is nugatory. A divorced father takes his teenage daughter (Marie
Gillain) to a Pacific holiday resort and watches her grow up, swarmed around
by boys. But all you need to turn a routine French comedy into a
near-masterpiece is to roll out the human barrel. Here he is, lank of hair,
fat as a malmsey butt, exuding charm, wit and passionate nonchalance. No
other movie actor today can so regularly turn the humdrum into the
humdinging.
