FT  26 FEB 92 / German companies see worse to come
FOR THE first time in three years, more German companies expect business
conditions to get worse than to get better.
On the other hand, an overwhelming majority consider that the economic
situation is good, or at least satisfactory. Investment intentions remain
absolutely balanced between companies planning an increase and those
intending to cut back.
These were the key conclusions of the bi-annual survey of business opinion
of the German Chamber of Commerce and Industry (DIHT), published yesterday,
which confirmed the growing pessimism in the economy after two remarkable
growth years.
'The economy in Germany is taking a pause for breath,' according to Dr Franz
Schoser, chief executive of the chamber. 'But in spite of a clear weakening,
there are still no symptoms of a recession.' In spite of that, he admitted
that there had been a 'slump' in business confidence.
The survey covers more than 20,000 enterprises in west Germany, and some
4,000 in the east. It concludes that 25 per cent think the economy will get
better, 27 per cent that it will get worse, and 48 per cent that it will
remain much the same. Those figures compare with 40 per cent expecting an
improvement, and only 13 per cent a worsening, one year ago.
Key elements in the grimmer mood include the lack of impulse from exports,
and the fact that the extraordinarily high consumer demand at the time of
German unification is falling back. Another reason for pessimism, the survey
suggests, is the high level of wage demands from trade unions, as well as
rising inflation, high interest rates and increased tax and social security
payments.
There is still a sharp contrast in the expectations of businessmen in the
two halves of the country: in the east, where economic activity collapsed in
the wake of unification, there is a pick up. Forty-six per cent of
enterprises expect an improvement in their economic situation, against 42
per cent expecting no change, and only 12 per cent expecting further
deterioration. The mood is clearly more optimistic among small and
medium-sized enterprises than in the big businesses, Mr Schoser said.
The surprising conclusion is how many businesses in the west still consider
the economic situation 'good': no fewer than 38 per cent, while a further 48
per cent consider it satisfactory, and only 14 per cent poor.
As far as investment plans are concerned, the boom of the past three years
has clearly ended, leaving plans steady, but not falling. The principal
motive for investment is rationalisation, the DIHT says, and not expansion.
Environmental protection is also a growing reason for investment, regardless
of the economic climate.
The survey shows some stark differences between business sectors in their
assessment of the economic climate. Thus only 29 per cent of enterprises in
the investment goods industries think their situation is good (against 51
per cent last year.)
The sharpest slump in mood is in the machine engineering sector, while there
is more optimism in electronic industries, precision engineering, and
optics.
The attitude is more cheerful in consumer goods, food industries, wholesale
and retail trade, transportation, and above all in construction, where there
was the least deterioration. In the building industry, for example, 39 per
cent still saw the situation as 'good', and 53 per cent as 'satisfactory'.
