FT  25 JUN 92 / Lloyd's attacked by Names over Pounds 2bn 1989 loss
LLOYD'S OF LONDON came under sustained criticism from the Names whose assets
provide the market's capital base at its annual general meeting yesterday,
when losses of Pounds 2.06bn for the 1989 year were announced.
An estimated 5,200 Names, nearly a sixth of the insurance market's
membership in 1989, attended the meeting, held at its City headquarters, and
dozens spoke out in a meeting lasting a record 6 hours 6 minutes.
But although many were fiercely critical of Mr David Coleridge, Lloyd's
chairman, and the governing council, the meeting was generally
good-tempered, with very little heckling.
Mr Valentine Powell, chief executive of the Association of Lloyd's Members,
the biggest Names' organisation, which represents over 9,000 Names, said
afterwards: 'The meeting was held in a more constructive manner than
generally expected.'
Mr Coleridge fielded questions in a marathon 5 hour 20 minute session during
which the harshest attacks came from Names on syndicates which participated
in 'spiral' reinsurance business, in which syndicates and London market
companies reinsure each other's catastrophe exposures.
Mr John Harris, one of over 4,000 Names on the lossmaking Gooda Walker
syndicates, for example, said: 'Some of us put our trust in the history and
reputation of this institution and we feel totally betrayed.'
Gooda Walker's losses amount to Pounds 491m, nearly a quarter of the total.
Mr Harris received warm applause when he said that he had been offered
totally 'irresponsible advice' by the Gooda &amp; Partners agency - which was
part of the Gooda Walker empire - to become a member of several 'spiral'
syndicates.
Another Gooda Name, Mr Michael Deeny, said that Lloyd's had 'failed to
regulate the market and allowed the disastrous growth of the spiral'.
'We had hoped you might acknowledge some level of responsibility for what
has happened,' added Mr Deeny, who said that Gooda Walker Names were victims
of 'at best gross negligence and at worst fraud'.
Mr Coleridge himself bitterly criticised the performance of Gooda Walker and
Feltrim 'spiral' syndicates, whose losses had 'crucified Names'. Lloyd's
would 'not flinch' from taking action once a number of reports into the
circumstances of these losses were complete.
Many Names criticised Lloyd's for the imposition of a levy on the Central
Fund, which will cost them an average of Pounds 20,000 a head, while others
focused on the Council's rejection of a bail-out scheme to help the hardest
hit Names. In his opening address, Mr Coleridge reported that Pounds 398m of
the Pounds 2.06bn loss had occurred because of a continuing influx of United
States pollution and asbestos-related claims. 'Huge uncertainty continues to
surround the outcome on pollution claims,' he added.
Mr Coleridge faces a further grilling this week from a delegation of about
40 members of parliament. According to Lloyd's, invitations were issued to
all 651 MPs.
Names' anger defused, Page 9
Lex, Page 20
