FT  14 MAY 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Tin producers' association set
to end export quotas by 1994
THE ASSOCIATION of Tin Producing Countries is likely to end tin export curbs
by 1994 because low prices are already forcing members to produce below
their quotas, according to a senior association official, Reuter reports
from Kuala Lumpur.
'Based on the current stock depletion rate, we may continue the export
quotas for another one-and-a-half years,' said Mr Redzwan Sumun, the
producer group's executive secretary.
The association's members - Australia, Bolivia, Indonesia, Malaysia,
Nigeria, Thailand and Zaire - account for about 60 per cent of world
production and they have operated a system of annual export quotas since
March 1987.
Prolonged low prices, caused by a large stock overhang and depressed demand,
have caused mine closures and production cuts.
To help reduce the overhang, the association's current agreement limits
members' exports to a total of 87,091 tonnes in 1992, down from 95,849 in
1991. Members produced less than their quotas in 1991 and analysts say the
trend could continue if prices remain low.
Some analysts estimate the ATPC members' 1992 production at 85,000 tonnes.
The Malaysian tin price surged yesterday to an eight-month closing high of
MDollars 15.05 (Dollars 5.92) a kilogram, reflecting rising consumer
interest, after recently dropping almost to a low of MDollars 13.99 a
kilogram.
Non-ATPC members Brazil and China, the world's top two producers, have
voluntarily limited exports in recent years.
Mr Redzwan put world tin stocks at slightly below 40,000 tonnes at the end
of April, marginally lower than a year ago but well above the ATPC's
market-equilibrium target of 20,000 tonnes, or six weeks' of world
consumption.
A Brazilian high court has delayed an expected ruling on a dispute over
mining rights at Brazil's biggest tin mine, Bom Futuro, after a judge asked
for more time to study the case, the Gazeta Mercantil reported.
The Gazeta said two Supreme Court justices had voted to give the rights to
the Ebesa consortium when a third justice called for a delay to review the
process.
Ebesa, a group of seven companies led by Paranapanema, the world's largest
private-sector tin ore producer, was granted the right in November to mine
the open-cast site in the Amazon state of Rondonia.
In December, wildcat miners won a court injunction against the Ebesa
consortium while appealing to win the right to work Bom Futuro.
State of Rondonia officials have said that despite the injunction about
1,500 wildcat miners continue to work the site. In March, police and
government officials confiscated 48 tonnes of tin produced by the wildcat
miners.
The Gazeta did not report whether a new date had been set for the ruling.
