FT  15 OCT 92 / The Don has gone - let the battle begin: The party and
policy consequences of the departure of backroom maestro Kanemaru
CRUISING past the Japanese parliament building in the centre of Tokyo, a
taxi driver summed up the collective disbelief of Japan over the resignation
of Mr Shin Kanemaru, the political godfather, kingmaker, powerbroker and
much more: 'He should have resigned a long time ago, but I never thought he
would.'
There was surprise that the disgraced and distant Mr Kanemaru had resigned
because of public controversy. But there was also a deep sense of concern
over what would happen next - and a realisation that the departure of one
man would not change a complex political structure with many pretenders to
be the next Shin Kanemaru.
The demise of the Don has already provoked struggles within the faction over
which he has presided. It is the largest faction in the ruling Liberal
Democratic Party (LDP), claiming credit for having appointed the past few
prime ministers and proud of its ancestry, traced back to Kakuei Tanaka, who
ruled in the early 1970s and beyond.
Mr Kanemaru, 78, and an MP since 1958, has been the target of unusually
bitter public protests over the past month, after having admitted that he
received Y500m (Pounds 2.3m) from a scandal-stained parcel delivery company
called Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin. But he had presumed that his political life
would return to normal after the protests died down.
Instead, the protests continued and members of his own party this week
demanded that he resign, apparently convincing Mr Kanemaru that his
influence was permanently damaged.
His motives may never be known, as he is spare with his words, which are
generally delivered in an almost unintelligible mumble. (When he first
admitted receiving the Y500m, the statement had to be read again for the
confused gathering of journalists.)
Mumbling aside, Mr Kanemaru has clearly been the most influential Japanese
politician in recent years. He has supported the concept of
'internationalisation,' been active in improving relations with North Korea
and China, and played a decisive role in the drafting of the
recently-announced emergency economic package.
Unlike most western countries, the departure of the most powerful politician
will not mean a shift to the left or right in policy. Mr Kanemaru is no
ideologue. His vision was that of the backroom maestro, who could raise
campaign funds, and muster the numbers within his faction and the party to
push through a piece of legislation or secure the appointment of a prime
minister.
Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, the present prime minister, owes his term in office to
Mr Kanemaru. It is a measure of his dependence on the Don that he has been
as confused as most Japanese by the events of recent days. When the
resignation was confirmed, the prime minister, dazed by the day's events,
shook his head and said: 'It's a very unfortunate thing.'
Perhaps Mr Miyazawa has a vision of a troubled future that includes months
of factional infighting and a crippled LDP. The faction, one of five, could
split, creating more indecision than usual in a party that took months to
respond coherently to the outbreak of the Gulf war. Mr Kanemaru's exit may
be a setback for Japan's cherished aim of a political role appropriate to
its international economic influence.
His chosen successor was Mr Ichiro Ozawa, a good friend of the US ambassador
to Japan, Mr Michael Armacost, and the man most foreign governments would
like to see at the helm. But the premature departure of Mr Kanemaru has left
Mr Ozawa without the numbers he needs to secure his power, and facing a
challenge from Mr Seiroku Kajiyama, a former justice minister, whose
backroom skills are as polished as his ambition is fierce.
Japanese are agreed that Mr Kanemaru represents the 'old ways,' but Mr
Kajiyama is even more of a throwback. He has cultivated strong ties with
business interests, ensuring his ability to then cultivate younger
politicians, who are dependent on factional patrons for funds.
However, Mr Kajiyama does not have the prestige needed to influence other
LDP factions or opposition parties, as was frequently done by Mr Kanemaru in
guiding legislation through parliament.
The weakness of Mr Kajiyama could provide an opportunity for Mr Noboru
Takeshita, the former prime minister, to preside again over the faction,
which he headed in the 1980s. The role is akin to that of Deng Xiaoping's
reign in China - there is not necessarily a government or party title, but
there is immense power, exercised selectively and out of public view.
Months of scandal and the embarrassing resignation of a government
powerbroker should provide much hope for opposition parties, but Japan's
largest opposition party, the Social Democratic Party, was yesterday
distracted by a dispute over its leadership. Younger MPs, frustrated by the
SDP's apparent determination to remain eternally irrelevent, demanded that
the leader, Mr Makoto Tanabe, also resign.
Mr Tanabe was accused by the younger MPs of allowing his close friendship
with Mr Kanemaru to compromise the party's strategy against the LDP.
It is typical of the hierarchical nature of Japanese politics that their
shared roles as elder statesmen created a bond far more durable than their
ideological differences.
Editorial comment, page 18
