FT  19 SEP 92 / Arts: The quiet conductor - Andrew Clark talks to Kurt
Sanderling on his 80th birthday
FEW OF the world's senior conductors have escaped the cult of personality as
successfully as Kurt Sanderling, who today celebrates his 80th birthday.
Apprenticed at the Berlin City Opera in 1931, Sanderling fled to the Soviet
Union when the Nazis came to power and eventually became Evgeny Mravinsky's
deputy at the Leningrad Philharmonic. When he returned to Germany in 1960,
it was to the communist East - as music director of the fledgling Berlin
Symphony Orchestra. He was 60 before he made his name in the West, standing
in at short notice for Klemperer in London in 1972.
Sanderling remains an underrated musician, partly because he has never
followed fashion or sought popularity, but also because he is difficult to
package commercially for modern audiences: there is no unnecessary gesturing
in his platform manner, he is publicity-shy and dislikes recording. And yet
he commands the respect of the world's leading orchestras, who respond to
his musical authority, his quiet charm and integrity. As German conductors
go, Sanderling is unusual: he is equally at home in the German and Russian
Romantic repertoire, having the structural grasp of his native tradition,
combined with the emotional warmth of the Russian school.
Anyone who makes their way to Sanderling's modest home in the East Berlin
suburb of Pankow gets a courteous welcome. His living room is full of
double-basses belonging to his second wife Barbara, a former orchestral
player who now teaches. Sanderling, looks fit and speaks in gentle, measured
tones. Why, as a Jewish refugee in the mid-1930s, had he chosen Russia and
not the West? 'There was no choice - you went where you could get bread and
work. I had an offer from Bodanzky at the Met, but I couldn't get a US entry
permit. I went to Moscow because an uncle there got me an immigration visa.'
After learning a wide repertoire in Moscow and the provinces, Sanderling was
invited to conduct the Leningrad Philharmonic at its wartime base in
Siberia. He stayed with the orchestra nearly 20 years. 'When I arrived my
knowledge of Russian music was extremely limited. That changed quickly. I
got to know some fine music that was hardly played in the West - Arensky,
Taneiev, Rimsky-Korsakov's late works. I wanted to conduct them. I was the
first to conduct all three Rakhmaninov symphonies.
'Nothing was forbidden, except for Richard Strauss during the war. I
conducted Hindemith, Schoenberg and the German classics. But we had
obligations, often depending on the stupidity or wisdom of those in power.
One year La Valse would be bourgeois decadent, two years later it might be
acceptable. There was no point fighting it. The public also had its taste -
we did Tchaikovsky's Fifth Symphony several times a year, which is why I no
longer have any desire to conduct it.'
Sanderling's Soviet exile left an indelible stamp. It took him away from the
sentimental German school of Tchaikovsky interpretation championed by
Nikisch and Furtwangler, nurtured a respect for foreign cultures which his
chauvinist German upbringing had denied him, and led to friendship with
Shostakovich. 'From the time he wrote his Fifth Symphony, it was as if he
was telling our common life-story. His whole music was a protest against the
life he was forced to live, and that was to a large extent my own life.
No-one escaped the Stalinist terror, the awareness that people 'disappeared'
without being able to talk about it. Russia saved my life and gave me my
career, but my feelings are ambivalent.'
Sanderling's reputation as a non-party leftist intellectual was in his
favour when he applied to return to Germany. There was no question of
settling in the West: it was difficult enough getting permission to leave
Leningrad. 'The Berlin I returned to was totally different to the city I had
left, but I wanted a spot I could call my homeland. That doesn't mean to say
I found East Germany beautiful and just, any more than the Weimar Republic
and Soviet Union had been.'
In his 17 years with the Berlin Symphony Orchestra he became known for his
qualities as an orchestral trainer and his wide musical sympathies. Today
his repertoire is deliberately small. He still conducts a handful of
Shostakovich symphonies - the Eighth is a favourite - and continues to
enthuse over Tchaikovsky's Fourth, which he believes is easily
misunderstood: 'It's a tragic symphony. The main theme of the finale is
based on a Ukrainian song about a lonely tree battered by the winds of fate
and finally trampled. If you treat it like a triumph, it sounds banal.'
In recent years he has been increasingly drawn to music with a positive
spirit, such as Bruckner, and is much in demand for Brahms - whose
symphonies he will conduct in a cycle with the Philharmonia next year in
London. His Beethoven, Schubert and Schumann are of the old school, with
doubled woodwinds and other changes in instrumentation which he believes
restore the 'chorale-like' balance of orchestral sound intended by early
romantic composers.
He loves the Sibelius symphonies, but says they demand a degree of
preparation that only a chief conductor has time to achieve. Of the Mahler
canon, he restricts himself to Das Lied von der Erde, the Fourth and Ninth
symphonies and Deryck Cooke's performing version of the Tenth. 'Mahler was
the hero of my dreams when I was young, but I can no longer believe him when
he's joyful - it's so obvious he's forcing himself. His nature is to grieve
for the world.'
His operatic work has been sparse - despite the fact that he started out in
the theatre, as a repetiteur in the Berlin company led by Bruno Walter. 'You
can't imagine how wonderful it was to conduct the Fidelio quartet, standing
next to the producer on stage while someone played the piano. The next time
it was the stage music in Act 2 of La boheme, and then something else.
That's how I learned to conduct.'
