FT  14 NOV 92 / Travel: Swaying across the shimmering plains - African
elephants are reputed to be impossible to train. But three of them carried
Michael J Woods through the Okavango Delta - on their terms
SIX WHITE, black and tan wild dogs, the rarest and most endangered of
Africa's carnivores, reluctantly rose to their feet and disdainfully stepped
aside as we pushed into the thick thorn scrub where they were resting in the
heat of the day.
For the first time in my life I felt quite invisible, my universally feared
human form subsumed into that of the African elephant on which I was riding,
for the dogs had no inkling of our presence. All they noticed were the great
grey ghosts padding almost silently past. This magic was to be repeated
again and again during our safari. For almost a week, I became an elephant.
Even giraffes with small calves and notoriously grumpy lone bull buffaloes
allowed us to come much closer than I had believed possible.
Sadly, the only animals it was necessary to avoid were wild elephants and we
had more than our fair share of encounters during our five-day elephant-back
safari from Abu's camp, run by Ker and Downey in Botswana's Okavango Delta.
Generally speaking, distant animals would be easily deterred by the sight of
Randall Moore, the owner of the three riding elephants, Abu, Bennie and
Kathy. He accompanied us on foot and was armed in case of problems. Twice,
though, we were followed. On the first occasion a troubled Kathy repeatedly
sent deep, rumbling growls far into the forest from her vibrating body; on
the second, it needed two shots, fired over the head of a persistent bull,
before he would retreat.
Each of the three adult elephants carried two passengers on its back,
sitting in a mixture of saddle and play-pen with the handler or mahout
riding astride the elephant's neck. From here the animals were controlled
with verbal commands, prods from the bull hook and rewards of cattle nuts.
African elephants are reputed to be impossible to train, being larger and
supposedly of more uncertain temperament than their Indian counterparts.
While Randall Moore has proved this to be a fallacy, I always felt our trip
was conducted on the elephants' terms.
Once, when they worked themselves into a frenzy of fear over a non-existent
danger and finally bolted with us on board, there was little Abu's handler
could do about it, in spite of beating him over the head with the bull hook
until its fibreglass handle shattered, sending the business end spinning
into the undergrowth. The elephants simply came to a halt when they felt it
was safe to do so.
Riding an elephant in these conditions was a little like sitting upstairs in
a silent, invisible, all-terrain, open-top, double-decker bus driven by an
ever hungry, somewhat obstinate and slightly unpredictable eight-year-old
guided by calls and prods from the top deck. They are an ideal form of
transport in the intricate web of sandy islands and shallow, clear waters of
the Okavango, for they are undeterred by all but the thickest thorn scrub
and the view from high on their backs is unsurpassed.
Our expeditions were enlivened by the presence of seven baby elephants, aged
between three and five, orphans of culling operations in Kruger national
park, which turned each outing from a gentle walk into a foray with a gang
of vandals, tearing branches from trees, uprooting grasses and shrubs and
generally leaving a trail of destruction behind.
When we walked along the channels which snake through the delta, the babies
would indulge in serious feeding, snatching succulent rushes as they passed
or pulling down with their small trunks the carefully selected fluffy
seed-heads of reeds.
Although the water is rarely more than 6ft deep, occasional pools exceeded
that, and then the youngsters would completely disappear. First a trunk tip
would come questing above the surface - followed by a little elephant, black
and gleaming, which would bob up before slipping under again.
Now and then a spirit of abandon would overtake the babies and they would
thrash and beat the water with their trunks, throwing spray high into the
air with great exuberance. Once, we came to a small mud wallow and this they
could not resist, falling on to their sides and working their way into the
dark morass, or picking up gouts of mud and tossing them over their backs
and under their bellies.
The activities at Abu's Camp are not restricted to elephant riding, and keen
fishermen may take a mokoro (a canoe punted by a local guide) out on to the
water where the catches can be prolific. Game drives are also on offer, and
one afternoon I escaped with a driver and a safari truck to look for the
wild dogs again.
After a two-hour search, we came across them lying in long grass and stayed
with them as they began to grow increasingly restless, greeting one another
and preparing for an evening's hunt. With the sun sinking in the sky, they
rose as a group and trotted off to look for supper.
Ever the showman, on the last morning Randall Moore found it impossible to
conceal his circus roots and treated us to a whole series of elephant film
stunts, from mock charges to babies crawling through the sand. This,
together with the occasional need to fire over the heads of wild elephants
and the slow acting sedative administered to Kathy after her nervous bolt on
the first day, left me slightly uneasy.
On the other hand, I treasure the memory of riding with a slow, steady
elephant rhythm across a shimmering plain of waving golden grass, studded
here and there with copper-leaved mopane trees and bordered by a frieze of
rustling lala palms, their blue-green foliage making feathery rosettes
against the clear blue sky of the Kalahari winter.
Michael Woods' elephant-back safari was arranged by Twickers World, of 22
Church Street, Twickenham, TW1 3NW, 081-892-7606, and was run from Abu's
Camp in the Okavango Delta, Botswana. The camp has en-suite facilities and
includes such luxuries as a daily laundry service and hot water bottles.
Elephants make unstable platforms for photography, so keen photographers
could combine an elephant-back safari with a stay at one of Ker and Downey's
photographic safari camps in the delta. The winter weather is dry,
pleasantly warm during the day but rather cold at night. Potential elephant
riders should note that they will be required to sign a comprehensive
release form, and agree not to sue, before being allowed to ride. From
London, elephant-back safaris cost from Pounds 3,037 per person for a total
of nine days.
