FT  13 APR 92 / Exporters to demand more government aid
EXPORTERS are to demand a change in government policy after a meeting during
the general election campaign at which they were assured by Mr John Wakeham
that an incoming Conservative government would address their criticisms.
Mr Wakeham, a former energy secretary who is to be leader of the Lords in
the new government, held a confidential meeting a fortnight ago with
representatives of export organisations including chambers of commerce, the
Confederation of British Industry and the Institute of Exports.
'The point was to drive home the way the Treasury strangles support for
exports while our competitors get much more help,' said an export
association official who attended the meeting.
The organisations had asked to meet Mr John Major, the prime minister, after
deciding that repeated meetings with junior trade ministers had failed to
convey their concerns to the highest levels of the government.
Some of the bodies represented at the Wakeham meeting wanted to make their
disenchantment with government policy public. They were persuaded to keep
their concerns private by Mr Wakeham's assurance that their complaints would
be investigated by a new Tory government.
A strengthened and streamlined approach to export promotion is likely to be
one of Mr Michael Heseltine's priorities in his new role as trade and
industry secretary.
An exporter who attended the Wakeham meeting said: 'We pointed out that
Labour had come out with positive proposals to help exporters and the
Liberal Democrats were fairly clear. But we had been through the Tory
manifesto, and other than vague references they had not said what they would
do to help exporters.'
Exporters want a significant reduction in export insurance premiums to match
levels elsewhere in Europe. They also want a consolidated advisory service
to promote exports. The CBI last week focused on export promotion as one of
its main priorities for the incoming government. It proposed concentrating
all export promotion at the Department of Trade and Industry.
