FT  11 APR 92 / Food: Set-price and sensible - Nicholas Lander eats out on a
reduced budget
ASK ANY restaurateur about the effect on trade of his customers' continued
financial restraint and he will probably just shrug his shoulders. In the
restaurant business, customers have been voting with their wallets for the
past nine months.
They have been doing so intelligently, often trading up at the same time as
reducing their monthly spending on entertaining. Couples who had allocated
Pounds 100 a month in their domestic budget for eating out would have
enjoyed two meals at Pounds 50 each. Now, many are choosing to go out just
once. But, to make it even more memorable, they are spending Pounds 70 to
Pounds 80. Thus, 25 to 30 per cent saved at a stroke - and still a great
deal of pleasure.
This has had two consequences. Those restaurants that are popular and priced
sensitively become even more in demand as customers stick to safe
destinations. And there are huge swings in business - one week a restaurant
can be very busy, the next week quiet - as overall demand falls.
Even those in the trade are now following their customers' new habits. A
leading hotelier from the West Country might come to London for a few days'
holiday. He will eat out as often as before, and in many of the same places.
But he will do so only at lunchtime, taking full advantage of the vast
number of good-value, set-price lunches on offer at virtually all London
restaurants and hotels. In the evening, he will go to the theatre.
The set-price lunch at a sensible price is (fortunately) here to stay and it
is something we must not feel ashamed to utilise - even if that means
telling your guest to save embarrassment. What restaurateurs must be forced
to realise - most effectively, by consumer demand  - is that a realistic,
fixed-price dinner menu would also be a great incentive. If the Department
of Trade and Industry could then find time to legislate for the inclusion of
the service charge in all prices, a meal out could be costed even more
accurately.
But there is one type of eating house which has been ignored recently and
which should be due for a surge in custom - the well-run neighbourhood
restaurant. Over the past few years, these have lost business to the more
glamorous competition in the city centres or the country. But as family
budgets begin to bite, these establishments will be able to offer an evening
away from the stove and sink - and all-round savings, too.
