FT  20 AUG 92 / Japan's investors unmoved by bank support measures
JAPANESE investors were yesterday unmoved by government efforts to restore
confidence in the markets, as reaction to an emergency package on Tuesday
was generally muted.
Investors remained unconvinced that the government's support measures would
help either the financial system or the depressed stock market. The Nikkei
average of the leading 225 shares, which fell to a six-year low on Tuesday,
managed to recoup only 341.33 points to 14,650.74, largely attributable to a
technical recovery.
In the package on Tuesday, Mr Tsutomu Hata, finance minister, announced
measures to curb the sale of shares by banks as a means of easing pressure
on the stock market.
The Tokyo financial community was surprised by Mr Hata's admission of the
severity of the problems facing Japan's economy and financial markets.
However, a lack of concrete measures to solve the problems of non-performing
loans discouraged many business-men.
Low volume on the stock market yesterday indicated an underlying market
scepticism. Traders noted that private investors remained on the sidelines;
institutions, the market's main investors, also maintained a neutral stance.
'We're not in a hurry to buy,' said an official at Nippon Life, the
country's leading life assurance company. 'There will be plenty of chances
in the near future,' he added, implying that the market had further to fall.
Prospects for an early market recovery remain bleak because of fears that
corporate earnings will stay depressed in this fiscal year. 'We haven't hit
bottom yet. The market could go to as low as 12,000,' said Mr Jason James,
strategist at brokers James Capel.
Investors now await the government's package of fiscal measures, including a
supplementary budget, which is expected to inject Y6,000bn (Pounds 24.7bn)
to Y8,000bn into the economy.
Mr Yasushi Mieno, governor of the Bank of Japan, expressed support for the
finance ministry's emergency package. He said the central bank intended to
back the ministry's efforts by ensuring price stability and maintaining
credit order.
Mr Mieno, who had been reluctant to comment on movements in the stock
market, expressed concern over the effect of sliding share prices on
corporate sentiment.
World Stock Markets, Page 31
