FT  18 MAY 92 / Management: Bosses on the up and up, down under - There is
concern over rises in executive pay in Australia
Australian bosses seem to be awarding themselves increasingly fat pay rises,
while at the same time expecting blue collar workers to act in the national
interest and accept modest increases.
Peter Cook, federal industrial relations minister, says he is 'concerned' by
forecasts that bosses' pay will rise by 12 per cent this year, when workers,
covered by Australia's centralised wage bargaining system, will receive
increases of 2.5 per cent.
The figures reflect a disparity which has become more noticeable since the
Labor Party began to open the economy to external pressures in the
mid-1980s, ending 80 years of protectionism. This has led to a more
competitive market for senior executives. But while top salaries have been
rising sharply, the government has sought to improve overall industrial
competitiveness and control inflation by holding down average wages.
Workers have been angered by evidence that the increases of their bosses
have not always borne much relation to performance, especially in companies
run by entrepreneurs like Alan Bond, former chairman of Bond Corporation
Holdings and Christopher Skase, former head of the Qintex media and leisure
group.
The largest rise in directors' fees in 1990 was for John Spalvins, then
managing director of the Adelaide Steamship group, whose pay rose 56 per
cent to ADollars 1.2m (Pounds 500,000). Adsteam subsequently fired Spalvins
under pressure from its bankers and the company is now being financially
restructured.
While no one is prepared to defend the entrepreneurs, many consultants say
Australian salaries and fees are relatively low by international standards
and suggest that an adjustment was inevitable.
Towers Perrin, the international management consultancy, recently produced a
comparison of executive pay which concluded that Australian salaries were in
the bottom quartile of the 21 countries studied.
The total package for the chief executive of a medium-sized Australian
company was put at Dollars 271,000, (Pounds 150,500) the lowest of any OECD
country surveyed. Equivalent salaries included Dollars 400,000 in the UK,
and Dollars 747,000 in the US.
Matthew Butlin, a senior official of the Business Council of Australia, says
disparities of this kind have been behind the increase in top pay which has
taken place as the economy has opened up.
However, the apparent underpayment of Australians may be misleading. Simple
comparisons fail to take into account the job security traditionally enjoyed
by Australian managers. In addition, many Australian businesses are
subsidiaries of overseas corporations which make important decisions at
parent company level. This means that the responsibilities of Australian
executives are often not comparable to those of managers in
independently-owned companies of similar size.
Nevertheless, the trend in executive rewards is clearly upwards, and there
are few signs that the boom is petering out, although it has been slowed by
18 months of flat or negative economic growth.
The government has set up an inquiry into the issue which will report later
this year. However, early indications are that the inquiry is finding it
difficult to identify ways of forcing executives to share the restraint
being urged on the rest of the community.
From the government's point of view, the best hope is likely to be a greater
linkage between pay and performance and greater scrutiny of top pay by
remuneration committees and non-executive directors. Peter Kent, chairman of
the Australian Shareholders' Association, says such a development would be
strongly supported by small shareholders, few of whom object to high
salaries for executives who produce results.
However, John Egan, a veteran Sydney remuneration consultant, says the
introduction of results-related remuneration is being strongly resisted by
managers who are unaccustomed to the idea of risking part of their income -
or their jobs.
'We have to find a path forward where we are not encouraging greed, but we
are genuinely responding to sustained performance by managers who are also
at risk of losing their jobs if they don't perform. That is not going to be
easy to do,' said Egan.
