FT  24 JUN 92 / Clinton sets tax sights on foreign companies: The
presidential hopeful's new economic plan selects a tempting target
FOREIGN companies have always been a tempting target for US politicians
seeking to raise new revenues without taxing their voters more heavily.
Governor Bill Clinton, the Democratic party's presumptive presidential
candidate, has now joined the chorus of politicians who claim foreign
companies evade US taxes by distorting the transfer prices at which they
ship goods to their subsidiaries in America.
In his new economic programme, Mr Clinton says he wants to raise Dollars
45bn (Pounds 24.3bn) over the next four years by 'cracking down on foreign
companies that prosper here and manipulate tax laws to their advantage'.
His proposals on transfer pricing echo those contained in a bill submitted
jointly by Mr Dan Rostenkowski and Mr Bill Gradison, the Democratic and
Republican leaders of the House of Representatives ways and means committee.
The changes set out by Mr Rostenkowski and Mr Gradison are designed to pay
for some Dollars 11bn of tax breaks for US-based multinational companies,
but also play along with a strong current of congressional hostility to
foreign, especially Japanese, companies.
The measures have provoked fierce international opposition both because of
the additional tax burden they would create for some foreign companies, and
because in several instances they conflict with the US's bilateral tax
treaties.
Mr Rostenkowski and Mr Gradison have made it clear they do not plan to bring
their bill forward in the current session of Congress, but they intend to
gauge the degree of support or opposition to individual components to help
them put together a package next year. With Mr Clinton signing on, foreign
companies are even more concerned that these measures could be carried in
the next Congress.
Sir Robin Renwick, the British ambassador to the US, has complained to Mr
Nicholas Brady, Treasury secretary, about the Rostenkowski-Gradison
proposals, and warned they could, if passed, lead to pressure for
retaliation. Other European countries have also registered their objections
with Treasury tax policy officials.
The Rostenkowski-Gradison bill proposes to tax foreign-owned companies
operating in the US as if their profit margin on gross receipts were at
least three quarters of the industry average, regardless of whether or not
they in fact made a profit. This measure is prompted by congressional
suspicions that foreign companies artificially lower their US profits by
manipulating transfer prices with their subsidiaries.
The transfer pricing measure has possibly aroused the most vigorous
opposition from foreign companies and governments.
The German parliament's finance committee has already taken issue with
current US treatment of transfer pricing - which many tax professionals
complain operates under the scarcely veiled assumption that all foreign
companies are out to cheat the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), and ignores
differences in profitability between a company which actually produces and
sells goods and one which merely acts as an importing conduit, without
itself adding any value. Companies would lose at both ends as most countries
would not allow them to deduct tax levied by the US on their hypothetical
profits.
The real purpose of the measure, however, is to coerce companies into
negotiating transfer pricing arrangements with the IRS.
Congressman Duncan Hunter of California has led the assault on foreign
corporations. On the intellectually dubious grounds that all companies ought
to be making a profit of at least 9 per cent on assets - or else they would
not bother to invest in the US - he claims foreign companies are cheating
the US Treasury of more than Dollars 30bn a year.
Mrs Shirley Peterson, IRS commissioner, is more circumspect; although she
says there may be some income shifting, she estimates the maximum tax loss
at Dollars 3bn.
Other measures in the Rostenkowski-Gradison package, however, are also
provoking international annoyance.
They include:
Excise taxes levied on reinsurance premiums paid to a foreign company to be
raised from 1 per cent to 4 per cent, and new compliance rules to be
imposed.
Benefits under a US tax treaty with another country to be limited to
qualified residents of that country. For example, a UK company with Dutch
ownership would not be allowed to claim zero withholding under the UK-US tax
treaty.
The US has written a similar limitation of benefits clause into some
bilateral treaties it has recently renegotiated, but this measure would
impose the limitation regardless of what the treaty said.
Foreigners who hold 10 per cent or more of the stock of a US corporation to
be taxed in the US on the capital gain, if they sell the stake. This clause,
however, would not override any bilateral treaty provisions.
The reinsurance excise tax proposal is causing particular concern to British
companies as, in current practice, they are exempt from the levy. 'I think
it's going to hit hardest at Lloyd's,' said Mr Bruce Lassman, head of US tax
affairs at accountants Ernst and Young in London.
Overseas governments, on the other hand, are more irritated by what they see
as politicians' latest attempts to milk foreign companies because they
influence fewer votes.
'Every year it's the same. Because of their domestic problems, they cannot
find revenue raisers without alienating one lobby or another, so they hit on
the foreign companies,' complained a Washington-based diplomat.
