FT  11 DEC 92 / International Company News: Chicago pushes novel line in
catastrophes - The two new insurance futures launched today by the CBOT
THE Chicago Board of Trade, the big US futures market, today launches two
innovative futures contracts that track quarterly property insurance claims
for losses from such catastrophes as earthquakes, floods, riots, tornadoes
and hurricanes.
But, in spite of a 15-year development period, the products may be too novel
for the US insurance industry, and may be arriving at a time when state
insurance regulators are discouraging 'creative financing' on insurance
company balance sheets.
The nation's largest casualty insurers, State Farm and Allstate, are not
participating in the index of claims reporting that underpins the futures
contracts. Only one state insurance regulator has said it will allow the
contract to be used for hedging risk, and then only on a limited basis. That
regulator is in Illinois, the CBOT's home state.
However, in another sense the CBOT's timing is impeccable. Insurance
companies traditionally lay off their underwriting risk through reinsurance.
A series of catastrophes in the past year - the Chicago flood, riots in Los
Angeles, and Hurricanes Iniki and Andrew - created enormous price volatility
and overwhelmed the reinsurance markets.
In fact, the CBOT shifted its focus to the catastrophe contracts only late
this summer, setting aside plans for less volatile homeowners' insurance
futures which had been scheduled for a September launch.
Mr Richard Sandor, executive managing director at Kidder Peabody in New
York, and one of the pioneers of financial futures, says the disasters
created capacity problems in the reinsurance business, and an opportunity
for the CBOT.
'What we're responding to is what is perceived to be a need for capital and
risk management in the insurance market,' Mr Sandor says. He expects some
reinsurance companies to be in the CBOT pits on opening day, but says
primary insurance companies have 'displayed healthy scepticism,' and 'don't
really know what futures are.'
Such resistance does not daunt CBOT officials. 'I can remember when 41
primary dealers of US government securities told me they didn't want
anything to do with a Treasury bond futures contract,' says Mr Leslie
Rosenthal, chairman of the CBOT's insurance subcommittee. 'Now we have the
biggest bond contract in the world, and every dealer uses it to hedge.'
The exchange will initially rely on its own stable of independent traders to
fill the insurance pits. CBOT traders have a natural affinity for disasters,
having bet their fortunes indirectly on drought, war and famine in the
Chicago's grain pits for the past century.
The CBOT hopes talks with regulators in New York, California, Texas, and
Florida will produce rulings that insurance companies can constructively use
the contract for risk management. In the meantime, Mr Rosenthal says
interest from offshore reinsurers has been growing. He also thinks that if
the futures contracts prove profitable, US insurance companies will find the
means to trade them.
Exchange executives note that most big insurers have financial trading
subsidiaries that are allowed to use futures. Allstate is under the same
Sears umbrella as Dean Witter Reynolds, for example, and Prudential has a
big brokerage arm.
The CBOT cites an industry study that pegs property insurance premiums
subjected to catastrophic loss at Dollars 41.6bn in 1990. However, Mr Marc
Rosenberg, vice-president of the Washington-based Insurance Information
Institute, says the size of the potential market for futures is much
smaller.
He says the amount of insurance premiums written for all property-related
coverages (excluding cars) is a little less than Dollars 80bn. Since
reinsurance purchases typically amount to just 10 per cent of gross
premiums, futures will be chasing a small portion of the estimated Dollars
8bn insurers spend on reinsurance each year.
Mr Rosenberg contends that industry scepticism stems from an apparent
contradiction: the exchange calls the contracts hedge vehicles, when US
insurance companies are not allowed to use them for that purpose. 'There is
a large gap between the (CBOT's) promotional materials and the realities of
the insurance business,' he says, dismissing the contracts as speculative
investments.
However, others take a more benign view. Mr Michael Pinter, chairman of
Kemper Reinsurance, one of the US's largest reinsurance groups, says: 'We're
being neutral at this stage. The concept is very interesting. The CBOT has
put a lot of time and effort into this, and we're going to wait and see.'
Mr Pinter says the main issue is whether the exchange will be able to
generate enough early transaction volume to make the contracts viable. While
regulatory hurdles are important, he thinks the contracts will survive if
they can prove their economic usefulness. 'The dollar potential is there,
and the volatility is certainly there,' he says.
The exchange starts today with national catastrophe insurance futures and
options and eastern catastrophe futures and options. It plans western
catastrophe contracts and health insurance futures in the first quarter of
1993.
