FT  29 MAY 92 / Canary Wharf: What Now For Docklands - High-speed link is
stopped in its tracks - Docklands no longer a dream destination
LONG-delayed plans to build a Pounds 4bn high-speed rail link between London
and the Channel tunnel seem certain to be thrown into further turmoil by
Canary Wharf's financial collapse.
Last October the government rejected British Rail's plans for a line running
into the capital from the south and announced that the private sector would
be invited to build the link through Stratford and the east Thames corridor.
The assumption underlying the plan was that the private sector would relieve
the government of the financial burden involved because of the potential for
property gains from lineside developments.
However, the combination of Canary Wharf's insolvency, uncertainty over the
outlook for the regeneration of the east Thames corridor and a massive
overhang of empty property means it is highly improbable that the private
sector will see any potential for property gains for years.
The result may be that the construction of the line will be further delayed
until well into the next century. It may also raise fears in south London
that the original BR proposals for a southern approach might be re-adopted.
BR has been trying since 1987 to win government permission to build a new,
faster line to the Kent coast to provide extra capacity for Channel trains.
However, its plans have been stymied by a combination of Treasury objections
to the cost and the political controversy over the route.
After the rejection of two previous proposals for the line's construction -
one by BR alone and one by a consortium of BR and the private sector - BR
last year came up with its definitive plan for a line that would help to pay
for itself by providing capacity for high-speed commuter trains as well as
the Channel tunnel expresses.
In what Sir Bob Reid, BR chairman, described in an unguarded moment as 'a
pantomime', the plans were thrown out by the government in favour of an
eastern approach proposed by Ove Arup, the consulting engineers, and
strongly advocated by Mr Michael Heseltine, then environment secretary.
Although appealing to the extent that it fitted in with Mr Heseltine's
vision of regenerating the east Thames corridor, the route appeared to make
little financial sense. Not only did it cost Pounds 500m more than BR's
preferred route: it also attracted Pounds 285m less in user benefits because
of the fewer commuters it would serve.
The government dismissed such criticisms, claiming that the potential for
the line lay in the development gains from the exploitation of sites along
the line from Stratford in east London to Rainham in Essex.
Doubts were cast on that assessment immediately when BR disclosed that
Pieda, the planning consultants it had retained to study the route options,
had assessed the potential benefits at Pounds 100m.
The government has nevertheless pursued its intention of finding a private
developer to fund the route. Earlier this year it appointed Samuel Montagu,
the merchant bank, to help it find a developer. BR's role has been reduced
to that of preparing a project ready for the private sector to take over at
the end of the year.
Growing uncertainty over the outlook for property gains in the east Thames
corridor, however, means it is increasingly unlikely that a private sector
developer will be found. That carries two possible implications: first, that
the Channel tunnel link will be further delayed or second, that the
government has to admit defeat and take the project back into the public
sector.
There is just one other possibility. If the Jubilee Line extension were to
be cancelled, the Department of Transport would be left with Pounds 1.6bn to
spend over the next three years and nothing to spend it on. It is just
conceivable that Mr John MacGregor, transport secretary, might consider
deploying the windfall by making an early start on the Channel tunnel link
via Stratford: but the possibility is remote in the extreme.
