FT  30 APR 92 / UK Company News: EC regulations could halt Lloyds bid - The
Battle for Midland
LLOYDS BANK'S attempt to buy Midland could founder in a matter of a few
weeks, depending on the outcome of an arcane calculation on the magnitude of
another bank's UK assets which has to be made by the European Community
competition directorate, DG4, in Brussels.
Lloyds has set the pre-condition that its Pounds 3.6bn offer terms will only
be available to Midland's shareholders if both its bid and Hongkong and
Shanghai's rival bid for Midland are referred to the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission in the UK.
In order for this to happen, DG4 has to surrender jurisdiction for judging
the competition issues raised by Hongkong Bank's bid. It has to decide that
the questions should be examined by the UK competition authorities, the
Office of Fair Trading and the Department of Trade and Industry. Thereafter,
the DTI would have to decide whether to refer the bid to the MMC.
Under the EC Merger Regulation, the relatively new legislative framework for
EC competition policy, the question of whether DG4 or a member country's
authority has jurisdiction is decided by a number of tests. In the case of
the Hongkong Bank bid, the key condition relates to the percentage of its
assets which are in the UK.
An individual EC country's competition authority automatically has
jurisdiction over companies involved in a takeover bid if more than two
thirds of the companies' combined EC turnover is in that country. In the
case of banks, which do not have sales or turnover in a conventional sense,
the two thirds yardstick relates to assets.
The bulk of a typical bank's assets are loans. If two thirds of loans made
by Midland and Hongkong Bank are to customers in the UK, then the Hongkong
Bank bid would fall under OFT and DTI jurisdiction.
It is probable that more than two thirds of Midland Bank's loans are to UK
customers. However, the issue in the case of Hongkong Bank is more
problematic.
When it announced its Midland bid, it published a geographical analysis of
assets, showing that Pounds 14.4bn were in the UK and Pounds 604m in
continental Europe.
This would appear to be prima facie evidence that the DTI has jurisdiction
over this bid. However, Hongkong Bank's asset figures are misleading.
They are believed to relate to the origin of the assets. In other words,
they show that Pounds 14.4bn was lent by its UK operations. It is not the
origin of the loans which matters, under the merger regulation but it is the
destination which counts.
It is not clear whether that Pounds 14.4bn was lent to UK customers. There
is separate controversy over the definition of a UK customer.
Much of the Pounds 14.4bn will have been lent to other banks in the London
interbank market. If the funds were lent to the UK branch of a foreign bank,
it is unclear in the merger regulation whether the loan counts as a UK loan
or a foreign loan.
DG4 is at this moment trying to establish the destination of Hongkong Bank's
assets. In the coming month it will make a decision about whether it has
jurisdiction on this basis.
Lloyds is particularly anxious because it does not believe it has any right
to scrutinise the figures supplied by Hongkong Bank to DG4.
It may have to rely on the DTI to vet the figures. DTI officials made it
clear that they would take care in checking DG4's work. They dislike
surrendering authority to Brussels unless they have to.
But even if, in the coming weeks, DG4 does surrender jurisdiction to London,
Lloyds is by no means home and dry. It would then have to persuade Mr
Michael Heseltine, the new President of the Board of Trade, that there were
grounds for making a reference of the Hongkong bid to the MMC. That would
probably be an even tougher challenge.
