FT  11 DEC 92 / Survey of Scotland (8): Banking on strengths - The financial
sector
SCOTTISH EQUITABLE, the life assurance company, is setting up a life
assurance company in the German state of Wurttemberg, a joint venture with
the composite insurance company Wurttembergische.
It thus becomes the first Scottish life company to finalise a joint venture
with a German company - and one of the first British companies to enter the
German life assurance market since Germany agreed, early this year, to
liberalise its life assurance market under the EC's third life assurance
directive.
The deal is one of a number in which Scottish financial institutions are
entering the continental financial services market - a sign of the current
vigour of Scottish life offices, one of the few growth spots in the
financial communities of Edinburgh and Glasgow.
In the first six months of 1992, income from new premiums for the nine
Scottish life companies, of which Standard Life is easily the biggest, rose
by no less than 35 per cent: from Pounds 2.3bn to Pounds 3.2bn. At a time
when Scottish banks and other companies in financial services have been
cutting jobs, the Scottish Life increased its staff employed in Scotland by
five per cent in the first half of 1992; to 14,100. Unsurprisingly, offices
of the life companies still proliferate in Edinburgh.
In March 1992, according to the Department of Employment, some 217,000
people worked in banking, insurance and finance. Among financial centres
outside London Scotland is eclipsed only by the north-west of England in
terms of employment, but it has its own particular strengths.
Unlike any other British region it has its own clearing banks. It has a
notable community of independent fund managers. Yet it has few building
societies - and no markets. Its representation in non-life insurance is
largely confined to General Accident, the Perth-based composite. There are
only a few merchant banks.
The financial sector exploits the perception that Scots are canny and
trustworthy in handling money. Scottish Financial Enterprise (SFE), the
sector's trade association, puts 'Trust the Scots' on all faxes.
The three Scottish banks are suffering along with their English
counterparts. For a time they were shielded - the Scottish economy held out
longer against recession; but two draw more than half their business from
south of the border.
A few weeks ago the Royal Bank of Scotland announced 3,500 job cuts in its
branch network over the next five years - a move which follows that of other
clearers. Last week it announced a further big drop in pretax profits after
making increased provisions for bad debts. But operating profits were up. In
the same week it mounted a robust defence of the Pounds 6m bonus paid to Mr
Peter Wood, the director who set up and then sold to the bank its insurance
arm Direct Line.
Clydesdale Bank, a subsidiary of National Australia Bank, shed about 500
jobs at its Glasgow headquarters. But it increased operating profit by 13
per cent last financial year, despite a jump in provisions for bad and
doubtful debts.
Among the fund managers, the Edinburgh-based partnership of Baillie Gifford
appears to be pulling strongly ahead of its Scottish rivals, with Pounds 5bn
under management, double the 1987 figure. It was recently selected to manage
part of Wellcome Trust's portfolio, the medical charity, and sees this as
recognition that it is on a par with the big London-based independent fund
managers.
In Glasgow, Murray Johnstone has largely recovered from a period of
uncertainty; it had Pounds 3.4bn under management in the middle of the year.
Scottish institutions, whose overseas orientation - if they had one - used
to be towards the US, are now looking with a little more interest to the
continent of Europe. Last spring Bank of Scotland took a 45 per cent stake
in Finannziaria Italiana Mutui (FIM), which operates in the expanding
Italian residential mortgage market. It also has a joint venture in Germany
with Quelle Bank.
Last month Scottish Financial Enterprise became a founder member of the
Association of European Regional Centres (AERFC), which was formed to
represent the interests of secondary financial centres in the EC.
