FT  22 APR 92 / Management: Dealing the cards for happy families / A look at
an American childcare initiative
Uh-oh - it's going to be one of those ghastly days. Cathy Jennings, a
research chemist at a US pharmaceuticals company, has just woken up to find
her three-year-old daughter standing by her bed, complaining of a sore head
and 'feeling kinda hot'.
For hundreds of thousands of working women, this is one of the worst moments
in trying to juggle a career and motherhood. Either they stay at home and
miss a day's work or dump the child with a relative or minder, pray the
fever is not too serious, and fret all day.
Result: they feel guilty either way. It might be different if Cathy were to
work in New Brunswick for Johnson &amp; Johnson, the healthcare business which
has its headquarters in the New Jersey town. For Johnson &amp; Johnson is at the
forefront of a growing movement among US companies to provide much better
support for employees with family problems.
Those difficulties can range from childcare to ministering to the needs of
geriatric parents - an emerging problem for baby boom employees now entering
middle-age.
Johnson &amp; Johnson not only provides an on-site childcare centre at its New
Jersey headquarters, as do a substantial number of US companies, but it also
has its own sick bay, where mildly-ill children can be dropped off by their
parents.
This is just one facet of a policy, introduced three years ago, which states
that 'we must be mindful of ways to help our employees fulfil their family
responsibilities'.
That is no idle commitment. Johnson &amp; Johnson's other initiatives include:
personal counselling and a nationwide network to help employees find
services for elderly relatives; paid time off to provide emergency care for
family members and up to a year of unpaid leave to look after sick
dependents; subsidies to off-site childcare centres; and on-site classes in
topics such as parenting, nutrition, toddler health and stress management.
Such a coherent programme is still very much the exception among US
businesses, according to a recent study* by the Families and Work Institute,
an independent research organisation.
This puts Johnson &amp; Johnson alongside IBM, Aetna Life &amp; Casualty and Corning
in an elite group of four (2 per cent) of the 188 leading US companies which
the institute surveyed.
The report argues that the four have an integrated, well thought out
approach to the issue and a commitment to change the group's culture, linked
with achieving equality of opportunity between men and women at work.
But while most companies are far less committed, the survey found that
two-thirds of them had evolved some sort of family programmes, and the trend
is clearly growing.
The latest annual report on US employee benefits published by the Hay Group
consultancy** says that 'family-oriented benefits such as long-term care,
work-at-home policies, flexible hours and paternity leave are becoming more
widespread,' with almost 50 per cent of companies offering the latter two.
Why are American businesses suddenly embracing the family? A crucial factor
is demographics. Family issues tend to be a woman's responsibility, and a
surge of women into work over the past 20 years means that 45 per cent of
the US labour force is now female.
The US, moreover, will face a shortage of skilled labour in the 1990s,
making it more important not only for companies to hold on to skilled
employees, but to make them as productive as possible, minimising
absenteeism and stress.
The Families Institute argues that these factors will force a re-evaluation
of some basic management tenets. For example, the idea that personal
problems should be kept at home becomes 'an increasingly difficult and
unrealistic philosophy' when children have only one parent lenges the
assumption that a company's performance depends on having all its employees
turn up to work every day, a conviction which prevents many US managers from
granting time off or work-at-home options. 'It seems counter-intuitive to
managers that employees could actually produce more at home,' the study
says.
The Institute reckons that companies tend to pass through three stages in
their approach to family issues. First, one or more executives start to
champion the idea that it is in the company's interest to respond to
childcare issues because these are taking a toll on productivity.
At this point, however, the management remains opposed to a serious
commitment. It argues that this is not a business issue and worries that it
would be interfering in individuals' lives or laying itself open to charges
of inequity by providing benefits mainly taken up by women. The result is
the half-baked development of one or two policies, such as a referral
service for childcare.
In stage two, the company's leaders join the crusade and the business moves
from piecemeal initiatives to an integrated policy covering all work-family
issues.
In stage three - the pinnacle reached by Johnson &amp; Johnson and its three
peers - managements try to co-ordinate their work-family programmes with
efforts to break through the 'glass ceiling', the invisible culture barrier
which is said to prevent many women getting top jobs.
One issue such an approach can address is the problem of men and women being
penalised for taking advantage of family-friendly policies. 'Work and family
programmes may allow women to work fewer hours,' the Institute explains,
'perhaps inadvertently creating a 'mommy track' where women are seen as less
committed and less worthy of promotion. A higher turnover rate among women
than men has been the impetus for companies to try to reconcile these two
streams of corporate action.'
The path which led Johnson &amp; Johnson to its new policy is instructive. The
pharmaceutical industry generally leads other sectors in its development of
work-family programmes, presumably because it is particularly dependent on a
highly educated workforce conducting research which can take many years to
come to fruition. It needs to woo the best scientific talent and then retain
it.
Johnson &amp; Johnson had another imperative: its strong presence in the market
for baby products gave it the image of a company with high ethical
standards, which served families and was good to work for. However, by the
late 1980s the company found its marks were not as high as it wished in
annual surveys of the best companies for working mothers, and it began to
feel it had to do more to attract and keep the best employees.
The result was a comprehensive review of its policies and employees' needs
which threw up some surprising statistics.
A survey of workers in New Brunswick, where it has seven businesses, found
that 45 per cent had missed at least one day of work in the preceding three
months because of a breakdown in childcare arrangements; 53 per cent were
late to work or left early because of childcare problems; and 9 per cent had
responsibilities caring for the elderly, 59 per cent of whom reported that
this interfered with work.
The upshot was a raft of new initiatives, including a change in the
company's 'credo', or statement of values, to include workers' family
responsibilities. And in an effort to change the corporate culture, it
became one of the few US companies to train supervisors in handling
work-family issues.
The idea is that employees are responsible for making sure their work gets
done, and for suggesting ways this can be achieved, while supervisors
provide the necessary flexibility.
The Families and Work Institute is carrying out an follow-up investigation
of Johnson &amp; Johnson's programme for the company, to determine its benefits
and what needs to be done next. The early results suggest that the scheme is
far from perfect. For example, employees suspect that supervisors are not so
keen on flexibility as the supervisors themselves claim to be.
But the study also provides evidence that work-family programmes can have an
appreciable impact on a company's hire power. A poll of employees found that
'the effect of the job on personal relationships' was the fifth most
frequently-cited reason for taking a job at the company and the fourth most
important for staying.
* The Corporate reference guide to Work-Family Programs. Ellen Galinsky,
Dana Friedman and Carol Hernandez. Families and Work Institute, 330, Seventh
Avenue, New York, NY 10001. Price Dollars 149.
**The 1991 Hay/Huggins Benefits Report. Published by HHBR Survey Unit, 229
South 18th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19103-6138. Price Dollars 695.
