FT  05 NOV 92 / Freer economy pays Syria big dividends: The flow of
investment that has followed reform
THE WELL-SWEPT streets of Damascus are lined with colonnades of cement pipes
for the city's new Dollars 350m Kuwaiti-financed sewage system. Shops are
filled with imported goods and residents of the city travel to work in
luxurious mini-buses.
Applications for foreign investment projects flow into the prime minister's
office. Salaries are still low, power cuts are frequent and the telephones
will not work efficiently until Siemens completes installation of 700,000
lines financed by Kuwait and Qatar. But Damascenes have almost stopped
grumbling.
The economic liberalisation that began in the late 1980s, the gratitude of
Gulf countries for Syria's participation in the anti-Iraq coalition,
increased oil output and a 1991 investment law have all contributed to the
improvement.
Over the past three years, annual inflation has decreased from 35 per cent
to 12 per cent. For years, consumer goods were smuggled from Lebanon into
Syria; now the trade is reversed. And Syrian enthusiasm for shares in new
companies rivals that of the Chinese.
Dr Mohamed al-Imadi, the Syrian economy and foreign trade minister for 14 of
the past 20 years, is one of the engineers of Syria's reforms. Dr Imadi
cites unification of exchange rates, the easing of price controls,
encouragement of new investment and lower government spending as causes for
the improvement.
Syria once had 10 different exchange rates; now the country plans to move
from two to a single, floating exchange rate by 1994. Syria's GNP has grown
an average 24 per cent each year since 1985, while the public sector's share
in the economy has decreased from 48.4 per cent to 38.7 per cent.
But liberalisation has been a slow process. 'We had to change our mentality,
to let people import whatever they wanted to, to stop state monopolies,' Dr
Imadi said.
Reform began in the agricultural sector, which accounts for close to 30 per
cent of Syria's economy. A cautious 1986 law established several
agricultural joint ventures. Farmers were later allowed to import equipment
previously subject to state monopoly. 'In the past two to three years, about
40,000 tractors and agricultural machines have been bought by private
individuals - that's more than the total in the whole country before,' Dr
Imadi said.
The most dramatic step was last year's Investment Law. Mr Mohamed Taghlibi,
the director of the prime minister's Investment Office created by the law,
says that 529 projects have been approved in the past 15 months,
representing a total of SPounds 79.5bn (Pounds 2.5bn) in investment and
generating 42,000 jobs. Investors enjoy a tax holiday of up to 10 years,
freedom to import equipment duty-free and repatriate profits in hard
currency.
The law sought an estimated Dollars 75bn held by expatriate Syrians abroad,
but investors include British and Italian poultry producers, Saudi and UAE
owners of transport companies, a Saudi shipping company, and Russian
manufacturers of furniture and drilling equipment. General Motors of the US
is discussing a pick-up truck assembly plant.
Large industrial projects must build their own generating plants while the
government expands the national grid in hopes of doubling electricity
production by 1996. About 650bn cubic meters in natural gas reserves will
help: electricity stations, factories and oil refineries are to be converted
from fuel oil to natural gas over the next five years, freeing up to 150,000
barrels a day of Syrian oil for export.
Oil production, a major hard currency earner, rose to more than 500,000 b/d
this year, of which 200,000 b/d are consumed domestically.
Syrian officials insist all Gulf funding has gone to project finance. 'The
Gulf war got things moving,' said Mr Taghlibi. Saudi Arabia is financing the
Dollars 500m steel mill at al-Zara near Homs and several textile factories.
Kuwait and Abu Dhabi are financing cotton spinning mills, cement factories
and irrigation projects, and the Arab Fund is building a power station and
two dams.
Many Syrians are now asking whether economic liberalisation may also bring
political freedoms. The inner workings of the regime remain mysterious and
the secret police still wield great power. Syrian media remain firmly under
government control and foreign publications are censored. Amnesty
International believes several thousand political prisoners continue to be
held in Syrian jails.
As economic prospects brighten, political stability depends on 62-year-old
President Hafez al-Assad's grip on power.
