FT  10 MAR 92 / Technology: Michelangelo makes its mark - Technically
speaking
The cynics are having a field day. The much ballyhooed Michelangelo computer
virus scare seems to have been a false alarm.
Just a couple of thousand personal computers were attacked by the virus last
week, rather than the tens of thousands that had been predicted. Many are
now charging that makers of 'anti-virus' software, which can be used to
detect and eliminate rogue computer virus programs, pulled off a massive
scam with their Michelangelo virus alerts.
Sales of anti-viral software soared over the weeks approaching March 6, the
date on which Michelangelo was set to attack. Some companies have clearly
profited from the virus scare. But many more averted what could have been
devastating losses if their data had been destroyed.
Prompted into checking their personal computers for virus infections by
publicity surrounding Michelangelo, many companies, government agencies and
individual computer users discovered in time that their computers were
contaminated by the virus.
In offices of the State of California, for example, hundreds of infected
computers were found. 'I'd say we would have had serious problems if we
hadn't been so worried by all the hype,' the computer systems manger
acknowledged.
Michelangelo is hardly the first computer virus to spread widely among
computer users. It is, however, one of the most destructive to date. While
most virus programs make computers display annoying messages or send, for
example, a fish floating across the screen, this one wipes out all of the
data on a computer's hard disk.
Michelangelo is also the first computer virus that is known to have widely
infiltrated the personal computer industry itself - the software and
hardware manufacturers. That alone was cause for concern. As many as 25 US
computer companies are believed to have been infected by Michelangelo. Most,
but not all, detected the virus and eliminated it before it got passed on to
customers.
Leading Edge, a 'clone' manufacturer, Da Vinci Systems, a software
publisher, and Intel, the leading manufacturer of microprocessors for
personal computers, issued warnings to their customers. Others have been
reluctant to admit to the problem for fear of liability law suits.
If it has done nothing else, Michelangelo has alerted the computer industry
to the need for more stringent controls to ensure that virus infections,
when they occur, are not inadvertently spread. Some of the biggest names in
personal computer software have instituted new security procedures in the
wake of the Michelangelo scare.
Did the industry cry wolf? Perhaps so, but that does not mean that there are
no predators. Michelangelo has raised awareness of the potential danger that
virus programs may pose and the methods that can be used to protect valuable
data. There are surely many more personal computer users now than there were
a week ago who have made back-up copies of their data.
This simple precaution, urged in every software manual, has been widely
ignored in practice. Yet viruses are not the only cause of data loss, as
anyone who has suffered the failure of a disk drive knows only too well.
And while Michelangelo itself did not live up to its reputation, there is
little doubt that computer viruses are proliferating and that all personal
computer users need to learn how to avoid them.
'Safe computing' has become a necessity. It is a fact of life today that any
floppy disk, whatever the source, may contain a virus. Rather than
dismissing Michelangelo as a hoax, we should regard it as a warning. After
all, Friday the 13th is just around the corner.
