FT  14 OCT 92 / Nobel prize winner extended the realm of economic theory
MR GARY BECKER, named yesterday as this year's winner of the Nobel prize for
economics, is proof that economists have more to offer than dubious
forecasts, indecipherable equations and contradictory conclusions about the
behaviour of money and markets.
Revered among his fellow professionals for his seminal work on the economics
of discrimination and human capital theory, the 61-year-old professor at the
University of Chicago has spent the past 40 years extending the discipline
of economics far beyond the world of international trade and finance.
Mr Becker was the first to show that racial discrimination was economically
costly and relied upon the existence of monopoly power. Only companies with
market power could afford to ignore qualified candidates or refuse paying
customers because of their colour or religion. So encouraging competition is
the best way to end discrimination.
He also investigated how we punish criminals and why prison sentences for
unarmed robbery are much lower than those for armed robbery. Mr Becker
argued that the criminal balanced the rewards from crime against the
probability and cost of capture, so not all crimes should receive too tough
a sentence.
Attaching a life sentence to unarmed robbery would reduce the number of
thefts, but it might also increase the number of murders once the marginal
disincentive for petty thieves to use guns was removed.
Mr Becker has also examined the loosening of US divorce laws. Contrary to
conventional wisdom, allowing one party to file a divorce suit rather than
requiring mutual consent has not led to more divorces in states which have
taken this route.
However, as Mr Becker predicted, the size of financial settlements has
fallen sharply now that there is no need for an agreement to the divorce.
Mr Lawrence Summers, an economics professor at Harvard university and
currently chief economist at the World Bank, says that policymakers should
have predicted this result. 'One of the most important unintended
consequences of the divorce revolution in the US - the impoverishment of
hundreds and thousands of children - would have been apparent if they had
studied Becker's seminal approach.'
