FT  04 NOV 92 / International Company News: Hurricane Andrew takes its toll
on Travelers Corp
DAMAGE claims from Hurricane Andrew, the storm which devastated parts of
southern Florida in late August, helped push Travelers Corporation, the
Connecticut-based composite insurer, to a Dollars 385m after-tax loss in the
third quarter. For the 1991 period, it made Dollars 65m profit.
The group has suffered from a souring property investment portfolio and has
been attempting to boost capital through disposals and the sale of a
minority share stake to Primerica.
Travelers said the after-tax cost of the hurricane was Dollars 240m. It had
estimated the loss at Dollars 175m to Dollars 225m, and blamed the higher
figure on 'the widespread disruption and dislocation of resources necessary
to rebuild damaged homes and businesses in south Florida'.
News of the hurricane claims was combined with a larger-than-expected
restructuring charge, Dollars 202m, which further depressed results.
Travelers had said it would take a Dollars 132m charge, largely to cover
3,500 job cuts. It now says it plans to axe a further 1,500 jobs among its
corporate and administrative staff over the next two years - explaining the
additional Dollars 70m charge.
'Our core businesses are sensitive to the protracted weak economy, and
therefore we are continuing an intensive process to streamline operations,'
said Mr Edward Budd, Travelers' chairman. He claimed that savings from the
job cuts should start to show next year, with the annual after-tax boost
topping Dollars 100m by mid-1994.
Travelers' after-tax loss came after realised investment gains of Dollars
37.6m, compared with a Dollars 15m loss in the same period of 1991. Net
investment income was Dollars 696.3m, down from Dollars 792.3m a year ago -
largely due to under-performing mortgage loans and real estate.
However, 'under-performing' property assets remained at Dollars 5.2bn,
unchanged year-on-year. This represents roughly one-third of the total
property portfolio.
The group took only a modest Dollars 17m addition to reserves for potential
property-asset losses in the third quarter, bringing the overall property
valuation reserve to Dollars 828m by the end of the period.
Stripping out the effects of the hurricane, restructuring charges and the
accounting changes, Travelers said 'core' operating earnings slipped from
Dollars 68m to Dollars 44m in the quarter.
This was mainly because of a decline in commercial lines, agency business
and another loss in the asset management and pension services division. The
property-casualty personal lines business made some progress, however, and
life insurance sales remained strong.
Mr Budd painted a bleak picture. He cited the weak economy, declining
interest rates, very weak pricing in some property-casualty segments, and
the property market problems, and suggested: 'We do not expect the pressure
on earning to abate over the near-term.'
Travelers posted an after-tax deficit of Dollars 68m for the first nine
months, compared with net profits of Dollars 249m last time.
The sale of the 27 per cent stake to Primerica, the financial services
group, is still awaiting regulatory and shareholder approval, but will add
Dollars 722.5m of new equity capital. That will bring total capital raised
by Travelers this year to Dollars 1.4bn.
