FT  28 APR 92 / Technology: Squeezing the life out of innovation -
Technically Speaking
Small high-technology manufacturers in the UK and Europe tend to operate in
market niches in which US companies set a fast pace of innovation. This
makes their products vulnerable to rapid obsolescence. European companies
must therefore be particularly innovative in order to gain and keep market
share.
But sustaining high-tech product innovation is costly. Unfortunately the
European market is still too fragmented and conservative to enable many
innovative companies to sell enough units to recover the cost of developing
one product before competition forces them to develop its successor.
The dynamic US market, on the other hand, encourages the early development
of advanced products and is large enough to fund the full costs of
development. This enables US companies to reduce their prices and capture a
large share of export markets. And the prices they set in their export
markets allow little or no margin for recovery of the development costs of
local competitors.
Many European countries recognise the seriousness of the resulting squeeze
on the high-tech manufacturing sector and are providing financial assistance
for technology and product development. In the UK, the Department of Trade
and Industry has introduced the Smart and Spur programmes to provide
financial support for product development in small companies.
However, the present schemes have serious deficiencies. Both are
under-funded. The Spur scheme claims to pay up to 30 per cent of the (fixed)
costs of approved developments. But the overhead recovery rate allowable in
calculating these costs is capped at a maximum of 100 per cent of direct
employment costs.
Many small high-tech companies must support significant product development,
quality assurance and marketing/sales costs, which increase their true
overhead rates to 250 per cent or more. In this situation the maximum
support only corresponds to 17 per cent of the actual costs.
Assistance on this scale is unlikely to be sufficient to enable the
development to proceed. A further deficiency is that decisions regarding the
award of support under the Spur scheme are made by DTl staff who generally
have neither the technical nor the marketing expertise to select between the
proposals presented to them.
The available schemes therefore need considerable improvement before they
can provide the support needed by UK high-tech companies. Additional funds
need to be made available and they must be applied effectively to generate a
good return.
To improve the effectiveness of the support it should continue to be
available only to manufacturing companies employing fewer than 500 people. A
realistic overhead recovery rate should be allowed, capped at not less than
250 per cent.
The total cost of the proposed development should not exceed a moderate
fraction of the total gross margin likely to be generated from sales of the
proposed product. Independent data should be provided to confirm that the
market is of sufficient size, and the applicant for support should be able
to demonstrate that it has previously succeeded in gaining the market share
it proposes with one or more of its other products.
The current Smart scheme should be replaced with a new scheme to provide
initial assistance to companies which are not yet in a position to qualify
for the above type of Spur support. It should be available to companies
under five years old which develop products that have good export potential,
that can improve industrial processes or that have environmental benefits.
The purpose of these proposed changes is to ensure that the support makes a
sufficient contribution to enable small companies to maintain vigorous
product development programmes, is given to companies with a proven ability
to use it effectively and is awarded on objective criteria.
The author is managing director of Signal Processors Limited.
