FT  10 APR 92 / International Company News: Skandia acquires Hafnia with
share swap
SKANDIA, Sweden's leading insurance group, strengthened its position in the
Nordic area yesterday when it agreed to take over Hafnia, Denmark's second
largest insurer.
The deal will create a group with premium income of SKr22bn (Dollars 3.7bn)
and assets of SKr176bn.
Mr Bjorn Wolrath, Skandia's chief executive, said it represented 'a
significant step in Skandia's strategy of establishing a strong position in
the Nordic market and in Skandia's international operations, where the focus
will shift to direct insurance'.
A 'critical mass' would be achieved in the UK where Prolific, Hafnia's life
business, and Economic, the general insurance company, would be merged with
Skandia's NIG Skandia, said Mr Wolrath,
The acquisition will take place through a share exchange in the ratio of
nine Skandia shares for four Hafnia Holding A shares and five B shares.
The agreement was a humiliation for Hafnia. Last December, Hafnia and
Norway's Uni Storebrand bought heavily into Skandia with the intention of
establishing a Nordic alliance.
Hafnia's position was weakened by a DKr1.22bn (Dollars 194m) loss in 1991,
announced yesterday. Mr Per Villum Hansen, Hafnia's chief executive and
Henrik Klaebel, director, have stood down.
Mr Ebbe Christensen, chairman, said Hafnia's holding company had borrowed
about DKr500m from its subsidiary Hafnia Insurance. He believed that at
least some of it was used to buy shares in Skandia. He admitted that a loan
of this kind from a subsidiary to a parent company was illegal.
Uni Storebrand will take over Skandia International, Skandia's reassurance
business (with the exception of its North American reassurance operations)
to become one of the 15 largest reassurance writers in the world with
premium income of about Dollars 1bn. The new reassurance group will take the
name Christiania International Insurance.
The Norwegian company's deal with Skandia was on the basis of a share swap
although the terms were not announced. Uni Storebrand holds 28 per cent of
the stock in Skandia, which will be reduced to 4 per cent when the
agreements are completed.
Mr Jan-Erik Langangen, chief executive of Uni Storebrand, admitted that the
company had failed in its intention of establishing a stronger Nordic base,
but he was satisfied that it had achieved the secondary objective of
strengthening the group's international business.
Hafnia's 1991 loss included an unrealised loss of DKr876m on shareholdings
in Skandia and Baltica, Hafnia's domestic rival. Losses of DKr1.09bn arose
from Danish credit guarantee business, mortgage indemnity losses in the UK,
and the financial costs of the investments in Skandia and Baltica.
Group equity capital was reduced from DKr5.34bn to DKr3.88bn over the year.
Hafnia holds 33.5 per cent of the shares in Baltica. Mr Wolrath said
yesterday that it was Skandia's intention to sell these.
