FT  31 JAN 92 / Survey of World Industrial Review (9): At the parting of the
ways - Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals
THE PATHS followed over the last year by the world's chemical and
pharmaceutical industries have diverged markedly, in spite of their common
scientific base.
Buoyed by ageing populations and increasingly expensive and sophisticated
drugs, pharmaceutical groups have proved inoculated against the insidious
slowdown of the world economy. In contrast, the chemicals sector has
confirmed its lamentable reputation for being the most cyclical of
industries.
Two problems dominate the chemicals sector: the recession and the
environment. The industry is making too little money as it makes too much
pollution.
The chemicals industry is bleeding cash. The recession and the Gulf war have
battered demand for basic chemicals. At the same time, capacity ordered in
the boom times of the late 1980s - when even the least efficient plants were
profitable - continues to come on stream, increasing competition still
further.
The consequent squeeze on margins has been further exacerbated by the
increased capital costs required by ever-tougher environmental legislation.
Complying with environmental legislation is cutting deeply into ordinary
capital expenditure. Increasing public and legislative demands for more
environmental protection appear unlikely to slacken in coming years.
At the end of last year, German chemical companies complained that new taxes
on emissions would stretch the industry to its limits, making Germany too
expensive for manufacturing certain types of products.
In Britain, too, environmental spending is set to mushroom. The UK's
Chemical Industry Association estimates capital expenditure on the
environment will double between 1990 and 1992 from Pounds 200m a year to
Pounds 400m. It is now 25 per cent of all investment. With costs and
capacity rising, while demand falls, the descent from profits to loss has
been precipitous. There are few signs of an upturn.
Even the German giants, hitherto protected by German reunification, are
suffering a slowdown. Mr Wolfgang Hilger, president of the German Chemical
Industry Association, warned this month that the German domestic market was
likely to stagnate this year and there was no sign of upturn in export
markets.
Only in the Far East has demand held up, but capacity there, particularly in
the petrochemical sector, looks set to grow rapidly over the next few years
as investments by newly industrialised nations come on stream.
The contrast with the pharmaceuticals sector could not have been more
marked. Drugs have proved a panacea for those companies trying to escape the
roller-coaster ride of the cyclical commodity chemicals business. ICI and
Rhone-Poulenc, two groups traditionally involved with basic chemicals,
reported profits last year heavily dependent upon the success of their
pharmaceuticals business.
For the pure pharmaceuticals companies 1991 was a heady year. Most European
pharmaceuticals groups proved the ultimate counter-cyclical stocks, with the
sector reporting sales growth averaging 13 per cent over the past 12 months.
But although the pharmaceuticals market remains buoyant, the horizon is not
without its clouds. Research and development costs are rising inexorably at
the same time as governments are beginning to balk at the ever increasing
cost of drugs.
Western governments are grappling with ever increasing healthcare budgets.
In Germany, for example, health costs more than 13 per cent of GNP.
Drugs form a significant proportion of such costs and have been designated
as easy targets for recession-battered governments. In Germany,
pharmaceutical spending represents nearly 16 per cent of healthcare costs,
while in Italy and Portugal it represents more than 30 per cent.
Prices are likely to come under increasing pressure in coming years. And the
sparkling performance of the pharmaceuticals groups over the last 12 months
has not helped their position.
In the US, the world's largest drug market, Senator Edward Kennedy has
conducted a vocal campaign to restrain price increases for drugs sold to
public health service-funded institutions. A wave of pricing legislation is
presently sweeping through Congress questioning the sector's pricing
structure.
A debate also opened up last year on whether uncontrolled healthcare costs
had not become a full-blown contagion - one that was sapping the nation's
competitiveness and standard of living.
It is far from clear whether the pharmaceutical industry's traditional
defences - the need to reinvest profits in research and development, and the
requirement for a return for the significant risks involved in drug
development - will withstand the current political tide.
Outside the US, governments are already attempting to limit drugs
expenditure through:
Lists of products which doctors are forbidden to prescribe or for which
patients receive only partial reimbursement.
Obligatory and direct price cuts.
Profit controls which insist on a limited return on capital employed.
Controls on marketing costs.
Penalising doctors who prescribe excessively.
Encouraging generic, non-patented, cheaper products.
At the same time, the pharmaceutical groups continue to struggle with the
inexorable rise in research and development costs.
Such growth in costs is partly explained by the increasing complexity of new
drugs. But it has also been caused by the growth in regulation to test the
safety, quality and efficacy of drugs.
Meanwhile, recessionary storms appear to have set in for the duration over
the the basic chemicals industry. Dark clouds may also be gathering for the
pharmaceuticals sector.
