FT  07 MAY 92 / International Company News: Canadian Pacific suffers
CDollars 39m first-quarter loss
CANADIAN Pacific suffered a first-quarter loss of CDollars 39.7m (USDollars
33.3m) or 12 cents a share, in spite of a strong performance by the group's
railway business. The latest deficit at the Canadian conglomerate compares
with a loss of CDollars 5.3m or 2 cents a share, a year earlier.
Total revenues were CDollars 2.42bn, against CDollars 2.46bn last time.
Canada's railways are busy moving record exports of grain, via Vancouver, in
the first quarter and CP Rail almost doubled its operating income to
CDollars 73.5m.
The rail side was buoyed by the fact that expenses increased only slightly
because of higher efficiency and lower fuel prices.
CP Rail has just agreed to annual pay increases of 3 per cent in 1992 and
1993 with most of its unions.
The improved railway results were more than offset by lower income from Pan
Canadian Petroleum, the energy arm, and also contin-uing losses at Canadian
Pacific Forest Products.
The operating loss at CP Forest Products grew to CDollars 83.6m from
CDollars 61.4m a year ago.
CP Ships narrowed its loss with higher container rates, CP Trucks saw its
loss increase, but Fording Coal managed to lift its income to CDollars
22.4m, up nearly CDollars 9m, because of lower operating costs.
Marathon Realty's results were off slightly due to problems in the office
building sector. This unit in April arranged the sale of CDollars 160m of
properties, the proceeds of which will be used to repay debt.
The hotels unit reduced its losses, though the market remains soft. The US
Doubletree chain did better, with new management contracts and lower
overheads.
Telecommunications were unchanged, while the industrial products group
improved.
CP's 19 per cent interest in Laidlaw, the waste management group, generated
income of CDollars 3.8m, against a loss of CDollars 3.9m a year earlier.
CP expects some improvement in overall performance later this year, as the
North American economy recovers from the long recession.
