FT  10 JUN 92 / International Company News: Sprint joins European telecom
venture
TELEVERKET and PTT Telecom, the Swedish and Dutch state-owned
telecommunications companies, have signed up Sprint, the US
telecommunications carrier, as their first partner in a venture aimed at
providing European-based multinationals with internal communications
networks on a global basis.
Under a preliminary agreement with the US company, the 50-50 Dutch-Swedish
joint venture, called Unisource, will also buy an unspecified amount of
Sprint equipment as part of its efforts to build telecommunications networks
for European-based international companies.
Sprint will not take an equity stake as part of its involvement in the
venture.
Unisource said yesterday it was also negotiating with an unnamed Asian
carrier about participating in the telecommunications network.
The Dutch-Swedish joint venture, which was first announced in October under
the provisional name Unicom, is scheduled to be fully operational on
September 1, when services in the UK, Germany, Sweden and the Netherlands
will begin.
Unisource's network will be extended to Belgium, France, Norway, Denmark and
Finland later this year, with southern Europe soon to follow.
Global coverage is planned from 1993 through SprintNet, the US company's
worldwide data network.
Unisource officials said the joint venture marked the first time that
telecommunication companies anywhere had agreed to pool their international
activities in a company which will operate at arm's length from both parent
companies.
The company's services will range from data network services to messaging
services such as 'fax store' and 'fax forward'.
The joint venture, which underlines Swedish and Dutch ambitions to expand
beyond their limited home markets, hopes to capture 20 per cent of the
market for pan-European business communication networks.
Unisource estimates this market is worth an annual Ecu2bn (Dollars 2.56bn)
and is set to double over the next three to four years.
