FT  01 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: NHS drugs provision to be reformed
 -Move to curb steep rise in costs
THE government intends to widen the range of drugs available without a
prescription as part of a drive to control the National Health Service's
soaring pharmaceuticals bill.
Drugs are the services' biggest expenditure after staff costs. The annual
drugs bill - Pounds 2.3bn in England alone - is currently rising by nearly
12 per cent in cash terms.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, the health secretary, has set her officials a target
of bringing the pace of increase much closer to the rate of inflation.
She will tell a Royal Pharmaceutical Society dinner tonight that she cannot
justify holding NHS pay within the government's 1.5 per cent guidelines
while allowing the drugs bill to rise so far ahead of inflation.
She believes extending the range of drugs available without prescription
would be consistent with the government's Health of the Nation strategy of
making individuals more aware of personal healthcare issues, as well as
producing 'significant' savings.
The voluntary pharmaceutical pricing regulation scheme, which controls the
industry's profits on drugs supplied to the NHS, is being renegotiated
between the government and the Association of the British Pharmaceutical
Industry. Mrs Bottomley wants to see progress on a replacement agreement by
the new year.
She will point out tonight that the German government is legislating to cut
a range of drug prices by 5 per cent and then to impose a freeze.
The government last month announced plans to extend the selected list
system, under which NHS doctors cannot prescribe specified drugs when
effective lower-cost alternatives are available. Talks are taking place
between the Department of Health and the British Medical Association on
other means of tightening up prescribing.
Research by the Department of Health shows that the prescribing costs of GP
fundholders, who control their own budgets, have risen by 3 per cent less
than family doctors in general. By next year about 25 per cent of the
population will be patients of fundholders. The government wants the same
prescribing disciplines to apply to all doctors.
The pharmaceutical industry has attacked previous attempts to control NHS
drugs expenditure, arguing that they could affect research and employment as
well as patient choice.
'I recognise that the industry has a Pounds 1bn balance-of-payments surplus,
employs 80,000 people and has a strong research-and-development base,'said
Mrs Bottomley. 'It is a problem calling for balanced measures, but we must
get value for money and ensure that the re-sources . . . are used to treat
as many patients as possible.'
