FT  02 JUN 92 / Dinkins makes a strong sales pitch for the Big Apple
IT MUST be a tough job making a sales pitch for the city that attracts the
worst press coverage in the world, regularly portrayed as a den of iniquity
teetering on the brink of social disintegration.
But Mr David Dinkins, New York City's soft-spoken and mild-mannered mayor,
musters all the enthusiasm he can. 'I like to try to sell New York 24 hours
a day, seven days a week. I'm constantly selling New York. We want to tell
European businesses: If your thoughts are for expansion in the US you could
not do better than New York City. It's the gateway to America.'
Mr Dinkins was in London yesterday as part of a joint effort by the New York
City Partnership and the Chamber of Commerce to promote the city as a US
base for foreign companies.
The delegation, which moves on to Paris, Frankfurt and Hamburg later this
week, was due to see a range of UK businesses, particularly design, retail,
financial services, communication and entertainment companies. The visit
includes meetings with the London Chamber of Commerce and the Design
Council.
'We don't expect to go home with a bundle of contracts,' Mr Dinkins told the
Financial Times yesterday. 'But we believe this an excellent opportunity to
convey what a good place New York is to do business.'
Setting aside his sales patter, Mr Dinkins is frank about the reasons for
his push to heighten international interest. 'During New York's financial
problems in the late 1980s we realised we had to find ways to expand our tax
base. We believe that small businesses - those with 100 or fewer employees -
and international involvement provided the way ahead. So this philosophy is
not new.'
At the same time Mr Dinkins denies that New York is suffering a loss of US
corporations to smaller cities or greenfield sites. 'It's true that some
have left, but it's also true that many have expanded and put more money in
 -ITT is an excellent example. A lot of companies are coming and going, but
we think we net out pretty well.'
New York is particularly keen to hang on to Morgan Stanley, the Wall Street
investment house which has been pondering a move to Connecticut. Mr Barry
Sullivan, deputy mayor for finance and economic development, was in talks
with Morgan until just before he left for Europe.
'We have put an attractive package on the table which we are just
finalising,' Mr Sullivan says. 'I feel pretty good about what the result
will be - but it is not decided as we speak.'
New York's communications, its status as an international city, tax
incentive programmes and declining office rents form the basis of the
mayor's appeal to European business.
Mr Sullivan is also eager to dispel New York's image as a city mired in
financial crisis. 'For three successive years New York has produced budgets
on time that are balanced or even in surplus. We work very hard on our
fiscal health,' he says. Both men believe New York's 10-year Dollars 47bn
(Pounds 26.1bn) capital expenditure programme will go a long way to
addressing some concerns over the city's ageing infrastructure that might
deter investors.
None the less, Mr Dinkins recognises that selling New York is an uphill
struggle in the face of almost ceaseless negative coverage, particularly of
its ethnic tensions.
