FT  02 MAR 92 / Arts: Shakespeare in Vienna - Burgtheater
DISASTER offstage by superstition accompanies openings of Macbeth and the
Viennese kept the tradition handsomely alive last week. Just after his
premier of the play, radical German director Claus Peymann was reappointed
intendant of the grand, stuffy velvet-and-gold Burgtheater. On Monday four
of its ensemble resigned in protest; the Austrian press compared Peymann to
the three witches and accused him of "smearing Austria with the coolness of
a Prussian hussar," the row became a national sensation, Austrian Chancellor
Vranitzky was forced to comment, but the show played on - to packed houses.
Where else but Vienna, whose stormy relationship with its hallowed
institutions, the Burgtheater and the Opera, express at once an intensity of
belief in culture and a conservatism unmatched in Europe? The Viennese love
to hate the unconventional productions Peymann brings to the Burgtheater. I
caught the two Shakespeares in the repertory: the new Macbeth and Peter
Zadek's Merchant of Venice, a hit which, since I first saw it, has acquired
the confident gloss of a contemporary classic.
Peymann's long-delayed and overlong production (4 1/2 hours) is the weaker,
but it is full of the fun which makes a Burgtheater visit so rewarding.
There is a fat, camp witch (Urs Hefti), who dances a melancholic, solo
waltz, lifts his skirts, inflates himself with balloon breasts drooping to
the knees, and balances on the rim of a giant cauldron; a sexy colleague
stirs it with a six-foot spoon, while smouldering up to Macbeth.
Forget the sustained hellishness of a traditional Macbeth: every image here
is developed, parodied, reversed. Starting with bare boards, no one uses the
stage less conventionally than Peymann. Act II takes place in a shaft of
light just three feet wide. Bloodstained, frightened, determined, the
Macbeths slither and stumble up and down a central staircase. It rises to a
loft where a chandelier glows, then fades as dawn breaks, panic sets in,
guests tumble over the banisters in shock. At its foot, a trap door is the
castle gate; the drunken porter (Gerhard Ernst) sits on it, tells Viennese
jokes, is bounced into the air at each insistent knock from beneath: comedy
underlies tragedy above.
This is a Macbeth whose clever effects hold the house but have yet to cohere
into a powerfully realised vision: I understood the play no better at the
end than at the start. Gert Voss, a Shakespearian actor whose refusal to be
awed by set speeches makes for a wonderfully relaxed Shylock, is here a
confused, too casual Macbeth, a thinker rather than a soldier but a
befuddled one.
His lady (Kirsten Dene) also lacks vigour. They share an eerie repertoire of
laughs - conspiratorial giggles, embarrassed bellows, mocking, Don Giovanni
before the statue guffaws - but never go beyond unease or delusion. Even
when Macbeth sees himself in the glass of the last kingly ghost, where
fantasy should meet reality, his shriek might sound from a grotesque chamber
of horrors as well as from isolation or guilt. "Best not know myself," says
Voss, not with the regret of "This is not Lear" or "That's he that was
Othello," but as if entertainment, not transformation or self-knowledge,
were the name of this game.
By contrast, The Merchant of Venice has the best of Burgtheater showmanship
allied to a genuinely original re-reading. This production, set on Wall
Street, is now compelling as a 1980s period piece, as well as a Shakespeare
interpretation. It changed Venetians into Brylcreemed power-dressed yuppies,
who slide in and out of a huge chrome lift onto the dealing floor, do
work-outs in lunch breaks, and make hard, macho jokes which may happen to be
about Jews, or about bonds in pound of flesh.
Voss's aryan Shylock is so integrated that plummy Portia (Eva Mattes)
demands of the wrong men: "Which is the merchant here, and which the Jew?"
His daughter, Jessica, buys her way into her gentile husband's office
knees-up by slinging dollars among the debris of party hats and empty
glasses. She is instantly welcomed. And when Shylock loses his case, he
struts manfully across the office, like the dealer who flopped on Black
Monday: a blip in his career, but not the end.
In shifting the moral core of the play from mercy and tolerance to survival
and brazen guts, Zadek both questions the traditional role of Jew as victim
and offers social comment. Like a recent Peymann production which satirised
Vienna through a scaled-down but lovingly detailed model of the Burgtheater
itself, the green copper roof peeping out over a stagey Volksgarten, Zadek's
classic vision is a critique of a loveless, money-mad world whose energy is
nevertheless attractive. It is a love-hate response. This production has
gathered pace since its opening and now zips along breathlessly, its
slapstick humour - dealers caught in lifts, runners left out of lifts -
bizarre as a video on fast forward, its charm and speed already nostalgic as
well as contemporary.
