FT  21 SEP 92 / Where the front line meets the bottom line: South African
business is becoming directly involved in politics in a bid to restore
stability and growth
When troops from the Ciskei black homeland opened fire two weeks ago on an
African National Congress (ANC) march, they risked claiming an unusual
victim - one of South Africa's leading businessmen, Mr John Hall, an
executive director of Barlow Rand, the country's largest industrial group.
Business leaders in the rest of the western world would scarcely consider it
a normal day's work to risk their lives in a political demonstration. But
for Mr Hall (who attended the march as a 'peace monitor') and for many other
South African businessmen, the notion of 'business as usual' has lost its
meaning after months of mass protest action, industrial unrest, township
violence and political deadlock.
Increasingly, business is becoming directly involved in politics, in
economic policy-making and in attempts to shape a new South Africa society.
Frustrated at the failure of politicians, white and black, to lead the way
to a post-apartheid future, businessmen are trying to fill this leadership
gap with initiatives of their own. They have decided that politics is too
important to be left to politicians, and are hoping that the institutions of
civil society - business organisations, unions and churches - can work
together to restore stability, without which economic growth is impossible.
With the economy in its worst recession since the turn of the century,
labour and business have discovered a remarkable community of interest. Both
want a rapid transition to democratic rule; both know that permanent
economic damage results from every delay in the transition.
Indeed, late in July, the two sides came within a hair's breadth of agreeing
a joint strategy to pressure the politicians to resume constitutional talks,
suspended since June. The Congress of South African Trade Unions (Cosatu),
the largest union federation, and an umbrella employers' body, the South
African Co-ordinating Committee on Labour Affairs (Saccola), drew up a draft
Charter for Peace, Democracy and Economic Reconstruction, which would have
committed labour and business to a joint programme of action to force the
pace of political transition. The charter called on both sides to 'suspend
normal economic activity' for one day, on August 3, to demonstrate for
democracy.
In the end, the fledgling coalition proved too weak to hold, and Cosatu went
ahead with a more traditional two-day national strike on its own. Those who
negotiated the charter say talks broke down over union demands that Saccola,
a private-sector body, guarantee public-sector participation. The
government, the main target of the strike, made clear the public sector
would not co-operate.
The private sector also appears to have baulked at the last moment at the
idea of business and labour 'ganging up' against the government, in favour
of the ANC, whose anti-capitalist bias worries most businessmen. And even if
the joint stoppage had gone ahead, it seems unlikely that more than a
quarter of the private sector would have participated.
Since then, relations between business and labour have deteriorated, with
several strikes dragging on and with the unions attacking business anew for
failing to pressure government for political change. Unions have long blamed
business for colluding with Pretoria in its apartheid policies, and the rank
and file remains sceptical of corporate South Africa's conversion to
non-racial democracy. And some businessmen are clearly using the recession
to reduce staff permanently.
But liberal businessmen argue that the basis has been laid for future
co-operation. They say that the charter called for far more than just one
day's strike action; it spelt out a joint commitment to curb violence,
combat poverty and seek consensus on economic restructuring.
Initiatives in these areas are already under way. At the national level,
senior businessmen are involved in the National Peace Committee, the
multi-party body which tries to mediate between political parties in
potentially violent disputes. Mr Hall, the Barlow Rand director, is chairman
of the National Peace Committee, and was heavily involved in negotiations
between the ANC, the Ciskei government and Pretoria to try to prevent the
Bisho massacre. He was in the front line of demonstrators when the firing
started.
Barlow Rand says half a dozen of the company's senior executives are
involved in regional dispute-resolution committees and other structures of
the National Peace Accord, signed a year ago by all South Africa's leading
parties in an attempt to halt violence which has left 7,000 people dead
since the ban on the ANC was lifted in 1990.
Barlows is not unusually virtuous in this regard; Companies from across the
spectrum have attempted to mediate in the violence, which disrupts
production and sometimes spills over into the workplace. Indeed, business is
often the closest thing to a neutral party in a situation where political
rivalries inspire everything from protest to murder.
Businessmen can succeed in separating warring black factions where the
police, with their suspect background of involvement in political violence,
cannot. Business has the resources to provide venues for local peace talks,
and such mundane support as fax machines and transport.
The Consultative Business Movement (CBM), a business grouping supported by
about 100 corporations, argues that business should be a bulwark in a
fractured society. 'During this crucial period of transition, business is
one of the few institutions whose national networks are intact. Violence has
destroyed many community organisation networks and government networks are
largely discredited,' it says.
But the CBM points out, in its document Surviving Change: Business' Role in
the Transition, that ad hoc dispute resolution is not enough. Business must
work at creating 'the socio-economic and developmental foundation without
which a negotiated solution will not be permanent'.
Indeed, the Saccola/Cosatu draft charter committed business to an ambitious
programme to combat poverty, including job creation programmes, schemes to
deliver food aid, provide electricity, and upgrade housing and education
facilities. No details were agreed, but it seems clear that business was
willing to go well beyond traditional social responsibility programmes which
have helped provide housing and education to employees and local communities
in the past.
Mr Ken Ironside, public affairs manager at Barlows, says: 'We realise we
have a role to play in shaping this society - reluctantly - but we won't be
offended when society settles down and we can get back to making money.'
