FT  08 JAN 92 / Business and the Environment: Chopping down rainforest myths
 -Christina Lamb describes how a Brazilian pulp producer has achieved
sustainable growth
To be a virgin wood pulp producer in a world turning increasingly to
recycled paper is unfortunate. Worse still is to be based in Brazil - which
means being immediately identified with Amazonian rainforest destruction.
For such a company in this shrinking market to have doubled its capacity and
become the world's largest producer of eucalyptus pulp seems sheer madness.
Erling Lorentzen, chairman of Aracruz Celulose, admits that his timing could
have been better. While his company has just completed a Dollars 1.2bn
project to increase capacity to more than 1m tonnes per year, the pulp
industry has, he says, seen a tremendous change of consumer attitudes.
Yet Aracruz has become a showcase for how a thorny environmental area can be
turned into an economically feasible and environmentally sustainable
development project which Lorentzen claims even the greenest of greens
cannot reprove. Lorentzen, a Norwegian who came to Brazil in 1953, sees it
as his challenge to convert a suspicious world to the use of paper produced
from sustainable forestry.
Not only has his company invested heavily in forestry, always met 100 per
cent of its pulp needs from plantations and planted 1.5m native trees to
preserve biodiversity, but he has hired an environmental director and a
British PR company to plead his case. He is also lobbying hard for next
year's World Environment Conference in Rio to use paper from his pulp.
'Paper produced from sustainable forestry may not have the same ring about
it as recycled paper,' admits Gordon Knight, PR adviser for Aracruz, 'but it
is better than recycled paper because with recycling one does not know where
the original came from. We need to break this myth that saving paper saves
rainforests.'
Aracruz is well qualified to do this. Its pioneering forestry work has won
international recognition such as the prestigious Marcus Wallenberg Prize in
1984 and it will feature as a case study of responsible environmental
management in a book being compiled by the Business Council for Sustainable
Development to coincide with the Earth Summit.
So developed now is its technology that the Aracruz forestry team, led by
Yara Ikemori, is exporting seeds back to Australia from where the company
initially bought them. Its techniques are also used in South Africa, Spain,
Portugal, Argentina and Colombia.
Aracruz has developed the perfect eucalyptus tree - one which grows quickly
with a minimum of side branches in order to reduce the amount of land needed
for plantation. Carlos Roxo, the environmental director, explains: 'Through
genetic engineering we've adapted the tree to the local environment and
tried to get the best tree for the area in terms of disease resistance and
fibre quality.'
The tree improvement programme began in 1973 when Aracruz bought seeds from
places with similar conditions such as Indonesia and Australia. As Brazil
could not obtain foreign technology the company sent scientists such as
Ikemori abroad to places like the Oxford Forestry Institute. According to
Ikemori: 'By 1980 we could select the best trees and propagate them.'
Having found the best tree Roxo says the turning point was 'realising we
could produce trees much faster and better through a cloning process than
with seeds'. The simple method is based on planting eucalyptus from
propagated rooted cuttings. When trees are felled the stumps have an average
of 30 sprouts, each of which is cut into three parts and planted. After 75
days a seedling develops and is planted.
Not only is this quicker than using seeds but the cuttings grow with exactly
the same characteristics as the mother tree, whereas seeds display
variation. Brazil's climatic conditions mean planting can occur the whole
year round. Aracruz plants an average of 100,000 seedlings and rooted
cuttings per day. So far the company has planted 133,000 of its 200,000
hectares.
Aracruz trees take only seven years to reach a mature height of 35 metres
compared with 12 years in Spain and Portugal and 35 years for pine trees in
northern Europe. According to Roxo, Aracruz's average yield is 35 cubic
metres compared with a Brazilian average of 18 and a European of three.
'This means we need 10 times less area than in Europe,' he says.
Ecologists complain that eucalyptus plantations damage the soil, encroach
into native forest and reduce biodiversity, but the Aracruz team rebuts
these charges. The soil is monitored continually and nutrients added;
careful land planning means the plantations have never encroached. For
variation Aracruz now has more than 100 clonal banks - each developed for a
particular soil and considered a new species. Lineu Siqueira, environmental
resources manager, heads a programme to preserve the remaining original
forest in which he has so far identified 156 bird, 36 mammal and 3,000
insect species.
The area around the Aracruz mills on the palm-fringed coastline of Espirito
Santo state resembles a chequer-board with row after row of eucalyptus trees
like upturned broomsticks standing to attention, interspersed with darker
green patches of remaining native forest - one hectare for every 2.4 of
eucalyptus.
The landscape is different from when Aracruz bought the land and started
plantations in 1967. The coastal Atlantic forest had been almost entirely
stripped by farmers, cattle raisers, loggers and charcoal burners, leaving
land suitable only for coffee plantations.
'Eucalyptus should really be treated like sugar cane as a crop - one which
produces huge volumes of wood in a very short time,' explains Roxo. 'We do
not cut the Amazon and replace it with eucalyptus - we plant on land a few
thousand kilometres away which has already lost biodiversity and doesn't
generate anything. By giving this land an economic function we are
preventing further incursion into the Amazon.'
As part of this aim seedlings and credit are distributed to local farmers to
plant eucalyptus on degraded land. This prevents them from cutting down
trees to sell for fuel.
'People cannot say that others have no right to cut down trees even if
that's the only way they can earn a living,' believes Lorentzen. 'The way to
both help them and relieve pressure on forests is through development and
you cannot give people anything better than a job'.
Lorentzen, who was one of the first signatories of the Business Charter for
Sustainable Development, is the leading Brazilian crusader for industry to
adopt environmental protection measures.
Aside from its forestry programme the company has spent nearly Dollars 300m
on environmental measures including a Dollars 100m project to introduce a
chlorine-free bleaching process. Aracruz generates almost all its own power.
Effluents go through primary treatment, then enter a series of six lagoons
before being discharged into the sea 1.7km away from the coast.
Lorentzen maintains that environmental protection measures may be costly but
necessary. In his case they also make good business sense: 'We export 80 per
cent of our production so we have to ensure that our product is
environmentally acceptable to our clients and their customers in Europe and
the US.' Aracruz issues clients with a policy resolve which they can show to
customers who may be tending towards recycled paper. 'It's not only our
philosophy it's our self defence,' he says.
