FT  09 MAY 92 / Markets: Doublespeak in the finance game - Serious Money
MY OLD friend Professor Walt Anschaung was very excited when I saw him this
week, as he prepared for his annual lecture on doublespeak to the Winston
Smith society.
'Zere are some very innovative uses of language at the moment,' he
exclaimed. 'I think I may have a chance of the Nobel prize in surreal
semantics. Take ze reduction in UK base rates this week by chancellor Norman
Lamont. I saw one tabloid paper announce that millions of homeowners were
given a welcome cut in mortgage rates as a consequence.'
'What was wrong about that?' I asked, innocently.
'It was a bit premature. Most lenders that announced a cut made one for new
borrowers only. And in the current state of the housing market, there are
hardly any new borrowers. All that good publicity will cost the societies,
as you say in England, only tiny spuds.'
'So what will happen to existing borrowers?'
'They will have to wait. A change will be announced in due course, as they
say, which probably means a month or two before their bills fall. Meanwhile,
savers are going to see their rates reduced almost immediately. Although, of
course, it will not be described as a cut.'
'Take two advertisements from the Halifax this week,' said the Professor,
pulling some clippings from his white coat. 'How low can you get, asks the
first, following it up with the words (in bold type and capitals) 'new
reduced mortgage rates.' But the second says merely Notice to Halifax
customers, with underneath the words (in restrained type) 'Halifax Building
Society announces the following changes to interest rates.' No mention of a
cut, or a reduction at all.'
'At least the Halifax is advertising its changes,' I pointed out. 'Remember
all those societies which replaced their old accounts without letting their
customers know? That's another good piece of doublespeak - societies are run
for the benefit of their members.'
'Indeed,' the Professor pointed a finger at me accusingly. 'You never told
me what an exciting field you worked in. The financial services industry
could hold a gargantuan gala of gobbledegook every year. Take bonus rates on
endowment policies, for example. There has been a round of bonus cuts on
those policies. But do the companies call them cuts? No. They are described
as adjustments.
'Even National Savings is not immune,' he continued. 'The recent ads for its
capital bonds had the rate - then 11.5 per cent - in big letters. Investors
were told that they had to pay tax on the interest every year, but what was
not clear was the fact that no income is paid out. You only receive the
return when you cash in the bonds. So an elderly investor who wanted income
every year might have been disappointed.
'And then there was an advertisement from the Homeowners Friendly Society.
It offered a bond where you could take up to 15 per cent income a year.
Sounded a great deal. But, of course, unless the bond performs extremely
well, then taking as high an income as that would cause a decline in your
capital.'
'Didn't the ad refer to that risk?' I asked.
'Well, it did say that taking an income which is greater than the growth
rate would reduce your capital over time. In fact, it would reduce your
capital straight away. The unsuspecting investor might get a very nasty
shock.'
'So what can the poor consumer do, Professor?' I asked.
'My new book, 1984 ways to confuse the financial services consumer
(available from room 101 of all good bookshops) will, as zey say, suck the
lid off the whole caboodle. It will cost Pounds 5.01, of course. I hate
things that are priced at Pounds 4.99.'
'Enough of the plug' I said. 'Give me three points for the consumer to
remember.'
'OK. First, remember that you have to look after number one. Do not assume
that a financial institution is as protective as your big brother. You have
to monitor your savings and your products to make sure you are being fairly
treated. Ignorance isn't strength.
'Second, read the small print. The financial services regulatory structure
is far from perfect but it normally does ensure that the vital information
appears somewhere in the documentation. And if you don't understand the
jargon, ask. Don't buy the product until you are sure. There is rarely any
need to rush.
'Third, use a good financial adviser, preferably one who charges a fee. They
can be great at sorting out the pros and cons of an investment, like the
Pensionsline service you have written about this week on page V'
'More specifically, Professor,' I said, 'what can savers do in the future?
Interest rates are falling and some expect base rates to reach 8 per cent by
the end of next year.'
'Well, if you don't need income, then the National Savings fixed rate
products, even at reduced levels, still look attractive. If you do need
income, then gilts currently yield over 9 per cent to redemption, although
you need to realise if you buy one above par value that, in return for a
higher running income, you face a capital loss.'
'One last question, Professor,' I asked. 'How do I finish this article?'
'Easy,' said the sage. 'Orwell's that ends well.'
