FT  21 MAR 92 / Finance &amp; The Family: What will Labour do with Serps? - The
Election and You / The Labour Party's plans for pensions
THE LABOUR Party's commitment to increase the old age pension by Pounds 5
for single people and Pounds 8 for couples is well known, but little has
been said about the party's plans to revitalise the State earnings related
pension scheme (Serps) and to stall the drive towards personal pensions.
Since 1988, 4.6m employees have opted out of Serps using personal pension
plans, switching a big chunk of pensions provision from the state to the
private sector.
Personal pensions have widened choice. Before 1988, it was only possible to
opt out of Serps through an approved occupational scheme. If the employer
did not offer such a scheme, the employee was automatically in Serps.
However, a Labour Government would seek to re-establish Serps and good final
salary schemes as the twin pillars of UK pension provision. Serps and most
UK occupational schemes are based on the final salary concept. Under
occupational schemes, each year of service builds up to a pension based on
the employee's salary at retirement.
In a money purchase scheme - such as personal pensions - contributions are
invested to build up a fund which buys an annuity on retirement. This means
that the level of pension depends on the fund's investment performance.
There is no guaranteed pension or link with final salary.
Under Labour, Serps would be revamped to provide the benefits it originally
offered, before the present Government reduced its value. It will also offer
several new features.
First, the Serps pension will be based on an individual's best 20 years of
earnings rather than on an entire lifetime. This is particularly important
for women who tend to work part time for several years while they raise a
family. Clearly if the pension is based on earnings over an entire career
these periods of low earnings would drag down its value.
Second Labour would increase the value of the pension to 25 per cent of
average 'band' earnings. Band earnings are the earnings on which National
Insurance contributions (NICs) are paid. From April, employees would pay
NICs on earnings between Pounds 54 and Pounds 405 per week.
Of course Labour plans to abolish the upper earnings limit (UEL) for
employees' contributions so that NICs will be levied on the entire income
over Pounds 54 per week. However, the Party will retain a notional UEL to
limit the earnings which can be taken into account for the Serps pension.
Third, the new Serps would be open to the self employed for the first time,
thus partly eliminating the need for private plans in this sector.
Fourth, the scheme will allow members to pay additional voluntary
contributions, rather like the AVC plans available for members of
occupational schemes. Serps AVCs would allow members to make good any
shortfall in provision, to build up a higher pension and/or to take part of
the benefit as a cash lump sum.
The ability to boost the Serps pension in this way could further restrict
the role of personal pensions and free standing AVCs (FSAVCs).
Labour also has pledged to increase both the basic and the Serps pensions in
line with average earnings, rather than the present system which links
pension increases to retail prices. Earnings inflation tends to outstrip
prices by about 2 per cent. The party said it did not plan to abolish higher
rate tax relief on contributions.
There will be a new regime for personal pensions. Currently employees with a
personal pension can apply for a rebate of band earnings worth up to Pounds
1,500 for the 1991/92 tax year. This includes an 'incentive' - in Labour's
view a bribe - to encourage employees to opt out. The Government recently
announced it would reduce the incentive to l per cent and apply it just to
the over-30s after April 1993.
Michael Meacher, Labour's shadow spokesman for Social Security, plans to
introduce a series of conditions for personal pension providers and those
selling the plans so that employees can make a meaningful comparison with
the new Serps benefits. To this end Labour will:
Withdraw the 2 per cent incentive immediately and the 1 per cent incentive
planned to take effect from April 1993.
Ensure that in future occupational and personal pension providers can only
contract out of Serps if they can guarantee a minimum pension.
Require people with personal pensions to be informed when it is in their
best interests to opt back into Serps.
Require disclosure of agents' commissions and management charges showing
their impact on the investment.
Ensure national standards for user-friendly information to compare personal
pensions with occupational schemes and Serps, distinguishing between
speculative and guaranteed projections.
On occupational schemes, Labour has said it will require preserved pensions
 -the benefits an employee leaves behind when he or she changes job - to be
fully index-linked. At present, preserved pensions must be increased by a
maximum of 5 per cent per annum or retail prices, whichever is the lower.
Labour's proposal also would have a significant impact on the transfer
values offered to job changers, since the calculation is based on the
preserved pension.
A further concern for the occupational pensions industry is Labour's
approach to the equalisation of pension benefits under company schemes. The
historic Barber judgment stated that pensions are pay and, as such, must be
equal for men and women.
If equalisation applied to all benefits built up before the judgment, the
cost to schemes would be up to Pounds 50bn. But at the Maastricht summit
last December, EC ministers agreed that there should be no retrospective
application. However Labour has said it could oppose the Maastricht
protocol, which has yet to be ratified and implemented in the 12 member
states.
