FT  09 DEC 92 / Survey of Canada (2): Federalist fights on - Profile of
Robert Bourassa
'A BATTLE is over but the war continues', declared Mr Robert Bourassa, 59,
as the Quebec premier conceded defeat in the October 26 referendum.
For Mr Bourassa, the war is the 30-year struggle to define an acceptable
place for French-speaking Quebec within Canada and his own campaign to
contain the forces of separatism.
Mr Bourassa, only 36 when he first became premier in April 1970, has been
publicly derided by Mr Pierre Trudeau, the former federal prime minister,
called a closet separatist by Anglophones, and accused of capitulation by Mr
Jacques Parizeau, the Parti Quebecois opposition leader .
Mr Robert Rae, the Ontario premier, called him a 'master of ambiguity' as
the Quebec leader played for time last July after the other nine provinces
tabled their initial constitutional offer.
Mr Bourassa has at times dithered, bowed to federal pressure, mistaken
timing and strategy, and violated his economic instincts in manoeuvring to
hold the centre ground. But he is an extraordinary survivor and has won the
grudging respect of his political enemies.
Mr Trudeau's use of the War Measures Act to quell the October crisis of 1970
fuelled separatist passions for a generation and led to Mr Bourassa's
humiliation in 1976 by Mr Rene Levesque and the Parti Quebecois.
But Mr Bourassa engineered a remarkable comeback in 1985. He was re-elected
in 1989, confident that he could lead Quebec into signing Canada's 1982
constitution. Those hopes died with the failure of the Meech Lake Accord in
1990.
If anything, Mr Bourassa's defence of federalism has become more passionate
over the past year. He told voters squarely just before l a s t October's
referendum that Quebec could still achieve its economic and cultural aims
best by remaining a part of Canada. There was nothing ambiguous in his
words.
After studying at a Jesuit college in Montreal, Mr Bourassa took a law
degree in 1956 and postgraduate degrees in political economy and
international tax at Oxford and Harvard.
He married into the wealthy Simard family. He worked as a tax specialist in
Ottawa and Quebec City, and then was elected to the national assembly in
1966.
He spurned offers from the surging separatist movement and won the Quebec
Liberal leadership early in 1970. Two months later, he defeated the old
Union Nationale coalition on a platform for economic growth, and won again
in 1973.
After his defeat three years later at the hands of the PQ, Mr Bourassa,
frustrated and bitter, went to study the European Community and later taught
in Europe and the US. But he kept in close touch with Quebec, and by 1983
was back as Quebec Liberal leader. He took his revenge on the PQ in 1985 and
was re-elected with a two-thirds majority in 1989.
Mr Bourassa's passion is the craft of politics. His tenacity is legendary,
but his consensus-type leadership is often bewildering. He dislikes broad
visions and goals, preferring to explain the virtues of investment and
stability.
He freely used the promise of the huge James Bay hydro-electric project to
win at the polls in the 1970s. His 1985 tome 'Power from the North' extolled
the CDollars 15-bn James Bay Phase II as a great export project ensuring
Quebec's prosperity into the next century.
James Bay II has been delayed by New England's long recession and opposition
from the Cree Indians. But Mr Bourassa says he will have the last word,
'because hydro power is most economic and environmentally acceptable'.
Slight in build and tutorial in manner, Mr Bourassa inspires respect but
lacks charisma. He is uneasy on TV, yet friendly and relaxed in
person-to-person meetings. Many Quebecers vote with their wallets and
approve of his cautious approach.
Rumination rather than rhetoric is his style. But Mr Bourassa springs to
life in the national assembly, where he is known as a master of repartee,
able to put down his critics with a contemptuous flip of the hand. He
usually gets the better of Mr Jacques Parizeau, the PQ leader, who was PQ
finance minister from 1976 to 1984 before becoming a popular University of
Montreal economics professor.
For Mr Bourassa, the failure of Meech Lake in 1990 took a heavy toll. The
accord would not only have recognised Quebec as a distinct society but, in
his words, 'would have given us more powers than I'd expected'.
The No vote in this year's referendum has been far less of a setback. Senior
ministers say Mr Bourassa will lead his troops again in the next election,
which is expected to be called in 1994. The one question mark is his health
following a brush with skin cancer two years ago.
He will try to show how Quebec can win more administrative and cultural
'space' from Ottawa, picking his ground for the next constitutional battle
with customary caution.
