FT  02 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Black in bid for Maxwell Israeli interests
MR CONRAD Black's Canadian-based Hollinger group of newspapers is among
about 15 preliminary bidders seeking to acquire the late Robert Maxwell's
main newspaper interests in Israel, a company official said yesterday.
Mr Yehuda Levy, President of the Jerusalem Post, which Mr Black acquired
ahead of Mr Maxwell in 1979, said he had submitted a bid on Hollinger's
behalf to the administrators appointed to dispose of the British publisher's
Israeli holdings for the 84 per cent stake Maxwell held in Modi'in
publishing.
Modi'in owns Ma'ariv, the country's second biggest selling daily newspaper,
a Russian-language newspaper, a record company and other interests.
Other bids, which are understood to be priced around Dollars 15m, have been
made by a range of Israeli and diaspora Jewish investors ahead of the
December 31 1991 deadline for preliminary offers.
Mr Black, who last month headed a group which acquired the Fairfax group of
newspapers in Australia, owns the British Daily and Sunday Telegraph.
Hollinger came to Israel when it paid Dollars 20m for the Jerusalem Post,
easily outbidding Mr Maxwell, among others.
Management of the Daily News, the New York tabloid which is part of the late
Robert Maxwell's empire and which is currently under Chapter 11 bankruptcy
protection, has told creditors that the end-December cash position stood at
Dollars 8m (Pounds 4.3m), writes Nikki Tait in New York.
In discussions with the creditors' committee - the body formed to represent
creditors in the bankruptcy process - management added that it was looking
for debtor-in-possession financing. This is a type of temporary loan
provided in bankruptcy situations, and the lender usually goes towards the
front of the creditors' queue.
Daily News management said that projections of the paper's finances through
to March 1 had been made and that further projections beyond that date would
be made this month. It suggested that projections to date showed 'adequate'
cash flow, adding that 'advertising and circulation remain strong'.
