FT  21 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Wheway declines to Pounds 2.8m
WHEWAY, the environmental engineering group, yesterday announced a sharp
fall in profits and strengthened its board by appointing Mr Gareth Davies,
chairman and chief executive of Glynwed International, as a non-executive
director.
Pre-tax profits in the year to September 28 fell from Pounds 7.54m to Pounds
2.81m, in line with expectations, while the final dividend, as forecast, is
halved to 1p on the increased capital, making 2p (3p) for the year. Earnings
per share dropped from 6.44p to 2.08p.
Turnover at Birmingham-based Wheway, which has been transformed over recent
years from a Midlands metal basher into an international clean air and
design engineering group, fell from Pounds 120.3m to Pounds 89.3m, although
the 1990 figure included Pounds 37.5m from discontinued activities. Those
activities made an operating profit of Pounds 1.97m last year.
Mr John McGowan, chairman, blamed the profits decline on three factors:
the decision to withdraw from businesses which previously made up the
industrial and building products division;
the reorganisation and investment programme in air filtration, which came on
line in April;
and the depth and duration of the worldwide recession.
Mr McGowan said the group had entered the current year with an weaker order
book than it would normally expect, resulting in immediate action further to
contain operating costs and conserve cash.
There were signs, however, that the order book was improving. In the UK,
Cudd Bentley, which does mechanical and electrical design work for the
construction industry, had taken more orders in the past six weeks than in
the previous 22 months.
Overall, the first half of the current year was expected to be
disappointing, but Mr McGowan expressed confidence for the outcome in the
second half, assuming that the trend in orders continued to improve.
He said Synsafe, a new air filtration product, was doing 'pretty well' in
the UK since its launch in November. Synsafe will be launched in the US next
year, and the group is negotiating to expand into Germany and Spain.
Another non-executive director will also be appointed soon, and the group
then plans to move as quickly as possible to appoint a non-executive
chairman so that Mr McGowan can concentrate on his role as chief executive.
