FT  05 FEB 92 / Little-known group makes top bid for radio channel
A PREVIOUSLY unknown radio company, Independent National Broadcasting,
yesterday submitted the highest bid of five applicants for the UK's second
national commercial radio channel.
INBC bid Pounds 4.01m a year for the franchise, more than double the
second-highest bid of Pounds 1.883m submitted by Independent Music Radio, a
joint venture between Mr Richard Branson's Virgin Communications and TV-am,
the commercial breakfast television station that recently lost its
franchise.
INBC plans to broadcast pop and rock music from its headquarters in
Sheffield. It has been set up by three individuals and at the moment does
not appear to have heavyweight financial support.
The three are Mr Michael Mallett, chairman of Yorkshire Radio Network until
the group was taken over by Metro Radio in 1990; Viscount Lewisham, who was
involved in an unsuccessful bid for Yorkshire Television's franchise; and Mr
Toby Horton, a former managing director of Tees Radio.
Mr Mallett, INBC chairman, conceded yesterday that the company had not yet
raised the planned Pounds 12m needed for the radio station. A prospectus
will be issued in the next few weeks.
Rivals predicted yesterday that INBC would go the way of Showtime, which bid
the highest amount for the first national channel last year but could not
complete its financing. The franchise went instead to Classic FM. Mr Bruce
Gyngell, chairman of TV-am, said yesterday: 'There is no doubt about it. We
are the hot favourites.'
The Radio Authority, embarrassed by Showtime's failure, will be looking
closely at the applicants' business plans.
The Radio Authority, the industry regulatory body, will award the licence to
the highest cash bidder meeting basic requirements on programming and
financial viability.
The channel will use AM frequencies at present used by BBC Radio 3 and
should offer 85 per cent coverage of the UK.
The INBC application is supported by letters from two stockbrokers, Wise
Speake of Newcastle upon Tyne and Peel Hunt of London.
Mr Christopher Hunt, a director of Peel Hunt, said he had received
expressions of interest from financial institutions that had been told the
annual rate of return to the investor might be as high as 34 per cent to 35
per cent.
Capital Radio, the UK's largest commercial broadcaster, surprised the
industry by not bidding.
The other bidders were:
20/20 Radio, a consortium including Chiltern Radio, which bid Pounds 1.311m
and planned to broadcast adult contemporary music.
Score Radio, a consortium put together by Glasgow's successful Radio Clyde
group, which bid Pounds 701,000 and planned to broadcast music from the
1950s to the 1980s.
National Rock Radio, a joint venture between Ireland's national broadcaster
RTE and CLT of Luxembourg, which bid Pounds 211,000.
The winner will have to pay an annual licence fee of Pounds 645,000 and 4
per cent of revenue to the Treasury.
