FT  26 NOV 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Russian group wins monster gas
contract
THE RUSSIAN government yesterday confirmed that a multi-billion dollar
contract for the development of the world's biggest gas field had gone to a
Russian consortium and gave encouragement to another Russian group seeking
to develop one of the world's largest copper deposits.
A meeting in the Kremlin presided over by Mr Boris Yeltsin, the Russian
president, awarded the contract for the exploitation of an estimated 3
trillion (million million) cubic metres (105 trillion cubic feet) of gas in
the Shtokman field in the Barents sea to the Rosshelf consortium of 19
Russian companies mainly engaged in defence production.
Another group, known as the Russian Industrial Consortium, attended the same
meeting to present its case for the award of a contract, estimated to be
worth at least Dollars 1bn, for the development of the Udokan copper
deposits in the Chita region in Siberia, thought to contain 18m tonnes of
copper. This consortium is led by the giant Uralmash engineering plant.
Mr Yevgenny Velikhov, vice president of the Russian Academy of Sciences and
chairman of Rosshelf, told the meeting that the Rosshelf consortium would
provide greater employment in Russia. This has been a key factor in the
Russian group's victory over a rival foreign consoritum including the US
energy company Conoco, Norway's Norsk Hydro and three Finnish companies,
Neste, Metra Engineering and Imtran Voima.
The cost of the Shtokman project has been put by the foreign consortium at
between USDollars 8bn and Dollars 10bn, but by the Rosshelf group at Dollars
5bn. The Russian group also claims it would spend Dollars 2.5bn in Russia,
with its rivals spending only Dollars 400m: it said it would employ 250,000
people in Russia, compared with only 30,000 by the foreign group.
Mr Yeltsin made clear at yesterday's meeting that the country's industrial
policy would tend to favour Russian companies and groups, though they would
be encouraged to work with foreign companies and consultancies.
No award has yet been made in the case of Udokan as the final date for
tenders is January 15 next year. However, the attendance of the Russian
Industrial Consortium at yesterday's meeting and the drift of government
policy appears to favour it.
