FT  28 JUL 92 / Reversal of fortune for Kevin Maxwell: FT writers on efforts
by liquidator Robson Rhodes to secure a bankruptcy declaration
MR KEVIN Maxwell, whose father, Robert Maxwell, was one of Britain's richest
men, is on the verge of becoming Britain's biggest bankrupt.
On August 17 Robson Rhodes, the liquidator of Bishopsgate Investment
Management, which recently obtained judgment against Mr Kevin Maxwell for
more than Pounds 400m, will ask the High Court to declare him bankrupt.
Robson Rhodes believes that will give the best chance of gathering in his
assets for his creditors, of which it is the largest. If it is successful,
Mr Maxwell will assume the mantle of record bankruptcy held for 18 years by
Mr William Stern, the former property millionaire made bankrupt in 1974 for
Pounds 118m after his business crashed with debts of nearly Pounds 143m.
The High Court granted the liquidator final judgment on the grounds that Mr
Maxwell had no defence to allegations of breaches of his fiduciary duty as a
director of BIM, from which hundreds of millions of pounds of Maxwell
companies pension funds are missing.
The liquidator is seeking final judgment on an identical claim against Mr
Maxwell's brother Ian. It intends, if that succeeds, to apply to have him
declared bankrupt also.
Robson Rhodes has wasted no time in moving against Mr Kevin Maxwell. The
judgment against him was obtained only on July 20. The liquidator then
served a statutory demand for payment of the judgment debt and issued an
expedited petition under section 270 of the 1986 Insolvency Act.
Normally three weeks are allowed for compliance with a statutory demand but
the section permits abridgement 'if there is a serious possibility that the
debtor's property or the value of any of his property will be significantly
diminished during that period'.
The liquidator hopes also to short-circuit the normal procedure of the
appointment of an interim receiver, followed by the official receiver, who
would take possession and control of the debtor's assets. It hopes to get
the immediate appointment of a trustee in bankruptcy, who would become the
legal owner of Mr Maxwell's assets.
In an affidavit sworn after his father's death, Mr Kevin Maxwell put his
assets at Pounds 1.6m. He admitted to debts of Pounds 1.75m. Less is known
about the assets of Mr Ian Maxwell, who lives in a Pounds 400,000 flat in
Belgravia registered in the name of his wife Laura.
Since news of the raids on the pension funds of Maxwell empire companies
emerged last year, the previously approachable brothers have retreated
behind a wall of silence.
Robson Rhodes is confident that the trustee's authority will be recognised
by courts worldwide and will achieve quicker access to information - and
assets - than the Serious Fraud Office or other government entities which
have to work through cumbersome diplomatic channels.
The trustee is likely to focus in particular on areas such as Liechtenstein,
where trusts are suspected of holding the key to a secret Maxwell 'pot of
gold', and the US, where companies in which members of the Maxwell family
had either directorships and or shares are suspected of having been used as
vehicles for transferring cash beyond the more visible parameters of the
Maxwell empire. Administrators of Maxwell companies have begun legal action
in the US, believing that transfers to Liechtenstein companies occurred both
before and after Robert Maxwell's death last November.
Although not named in court, two companies - PH(US) Inc, a US company
controlled by Swico Anstalt, a Liechtenstein company that is part of the
Maxwell Foundation, and Sphere Inc, a California computer-games business
also controlled from Liechtenstein - are the focus of this legal action.
The Maxwell family's Liechtenstein associates made clear last January that
they were eager to co-operate with British investigators. However local
lawyer Mr Werner Keicher, who is also a director of the Maxwell Foundation,
has said that a way had yet to be found under Liechtenstein law to release
assets.
The trustee will look closely at the assets of Mr Kevin Maxwell's wife
Pandora - including a Pounds 300,000 converted barn in Oxfordshire to which
her family has recently moved - to satisfy themselves that the purported
ownership is genuine. A bankruptcy trustee has the power to take back from a
wife anything given to her by the bankrupt within the previous two years.
After the trustee has gathered all the available assets he will distribute
them to creditors. Priority goes to preferential creditors such as the
Inland Revenue.
During his bankruptcy, which could last for years, Mr Maxwell would be
debarred from being a company director or involved, directly or indirectly,
in the management of any company. Any money he received would have to be
handed to his trustee, who would be empowered to allow him an amount to live
on.
