FT  08 SEP 92 / International Capital Markets: Difficult times for US
private placement market / A look at the sharp decline in privately issued
securities
The boom in US public stock and bond issues over the past year and a half
has made Wall Street underwriters and corporate finance officers happy, but
it has exacted a heavy toll on the market for privately placed debt and
equity.
The volume of corporate debt and equity placed privately with investors in
the US has fallen sharply since last year. In 1991 private placements in the
US fell 14 per cent to Dollars 110.4bn, according to IDD Information
Services in New York. That rate of decline has accelerated this year. The
Dollars 42.3bn issued in the first six months of 1992 was almost 20 per cent
below the same period last year.
The slump in the private market contrasts with the public market, where the
lowest domestic interest rates for 30 years have lured companies to the US
debt and equity markets in record numbers - Dollars 437.1bn was raised via
bond and stock sales in the first six months of this year alone.
The only consolation is that the downturn in private placements would have
been worse but for a big increase in the number of foreign companies tapping
the US private market - between January and the end of June overseas
issuance rose 40 per cent to Dollars 15.6bn. Rule 144a had a lot to do with
the rush of foreign issues. Introduced in 1990, Rule 144a exempts big US
investment institutions from registering privately issued securities with
regulatory authorities, making it much easier for foreign companies to sell
their securities to US investors.
UK issuers were the most active users of the US private market, led by
well-known names such as Pilkington and British Aerospace (which issued
notes secured by its UK headquarters, the first deal from a non-US issuer
secured by property).
US investors, hungry for better yields than currently available from
domestic issues, have leapt at the chance to pick up foreign paper. Ms Dale
Paulshock, managing director of private placements at Merrill Lynch in New
York said: 'With US rates so low, US private placement investors are now
much more willing to take the time to look at non-US issuers than they used
to.'
The surge in foreign issuance aside, the sharp decline in privately issued
securities is a consequence of the boom in the public markets, where
corporate finance officers have been eager to take advantage of low rates
and heavy demand for securities from institutional and individual investors.
The favourable conditions persuaded many companies that might have
previously tapped the private markets to issue public debt instead.
This trend has been noticeable on the equity side. During the first five
months of this year initial public offerings (IPOs) of stock roared to
record levels, while private equity issuance stagnated.
The reluctance of many institutions, especially the insurance companies
which make up the core of the investing community, to lend to issuers rated
below investment grade has been another factor behind the private market's
malaise.
The new emphasis on credit quality, a hangover from 1990 when insurance
regulators set stricter guidelines for the private sale of debt to insurers,
has hit the private market hard. Often companies choose to raise funds
through private placements because of their non-investment grade status,
which makes it difficult for them to raise money in the public markets
without paying a heavy price.
Investment-grade issuers, meanwhile, especially those from overseas that
offer higher yields, have found conditions much more favourable, with a
large supply of insurance companies, banks, pension funds and money managers
willing to sign up for their paper.
Another factor troubling the private market has been the steepness of the
yield curve. The huge spread between short-term and long-term interest rates
has dissuaded many companies from issuing longer-dated securities. Yet the
long end of the market is exactly where many insurance companies want to
invest. Having turned away from the troubled property market, insurers are
keen on long-dated paper, which provides them with a better match of their
liabilities.
Yet, despite the gloom of the past year and a half, the outlook for the
private placement market is improving. Ms Paulshock of Merrill Lynch said:
'The level of inquiry about doing private placements is up significantly in
the last couple of months, from both domestic and international issuers.'
Ms Paulshock said many of the companies that adopted a 'wait and see'
approach during the past year while US interest rates were falling may now
be ready to enter the fray. She said that as the US election day (November
3) nears, domestic and foreign issuers will be in a hurry to complete their
deals before interest rates are buffetted by uncertainty over the voting.
The private markets may also benefit from a slowdown in public issuance,
especially on the equity side. In the past two months the IPO market has run
into trouble. Investors have become more choosy, and companies have been
deterred from going public by the sight of large numbers of IPO issues
trading at a discount in the stock market.
Several big companies have cancelled or postponed IPOs, and it is possible
some of them may turn to the private market if conditions in the public
arena remain unfavourable.
Ms Carla Harris, head of equity private placements at Morgan Stanley in New
York, is another banker who has seen the number of deals coming across her
desk increase since the IPO market ran out of steam. She believes the trend
is positive for private placements: 'So long as the public market continues
to stay challenging, especially on the IPO side, it will be a boost to the
private equity business.'
