FT  12 MAR 92 / Leading Article: An election that matters
THIS IS the most important British election since Mrs Thatcher won power in
1979; it is the least important. Both cases can be powerfully put.
The strongest argument for the second point of view is that since elections
are largely about economic wellbeing and there is a consensus upon the
largest macroeconomic questions, there is little to choose between the main
parties, other than personalities.
This scramble for the commanding centre ground of British politics was
reinforced this week by a clothes-stealing budget and is underpinned by
other, stronger forces: Britain's diminishing independent role in world
affairs and a continuing erosion of class identities, to name the two most
obvious.
To conclude from this, however, that the contest is only about nuances would
be wrong. The fact that the mainstream political debate in Britain no longer
encompasses unilateral nuclear disarmers, EC quitters or unreconstructed
Keynesian or monetarist economists makes the election harder to read and
closer to call than any since 1974, but it does not make it unimportant.
Anyone who cares about Britain's future should be glad that the political
debate is being conducted within sensible parameters; the justification for
political extremism was extreme problems. Thanks to Margaret Thatcher,
Britain is a more competitive, realistic place. No party proposes to cast
aside her main achievements of a reduced state and a contained trade union
movement, although there are grounds for asking how Labour's instincts on
these matters would develop once its ministers had settled into the seat of
power.
Interesting terrain
But the most interesting terrain in this election is that which neither
Thatcherism nor old-style Labour socialism has been able to cultivate
successfully, namely those public services upon which a modern economy is
heavily dependent. These include a disastrous secondary education system;
local government, which has lost its independent fiscal base and its sense
of purpose; and a labour market, battered by legal change and economic boom
and bust, still failing to train enough skilled workers.
The common theme here and in other areas, from health to the regulation of
utilities, is broadly that of governance. To whom are teachers responsible
for their performance? Boards of governors, local education authorities or
directly to the education secretary? What do we think local government is
for: an agency for delivering central government programmes or an expression
of democratically accountable civic will? Can training be left safely to
quangos, whose membership is settled in Whitehall and whose overall
accountability is vague, but in effect directly to the employment secretary?
On all sides there is an urgent need for stable, efficient policy delivery
mechanisms, locally accountable and unbeholden to producer interests.
Neither citizen's charters, nor direct labour organisations will do the
trick.
Difficult issues
These are deeply difficult issues for a society divided for so long along
the socialist-conservative faultline. For all the turmoil of recent years,
Britain still lacks a lively, imaginative politics of the centre, capable of
resolving such matters in a way that commands the widespread confidence that
leads to institutional stability.
Happily, pressures are at work in British politics which should assist this
process of change. The re-shaping of Westminster in the light of EC
developments is one force; Celtic devolutionists are another. Both these
pressures are reflected in a constitutional debate certain to be prominent
in a campaign everyone knows could lead to a coalition government.
It is not that regional devolution and proportional representation can
themselves solve Britain's problems; more that the processes involved offer
the best hope of the sort of true consensus-building needed for Britain to
re-discover stable and accountable institutions. An elective dictatorship in
London is incapable of imagining what is needed, let alone delivering.
The governance question, of course, is not confined to these matters in this
election. It must also be asked: if the Conservatives win, will Labour
self-destruct in a way which yields semi-permanent Tory government enlivened
only by factionalism, as in Japan? If Labour wins, will it seek allies in
Europe for a centralising, interventionist pan-European state?
This may not be so much fun as the old Punch and Judy show. It is less clear
when to hiss and when to cheer. But they are issues the parties must address
in their manifestos and on the hustings. Then the people can decide.
