FT  22 JUL 92 / Japan waits for economy's lucky number: The recovery will
take longer than expected
THE numbers three, five and seven hold a spiritual significance for
Japanese, who celebrate when their children reach these symbolic ages. But a
saying now growing in popularity is that recovery will take three years for
Japanese manufacturing, five years for the banks, and seven years for the
property and securities industries.
Having confidently expected a recovery in the autumn, Japanese industry is
readjusting its sights, and even the optimistic Bank of Japan yesterday
conceded in a quarterly forecast that 'inventory adjustment', its euphemism
for economic downturn, will take longer than expected.
Japan 'must still undergo a considerable degree of adjustment for the time
being', the bank said, and there remains a 'lingering uncertainty about the
course of the economy'.
The realisation in recent days that recovery is still far in the distance
has undermined confidence in Tokyo share prices, which fell 4 per cent on
Monday and were weak again yesterday.
In part, the stock price weakness is a sign that Japanese companies, their
sales slipping and profit forecasts due for downward revision, are
confronted by difficult restructuring decisions that can no longer be
postponed.
There is also a recognition that even if the ruling Liberal Democratic Party
(LDP) wins finance ministry approval for a supplementary budget of between
Y5,000bn (Pounds 20.9bn) and Y8,000bn, the country will not reach the
official target of 3.5 per cent economic growth for the year to the end of
March. Private forecasts vary greatly, but the 2-2.5 per cent range has
become a popular target.
Economic management remains a minor issue in the campaign for an upper house
election to be held next Sunday. Promises have focused on provincial
projects, and the leading opposition party, the Social Democratic Party
(SDP), formerly the Japan Socialist Party, fears that it could lose votes if
the flagging economy became a central issue.
But politicians are under pressure from small business owners, who are
feeling the financial pinch. A survey by the Small Business Credit Insurance
Corporation, a government agency, found that the number of companies
reporting difficulty in obtaining funds was 13.8 per cent higher than those
not having problems.
Conceding that the next few years will not see a return to the easy money
era of the late 1980s, several larger companies have announced reform plans.
Brother Industries, the office equipment and sewing machine maker, is
cutting its product line by 30 per cent. Leading securities houses are
reducing the annual staff intake, and steel makers are reviewing
diversifications that were affordable in the late 1980s, but an unnecessary
burden in the early 1990s.
However, many hard decisions on cutting staff and reducing products have
been delayed in the expectation of a relatively quick recovery. These
decisions will not wait much longer, and in the past few days, there has
been a steady flow of corporate announcements reflecting this realisation.
Sanyo Electric has scaled down plans for semiconductors and Honda Motor may
withdraw from Formula One racing.
The timing of the recovery is particularly crucial for the property sector,
which needs an upturn in the spring to help apartment builders weighed down
by heavy inventories and to assist banks which have accepted a postponement
in interest payments. These non-payment programmes are an attempt to avoid
confidence-shaking collapses, but the longer the property downturn, the more
pain Japanese banks will suffer.
Two signs of the increasing difficulties facing Japanese banks came last
week. EIE International, the troubled developer, said that it wanted to
renegotiate Y740bn in debt. And Watakyu Kensetsu, a Tokyo apartment builder,
admitted to being on the verge of collapse, owing Y145bn - its failure would
be the largest for the year.
In the wake of these announcements, the Japan Association of Corporate
Executives said companies are facing a credit shortage and called on the
Bank of Japan to cut the official discount rate, which was lowered by 0.75
per cent to 3.75 per cent on April 1. The association said the need for a
lowering was emphasised by the record low 0.9 per cent June growth of money
supply.
The domestic downturn was also highlighted by a continuing expansion of
Japan's trade surplus, with exports rising 10.5 per cent in June, a sign
that manufacturers are exporting some of their excess domestic production
capacity. Industrial production in May fell 1.9 per cent month-on-month, and
8.8 per cent year-on-year, and the capacity utilisation index fell back to
95.7, similar to the 1987 level. But Mr Masaru Yoshitomi, director-general
of the co-ordination bureau of the Economic Planning Agency, said these
indicators are no cause for panic and, indeed, the economy is returning to
something like the pre-'bubble' normal state of 1987.
'If you just look at the 3.5 per cent growth estimate, maybe you will get
pessimistic. If you are prepared to accept 2.6 per cent growth, then maybe
you would not be pessimistic,' Mr Yoshitomi said.
 ---------------------------------------------------
INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION*
 ---------------------------------------------------
January                           -0.8
February                          -1.0
March                             -2.6
April                             +0.1
May                               -1.9
 ---------------------------------------------------
*% change month on month
 ---------------------------------------------------
Source: Ministry of International Trade and Industry.
 ---------------------------------------------------
