FT  28 OCT 92 / Arts: Ogres, vampires and maidens abound / Review of
Mascagni and Marschner operas at Wexford
An 18th century operatic version of a Shakespearean comedy, an early 19th
century romantic tale of vampires and innocent maidens and a 20th century
retelling of an episode of the French revolution - the fare offered by the
current Wexford Festival - is nothing if not eclectic.
When he came to compose Il piccolo Marat around 1920, Pietro Mascagni had
been famous for three decades. They had not been happy decades, for his
efforts to repeat the youthful success of his Cavalleria rusticana had
largely failed. In accepting the French subject proposed by the librettist
Gioacchino Forzano, Mascagni was in effect taking a step backwards, toward
the grim realism of an earlier generation. The story of 'Les Noyades',
victims of the Terror slain by mass drowning, inevitably suggests Umberto
Giodano's Andrea Chenier; unfortunately, the comparison only underlines the
weakness of the Mascagni work, its flat, disjointed libretto, its
over-emphatic, undistinguished score, its cardboard characterisation.
Still, Il piccolo Marat has its defenders, including the scholar Julian
Budden, who makes a fervent case for it in the Wexford programme book. The
Wexford production also argued strongly, if not convincingly, in the work's
favour. The conductor Albert Rosen drove orchestra, chorus and singers at an
urgent pace, the volume turned up full blast. The vigour of the performance
still could not hide the limpness of the text  - though in the central role
of the Ogre, the Russian bass Georgi Selesnev, was a splendid, vital
villain, notable not only for his powerful yet flexible instrument but also
for his excellent enunciation. In the ungrateful, taxing title role, the
American tenor Thomas Booth sang with generous enthusiasm, letting his voice
ring out. While he is not a great romantic actor, Booth's purposeful
sincerity won him deserved applause.
The role of Mariella, the ingenue heroine is not rewarding: she has little
to do save suffer. But Karen Notare also threw herself totally into her
task. The voice is big, occasionally unruly and, at top volume (as the
conductor often wanted it) it is not entirely pleasant. But in her long
second act scene this dramatic soprano sang accurately and affectingly.
Producer Stephen Medcalf boldly scrapped any notion of realism and opted for
a more fanciful narration, with dream-like, flashback tableaux and a lovely
final apotheosis-vision.
The designer Charles Edwards merits all praise.
Wexford is to be praised, too, for its intelligent selection of supporting
singers. The American baritone Richard Zeller (European debut) made a
moving, lyrical Carpentiere and in their even briefer appearances, the bases
Jose Garcia and John Rath made a good impression.
While it is given fairly regularly in German houses, Marschner's Der Vampyr
is virtually unknown elsewhere; and yet, as this Wexford staging indicates,
it can be enjoyable and, within its limits, effective. Wisely, the Wexford
producer Jean-Clause Auvray decided not to send up the work. There are,
true, some light, singspiel-like moments in The Vampyr, but there are also
scenes of tenderness and terror. Unfortunately, Auvray decided to add some
inventions of his own - including a totally misleading ending - and also to
omit some of its magic. Thus the designer, Kenny MacLellan, was not allowed
much scope.
In the libretto, by WA Wohlbruck (after Polidori), Lord Ruthven, the
vampire, has to drain the blood of three maidens on the eve of their wedding
and all within the space of 24 hours. Miraculously Ruthven brings it off -
so there are three fairly meaty female roles. As the third girl, Emmy, the
young Irish soprano of Frances Lucey enjoyed a well-earned triumph. Clean
and pure, the voice poured out freely, naturally; the words were distinct,
the phrases sensitively shaped. Unfortunately, the other two victims were
less exciting and the vampire himself, the American baritone William
Parcher, was hollow-voiced, his diction woolly, his pitch sometimes less
than perfect.
As Aubry, the proper beloved of victim number two, the tenor Walter MacNeil
sang with fresh, impassioned tone and musical precision. Though not a born
actor, he commanded respect and admiration. Among the smaller roles, the
German tenor Jurgen Sacher was appealing as George (Emmy's betrothed) and
Jutta Winkler was a pert Suse.
Marschner's music, following Weber and anticipating Wagner, is not sublime,
but it is never less than competent and often delightful. Wexford performed
it in the revision made by Hans Pfitzner in the 1920s; among its vagaries
there is the shifting of the catchy Overture from its normal position at the
opera's beginning to an awkward place between first-act scenes. The Festival
might well have gone back to the original on this occasion.
