FT  10 JUN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Charting gold's midsummer
misery
THE GOLD market has become seasonal in recent years, peaking in mid-winter
and falling to a trough in mid-summer, according to Mr Andy Smith, analyst
with Union Bank of Switzerland.
Several factors combine to bring about this trend, Mr Smith suggests in the
UBS Precious Metals Outlook. In the West, jewellery sales are concentrated
in the run-up to Christmas. 'Production lead times and capacity restraints
mean jewellery manufacturers must obtain raw material three to six months
ahead of this consumption cycle.'
During the Muslim Ramadan, which will continue to be celebrated in spring on
the western calendar until the end of the decade, the average gold price is
usually lower and is traded in a narrower range. 'Reduced price volatility
during Ramadan is consistent with less than full participation in the market
by important Middle East players.'
Mr Smith also points out that Chinese New Year - another occasion for gifts
of jewellery - falls in February. In nine of the last 12 years the gold
price has been lower in February than in January.
In addition the Indian wedding season runs from September to May, and takes
a complete break during the June-August monsoon. More than half India's
annual demand for gold of 250 tonnes is wedding-related.
Seasonal movements in both oil and the dollar also reinforce the seasonal
gold price swings, Mr Smith believes. In summer the oil price tends to be
weak while the dollar, which helps to determine how much 95 per cent of the
population outside the US pay for gold, is usually strong.
Shocks to the gold market still count, Mr Smith says, but 'positive
surprises in the first half of the year simply have to work harder to have a
sustained impact on price.'
A Tokyo district court has rejected an appeal by a British coin dealer
against police refusal to return his 3,200 gold coins seized as fakes, the
Kyodo News Service said, reports Reuter from Tokyo.
Kyodo quoted the court as saying, in rejecting the appeal from Mr Paul
Davies: 'It is clear that the confiscated coins are all counterfeit. It is
necessary to continue to impound the coins since an international
investigation into the counterfeiting is still under way'.
The coins, which Mr Davies sent to three Japanese dealers, were purportedly
among 11m commemorative pieces struck by the Osaka Mint for the 60th
anniversary in 1985 of Emperor Hirohito's enthronement.
Police said they seized a total of 108,000 fake coins from Tokyo banks, Mr
Davies and other dealers.
The face value of the genuine coins is twice that of the 20 grams of gold
they contain. More than 9m were sold in Japan.
Davies filed his appeal in April after an unsuccessful two-year struggle to
recover his coins, seized by police in February 1990 from a bonded warehouse
at Narita airport.
The coins claimed by Davies have a total face value of Y320m yen (Dollars
2.52m). Mr Davies also sued the Japanese government and Tokyo city
authorities on May 19, seeking that sum in compensation, plus interest at 5
per cent since they were impounded.
