FT  16 APR 92 / Sir Peter Levene appointed to Major's personal staff
SIR PETER Levene, who is reputed to have saved taxpayers nearly Pounds 1bn
by reorganising the procurement arm of the Ministry of Defence, has been
appointed adviser on efficiency to Mr John Major, the prime minister. His
was one of a clutch of appointments involving the prime minister's personal
staff and top posts in Whitehall announced from 10 Downing Street yesterday.
Other significant changes include the appointment of Mr Alex Allan as the
prime minister's principal private secretary, in succession to Mr Andrew
Turnbull, who is to return to the Treasury.
Sir Rodric Braithwaite, Britain's ambassador in Moscow, will become the
prime minister's foreign affairs adviser when he returns to London.
Sir Peter, 50, is deputy chairman and managing director of Wasserstein
Perella, the US investment banking concern, and chairman of the Docklands
Light Railway.
He will combine his new post with his existing responsibilities as adviser
on competition and purchasing.
Sir Peter will report direct to the prime minister on the progress made in
securing substantial improvements in the management of the public services.
He had a controversial introduction to the Civil Service machine after being
appointed personal adviser to Mr Michael Heseltine, then defence secretary,
in 1984.
Political sniping from Labour MPs and disquiet among career civil servants
intensified when he became chief of defence procurement the following year
on a special contract said to be worth Pounds 100,000 a year.
As the savings resulting from Sir Peter's commercial input mounted, most of
his critics were disarmed, and the effectiveness of the new procurement
regime was increasingly recognised by the time he completed his contract in
April last year.
Sir Peter, who shares the prime minister's enthusiasm for watching Chelsea
Football Club play at home, will be based in the office of the minister for
the Civil Service.
He replaces Sir Angus Fraser, the former chairman of the board of Customs
and Excise, who agreed in 1988 to serve as efficiency adviser until the
general election.
Mr Richard Wilson, deputy secretary (industry) at the Treasury, is to be
permanent secretary at the Department of the Environment in succession to
Sir Terence Heiser, who retires in June.
Mr Hayden Phillips, who has been responsible for Civil Service management
and pay at the Treasury since January 1990, is to be permanent secretary at
the new Department of National Heritage.
