FT  03 AUG 92 / Letter (2): Devaluation, a common currency and the answer to
Britain's current account deficit
Sir, Walter Eltis is quite wrong to argue that, since the current account
deficit can be viewed macro-economically as a deficiency of domestic savings
in relation to domestic investment then the microeconomic/structural
explanations for our trade imbalance, rooted in the economy's lack of
competitiveness, can be ignored.
The correct perspective is to appreciate the interactions between all three
elements.
Thus, is it any wonder that savings are depressed in an economy whose
relative economic performance has been weak for decades, culminating in a
recession more severe than any other industrial country (bar Sweden and
Finland)?
Poor long-run performance depresses the growth of real incomes relative to
aspirations for increased consumption - making for a chronically low
household savings propensity. Meanwhile, the adverse impact of recession on
savings - squeezing corporate profits and pushing up government borrowing
through lowered tax receipts and increased spending - are obvious.
Contrary to Eltis, devaluation can, in principle, impinge positively on the
external balance via improvements in the savings-investment balance both
through its direct effects on the latter and its indirect effects working
through improved international competitiveness. Thus, the impact of
devaluation is typically to bring about a redistribution of income in favour
of profits, implying an increased propensity to save. Of course, any such
beneficial effects on the trade balance resulting from increased savings
could be more than offset by a rise in investment - induced by a successful
strategy - causing the external deficit to persist. But, this would be a
healthy situation, as is the foreign borrowing of many vigorous young
economies. Deficits of a mature, not to say senescent, industrial power in a
deep slump are deeply pathological. And the UK trade balance worsens even as
the slump persists and deepens]
John Wells,
Faculty of Economics and Politics,
University of Cambridge,
Austin Robinson Building,
Sidgwick Avenue,
Cambridge CB3 9DD
