FT  12 DEC 92 / Summit moves closer to deal: Progress on Danish demands - UK
may concede bigger EC budget rise
BRITAIN last night signalled it was ready to give ground in its hard-line
stance on future EC financing as European leaders moved closer to agreement
on granting exemptions to Denmark on the Maastricht treaty.
British officials at the Edinburgh summit said they had to make a judgment
on whether the UK would get a better deal under its own presidency of the
EC, which expires at the end of the year, than under the forthcoming Danish
presidency.
This diplomatic move came at the end of a day in which progress on the
Danish question raised prospects of a successful outcome to the summit.
After a day of passionate debate and hard bargaining on the EC budget,
Britain's tactic of playing on leaders' fear of failure appeared to be
paying off.
It was clear, however, that Britain would be forced to allow a more generous
increase in the EC budget than it has proposed so far. German Chancellor
Helmut Kohl said more money had to be channelled to the poorer countries: 'I
am prepared to compromise.'
Other EC governments meanwhile warned Mr John Major, the prime minister,
that in return for a successful summit, he was expected to speed up British
ratification of Maastricht.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, described as 'nonsense' reports that
Mr Major would be forced to agree to a firm deadline. But several other
members said they wanted UK and Danish ratification by mid-1993.
France, which praised the work of the British presidency, said the EC had
gone '80 per cent' of the way towards a solution of Denmark's demands for
legally binding opt-outs on the Maastricht treaty, thus preparing for a
second Danish referendum, probably next May.
Mr Kohl's chief spokesman, Mr Dieter Vogel, said he could not imagine the
summit failing because of a dispute over legal niceties. Over lunch, other
EC leaders appealed to Denmark to end the uncertainty about Maastricht
which, they said, was paralysing the EC's work.
Mr Poul Schluter, Danish prime minister, acknowledged the dangers of
failure, saying there could not be a third referendum, and that Denmark
could not enjoy the rights of full EC membership in the event of another No
vote.
'It will be difficult, but I think we will eventually succeed because if we
don't the Maastricht treaty will not be implemented,' he said.
The leaders were also last night expected to wrap up agreement on
'subsidiarity' - decision-making at the lowest appropriate level. They
agreed to accept a list of European Commission draft directives to scrap,
including one on takeovers.
Mr Major stressed that the summit must also address, at length, low economic
growth and unemployment in the EC. With job losses continuing to rise, and
growth prospects bleak, the European Council had to show its relevance to
the people of Europe.
EC leaders are expected to agree today proposals to encourage investment and
boost confidence. The package is likely to urge governments to channel
public sector spending into capital projects and infrastructure investment.
EDINBURGH SUMMIT
Page 3
Macedonia deal blocked
Budget row
Growth plan
Denmark warned
Man in the news, Page 10
