FT  05 AUG 92 / November start for GM plant
GENERAL MOTORS is to start production in November at its Pounds 190m engine
plant at Ellesmere Port, Cheshire.
The top-of-the-range V6 engines to be produced at the plant will be used in
GM's European Opel/Vauxhall executive cars and will also be supplied to Saab
Automobile, the Swedish carmaker in which GM holds a 50 per cent stake and
management control.
GM said yesterday that the new 2.5 litre V6 engine would be fitted first in
a luxury version of its Vauxhall Cavalier/Opel Vectra large family car to be
launched early next year.
The investment at Ellesmere Port, which will be GM's sole European source
for the V6 engines, marks a watershed for the US group's operations in the
UK. It reverses its earlier significant retrenchment from manufacturing in
Britain, where it made big losses for nearly 20 years until the late 1980s.
GM has achieved record profits in the UK in recent years, and the engine
plant is expected to lead to the establishment of other component operations
at the Cheshire site.
Work on the plant started last year. The facility will have a workforce of
about 300 initially. This is expected to rise to about 450 at full
production.
GM has a considerable trade deficit in the UK, but the engine plant is
expected to cut it by about Pounds 100m a year with most production being
exported to GM assembly plants in continental Europe.
The plant will have an initial output of 85,000 engines a year on
three-shift, 24-hours-a-day working. This capacity is expected to rise
substantially as demand grows.
The plant will include extensive machining operations for blocks, cylinder
heads, crankshafts, camshafts and con-rods, and will also produce more than
140,000 additional cylinder heads to be supplied to other GM European engine
plants.
The 170-brake-horsepower V6 engine is expected to be used in the next
generation of GM's Vauxhall Carlton/Opel Omega executive car to be launched
in 1994, and a version will be used by Saab when it unveils a replacement
for its Saab 900 range late next year.
GM claims that it has achieved a lighter, more compact V6 than many of its
rivals with a narrow angle V6 configuration.
The US carmaker, which holds second place in the German and UK new car
markets, is in urgent need of the new top-of-the-line V6 engine range in
order to counter the success of Volkswagen's rival VR6 engine, which was
launched last year in its Passat large family car.
