FT  12 FEB 92 / FT Law Report: No damages for late pay-out
ITALIA EXPRESS
Queen's Bench Division (Commercial Court): Mr Justice Hirst: February 6 1992
AN ASSURED under a fixed-value marine insurance policy is entitled to
recover only up to that value for loss of the vessel; and where payment is
delayed he is entitled to interest, but cannot claim unliquidated damages
for loss of income or increase in capital value which would have been earned
by a replacement vessel, or for hardship, inconvenience and mental distress.
Mr Justice Hirst so held when dismissing a claim by the assured, Mr
Apostolos Konstantine Ventouris, for damages for delayed payment of an
insurance claim by Lloyd's underwriters, represented by the defendant, Mr
Trevor Rex Mountain, in respect of the sinking of the Italia Express. It was
held that claims for expenses arising out of the sinking were covered by the
policy.
HIS LORDSHIP said that Mr Ventouris claimed against the underwriters under a
War Risks insurance policy in respect of Italia Express.
The vessel had been given to Mr Ventouris in January 1988. Two months later,
on March 24 1988, she was sunk by explosives at Drapestona, outside Piraeus
harbour.
Four days after the sinking, Mr Ventouris served notice of abandonment on
the underwriters, and demanded Dollars 4m for total loss.
The underwriters did not dispute that the loss fell within one of the
insured perils. Their sole defence was that the loss was caused by Mr
Ventouris's wilful misconduct.
On the 37th day of the trial the underwriters withdrew those allegations,
and submitted to judgment on liability. The very serious charges against Mr
Ventouris thus disappeared and he was vindicated. He left the court without
a stain on his character. Judgment was entered in his favour on December 19
1991 in the sum of Dollars 4m, which was the insured value of the vessel,
and Dollars 1.61m interest was awarded.
The present issues related to damages claimed by Mr Ventouris.
First, he claimed special or general damages for (a) loss of income which
would have been earned by a replacement vessel; (b) loss of increase in
capital value of a replacement vessel; and (c) damages for hardship,
inconvenience and mental distress.
The underwriters contended that such damages were irrecoverable in
principle, and that those claimed under (c) were in any event not
sustainable.
It was common ground that a contract of insurance was an agreement by the
underwriter to hold the insured harmless against loss or damage from the
insured peril, and that the remedy for breach was in damages, not debt (The
Fanti (1991) 2 AC 1).
Mr Tomlinson for Mr Ventouris submitted that the underwriters' primary
obligation was to indemnify him to hold him harmless against the loss, and
if the Dollars 4m was not paid immediately following demand for payment,
then at that stage the underwriter was in breach of contract and his
secondary obligation came into being to pay damages at large, not limited to
the Dollars 4m indemnity.
Mr Clarke for the underwriters submitted that the underwriters' agreement to
hold the assured harmless was broken the moment he suffered loss from the
insured peril. Therefore, he said, the assured had a right of action the
moment the loss occurred, no prior demand was necessary, and no separate
subsequent breach was constituted by failure to respond to demand.
Section 67 of the Marine Insurance Act 1906 provided that '(1)The sum which
the assured can recover . . .to the full extent of the insurable value . . .
is called the measure of indemnity.' Section 68 provided that where there
was total loss '(1) If the policy be a valued policy, the measure of
indemnity is the sum affixed by the policy'.
In The Fanti Lord Goff rejected the proposition that a condition of prior
payment was, at Common Law, implicit in a contract of indemnity.
In Irving v Manning (1847) 1 HLC 287 Mr Justice Patteson said a policy of
assurance was not a perfect contract of indemnity, in that 'the parties may
agree beforehand in estimating the value of the subject assured, by way of
liquidated damages'.
In Chandris v Argo Insurance (1963) 2 Lloyd's Rep 65 Mr Justice Megaw said
that in the absence of special contractual provisions, an assured could
bring his action without alleging that demand for payment had been made on
the insurer. He held that the cause of action arose when the loss occurred.
In India v Lips Maritime (1988) AC 395 Lord Brandon said: 'There is no such
thing as a cause of action in damages for late payment of damages.'
Section 67 of the Act together with section 68 in total loss cases, was
conclusively definitive of the extent of the insurer's liability for loss of
the vessel under a valued policy.
That in itself was sufficient to defeat Mr Tomlinson's argument in marine
insurance cases.
While Fanti was a liability insurance case, Lord Goff's statement of the law
was of general application, extending to property insurance cases also. The
two classes of insurance were not different in their essential character,
namely that once the loss was suffered, the indemnifier was in breach of
contract for having failed to hold the indemnified person harmless.
In Irving v Manning the judges meant precisely what they said. Chandris also
seriously undermined Mr Tomlinson's argument since, if he were right, a
demand would always be a necessary prerequisite in property insurance cases
for the cause of action to arise.
As a matter of law, Mr Ventouris's claim for loss of the vessel under the
policy was limited to the value fixed by the policy, namely Dollars 4m. He
was not entitled to any additional special or general damages.
The claim was a claim for damages for late payment of damages, contrary to
the principle in Lips.
As to the claim for hardship, inconvenience and mental stress, there could
be little doubt that Mr Ventouris had suffered very serious hardship,
inconvenience and mental distress, as a result of the underwriters' refusal
over nearly four years to make payment under the policy, and in consequence
of the defence against him. He had suffered, not least, a spell of several
weeks imprisonment under very unpleasant conditions in Greece.
However, it was well-settled that such damages in contract were only
recoverable in the case of a contract to provide peace of mind or freedom
from distress.
A marine insurance contract was not of that character, not only because of
the very nature of the contract itself (to provide financial indemnity for
commercial loss), but also because in the vast majority of contracts the
assured was a company which could never invoke the 'peace of mind' test.
The claim under subparagraph (c) would therefore have been rejected on that
further ground.
Second, Mr Ventouris claimed indemnity in respect of a number of
liabilities, costs and expenses arising in relation to the sinking of the
vessel.
Under the Protection and Indemnity (P&amp;I) clause in the policy the insurance
covered any P&amp;I claims 'as would be paid under the entry of the insured
vessel with any insurer scheduled hereto'. And in the event of there being
no club entry, 'the vessel shall be deemed entered' for all P&amp;I risks with
the Britannia Steam-Ship Insurance Association (BSIA).
The vessel was entered with the British Marine Mutual Insurance Association
(BMM), but that was not recorded on the schedule.
Mr Tomlinson submitted that the club with which the vessel was actually
entered applied. Mr Popplewell submitted that in the absence of insertion in
the schedule, the applicable club was the Britannia.
In the P&amp;I clause, 'entry' of the vessel was a matter of established fact;
insertion of the insurer on the schedule was no more than an administrative
requirement.
As a matter of construction, the applicable P&amp;I club under the P&amp;I clause,
was that with which the assured was in fact entered,ie BMM.
Under BMM Rules, Mr Ventouris would be entitled to recover for wreck charges
if properly levied by the Piraeus Port Authority, and for wreck removal. A
'pay to be paid' clause in the Rules was not incorporated in the P&amp;I clause,
in that the purpose of the P&amp;I clause was to define and delineate the risks
covered.
Had the Britannia Rules applied there would have been no bar to a claim and
again, Mr Ventouris would have come within their scope.
For the underwriters: Christopher Clarke QC and Andrew Popplewell (Ince &amp;
Co).
For Mr Ventouris: Stephen Tomlinson QC and Stephen Hofmeyr (Hill Taylor
Dickinson).
