FT  18 AUG 92 / Working within flawed walls: Stumbling blocks that face
diagnosis and action on sick building syndrome
ST JOHN'S HOUSE in Bootle on Merseyside is reputed to be a sick building.
Since the early 1980s, almost half of the civil servants who work there,
mainly for the Inland Revenue, have experienced the flu-like symptoms of the
so-called sick building syndrome.
Sick building syndrome is an elusive illness. It is difficult to diagnose,
harder to pinpoint causes and few employers will admit to the problem for
fear of bad publicity or being forced to make costly refurbishments.
Mr David Rogan, a lay official for the Revenue's staff federation at St
John's House, who works in the building, says he has suffered mildly. 'It is
depressing. You have not only your normal workload, you have the fact that
the building is making you feel ill or not up to par. For the people who
suffer badly it's like having a persistent headcold.'
The government is just one of many employers which have found that even the
most pristine, modern office block can appear to be a health hazard. The
World Health Organisation estimates that the syndrome affects a third of
European and North American offices. The Commons environment committee put
the annual cost to the UK economy at between Pounds 330m and more than
Pounds 650m in absenteeism.
Yet the Health and Safety Executive said this month that 20 years of
research had failed to establish the precise cause or cure for the
condition.
At St John's House many of the 2,000 staff began complaining of sore
throats, dry eyes, headaches and coughs in 1981 as soon as they moved there.
They said the symptoms came on at work and their families seemed immune.
They blamed the building.
Mr Rogan said: 'People would arrive in the morning feeling fine and by late
afternoon feel so bad they would have to go home or take a break outside.'
The management initially dismissed numerous complaints as resentment at the
move or stress from the upheaval. But a 1988 staff survey found that more
than 40 per cent of employees regularly went home early because of
discomfort. The report said St John's House had the characteristics of a
'sick building'.
In the 1960s the government had decided to computerise the Inland Revenue
records and St John's House was built, but a 1971 dispute between the
government and contractors which began after the main structure was complete
meant the offices remained empty until 1981.
This year Property Holdings, the government's building managers, received
Treasury approval for an overhaul of the air-conditioning system, new
fixtures, fittings and some structural alterations that will cost about
Pounds 20m over the next three financial years. Property Holdings stresses
that the works will address several problems bedevilling such offices, not
just sick building syndrome.
While it is hard to find a company that will admit to a sick building, there
are some celebrated examples. In the US, the Environmental Protection Agency
was called in to investigate a mysterious illness affecting 70 staff at its
own headquarters.
In 1984 the Public Records Office in Kew, west London, was closed for about
four months for an overhaul after the syndrome was diagnosed.
Dr Leslie Hawkins, director of the occupational health service at Surrey
University's Robens Institute and an authority on the syndrome, said the
label 'sick building syndrome' was often misused.
'Sometimes we are called in where 10 or 15 per cent of staff complain of
headaches. That's no different to what the population as a whole suffers,'
he said.
He believes that where a higher-than-normal proportion of staff report
symptoms ranging from irritated eyes, noses, and throats to menstrual
disorders, and where those symptoms are triggered by office work, it is
likely that the building is sick.
Difficulties with diagnosis are outstripped by the problems of determining
causes. The HSE's 121-page review of recent research concluded that while
the sources of the individual symptoms are likely to indicate the sources of
the syndrome itself, the field of possible causes is still wide.
The most popular theory is poor air quality or some as-yet-undiscovered
pollutant. Researchers have also examined noise, artificial lighting, static
electricity and electromagnetic fields.
The HSE found that, in general, cheaply constructed buildings with poorer
air-conditioning systems, especially public-sector buildings built in the
1970s, have had more difficulties than others.
One cause favoured by some employers is that the symptoms are dreamt up by
the 'sufferers'. They say the syndrome is more common among women, those
doing boring or low-paid jobs and those with allergies.
The HSE report argues there is little to show the syndrome is psychological.
But it says psychological factors can produce a snowball effect on reporting
of symptoms once perceptions of an office change.
Dr Hawkins believes stress is an important factor. He said: 'I have seen
cases where it is not the building that is the problem, but what goes on
inside it.'
