FT  14 MAY 92 / Russia rolls the dice of reform: Martin Wolf traces the
difficult process of making the rouble stable and convertible
Nothing could more clearly reveal the revolutionary changes now under way in
Russia than the attempt to make the rouble internationally convertible. If
the attempt succeeds, Russia and, shortly thereafter, other participants in
the rouble area, will have been dragged into the global market economy. More
important still, the global market economy will have been dragged into
Russia.
The rouble symbolises almost everything that was wrong with the Soviet
economy. That it was inconvertible into foreign exchange was the least of
its problems. Cash could not be freely exchanged into goods, assets or even
bank accounts. When Mr Valentin Pavlov decided in January 1991 to take
Rbs100 and Rbs50 bank notes out of circulation, he was merely demonstrating
the contempt in which Soviet ministers held both the money they issued and
the people who have to use it.
The use of the printing press as the main instrument of public finance in a
year when the all-Union budget deficit rose to 19 per cent of gross domestic
product destroyed what remained of the rouble's utility. One result was
restrictions on inter-republican trade, in order to keep scarce commodities
from flooding out. This accelerated the move towards barter trade, itself an
important reason for the 17 per cent decline in the real GDP of the former
Soviet Union last year.
The price liberalisation announced by the Russian government at the end of
December 1991 and reluctantly followed by the other republics was the first
stage on the road to convertibility. Paradoxically, the reduction in the
notional purchasing power of the rouble by three and a half times (on the
official price index) made that despised piece of paper worth possessing, by
eliminating shortages.
Convertibility into domestic consumer goods is the least one might expect of
a currency. But, with the introduction of a foreign exchange auction -
albeit a limited one, with no more than Dollars 15-Dollars 20m offered at a
time - along with a sharp depreciation of the currency, the rouble could
also be turned into foreign exchange.
It is on the latter that the government now wishes to build. Convertibility
of the rouble into foreign exchange at a unified and fixed exchange rate
offers the following advantages:
together with the proposed elimination of almost all import and export
quotas (apart from those on oil and gas) and the introduction of export
taxes and import tariffs, the latter mostly at around 5-10 per cent, a
convertible exchange rate would help to move Russian relative prices towards
world levels;
a convertible exchange rate would increase competition in the domestic
economy;
an internationally convertible rouble would encourage the return of flight
capital, stimulate foreign direct investment, eliminate the need to
introduce market-protecting export controls among the former Soviet
republics, reduce the incentive to introduce new republican currencies
helter skelter and create the basis for a common market throughout the
Commonwealth of Independent States; finally,
a fixed exchange rate for the rouble would provide a monetary anchor to the
reforms.
By July 1, the exchange rate of the rouble is to be unified and made
convertible for Russian residents on current account. Initially it will
float. Some time afterwards (a date and the autumn now being discussed by
the Russian authorities) the rouble is to be fixed. A rate of Rbs80 to the
dollar has been tentatively proposed, with a margin of 7 1/2 per cent on
either side.
The reform would create a single exchange rate. Penal rates, such as the one
obliging exporters to sell 40 per cent of their earnings to the state at a
sharply reduced rate (something they generally fail to do), would be
abolished. Furthermore, there would not be a special rate for capital
transactions, though convertibility on capital account would be restricted
until the rouble finds a more 'realistic' level.
Far more important than setting dates is establishing the necessary
conditions. Exchange facilities have to be created throughout Russia. More
important, a unified, convertible and fixed exchange rate is possible only
with strict monetary control. But to gain such control, the Russian
government needs to achieve a harmonious working relationship with its own
central bank and curb the three main sources of rouble diarrhoea: the
budget, the enterprises and the republics.
The Russian government inherited a budget in extreme disorder. Ostensibly,
it reduced that deficit to about 1 1/2 per cent of GDP in the first quarter
of 1992. But this was on an expenditure, not a commitment basis. On the
latter basis, the deficit was about 5 per cent of GDP. In the government's
memorandum to the International Monetary Fund on its economic policies of
February 1992, it promised a budget deficit for April to December 1992 of
1.4 per cent of GDP. This forecast has since risen to 5 per cent and
presupposes that defence spending can be kept to around 4 1/2 per cent of
GDP. Further monetary emission to finance the deficit seems inevitable.
February's draft budget forecasts domestic taxation of oil and gas at 4.7
per cent of GDP between April and December and export taxation (including on
oil and gas) at 9.1 per cent of GDP. But Mr Yegor Gaidar, the deputy prime
minister in charge of economic reform, insists that a large net increase in
revenue must not be expected. A rise in the price of oil from an initial
level of Rbs350 a tonne to over Rbs12,000 by the end of next year is likely.
Such large increases in energy prices will require offsetting subsidies to
users, at least for a transitional period.
State enterprises have responded to reform by trying to maintain employment
and output, while putting up prices and not paying their debts. In response,
a worried government has already agreed to expand central bank credit to the
commercial banks by Rbs200bn, which implies a rise in total credit of almost
50 per cent. The difficulties of enterprises can only increase after the
planned energy price increases.
Energy pricing plays no less important a role in the most difficult area of
all: inter-republican relations. At present, the rouble is a currency with
15 central banks and no monetary discipline. Why should any government or
central bank behave prudently when the central bank next door can flood its
country with roubles? The planned move to stabilise the rouble would be
swiftly undermined if errant republics were not first brought to heel.
The question is whether Russia possesses the right mixture of determination
and generosity. Without the former, there will be monetary chaos; without
the latter, there will be collapsing trade. But convertibility plus energy
price liberalisation does provide Russia with the needed carrots and sticks.
As an internationally convertible currency, the rouble would be more
valuable than any of the new currencies that are likely to be introduced by
other republics, at least in the near future.
Sustaining trade among the countries of the former Soviet Union is
essential. Such trade cannot be sustained (or rather restored) on the basis
of settlement in hard currency, because of the shortage of foreign exchange.
But the simplest payments union would be the maintenance of the rouble area.
Russia would run it. In return for control, Russia would also have to
provide the transitional credits that most of the other republics will need
as soon as energy prices are raised to world levels.
Even for those republics that resent Russian control and intend to establish
their own currencies a period of economic restructuring within the rouble
area is a sensible first step. Mr Matiukhin, the chairman of the Central
Bank of Russia, states that much progress has been made, with agreement on
obligatory reserve ratios, discount rates and the distribution of cash.
Correspondent accounts between central banks have also been established.
Agreeing limits on mutual credit is now the most important outstanding item.
Rouble stabilisation demands assistance from abroad as well. The Dollars
24bn proposed by the Group of Seven industrial countries for this year
includes humanitarian assistance and debt relief. But the latter merely
recognises the reality that repayments are not being made.
The core of the Dollars 24bn would be a Dollars 4bn stand-by agreement with
the IMF, which that organisation suggests may be completed in July, plus
Russia's share of the Dollars 2.5bn promised by the World Bank in loans for
essential imports. The Dollars 6bn stabilisation fund from the General
Arrangements to Borrow of the Group of Ten, which comprises the G7 countries
plus Belgium, the Netherlands, Sweden and Switzerland, would be available
only when the rouble is fixed.
If the rouble is to be fixed, however, two questions arise: at what rate?
And for how long?
With Russian gross national product smaller at current exchange rate than
Belgium's, the rouble is undervalued. It has been appreciating rapidly in
real terms, however, as prices soar and a further real appreciation seems
inevitable. If some of that could come via nominal appreciation rather than
inflation, that would be heplful. But it will take some time for a sensible
exchange rate to emerge in a market that will be distinguished by Russians'
determination not to exchange hard currency for roubles.
Moreover, with large energy price increases in the offing, inflation will
continue at a rapid rate. The government itself talks of 15-20 per cent a
month (400-700 per cent a year). Such inflation is inconsistent with
exchange rate stability. Moreover, a trade deficit of Dollars 2.8bn in the
first quarter alone shows that what is on offer is not, in fact, that much.
It would be senseless even to try to stabilise the rouble before the
exchange rate had stabilised and positive real interest rates had been
established (along with the effective bankruptcy provisions needed to make
such interest rates bite). A central bank discount rate of 50 per cent,
however astronomical it may seem to Russians, will provide no dyke against
the monetary tide with inflation running at 15 per cent a month.
No single act could do more to signal the beginning of serious economic
transformation, not merely of Russia but of the former Soviet Union, than
rouble convertibility and stabilisation. It is worth the gamble. But the
gamble must be taken carefully: unification and convertibility first; fixing
the exchange rate second; monetary control, first and last.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
MONETARY CHAOS IN THE FORMER SOVIET UNION
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
             Share of    Domestic   Fiscal   Total   Share of   Trade
             total GDP   credit    balance   trade   intra-   balance as
             1988 (%)    growth     1991     1988   regional   % of NMP*
                       1991 (%   (% of GDP) (% of   in a total   1987
                       change)               GDP)    trade     at world
                                                    1988 (%)    energy
                                                                 prices
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Russian
Federation    61.1       93.1**    -20.0**   22.3     57.8       3.5
Ukraine       16.2      144.9      -14.4     34.1     79.0      -3.7
Kazakhstan     4.3      117.6       -8.0     33.9     86.3     -22.3
Belarus        4.2       87.4        2.2     51.4     85.8       7.3
Uzbekistan     3.3       99.3       -5.5     39.5     85.8     -20.7
Azerbaijan     1.7       90.7       -5.2     42.0     85.6      20.8
Georgia        1.6       34.8       -4.9     44.3     86.5       2.1
Lithuania      1.4       57.4        3.0     54.9     86.8     -19.5
Moldova        1.2       62.7         -      53.1     87.8       4.0
Latvia         1.1       95.7        8.0     54.6     86.7      -8.9
Armenia        0.9       38.2       -0.8     54.9     89.1       6.0
Kyrgyzstan     0.8      105.5        3.3     45.2     86.9     -14.1
Tajikistan     0.8      117.4        3.4     41.6     86.3     -26.9
Turkmenistan   0.8      232.3        3.2     39.3     89.1       8.4
Estonia        0.6      144.6        5.5     63.9     85.1      -9.7
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
* Net material product excludes non-material services
** Allows for Russia's assumption of Union level responsibilities
Source: IMF; Peter Bofinger and Daniel Gros 'Soviet Payments Union: Why
and How?' Centre for European Policy Studies
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
