FT  23 APR 92 / International Company News: McDonnell Douglas slides 10%
after Dollars 80m loss provision
MCDONNELL Douglas, the US defence and aerospace group, yesterday reported a
10 per cent drop in first-quarter net earnings after taking an Dollars 80m
pre-tax provision for losses on the C-17 military transport aircraft it is
developing for the Pentagon.
The C-17 has been at the centre of a long-running controversy between the
company and certain Pentagon officials who have alleged that the fixed-price
programme has suffered from severe cost overruns. McDonnell Douglas has
repeatedly denied this and yesterday's provision is small relative to the
size of the Dollars 6.6bn programme.
The company reported earnings of Dollars 52m, or Dollars 1.34 a share,
compared with Dollars 58m, or Dollars 1.50, in the same period of last year,
after taking the provision. But it added that earnings would have been up 74
per cent without the charge, with an improved financial performance across
most aerospace programmes. Revenues were little changed at Dollars 4.15bn,
against Dollars 4.24bn.
Its commercial aircraft operations saw operating earnings rise Dollars 15m
to Dollars 43m and its missiles, space and electronics systems business
produced a Dollars 14m rise to Dollars 54m. The C-17 provision cut the
military aircraft segment's profits to Dollars 41m.
The figures were also helped by a Dollars 28m reduction in interest expense
on its aerospace side and Dollars 17m of pension income, thanks to a change
in actuarial assumptions.
The company said the C-17 loss was caused by estimated cost growth in the
portion of the programme which included research, development and the first
six production aircraft. This was now 90 per cent complete. Losses in this
area had been partly offset by performance on the four following production
aircraft.
The figures underlined the softened market for civilian aircraft. McDonnell
Douglas has substantially reduced its high level of indebtedness over the
past year but in this quarter the trend was reversed.
Aerospace debt at March 31 was Dollars 2.57bn, up from Dollars 2.39bn at the
end of December. The company said this was due primarily to reduced
commercial aircraft deliveries and lower bookings.
