FT  21 APR 92 / Hurd visit aimed at reassuring Turkey on EC
BRITISH foreign secretary Douglas Hurd begins a two-day visit to Turkey
today aimed at reassuring the country's leaders that Britain and its
European Community partners continue to regard it as a valued ally, in spite
of recent tensions in some of their relations.
While it is generally agreed in the Community that Turkey cannot be part of
the next wave of new EC entrants, Mr Hurd is known to feel that Ankara has
been getting a raw deal from the EC, with which it has had a long-standing
association agreement.
Britain is anxious that Turkey should be treated equally in the EC's
proposed Mediterranean arrangements and that the Community's fourth
financial protocol for Turkey should also be unblocked.
Both these measures, which could enhance Turkey's relationship with the EC,
short of full membership, are currently being held up by Greek objections.
Mr Hurd, who is due to meet both President Turgut Ozal and Mr Suleyman
Demirel, prime minister, will also discuss the obstacles which have arisen
in talks on Turkey's association with the nine-nation Western European Union
defence organisation.
Under last year's Maastricht Treaty, Greece, a member of the EC, was offered
full membership of WEU, while Turkey was offered only association.
The main problem is how article 5 of the WEU treaty, which says an attack on
one member country should be considered as an attack on all members, will
apply to Greece and Turkey, given their historically hostile relations.
The proposed solution is a formula which will make clear that the article in
question cannot be invoked in the event of hostilities between two member
countries.
Though Britain is anxious not to get involved in Turkey's problems with its
Kurdish population, Mr Hurd will hardly be able to avoid discussions of the
Kurdish problem. The UK, together with other anti-Iraq coalition powers, is
expected to seek permission to extend Operation Provide Comfort, the
security umbrella for the Iraqi Kurds provided by allied aircraft flying out
of the joint US-Turkish airbase at Incirlik in south Turkey.
The current six-month agreement expires on June 28. An extension may prove
difficult, because Mr Demirel has said any decision must be taken by
parliament, whereas previous extensions were decided by government decree.
