FT  07 NOV 92 / A monstrous regiment fights the good fight: Women priests
are knocking at the door of the Church of England. But will their prayers be
answered?
THE Church of England will never be the same again after next Wednesday,
when its general synod votes on whether to ordain women to the priesthood.
Supporters and opponents of the move, divided on almost everything else, are
at least agreed on that. The debate happens to be taking place on November
11 - Armistice Day - but no armistice will follow the result. Some people
will leave the church if it ordains women priests; others will leave if it
does not.
Church-going is a minority activity in modern Britain. Around 7m people are
practising members of the main Christian denominations, which is low by the
standards of other European nations. Only around 2m adults worship regularly
in the Church of England. But interest in the national church continues to
reach far beyond its active membership. The BBC, reflecting this, will
broadcast next week's entire debate live on radio and the decisive,
afternoon session on television - giving it parity with big parliamentary
occasions and political party conferences.
Some among this wider audience of non-churchgoing viewers and listeners may
question the idea of women priests in the same way as they are unhappy about
female voices in choirs, hymns written since the start of this century and
church architecture that does not look at least vaguely gothic. They regard
the Church of England as a repository of timeless - in reality more often
Victorian - values that should be preserved in familiar and unchanging form.
Next week's debate is not for them. It is about the future shape of the
church rather than about preserving traditions - even 2,000-year-old ones -
for tradition's sake.
For the church no other subject, with the possible exception of a decision
on disestablishment, could run next week's debate close in either importance
or potential for division in an institution which takes pride in its powers
of comprehensiveness, co-existence and compromise.
A synod decision in favour of women priests would need to pass through
parliament before becoming law, and divisions have already opened among MPs
and ministers. John Gummer, the agriculture minister, might leave the Church
of England if it agrees to ordain women. Virginia Bottomley, health
secretary, has declared herself in favour and recently sponsored the
Movement for the Ordination of Women's first meeting in the house of
commons.
If next week's debate were taking place under parliamentary procedures,
there would be no doubt about the outcome. A majority of synod members will
vote in favour of women priests. The synod, however, votes in three houses -
bishops, clergy and laity - each of which must approve the change by
two-thirds majorities.
Even this demanding threshold will almost certainly be met by the bishops
and clergy. If the move to ordain women is defeated, it will be because it
fails on the narrowest of margins to scrape a two-thirds majority among lay
members of the synod. In a related vote earlier this year, support for women
priests reached only 61.4 per cent in the house of laity.
Dr George Carey, Archbishop of Canterbury, last month defended the church's
'slow and cumbersome' decision-making process, saying 'dictatorship of the
simple majority' could cause worse tensions and problems. Campaigners for
women priests will not settle for such calm rationalisation if the vote goes
against them next week.
Representatives of most of the 44 dioceses have voted in favour of ordaining
women and, if the move is thwarted because it just misses a two-thirds
majority in one of three houses, there will be accusations that the
dictatorship of the blocking minority has been at work.
The difficult implications of ordaining women have been recognised
throughout years of preparation leading up to next week's vote. Some male
priests would leave the Church of England - a financial compensation scheme
has been devised for them - and relations with the Roman Catholic Church
would come under severe strain.
It has become apparent as the final decision has neared, however, that a
vote against would be just as divisive and difficult for the church to
handle as one in favour.
If the vote is lost, supporters of women priests are threatening sanctions
including an 'ordination strike' - male deacons refusing to accept
ordination to the priesthood until women deacons could become priests as
well.
The Rev Philip Crowe, principal of Salisbury and Wells theological college,
says he would be unable to continue in his post if the church adopted an
official policy of opposing women's ordination. Other high level
resignations might follow.
The bishops are under acute pressure to maintain a united front whatever the
result, but some have very publicly endorsed the ordination of women. One or
two might find it impossible in the new circumstances to continue ordaining
men. It has even been suggested that retired bishops might be prepared to
carry out unlawful but valid ordinations of women.
Dr Carey would be left in an exposed position personally by a 'no' vote.
Since leapfrogging much longer-serving bishops to become Archbishop of
Canterbury last year, he has maintained whole-hearted support for women
priests.
There have been mutterings among a few senior colleagues that the archbishop
was unwise not to take a more neutral line given the uncertainly of the
outcome. But Carey - the first non-Oxbridge archbishop of Canterbury since
the Middle Ages - comes not from the pages of Trollope but from an east
London council estate and secondary modern school. He is not a natural
exponent of the fence-sitting skills that sometimes pass for leadership in
the Church of England. Supporters hope a heartfelt speech from a
sincerely-convinced Carey will win over enough waverers to carry the vote.
Outside the active membership of the church, the debate over women priests -
turning on such arguments as whether there are theological objections to a
woman representing Christ in the celebration of Holy Communion - can appear
medieval and arcane. But the church began moving towards the ordination of
women before sex equality issues achieved their current political and social
importance.
There have been women priests in the worldwide Anglican communion for nearly
50 years - the first, Florence Tim Oi Li, ordained in China in 1944, died
this year. Since then women have been ordained in other Anglican provinces,
not always in the most tranquil of circumstances.
Dr Peter Carnley, Archbishop of Perth, ordained Australia's first ten women
priests earlier this year without the authority of the Australian synod and
after a supreme court bid to block the ordinations had failed. 'Today we
ordain ten but we liberate tens of thousands,' he declared in a phrase that
illustrates the depth of feeling aroused by the issue.
The battle to win the argument for women priests in the mother church of
Anglicanism is continuing unabated right up to Wednesday. Potential waverers
among synod members are being lobbied as forcefully as Conservative
backbenchers in this week's Maastricht vote; advertising campaigns have run
in the religious press.
An advertisement by the Movement for the Ordination of Women features Dr
Susan Cole-King, a British-born medical doctor who went to New York as
senior health adviser to the United Nations children's fund in the 1980s and
became a priest in the US Episcopal church.
Today she is back in Britain as minister in charge of Drayton, Oxfordshire.
Dr Cole-King conducts baptisms, weddings and funerals, leads services,
presides at meetings and offers individuals support and advice. She lives in
a house called the vicarage and is, in the eyes of her parishioners, the
vicar of Drayton - except that she cannot use the title as it is restricted
to priests. Although Dr Cole-King is a priest, in England she has only the
status of a deacon.
The most significant effect of this is that she is prevented from
undertaking the exclusively priestly functions of celebrating Holy
Communion, pronouncing absolution and the blessing. Like other women deacons
in charge of parishes, she has to maintain a rota of male colleagues who are
available to celebrate communion. If a car breakdown prevented one from
arriving to say the Eucharistic Prayer, the service could not legally
continue.
' . . . who in the same night that he was betrayed, took bread and when he
had given thanks, he brake it and gave it to his disciples saying, Take eat,
this is my body . . .' The Eucharistic Prayer: the point in the Holy
Communion service at which the bread and wine is consecrated. Words that in
England only a man can validly say. This is, says Dr Cole-King, the only
real difference between her role and that of male priests in neighbouring
parishes. But, reflecting on her work in Drayton and her previous ministry
among the homeless in New York, she adds: 'The Eucharistic Prayer is not
what makes a priest a priest.'
Her experiences in New York and Oxfordshire draw her to the conclusion that,
when confronted with a women priest, most parishioners find 'there really is
nothing particularly special' about the experience. 'The biggest problem for
people in Drayton was deciding what they were going to call me, particularly
as I followed someone who called himself Father John. I had no wish to be
called Mother, and resolved the problem by suggesting that people called me
by my name.'
Women priests are knocking at the door of the Church of England. They are
already ordained in the Church of Ireland. Scotland, where women ordained
overseas are allowed to celebrate Holy Communion, and Wales could follow
soon. England itself has women deacons - undiscernable from priests to the
lay eye - running parishes.
Even the staunchest opponents recognise what this means. A 'no' vote next
week might win them a few years. But there will be women priests in England
before long, whatever the outcome of the debate. They will eventually become
as much part of the natural, unchanging Anglican tradition as robed choirs,
festivals of nine lessons and carols and all that other 'timeless'
ceremonial inherited from only a century ago.
