FT  04 FEB 92 / Threat to Arctic ozone layer poses health risk in Europe
A HOLE in the earth's protective ozone layer is likely to appear in the
atmosphere over Europe and north America for the first time this spring,
according to international scientific observations released last night.
A hole in the ozone layer would expose early season sunbathers to a slightly
increased risk of contracting skin cancer.
Scientists working on the European Arctic Stratospheric Ozone Experiment
(Easoe) say 'the atmosphere in the northern hemisphere is highly perturbed
this winter'. The volcanic eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines
last June injected large amounts of natural pollutants into an atmosphere
already heavily loaded with man-made chemicals.
Easoe is a Pounds 14m project involving 250 scientists from 17 countries who
are measuring chemicals in the atmosphere from ground-based instruments and
from balloons, rockets and high-flying aircraft. Their observations have
been confirmed by satellite measurements.
The European scientists, based at Kiruna in Sweden, say 'unprecedented'
reactions are now taking place in the atmosphere. Natural chemicals thrown
many miles high by the Pinatubo volcano are exacerbating the man-made damage
caused by chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), which have built up in the atmosphere
after decades of use in the world's refrigerators, aerosol sprays, cleaning
fluids and insulating foams.
The reactions have already destroyed a few per cent of the ozone layer,
which is several kilometres thick and about 20km high. It protects life on
earth from the sun's harmful ultraviolet radiation.
More extensive ozone loss is likely over the next two months, or so, as the
early spring sunshine accelerates the destruction.
How large an 'ozone hole' actually appears will depend on weather patterns
and atmospheric circulation. The original Antarctic hole, which started
appearing in the early 1980s, is a seasonal phenomenon. It appears every
year in the late winter and disappears during the summer as winds bring in
ozone-rich air from lower latitudes.
But the Antarctic hole covers a largely unpopulated region. An Arctic ozone
hole would increase radiation over all temperate regions of the northern
hemisphere, as far south as the Mediterranean.
If an Arctic ozone hole does appear this spring, it will increase pressure
on governments to speed up the timetable for phasing out CFCs. According to
the Montreal Protocol, signed by all industrialised countries, CFC
production must stop by 2000 but the environmental group Greenpeace says the
latest evidence justifies an immediate ban. It would then take several
decades for the atmosphere to repair itself naturally.
