FT  11 AUG 92 / International Company News: Six-month sales static at French
groups
SEVERAL large French groups, including Peugeot, the car maker, yesterday
reported static sales for the first half of the year reflecting the sluggish
state of the country's economy.
Peugeot, which saw its shares slide last week on the news that its share of
new car sales in France had fallen in July, reported a 3 per cent rise in
overall turnover from FFr80.3bn in the first half of 1991 to FFr82.6bn
(Dollars 16.7bn) in the same period this year.
The group experienced a fall in sales of nearly 4 per cent in the second
quarter after seeing sales increase by 10 per cent in the first quarter of
the year.
Mr Jacques Calvet, chairman, recently warned that the European car market
was likely to fall by 1.5 per cent in unit sales this year and unlikely to
recover until the very end of the year.
The scenario of sluggish sales in a weak economy was replicated by other
large French industrial and service sector groups reporting their
half-yearly figures yesterday.
L'Air Liquide, the industrial gases concern, saw its sales rise by a
marginal 0.39 per cent, below the rate of inflation, to FFr15.42bn in the
first half.
Colas, the construction company, mustered a 3.6 per cent increase in
turnover from FFr5.27bn in the first six months of 1991 to FFr5.46bn in the
same period this year. Bongrain, the food group, saw sales rise by just 2.5
per cent to FFr4.85bn in the first half.
Publicis, one of France's largest advertising agencies, suffered a slight
fall in sales of 0.9 per cent to FFr53.2m in the interim period. Bidermann
International, a leading textile concern, suffered a 14.8 per cent decline
in sales to FFr1.83bn.
These static sales figures come when the French economy is still growing,
despite low consumer confidence in the face of relatively high interest
rates and rising unemployment. Consumer demand slackened in the second
quarter of the year, after rising slightly in the first.
The level of confidence in the industrial sector has also declined since the
opening months of the year.
The building trade suffered a fall in activity during the first half of the
year, according to a study published yesterday by INSEE, the state
statistics institute. However, the French government has so far shown no
sign of relaxing its rigid grip on the economy.
