FT  10 JAN 92 / Bank may act after sterling falls below ERM limit
PRESSURE on the Bank of England to help the pound intensified last night
after the currency closed for the first time in London below its effective
floor in the European exchange rate mechanism.
A late fall in the currency was triggered as US investors switched money out
of D-Marks and into dollars. This movement, prompted by concerns about a
slowing in the German economy, weakened the pound in its cross-rate against
the D-Mark.
However, it also led to speculation that Germany might soon lower interest
rates, reducing strains in the ERM and opening the way for a cut in rates
across Europe.
As the pound's slide took place after 4pm, the London time at which ERM
operations end, the development failed to trigger any immediate official
intervention that would normally be required to prop up sterling's value.
Continuing weakness would force the Bank of England to act in support and
buy the pound, or even to raise UK interest rates.
At the London close, sterling stood at DM2.83, half a pfennig down on the
day and roughly a quarter of a pfennig below its effective ERM floor of
about DM2.832.
At the end of ERM trading the pound had been comfortably above the limit at
DM2.84. The pound's late fragility was exacerbated by sterling sales in New
York by traders worried about the outlook for the UK economy. However it
picked up to finish at DM2.8358 in the US.
Sterling's decline was in contrast to the view evident on the London stock
market where investors pushed the FT-SE 100 index 30.8 higher to a close of
2,497.9 on optimism about UK growth prospects and a strong opening on Wall
Street, which closed up 5.59 at a record 3,209.53.
In London last night, the dollar closed against the D-Mark up more than 3
pfennigs at DM1.5475, while against the US currency the pound lost nearly 4
1/2 cents, finishing at Dollars 1.8285. In New York the pound fell further
to finish at Dollars 1.816.
Currencies, Page 21
World stocks, Page 27
London stocks, Page 30
