FT  23 SEP 92 / Washington group backs relaxation of Cuba embargo
THE US should exempt tourism and communications from its embargo on Cuba to
improve the flow of information and ideas to the country, an influential
foreign policy group has recommended.
The Washington-based Inter-American Dialogue's task-force on Cuba concluded
that such a selective relaxation of the embargo 'is the best way to foster
political opening' in Cuba and more likely than isolation to bring change.
This would mean expanding modest steps already taken by the Bush
administration, and would include allowing an upgrading of the telephone
service between the US and Cuba; permitting all US citizens, including
tourists, to visit Cuba; allowing scheduled air flights; establishing direct
mail links; and encouraging scientific, academic and other exchanges.
However, the group - comprising prominent personalities from North and Latin
America and led by Mr Elliot Richardson, former US attorney-general -
suggested that further relaxation of the embargo should only follow positive
steps by the Cuban government towards democracy and respect for human
rights.
The task-force, whose report was published last week, said the Cuban
government - which has suffered a devastating economic blow from the
collapse of communist regimes in east Europe and the Soviet Union - has
recently 'sharply stepped up its repression against all dissident groups'.
But it found no evidence that tightening the embargo and further isolating
Cuba would provoke positive change there. Such a policy would be
'short-sighted, costly for the people of Cuba and probably
counterproductive'.
It also rejected the opposite view that the embargo should be lifted
entirely: this would give away bargaining chips in negotiations to encourage
a change of policy in Cuba.
The task-force said that Radio Marti, the propaganda station relayed to
Cuba, should become a source of objective news while TV Marti, whose
operation violates international conventions, should be closed. The US
should also attempt to reduce Cuba's fear of military attack and start to
negotiate concrete accords with Havana over, for example, migration
agreements and weather and environmental matters.
US policy towards other countries should not be influenced by their
relations with Cuba. The group said it opposed legislation, such as that now
being proposed in the US Congress, designed to prohibit all trade with Cuba
by subsidiaries of US companies in other countries.
The report's likely influence on US policy is still unclear. In obvious
efforts to attract exiled Cuban voters in Florida, both main candidates in
this year's US presidential election have promised a hard-line stance
against the regime of President Fidel Castro.
