FT  02 SEP 92 / International Company News: Investors welcome changes at SBC
 -Ian Rodger looks at events on the inside of an outsider from Basle
SWISS BANK Corporation officials said yesterday that the top level executive
changes planned for next spring were merely 'normal'. However, investors
felt this was an understatement and drove the shares higher.
This was against the trend that prevailed for other leading banks and helped
recover some of the ground that SBC's shares have lost this year.
In Swiss bank management practice, the chairman of the executive board has
overall executive responsibility, so the appointment of Mr Georges Blum, a
tough commercial banker, to this post is the most important of the changes.
But some analysts suspect that the thoughtful Mr Walter Frehner, who moves
up to become chairman of the supervisory board, will be more active than Mr
Franz Galliker has been.
'I think they are trying to impose stricter quality control over lending,'
says Mr Hans Kaufmann, banking analyst at Bank Julius Baer in Zurich. Mr
Beat Philipp, banking analyst at Bank Vontobel in Zurich, foresees a renewed
concentration of power at the centre.
Historically, SBC is the most international of the Swiss banks, but it has
had more than its share of problems overseas in the past few years. Apart
from large problem loans in the US and UK, its acquisition of the second
division brokerage Savory Milln in London in 1986 turned out to be an
expensive failure. The same could be said for its lunge into the French
market with its purchase of control of Banque Stern in 1987.
On the other hand, the association SBC formed with the Chicago derivatives
house, O'Connor Partners, last year has so far been a resounding success,
and the bank has put a high priority on developing its international swaps
and options business.
Then there is image. Among the three big Swiss banks, SBC has always seemed
the hardest for analysts to understand. Union Bank of Switzerland is the
predictable but steady giant with an aura of military might. Credit Suisse
is the bank of the Zurich establishment which has transformed since the
early 1970s into a shrewd global investment bank. But SBC, the outsider from
Basle, has, say analysts, no clear image or personality and seems to change
strategy with disquieting frequency.
These weaknesses appear to be reflected in SBC's share prices. At
yesterday's SFr243 close, the bearer shares were only about 6.5 times
estimated 1993 earnings and yielded more than 6 per cent. 'Everyone is too
negative on this bank,' said Mr Kaufman, pointing out that it has made very
good profits in the past two years in spite of having to make large loan
loss provisions.
That is probably the message that SBC executives, who meet financial
analysts in London today, will try to put across.
