FT  24 JAN 92 / S African parliament on sidelines
SOUTH AFRICA'S race-based parliament, which begins sitting today in Cape
Town, is rapidly becoming irrelevant to the business of government.
If the African National Congress (ANC) has its way, over 50,000 people will
parade through the streets of Cape Town today to demand its dissolution.
They need hardly bother.
For as South Africa advances towards a power-sharing interim government,
parliament has, in effect, been sidelined. Legislation aimed at putting a
multi-racial government in place will be drawn up at the Convention for a
Democratic South Africa (Codesa), the multi-party negotiation forum which is
becoming the focus of real power in South Africa.
Indeed, parliament plans to sit only three days a week this year to allow
MPs more time to attend Codesa, which is charged with negotiating the
dissolution of the parliament itself. The current tricameral parliament
includes whites, coloureds and Indians but excludes blacks.
Not surprisingly, today's ceremonial opening of parliament is likely to
reflect the institution's diminished status. Previously, President F W de
Klerk has chosen the opening to announce reforms which have changed the
course of South African history: in 1990, the legalisation of black
political opposition and last year the abolition of apartheid's bed-rock
legislation, the Population Registration Act.
His aides say he will make no such leap forward in today's speech.
He is expected to stress the achievements of the National party government
elected in September 1989: South Africa's return to international sport, the
normalisation of international diplomatic and trade relations and the
limited return to international capital markets.
Mr de Klerk will no doubt hope to boost the morale of whites, shaken by a
three-year recession, sharply rising crime and uncertainty about the
political future. In the next 12 months, he is likely to seek white support
in a referendum: they will be asked to approve the creation of a
multi-racial interim government.
Privately, Nationalist officials and ministers fear Mr de Klerk may lose
such a referendum, given the depth of white fear and opposition to reform -
which has recently prompted a series of bombs at multi-racial schools and
other public buildings. Much depends on what form of power-sharing is
offered to whites: Mr de Klerk has said he will bring blacks into parliament
and the cabinet to form a government of national unity to serve for five
years or more - but so far the ANC has rejected this.
None the less, the momentum towards interim government seems stronger by the
day. Real negotiations on the issue will only begin at Codesa early next
month. However difficult they may prove, it seems likely that this year's
session of parliament will be the last to exclude blacks.
Mr de Klerk is expected to visit London and other European capitals early
next month. While in Britain he is expected to attend the England-Ireland
rugby match at Twickenham as a guest of Mr John Major, the prime minister.
