FT  25 SEP 92 / Third world vexed over future of aid
DEVELOPING countries have come away from the annual meetings in Washington
of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank deeply anxious over
their prospects for future aid flows from the richer nations.
Thrust offstage by the currency market turmoil that has dominated the
meetings, finance ministers of the developing world have watched in
bewilderment and some bitterness as their wealthier colleagues squabbled
over who was most to blame for the crisis.
Third world ministers who have painfully dragged their own budgets out of
persistent deficit have been particularly galled by the failure of
industrial nations to face up to their own budget deficit problems.
Mr Lewis Preston, World Bank president, yesterday echoed the gloom felt by
many of the developing countries which are his institution's customers:
'They need help. It's important that they not be expected to bear the burden
of adjustment in the rich countries as well as in their own.'
Sounding despondent and at times angry, he criticised the industrial
countries for repeated failure to live up to their promises - on the
reduction of protectionism in the Uruguay Round of negotiations on the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade; on the 'Earth increment' in aid
promised to the developing world to help in environmental protection; on the
next injection of funds into the International Development Association
(IDA), the World Bank arm which provides loans at concessional interest
rates to the poorest countries.
World Bank officials are now pessimistic about the prospects for the 10th
replenishment of IDA funds, which should start to take effect next June.
Donor countries have committed themselves to match in real terms the level
of IDA 9, which would require 13bn special drawing rights (Pounds 10.9bn),
the basket of reserve currencies used by the IMF and the World Bank, spread
over three years.
But a meeting of high-level officials from IDA donor countries last week
failed to agree on the replenishment. World Bank officials say openly that.
when it comes to specifying each donor's share of the pot, they will back
away from their promise.
'Today there is a serious doubt that we can reach the objective of SDR13bn,'
said Mr Ernest Stern, World Bank joint managing director. 'If we do not
achieve our objective, it is going to be very painful, with consequences for
those on the ground.'
Mr Preston said the most worrying aspect for his institution of the currency
crisis was its effect on aid flows from industrial countries to the
developing world. Once-generous donors such as Sweden, which last week
announced a budget retrenchment package in response to fierce market
pressure on its currency, have had to cut their aid budgets.
The package is expected to bring a cut of perhaps 10 per cent in Sweden's
SKr14bn (Pounds 1.47bn) aid budget, and the country has given up, at least
for now, its target of increasing aid to 1 per cent of gross domestic
product from 0.9 per cent in 1990.
Less generous countries, such as the UK and the US, whose official
development assistance amounts to barely 0.25 per cent of their GDP, are
expected to cut still further.
