FT  22 SEP 92 / Maastricht - After the French Vote: Ministers disagree over
timetable for ratification - Britain succeeds in avoiding deadline
EUROPEAN Community foreign ministers yesterday warmly welcomed 'the positive
result' of the French referendum on the Maastricht treaty, but disagreed
about both the timing of the ratification process and the strength of their
commitment to various aspects of proposed European union.
A joint declaration issued after an extraordinary meeting of the EC Council
in the margin of the United Nations General Assembly in New York made clear
there was general agreement that the treaty should not be renegotiated.
Britain succeeded in keeping out of the text any commitment to a precise
deadline for ratification.
The text was adopted after an earlier draft submitted by Mr Douglas Hurd, UK
foreign secretary, acting in his capacity as EC president, had been
rejected. According to a Dutch Foreign Ministry spokesman the draft was
rejected as being too weak on both ratification and renegotiation.
The spokesman pointed out it did not even go as far as the Oslo declaration
by the Twelve  - adopted last June after the negative referendum vote by
Danes  - which specified the Maastricht treaty should be ratified by the end
of this year.
The final version adopted by ministers still leaned more towards the British
position than towards those who  - like the Dutch, Belgians and French  -
wanted firm language on both ratification and renegotiation. It said the
Council noted with satisfaction that certain member states had already
ratified the draft treaty and that such procedures were well advanced in
most other member states.
'They attached high priority to the speedy and successful conclusion of the
process, without reopening the present text, on the timing foreseen in
article 'R' of the treaty.' This states that the treaty shall enter into
force on January 1 1993, provided all instruments of ratification have been
deposited or, failing that, on the first day of the month following deposit
of the ratification instrument of the last state to take that step.
Mr Hurd said after the meeting that Mr John Major, the British prime
minister, had made clear the British government's position on ratification.
The UK needed to be clear about Denmark's intentions and wanted to await the
outcome of the EC summit which Mr Major had called for next month before
tabling the ratification bill in parliament. The Danish government is due to
publish a white paper on its position on Maastricht within the next two
weeks.
Britain's and other members' concern that ordinary citizens' reservations
about certain aspects of the Community's development, voiced over the past
few months, should be taken into account by governments was reflected in the
communique.
'They (the ministers) pledged their determination to ensure that
preoccupations which had been brought to the forefront in the public
discussion will find specific responses in the future development of Europe
internally and externally,' it said.
