FT  07 MAY 92 / Leading Article: Make Poland governable
THROUGHOUT THEIR troubled history, Poles have found it easier to unite in
common purpose against an oppressor than to work together constructively
once liberation has been achieved. That pattern appears to be repeating
itself. The resignation yesterday of Mr Andrzej Olechowski, finance minister
in the minority coalition government headed by Mr Jan Olszewski, has
underlined the fragile political basis on which post-communist Poland is
built. It confirms that a continuation of economic reform will be impossible
without fundamental changes to the country's political system.
The immediate cause of Mr Olechowski's resignation is the inability of the
government to secure a two thirds majority in parliament to overturn a
controversial 1991 court decision that obliges the government to pay
inflation-indexed pensions to millions of state employees. The higher social
security bill will add an estimated Dollars 2.2bn to government spending and
demolishes all hope of limiting this year's budget deficit to 5 per cent of
gross domestic product, as agreed with the International Monetary Fund. Mr
Olechowski resigned because he knows, and repeatedly told parliament, that
without IMF backing Poland will not be able to make progress on debt
reduction negotiations with the commercial banks, to which it owes more than
Dollars 11bn. Without this, it will find it increasingly difficult to
attract the private foreign equity investment it requires for future growth.
Fragmented house
Such considerations were ignored in yesterday's parliamentary votes, which
reflected the fragmented nature of the 460-seat Sejm, or lower house of
parliament. The apparent irresponsibility of parliamentarians is above all a
function of the flawed electoral law under which members were elected. This
has to be changed.
The current system is a legacy of Poland's recent past. The electoral law,
which provides for untrammelled proportional representation, was pushed
through by the communists who dominated the previous parliament in a bid to
improve their chances in the first free elections.
The predictable result was a weak and divided parliament of 29 parties, many
with only one elected member, which makes effective government impossible.
This pleased the former communists, who emerged as the second largest party
just behind the Democratic Union, home to many former Solidarity supporters.
But it also allowed President Lech Walesa to step up his own campaign for
greater presidential powers.
Effective opposition
Mr Walesa believes that Poland needs a new constitution, which would combine
a Gaullist-style executive presidency with a parliament of fewer, but more
coherent parties, capable of providing viable governments and effective
parliamentary oppositions. His opponents are reluctant, however, to provide
him with greater powers. They point to his unpredictable nature and his lack
of understanding of economic and financial issues. After 45 years of
totalitarianism, they say, participation in democracy is required, not
another version of charismatic leadership.
The resignation of Mr Olechowski, and the probable collapse of the
government within the next few days or weeks, underlines the urgency of
resolving the present conflict between the presidency and the government.
This means, for a start, accelerating the work of the parliamentary
commission working on a new constitution. One obvious target is to change
the present proportional representation system, in particular by introducing
German-style limits, to eliminate parties with less than 5 per cent of the
vote. The inclusion of an element of first past the post voting would also
help to create fewer but more substantial parties.
Poland cannot afford a series of ineffectual governments and bickering
parliaments. It needs effective government if it is to carry through the
economic and social reforms required to achieve its goal of full European
Community membership by the turn of the century. The EC, which has a strong
interest in encouraging a stable transition in central Europe, should take
every opportunity to help the Poles establish appropriate institutions.
