FT  04 JUN 92 / Maastricht in the Balance: Prospect of early entry recedes
for Community candidates
THE LIKELIHOOD that the Community would begin opening its doors to new
members soon after the Maastricht treaty came into effect next year has been
considerably reduced by the Danish vote.
Those member states most committed to European union are also likely to be
reluctant to enlarge the EC to include Denmark's Nordic neighbours and
Alpine associates within the European Free Trade Association (Efta)  - at
least until EC integration is further advanced.
While the immediate problem the Community faces is to salvage the treaty,
the Danish vote signals the start of battle between the 'deepeners' and
'wideners' - those who emphasise integration and a more federal union
against those pressing for early enlargement, and perhaps dilution, of the
Community.
It will be more difficult to argue that the two processes are compatible,
given that a solution found to accommodate Denmark opens the way to a
'Europe a la carte', in which actual and potential member states can choose
what policies they want to be involved in.
There are currently seven formal applicants for EC membership and more
waiting in the wings. The Maastricht summit instructed the European
Commission to prepare a report on enlargement for this month's Lisbon
summit.
The Commission's preliminary conclusions were that the five Efta countries
of Austria, Sweden, Switzerland, Finland and Norway (assuming Norway also
applies) could be admitted before 1996 - when the EC's next constitutional
review is due - provided they accepted current EC law and the 'potential' of
the Maastricht treaty.
This means accepting not only greater EC powers in more areas (the Treaty of
Rome modified by Maastricht and including economic and monetary union), but
the two new 'pillars' of the union. These cover a common foreign and
security policy, leading towards a common defence, and increased
co-operation in justice and home affairs, both to be conducted through
intergovernmental agreement, but with the likelihood of greater involvement
of the European Commission and parliament after 1996.
From next year, the Efta countries will be associated with the EC in the
European Economic Area. This all but certifies that these countries'
economies are compatible with the EC. But membership would imply accepting
the EC's political aims, and in particular abandonment of neutrality
traditions common to all Efta candidates except Norway.
For the east Europeans, the situation is reversed. Hungary, Poland and
Czechoslovakia now have 'Europe agreements' giving them access to EC markets
during a 10-year transition towards a free trade regime, and the possibility
of membership thereafter.
But while it is agreed that the central European economies could not
withstand EC membership in even the medium term, there was always the
possibility of easing the long transition by binding them more closely to
the Community politically. Mr Frans Andriessen, external affairs
commissioner, last year canvassed the possibility of affiliate membership,
allowing the central Europeans into the EC's foreign policy deliberations,
for example. Yet this already minority position now looks very exposed.
One solution being suggested yesterday for Denmark was the 'a la carte'
option - 'variable geometry' in the EC jargon - which is such anathema to
federalists. This would involve Denmark accepting the beefed-up Treaty of
Rome but staying out of foreign and home affairs.
But if a special deal is found for Denmark - and this is by no means assured
 -federalists can be guaranteed to fight to ensure it is a one-off.
A majority of the Commission, and of the member states, with France and
Germany at their core, are radically opposed to 'variable geometry', and can
be relied on to insist that new members sign up for the whole Euro-trip.
Even the UK is suspicious of the 'a la carte' formula although some British
officials talk of 'a series of fixed menus'.
Mr Jacques Delors, Commission president, yesterday talked of 'consequences'
for 'the prospects of enlargement, at least of the kind we had in mind'.
Senior officials translate this to mean no early opening to Efta before the
1996 review. The original case for delay was to enable the EC to streamline
its creaking procedures and strengthen its leadership. Leaks indicating that
the Commission was considering such options, which would downgrade the
position of smaller countries in a larger Community, are considered to have
helped fuel the No vote in Denmark.
But the Commission was considering such changes for after 1996, by when the
Efta states would be inside the EC, able to take part in shaping
institutional reform. The effect of Tuesday's vote is to make that
possibility remote.
