FT  02 JUN 92 / Survey of The Earth Summit (1): Vast agenda but thin on
action - Few events have captured the world's imagination like the Earth
Summit in Rio de Janeiro. But few have also given rise to as many
misunderstandings and false hopes
WILL this summit be the historic moment when planet Earth finally becomes
environment-minded? Or will it be just another staged political event, rich
in form but bare in substance?
Will it launch a full scale assault on the world's mounting environmental
problems, or will it pass without trace?
Judging by the tortuous two-year preparations for the event, the answer will
certainly not be the first of these. The run-up has been marked by far more
discord than harmony among the dozens of powerful constituencies which are
taking part. As a result, the agenda for the two weeks of talks is huge,
jumbled and decidedly thin on specific plans of action.
So those people who had hoped or expected Rio to mark something of a
watershed in human history may have to brace themselves for disappointment.
On the other hand, the cynics who have denounced Rio as a sham may also come
away unsatisfied. There is no question that the event has focused the minds
of 140 governments on complex environmental questions, stirring up in the
process a lively debate which has sharpened many of the issues. Even if the
dozens of world leaders, who plan to attend Rio, disperse on June 14 without
a detailed action-plan, it would be most surprising if they do not take with
them a sense that the environment has acquired fresh political momentum. And
that may be the yardstick by which Rio's success should be measured.
Mr Maurice Strong, the Canadian businessman-turned-UN official who is the
chief organiser of the event, stresses that Rio is not the culmination of a
movement to save the environment, but it must mark 'a credible beginning.'
Why have a summit at all?
Rio's history goes back 20 years, to 1972 when the UN first put the
environment on the international agenda at the Stockholm conference.
Ten years later, the UN created the World Commission on Environment and
Development, chaired by Mrs Gro Harlem Brundtland of Norway, whose 1983
report Our Common Future warned that the current patterns of economic growth
were unsustainable.
Another ten years on, none of these problems has gone away. The world has
become a dirtier, noisier place, parts of the Third World have become
poorer, the pressures on dwindling natural resources have intensified. New
concerns, such as the ozone layer and greenhouse gases, have appeared. But
underlying these particular points are two greater ones, both of which
suggest that the time is ripe for a concerted, global initiative rather than
the national approach which has characterised 'green' action so far.
One is the growing awareness that the problems of pollution are
international: one country's dirt and smoke spills over into another, and
everyone is contributing to the gases and wastes which foul up the planet's
atmosphere and seas.
Heightened popular understanding of the science of ecology also means the
layman now appreciates the links in the world's natural systems: that the
rain forests of Brazil help purify the air over Europe.
The other is the growing influence of the economic theory of sustainable
development: the view that to survive, the planet should only consume that
which it can replace. A tall order in a world that is steadily sucking its
oil wells dry and chopping down its trees, but one with an appealing, if
stark imperative.
One of its tenets is that the true cost of exploiting resources, replacing
them and disposing of the waste will have to be built into prices if the
global economy is to make the necessary adjustment.
But though few people would disagree with this catalogue of problems, Rio
has exposed deep divisions in the world about the scale of the threats,
which of them are most urgent, and what should be done about them.
For example, the industrial countries who account for 80 per cent of the
world's wastes, have proved incapable of putting up the united front they
hoped for in Rio.
The fact is that recession has not helped. There is even an anti-green
backlash in the US where 20 years of mounting environmental regulation is
beginning to be costed in terms of lost jobs and hassle for the consumer.
The result is that there will not, as originally planned, be any binding
timetable in Rio to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Instead, there will
only be a promise to produce a plan of action by some future date. The
critics have already seized on this as a sign that the world's worst
pollution culprits are not taking Rio seriously. But, maybe, as the
minimalist school argues, this is better than the alternative which is
nothing at all.
Nor can the Third World agree on what it wants from Rio. Are the issues for
its members the protection of the natural resources which it possesses in -
dwindling - abundance?
Or do they centre on the degradation of the environment and the
under-development to which it can usually be traced: the spread of deserts,
the water contamination, the ill-health and poverty?
Third World representatives like to remind people that the official title of
the Earth Summit is the UN Conference on the Environment and Development,
(UNCED). This recognises the closeness of the two topics; it is futile, they
say, to talk of cleaning up the planet without first overcoming the damage
caused by economic backwardness. And it is pointless, if not immoral, of the
industrial countries to demand the protection of the rain forests while
ignoring the plight of people who have to cut down trees just to live.
'The whole question is how to protect the environment and have development,'
says Dr Lim Keng Yaik, Malaysia's minister of primary industries, and one of
the more combative spokesmen for the developing world. 'We have to find an
equation for that.'
The Third World's interest in development has provoked the other big clash
in Rio, between the rich and poor countries over the place that aid should
occupy on the agenda.
Many Third World countries will be attending Rio in the hope of securing
fresh commitments or offers of debt relief. But the industrial countries are
equally determined to prevent the familiar aid debate being dressed up in a
new and fashionable green garb.
Nonetheless, there is clearly a basis for agreement between rich countries
who want to preserve the world's living species and poor countries who say
they will do it provided they are given the financial and technical means.
Mr Michael Heseltine, the UK's former environment secretary, spoke of 'a
bargain' to be struck when he launched the final preparatory meeting for
UNCED in New York in March.
Japan also seems to be gearing itself up to take the initiative - something
it is usually reluctant to do on global issues.
Mr Noboru Takeshita, the former prime minister, who has now embraced the
environmental cause, says: 'Japan can play a bridging role between rich and
poor countries because it has itself escaped from poverty and pollution.'
The main question is how much money the rich countries will be prepared to
give. Despite UNCED's estimates of a requirement for Dollars 125bn a year,
the actual sum is likely to be less than one tenth of that figure. Again,
the critics will give voice, but the minimalists will say it's better than
nothing.
The other central question is what happens after the Summit. If Rio is to be
the start rather than the finish of the process, the strength of the
continuing machinery will be crucial. The participants will sign a Rio
Declaration, a kind of environmental 27 Commandments backed up by a bulky
Agenda 21 action programme. The Declaration is not binding, so the strength
of public opinion will decide how enduring Rio's legacy can be.
Large numbers of people will be disappointed by Rio because it will not
address their particular interest. The greatest danger is that it will leave
a vacuum into which will rush who knows what.
However, it would be surprising if Rio did not set something in motion and
earn a place in the history books, even if its value only becomes apparent
in the next century.
