FT  26 JUN 92 / Survey of India (18): Neglect of schools could hold back
growth - Half the population cannot read, but the government is resisting
pressure to introduce compulsory primary education
AS INDIA pursues east and south-east Asia down the trail of higher economic
growth, it could run into a major road block - it has one of the highest
rates of illiteracy of any country in the world and one of the worst records
for neglecting primary education.
While east and south-east Asia made universal schooling the focus of their
drive for higher economic growth, India has lagged badly behind in
developing primary schools.
Almost half the population aged seven and over cannot read or write. Less
than 50 per cent of children between the ages of 6-14 are in school -
leaving a staggering 82m who are put out to work by their parents in
so-called cottage industries, in the fields, or as bonded labour. Two-thirds
of those who attend primary school drop out before the final year.
The World Bank and donor nations are now putting pressure on India to face
up to the seriousness of the situation and to make universal primary
education a priority. Mr Oktay Yenel, head of the World Bank office in
Delhi, says: 'There is no country (other than the oil-rich countries of the
Gulf) which has achieved high levels of per capita incomes and reduced
poverty with a predominantly illiterate population.'
The Bank sees low levels of literacy - worst among the poor and among women
 -as putting a brake on other programmes to alleviate poverty, including
health education and family planning.
Both aid agencies and diplomats in Delhi were dismayed that the February
budget seemed to have dropped the emphasis on basic education that had
formed a key element of the budget presented by Dr Manmohan Singh, the
finance minister, last July.
The multilateral institutions are convinced that raising funds both
domestically and abroad for a mass primary education programme would be no
problem. 'If India had a major primary education expansion programme, I know
that the World Bank would come in in a big way and I guess that many other
countries would find it worthwhile,' says Mr Yenel.
The aid agencies believe that there are now well- established and polit-
ically neutral technologies for accelerating primary school expansion. They
do not believe the arguments of senior officials in Delhi who oppose
compulsory education on the grounds that the rural poor prefer to send their
children to work rather than to school.
'If there is good quality primary education, I am convinced that the great
majority of parents would want to send their children to school,' says Ms E.
Watanabe, head of the United Nations Children Fund (Unicef) in Delhi.
But in North India in particular, primary schools are bad. On average there
is one teacher for every 58 pupils. Appointed from outside through influence
of friends or family, he often has no contact with the village and turns up
irregularly at the school.
'I asked parents whether they knew the teacher,' Ms Watanabe says of
villages she visited in Bihar where Unicef has a project. 'None of them knew
him,' she says. Books, blackboards, and mats for pupils to sit on are all in
short supply.
India wrote the goal of achieving universal primary education into its
constitution after independence. But it has remained a dream as the number
of illiterates grew each year by 5m to 437m.
One of the paradoxes of the country is why its educated elite, committed to
the goals of development, socialism and democracy, should have allowed
primary education so low a priority. India spends less than 1 per cent of
GDP on primary education - or well below that of most countries in Asia and
in sharp contrast to the large resources it devotes to secondary and higher
education.
The blunt response of Professor Myron Weiner, an American academic who has
recently published a book on child labour in India, is that the fault lies
with the caste system.
Prof Weinder sees the neglect of primary education as based on the fear by
the higher castes that 'excessive' and 'inappropriate' education for the
poor 'would disrupt existing social arrangements'.
He explains: 'Rhetoric notwithstanding, India's policy makers have not
regarded mass education as essential to India's modernisation. They have
instead put resources into elite government schools, state-aided private
schools and higher education.'
Though universal primary education and the abolition of child labour have
been official policy since independence, the government under Rajiv Gandhi
shifted the focus about seven years ago.
The emphasis was put instead on improving the conditions of child labour
while providing non-formal education for those who had dropped out of the
school system and crash literacy courses for adults. This shift in policy
was justified as reflecting the 'socio-economic realities' of the country.
Mr Anil Bordia, the education secretary, who has presided over the change in
policies, says that the best results have been achieved in the south where
25-30 districts (including the state of Kerala) have been declared literate.
Two-thirds of the country will be literate by 1997-98, he claims.
He rejects Prof Weiner's analysis of India's educational problems. 'He does
not understand India. I think he does not know what he is talking about,'
says Mr Bordia.
The education secretary himself does not believe compulsory primary
education is the right approach to universal schooling in India. He recalls
how 'painful' it was for him as a young judge in Rajasthan - where education
in one district was compulsory - to fine parents who begged not to send
their children to school.
Mr Bordia is also suspicious of foreign interference in primary education
and is opposed to the World Bank sending specialist personnel to support a
large proposed primary education project in Uttar Pradesh, the northern
state with one of the highest rates of illiteracy.
He says that he has seen in Pakistan and Bangladesh 'the harm which big
investments in primary education can do to a country whose culture and
milieu are not particularly different from our own. Neither in planning
(primary education and literacy) nor implementation, do we need help from
abroad,' he adds.
The multilateral institutions believe that literacy campaigns and non-formal
education (where children attend classes after a day's work) are no
substitute for mass primary education. They fear as well that the these
programmes will divert resources from the more urgent task of primary
education. 'My concern', says Ms Watanabe, 'is that the focus on literacy is
diverting attention from primary education.'
The multilateral agencies need to maintain their campaign since primary
education lacks a lobby within India. 'Primary education is one of the
subjects that does not have a strong national lobby,' says Ms Watanabe. Mr
A. B. Vajpayee, the BJP leader and a veteran parliamentarian, says he has
never had a question from a constituent over primary schooling.
