FT  09 APR 92 / Leading Article: Ice cold in Tokyo
THE JAPANESE government is showing remarkable outward calm in the face of
relentlessly declining stock market and property values. It sees no problem,
except for the banks; markets go down as well as up. 'The Japanese
government does not seek any quick fixes now,' said finance minister Tsutomu
Hata on Wednesday. 'Please ask the stock market about the market.'
It is hard to be at all sure how far this inactivity represents cool heads
or cold feet. The so-called bubble economy may appear to be well deflated,
but long-term investors are still sitting on handsome profits, and a quick
rebound could readily get out of hand. The London equity market, after all,
doubled in six weeks from its post-bubble low in 1975, which may help to
account for the failure of too many British financiers to learn any lasting
lessons from that episode.
There is a domestic case, then, for continuing to allow the Japanese market
to seek its own salvation. Unhappily it is also true that a party devastated
by financial scandals is very ill-placed to do anything other than twiddle
its thumbs. That is why more than the usual burden of responsibility falls
on Mr Yasushi Mieno, the central bank governor.
The main impact of the market collapse has been on the banks, now facing
capital shortage. The real economy will be further slowed, but not
necessarily thrown into recession by their problems. As in the US, many of
the banks' clients now have higher credit ratings than the banks themselves,
and are disintermediating into the commercial paper market.
It is the emergent Japanese yuppie class which will be most incommoded; the
moral reformers among those in authority, notably the severe Mr Mieno, may
regard this as an advantage. The banks may still be able to cater for the
small company sector as the bigger borrowers turn elsewhere.
However, there is a clear danger that a severe correction could turn into
something worse; the low turnover during some of the heaviest recent falls
shows only how few people are yet prepared to regard cheap shares as
bargains. Above all, Tokyo is now far too large a figure in world markets to
be run as a purely domestic concern.
For the time being, there is little sign of any harmful repercussions: it is
likely that Japanese investors outside the banking system - notably the huge
insurance companies - are every bit as anxious to increase their overseas
weighting as the banks can be to realise some of their more liquid assets.
The restructuring of the Japanese market, notably the unwinding of
cross-holdings, is healthy, but only now beginning.
No cause for panic yet, then; but to insure against future alarums, the
Tokyo authorities should perhaps make it clearer that they are serious about
stimulating the real economy, and that in the last resort, they will stand
behind the integrity of the banks - whatever may happen to their
shareholders.
