FT  06 NOV 92 / Spur for Mideast peace negotiations
ARAB and Israeli negotiators will resume delicately poised peace talks on
Monday with an eye on president-elect Bill Clinton.
The talks were painstakingly brokered a year ago by the Bush administration,
which has nurtured them since. Both sides were pleased when Mr Clinton
voiced his support on Wednesday for efforts by President George Bush to push
the peace process forward during the transition between administrations.
The latest round of bilateral talks will be the eighth between Israel and
Syria, the Palestinians, Jordan and Lebanon. There is some expectation that
Mr Bush and Mr James Baker, his chief of staff and architect of the talks,
will push hard to cap their administration with a breakthrough in one of the
world's most persistent conflicts.
They may find the Arab side willing to help; Arab leaders have been worried
by pro-Israeli sentiments expressed both by Mr Clinton and Senator Al Gore,
vice-president-elect.
In a speech to American Jewish leaders in September, prominently reprinted
in the Jerusalem Post yesterday, Mr Clinton said: 'I do not believe we ought
to pressure Israel into making unilateral concessions in the peace process,
as this administration has tried to do.' He said it was time for Arab
concessions instead.
Mr Clinton also criticised President Hafez al-Assad of Syria in an interview
published this week, calling his regime a tyranny. Mr Farouk al-Shara, the
Syrian foreign minister, retorted: 'Clinton cannot be an honest mediator and
be biased towards Israel.'
Israel and Jordan are already on the verge of agreeing a joint statement
which would serve as a blueprint for a final peace between them. The
Palestinians and Israel appear to be edging towards an interim agreement on
Palestinian self-government in the occupied territories.
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime minister, who never shared the animosity
for Mr Bush felt by Mr Yitzhak Shamir, his predecessor, would be happy to
achieve early progress, especially with the Palestinians. When he was
elected in June he promised an interim deal on the West Bank and Gaza within
nine months.
Talks between Syria and Israel present a more difficult problem. President
Assad may judge it prudent before Mr Clinton is sworn in to office to agree
with Israel a joint 'statement of principles', over which it has been in
negotiations since September.
But both Israel and Syria are deeply suspicious of each others' motives.
This could delay progress, whoever is in the White House.
