FT  12 FEB 92 / Amazon destruction blamed on first world
THE EIGHT Amazonian Pact countries have signed a charter which demands
financial and technological help from the industrial world for environmental
protection and blames developed countries for environmental degradation.
Known as the Declaration of Manaus, it spells out their joint position for
the Earth Summit to take place in Rio in June. Its tough language seems a
further indication that the conference will turn into a showdown between the
developed and developing worlds.
'The solution of environmental problems is intimately linked to a new
attitude of international co-operation, which means increased financial
resources, greater access to technology, augmenting trade flow and measures
to resolve the foreign debt problem,' the accord said. It was signed during
a meeting in Manaus of presidents or representatives of Brazil, Colombia,
Bolivia, Ecuador, Guyana, Surinam, Peru and Venezuela.
The document pledges the countries to preserve the Amazon, the world's
largest rainforest, but insists that they will not accept conditions imposed
by the first world. Brazil's own position paper rejects any international
monitoring of the Amazon and calls for a global environment fund to be
administered by the World Bank.
During the conference's opening ceremony, Brazil's President Fernando Collor
de Mello lashed out at the 'super-rich' nations which, he said, were
'embarrassed but still not penitent for the damage they are doing to the
planet, themselves and future generations'.
He warned: 'As long as poor countries are restricted from access to capital,
technology and better living conditions they will be forced to interfere
with the environment,' adding 'we can't have an environmentally healthy
planet and a socially unjust world'.
Brazilian monthly inflation hit almost 26 per cent last month - its highest
level for almost two years. The figure, released by Sao Paulo university,
was a disappointment to Economy Ministry officials who had been hoping that
their continuing tight monetary policy would result in a stabilisation
around the December level of 23.25 per cent.
