FT  09 SEP 92 / Pounding home a Euro-message: Scottish views of monetary
union
THE SCOTS are providing a special stimulus to the increasingly stormy debate
about Europe's future.
The Royal Bank of Scotland, one of the three Scottish note-issuing banks,
will produce a special European issue of 2m Pounds 1 banknotes to coincide
with the EC's summit in Edinburgh on December 8.
The banknotes, adorned with the EC's 12-star symbol and depicting the Palace
of Holyroodhouse where the summit will be held, are aimed at familiarising
people with the idea of a European currency in their pockets.
The Royal Bank hopes uncertainty about the plan for economic and monetary
union (Emu) will be swept away by a 'yes' vote in this month's French
referendum on the Maastricht treaty.
If all goes well by the time of the December summit a few of the
lower-numbered notes - starting with EC 0000001 - are likely to end up as
commemorative gifts for visiting EC heads of government.
Lord Younger, the Royal Bank chairman, has been dipping into the history
books to make a separate point about the design of European banknotes if Emu
one day became a reality.
For about a century after political and monetary union between England and
Scotland in 1707 one pound sterling banknotes north of the border carried
the inscription that they were equivalent to 12 pounds Scots.
Lord Younger has been presenting EC Commissioners with facsimiles of
200-year-old Scottish banknotes to show how future European notes could
carry the names both of the prospective single European currency and of the
old national units.
If the Community really wanted to ease popular misgivings about the
abandonment of francs, pounds and D-Marks then, the Royal Bank chairman
suggests, it could copy this ancient example.
Scottish history since 1707 explains why the Scots' perspective on Emu is
different from that of the English. Scottish interest rates have been set
for nearly three centuries to meet the economic conditions of the south-east
of England, so Scottish people have far fewer reservations about monetary
sovereignty.
Scots bankers and academics often express surprise at English reluctance to
see the powers of the Treasury and Bank of England transferred to an
independent European central bank. 'Why do the English regard an
inflation-ridden currency like the pound as such a symbol of national
sovereignty?' is a commonly-heard question.
But, being possessed of almost Bundesbank-like hard-headedness, they are
likely to add a stricture on the difficulties lying along the route to a
single European currency.
Prof Donald MacKay of Pieda, the Edinburgh economic consultants, draws
parallels between the 1707 monetary union and the one being considered today
for the whole of Europe.
In both cases, he says, a primary economic motivation was to seek access to
growing markets. But Prof MacKay also sees a notable difference.
In Scotland's monetary and political union with England loss of Scottish
economic policy sovereignty was balanced by access to British tax revenues.
Europe's monetary union proposals contain no matching plans for political
union.
This means there is no corresponding means for redistributing revenues from
richer to poorer countries, a mechanism which, Prof MacKay says, would be
necessary to compensate lower-productivity countries for the loss of
economic flexibility caused by irrevocably fixing exchange rates.
Since the EC is unlikely to be able to agree a method for channelling funds
from German taxpayers to the rest of Europe, Prof MacKay believes plans for
Emu face 'a big political problem'.
This, of course, is exactly the conclusion drawn by the Bundesbank.
A visitor to Edinburgh's banking parlours hears much talk about Emu. But a
more pressing Euro-topic is whether the country will inevitably lose as a
result of a shift to the south and east in the Community's gravitational
centre.
Until four months ago many moderate Scots could support the idea of a
Scottish parliament dealing directly with a strengthened European executive
in Brussels at the centre of an enlarged Community. The general election
result on April 9 ruled this out.
As Prof William Paterson of Edinburgh University's Europa Institute points
out, two scenarios in vogue at the beginning of the year - Scottish
devolution and Maastricht-style European federation - have 'taken a pretty
hard knock on the head'.
Mr Robin Angus, a director at stockbrokers County NatWest Securities in
Edinburgh and an SNP supporter, says the issue of Scottish independence is
'dead for a generation'.
Mr Hamish Morrison, chief executive of the Scottish Council Development and
Industry, an independent organisation which has been promoting Scottish
industrial development for 60 years, says it is 'inevitable' that Scotland's
share of total foreign investment in Europe will fall in coming years.
The Scottish Council has been suggesting ways of attracting more EC regional
funds to compensate for the country's peripheral position.
The council would like to exploit the UK's present enthusiasm for
'subsidiarity' - decision-making at the lowest level of government - by
persuading London to give Scottish institutions more say in distributing EC
funds.
While affirming his opposition to full-scale devolution, Mr John Major has
recently promised to 'take stock' of greater pressures for self-government
in Scotland.
Mr Major does not have it within his power to distribute Europeanised pound
notes. But if he was looking for ways of boosting his popularity north of
the border, he might be well advised to listen to the Scottish Council's
proposals in the run up to the Edinburgh summit.
