FT  03 APR 92 / World Stock Markets: Belgian ills laid at door of German
intransigence - Pessimism in Brussels sprouts from corporate fears of a
tightening in fiscal policy
Political limbo is familiar territory for investors in Belgian equities, so
it is hardly surprising that the rally in the Brussels stock market ran out
of steam when a new centre-left coalition was formed at the beginning of
March, after 100 days of bargaining.
The Bel-20 index reached a 1992 high of 1,234.72 on March 3, three days
before Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene, the Flemish Christian Democrat, was appointed to
head the new government. That represented a 13 per cent rise since the start
of the year. However, over March it has slipped back to close at 1,193.02
yesterday, 3.4 per cent down from the year's peak but still above the
1,070.05 reached on November 26, the day after the inconclusive election
results were announced.
Mr Dehaene's government has pledged to tackle Belgium's large public debt,
and companies fear that this strategy may include closing loopholes in the
country's corporate tax system.
Analysts say, however, that the recent fall in the stock market is not so
much a reaction to domestic politics but disappointment that Germany is
unlikely to cut its interest rates in the near future. Mr Philippe Maystadt,
who was reappointed as finance minister in the new government, pondered but
eventually rejected an independent Belgian rate reduction just after Mr
Dehaene was appointed.
Germany's intransigence on the interest rate front, and Belgium's steadfast
devotion to a parallel monetary policy, have prompted stockbrokers to adjust
their forecasts for corporate recovery by the end of the year. Once stocks
are deprived of the short-term support of promised dividends, brokers
believe economic pessimism will feed through into the bourse, particularly
as Germany is a key export market for many Belgian companies.
Luckily, Belgium's stock market stars have not been completely eclipsed by
economic gloom. Shares in Delhaize and GIB Group, the country's two largest
retailers, have performed strongly since the beginning of the year and last
week justified the market optimism, when both companies announced strong
increases in their 1991 figures.
Other outperformers include the more cyclical stocks such as Bekaert, the
steel cord and wire producer, which has undergone an extensive
restructuring, and CBR, the building materials company. But analysts think
few pearls will be discovered during the 1991 results season.
They are forecasting a general decline in Belgian companies' earnings for
1991 of between 3 and 8 per cent. 'It is the same old story across Europe,'
says one analyst, 'more disappointments than pleasant surprises.'
In fact, two of Belgium's largest industrial companies - Petrofina, the oil
group, and Solvay, the chemicals concern - have already produced
disappointing figures for last year. Petrofina announced early in February
that its consolidated profits had fallen by nearly 25 per cent, pushed down
by a 66 per cent drop in profits at Fina, the group's US affiliate. A cost
reduction programme is under way, as is the case at Solvay, which announced
a 40 per cent decrease in group profits, excluding extraordinary items, at
the end of January.
Another depressant is the perennial illiquidity of the Brussels stock
market. Last year's government initiatives on Sicavs (societes
d'investissement a capital variable) - which allow investors to roll up
dividend income, free of tax - have not helped as much as analysts had
hoped, and there is a dearth of new equity.
There is a faint hope that the new government may follow the example of
other European countries by privatising state companies. A recent report
published by Petercam, the Belgian broker, and Hill Samuel, of London - both
keen to be among the advisers on the Belgian privatisation bandwagon -
estimated that the government could raise as much as BFr318bn (Dollars
9.4bn) if it sold a range of industrial, commercial and financial state
companies. RTT, the Belgian telecommunications monopoly, could alone be
worth BFr161bn.
The government has not yet taken the hint, but as Petercam points out, a
stock market flotation would ease the public debt and the bourse's liquidity
problem in one go.
