FT  05 AUG 92 / Germany faces huge increase in number of asylum seekers
ASYLUM SEEKERS poured into Germany last month at the rate of more than one a
minute, overburdening resources, threatening goodwill and straining the
patience of Mr Rudolf Seiters, interior minister.
Announcing a record influx of 46,496 people - bringing the total for the
year so far to 233,000, against 256,000 in the whole of 1991 - Mr Seiters
appealed yesterday for the Social Democrat party opposition 'finally to open
the way for a change in the constitution to stop the uncontrolled flow'.
Abuse of the existing law, which obliges immigration officials to allow in
anyone claiming asylum, limited Germany's ability to help people in real
need: the victims of war, terror and violence, the minister said.
Of the more than 130,000 claims examined so far this year, only 4.3 per cent
had been approved as genuine cases of people fleeing political persecution,
Mr Seiters added.
The SPD, reinforced by allies among the Liberal Democrats, junior partners
in the Bonn coalition, has long resisted constitutional change, which
requires approval in the SPD-dominated Bundesrat, the upper house.
The local authorities face increasing difficulties in handling the flood.
Yesterday, 200 police raided a 'collection hostel' in a former barracks near
Stuttgart.
Four people were arrested and charged with drug offences and burglary. Five
were found to have several sets of identity papers. Around 180 of the 390
people registered as resident in the hostel had disappeared.
In Schleswig-Holstein, 140 asylum seekers, who fled from neighbouring
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern on Monday to escape harassment from rightwing
extremists, were told they would be returned forcibly if they did not go
back voluntarily.
There has been no repetition so far this year of the large-scale violence
which flared last autumn after a concerted skinhead attack on a hostel in
Hoyerswerda, Saxony. But there are regular reports of assault on foreigners,
and popular discontent appears to be mounting.
Mr Seiters pointed out that, of last month's 10,700 asylum seekers from the
former Yugoslavia, fewer than 1,000 came from areas where civil war is
taking place.
Ethnic cleansing, Page 2
