FT  14 MAR 92 / Bonn sees danger to unity in states' demands
SENIOR German officials warned yesterday that the federalist demands of the
German states would prevent the country negotiating as a single unit within
the European Community and endanger its budget discipline.
As leaders of the 16 states spelt out their determination to play a direct
part in future budget negotiations in Brussels, they were warned that their
actions could undermine EC stability.
Mr Horst Kohler, state secretary in the German Finance Ministry and
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's principal negotiator on European monetary union
(Emu), expressed confidence that ratification of the Maastricht treaty on
both political and monetary union was not in danger. He also warned that the
whole debate in Germany over Emu was simplistic and insulting to the
importance of the issue.
Another official said the logical consequence of the German states' demands
for constitutional changes to reinforce their role in EC decision-making
would be to reduce Germany 'from a federal republic to a confederation'.
Mr Kohler summoned a briefing at the Finance Ministry to spell out concern
at the state of the European debate in Germany. Politicians, media
commentators and state members of the board of the Bundesbank have voiced
fears over introduction of a single European currency, and a common central
bank, under European union.
'I am concerned both about the manner, and the circumstances, of the debate
in Germany, because it makes it clear that German self-confidence has still
not got very far,' he said. 'Who would dare to underestimate the meaning of
the stability of the D-Mark? It is the absolute essence of our political and
economic meaning, of our self-confidence. The debate must not be re-duced to
the level of saying: 'They are endangering our D-Mark and therefore they are
traitors to the Fatherland.''
He rounded on the German states, which want a substantial reinforcement of
their control over the central government in return for ratification of the
Maastricht treaty. 'They are mixing up their justified desire to preserve
their own identities, with a fear that they face declining living standards,
and with a misunderstanding of the nature of federalism,' he said.
