FT  17 FEB 92 / Monday Interview: A thinker as well as a doer - Professor
Stephen Littlechild, electricity industry regulator
One year after the UK privatised its electricity industry, much of the
debate about its future takes place in a large, 15th-floor office
overlooking central Birmingham.
It is occupied by a lightly built man with a russet, gnome-like beard who
seldom smiles, and whose every word sounds so carefully chosen that it might
have been uttered by a judge. And, in a way, a judge he is.
Professor Stephen Littlechild is the director-general of electricity supply
 -the man charged with the statutory duty of promoting competition in the
electricity industry. The grand set of titles is no accident. He is both a
regulator and an academic: a thinker and a doer.
Anyone requesting a copy of his curriculum vitae is asked whether they want
the long version or the short one. The long one consists of 11 pages packed
with details of his degrees, fellowships, appointments, consultancies and
publications. The latter range from a weighty Elements of Telecommunications
Economics (in Japanese) to treatises on aircraft landing fees, smoking and
daffodil prices.
But the short version contains the central points. Since 1975, as Professor
of Commerce at Birmingham University (from which he is currently on leave of
absence), Prof Littlechild has been one of the leading academics on
regulation issues. He advised the UK government on the regulatory regime for
British Telecom and the water industry, and was a member of the Monopolies
and Mergers Commission for six years. Most significantly, he invented the
formula that governs the amount by which the electricity industry can raise
its prices each year. His credentials for the electricity supply job were
impeccable.
What this version does not say is that Prof Littlechild is also a great
believer in market forces, and as such was in tune with the 1980s when he
was appointed. But he resents any suggestion that he is a product of the
Thatcher years.
'The belief in the advantages of competition in satisfying the needs of
customers and making companies work efficiently is centuries old,' he says.
'In many respects this is a fundamental part of our civilisation.'
So what influenced his views? 'I've always had a belief in freedom of
choice, in a free society.'
Some people might see a contradiction between this philosophy and the
wielding of regulatory power over one of the UK's largest and most complex
industries. But Prof Littlechild sees a clear role for himself.
Electricity was not privatised without flaws: there is insufficient
competition in power generation; all sorts of barriers still prevent free
competition among suppliers; and the prices of power sources like coal and
nuclear are wildly distorted. The regulator has to maintain the momentum of
change by opening the floodgates of competition, while ensuring the lights
stay on.
Since last autumn, Prof Littlechild has issued a string of pronouncements
and decisions, many of them dozens of pages long. He criticised the two
companies that dominate the generating business for playing games with
electricity prices, and threatened them with a monopoly referral if they did
not mend their ways. He reduced some of the barriers holding back
competition, and he ensured that householders had rebates after being
overcharged by local electricity companies.
'I believe in market forces, but it is too simplistic to say that they will
solve all the problems,' he admits. One of his worries is that the socially
disadvantaged can become the victims rather than the beneficiaries of
competition. So he has been tough with the electricity suppliers over
disconnections, for example, when bills are not paid.
He also has his doubts whether market disciplines will push the power
industry into caring for the environment; this led him to pen another
lengthy paper proposing a new regime to encourage energy efficiency - by
adding what he calls an 'e' factor to the price formula.
This flurry of activity has not made him popular with the industry. This may
be the natural lot of the regulator. But electricity executives also
complain about the torrent of paper that streams out of Birmingham. They
accuse Prof Littlechild of academic remoteness, of being more interested in
producing learned treatises than in addressing the hard realities of the
business world.
He looks slightly offended at this. 'I don't think that I'm unduly academic.
I try to lay out what the issues are. I try to explain my thinking and get a
response. I think I have a good dialogue with the industry.'
His biggest immediate challenge will be to decide what to do about the
generating industry in England and Wales, where the two descendants of the
old Central Electricity Generating Board, National Power and PowerGen, have
three quarters of the market between them. In spite of his monopoly referral
threat, Prof Littlechild is keen not to cause upheaval at this early stage,
because 'I want to see if I can work with the industry I have inherited'. He
also studiously avoids accusing the generators outright of price gouging,
presumably to prevent bringing the monopoly issue to a head just yet.
But he also wants to give his price formula time to work. It was designed to
force electricity companies to keep price rises below the rate of inflation,
and therefore cut costs. The companies will only do this if they know the
formula will apply for several years, he argues. The first price review is
not due to get under way until 1994. In this respect, Prof Littlechild has
been much less aggressive than his colleagues regulating the gas and water
industries, who have provoked vigorous clashes with the companies in their
charge.
Further ahead, Prof Littlechild is already planning the introduction of
competition down to the grass roots of the UK electricity market - the
private home. He has a vision of each household buying its electricity not
just from its local distributor, but from any company it chooses.
'I do believe it is both possible and desirable for competition at the
domestic level. I look forward to a situation where the domestic customer
can look in the Yellow Pages for a supplier of electricity like a supplier
of oil.'
Power companies would compete not just on price but on levels of service,
availability of credit, types of billing and so on. Electricity would be
sold using sophisticated tariffs giving householders all sorts of options as
to how and when they draw their power.
This brave new world would be based on new-fangled metering technology which
Prof Littlechild has closely researched. For about Pounds 50-Pounds 60, he
believes, people will be able to buy a device to measure how much
electricity is used and apportion it to the various suppliers chosen by the
household. It will probably be linked by radio to the supplier, which will
then know exactly how much power it is supplying at any given moment.
His ideas about metering, laid out in a recent paper, have aroused interest
in consumer organisations, but attracted a scornful response from much of
the industry which doubts that ordinary householders want such a
sophisticated level of service. But Prof Littlechild argues that the
industry will have to go down this route as competition spreads. 'The future
is going to be different, and this is what people want,' he says. 'The UK
would be pioneering in providing this service. A sensible timescale would be
to look for full competition by the year 1998.'
Prof Littlechild was greatly encouraged by the recent energy directive from
Brussels which will throw open national electricity and gas markets to
competition from the rest of the European Community. It closely parallels
what he is trying to do with UK electricity and will therefore fit
comfortably with the future as he sees it. Continental countries, many of
them still dominated by state-owned power monopolies, will have a far
tougher time.
But Prof Littlechild's musings about the future could be rudely interrupted
in a few weeks' time if a UK election produces a change of government.
Although technically an independent regulator, the director of electricity
supply is appointed by the energy secretary, and there has been some
speculation that Prof Littlechild's free market leanings could cost him his
job under a Labour administration.
He views the prospect calmly. 'A change of government shouldn't have any
effect,' he says. 'I don't anticipate a major problem.'
PERSONAL FILE
1943 Born August 27. Educated Wisbech Grammar School.
1964 Graduated as Bachelor of Commerce, University of Birmingham.
1969 PhD, University of Texas.
1975 Professor of Commerce and head of department, University of
Birmingham.
1983-89 Member of the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
1989 Director-general of electricity supply.
