FT  06 NOV 92 / Survey of Ireland (7): Across the water / Review of the
energy sector
IN CONTRAST to the Irish manufacturers which are trying desperately to
distance themselves from the effects of the downturn in the UK currency, the
Irish energy sector is looking increasingly to the UK for future
development. The Irish gas board, BGE, is well advanced in its plans for the
construction of a IPounds 280m gas interconnector to Scotland in order to
tap into North Sea gas. A study on the feasibility of a UK electricity
interconnector is also under way.
Flogas, the only publicly quoted LPG distributor, is developing its UK
market presence by diversifying into the sale of British natural gas in
England, and the hopes of some of Ireland's leading oil exploration
companies are increasingly dependent on North Sea prospects. The currency
advantage of the stronger Irish pound makes buying UK energy for the Irish
market more attractive.
Conversely, competition from cheaper priced sterling products has further
intensified the pressure on the Irish government from industrialists
requiring reduced energy costs to improve competitiveness.
Even before the rise of the Irish pound against sterling, the Culliton
Review Group, a government-appointed commission on employment creation and
industrial competitiveness, pointed out that the Irish government-owned
electricity supply board, EBB, could reduce the cost of electricity by using
imported fuels instead of peat.
However, such a decision would spell disaster for Bord na Mona, the
state-owned peat harvesting company which generates 55 per cent of its
revenue from its sales to the EBB. Peat also provides an important source of
employment in the Irish midlands, where the Taoiseach's constituency, Mr
Albert Reynolds's, is based.
Culliton says: 'The financial and social consequences of a reduced price for
milled peat should be faced by the government directly and not hidden in a
cross subsidy between the two state sponsored bodies.'
But since implementation of the Culliton proposal would cause social and
political consequences equivalent to a pit closure for a British Labour
government, the Irish coalition government is unlikely to risk such a move.
Similarly, the government seems reluctant to implement another Culliton
proposal: that BGE charge a more commercial price for the natural gas it
sells to Irish Fertiliser Industries as a feedstock for manufacturing
nitrogen fertiliser. IFI (and its predecessor, NET) has been receiving this
gas at a discount, paying as little as one fifth of the price paid by
commercial customers.
A more likely victim of the drive for competitiveness could be the
state-owned Irish Refining Company. whose sales rely mainly on the
government requirement that Irish oil distributors source one third of their
supplies from the refinery. The result is an extra imposition on petrol
prices for consumers.
Here the government has at least taken the step of trying to find a
purchaser or partner to take over the operation and invest in upgrading. So
far its efforts have proved fruitless.
The government appears to be holding out in the hope that an important oil
discovery in the Celtic Sea - on the shore of which the refinery is located
 -could help to justify the investment. The most recent well to be drilled
last month discovered oil, which flowed at 100 barrels a day, approximately
30 miles south of the refinery.
This news offers little encouragement for the refinery company, but adds to
the tantalising results of exploration, which indicate that there is oil at
a number of locations off the southern coast. (The structure is so complex
that it requires innovative investment and production techniques to bring it
ashore.)
The government has recently begun to recognise that it too must take a more
innovative approach to offshore exploration. As a result it has reduced
corporation profits tax on oil discoveries to as low as 25 per cent - which
compares favourably with tax rates for North Sea producers.
It has also designed its terms to revive interest - which had been flagging,
after the disappointing results of the 1970s.
Mobil, the second largest US oil company, has committed itself to drilling
programmes with a number of Irish companies, including Aran Energy and Bula.
Pict, the UK exploration company, also joined in the search this summer.
To encourage exploration in the frontier area off the north west Atlantic
coast, Mr Bobby Molloy, the Irish minister for energy, is scheduled to
announce special licensing terms which 'will reflect the particularly
challenging nature of the acreage.'
The challenge to which the minister refers includes the weather conditions;
the minister describes the area as having one of the best wind regimes in
Europe. But while the wind may cause difficulties for exploration, it can
facilitate the generation of alternative energy. Last month saw the
completion of Ireland's first wind farm on the north west coast with a
capacity of 6.45 megawatts for the ESB controlled national grid.
But even the recent 30 per cent increase in the price, to 3.6p per unit for
independent supplies, is unlikely to lead to this sector catering for the
increased electricity demand expected before the end of the century.
Instead, the ESB has developed proposals for another gas powered station in
Dublin. Since nuclear fuel has also proved unpopular, it seems that the only
other alternative would be the interconnector which it is exploring with the
UK National Grid Company.
Both partners hope that the EC could be persuaded to help finance the
project (the gas interconnector is receiving IPounds 80m.). Routed through
Northern Ireland and Wales, it would link both parts of the island to the
European free trade electricity network.
Such a link would also lay the groundwork for outside involvement in
generating electricity for the Irish market.
With serious concern that gas sales are unlikely to provide a return from
the interconnector soon enough, BGE may encourage British Gas to avail
itself of the interconnector in order to introduce natural gas to the
Belfast markets, and to power an electricity station in Northern Ireland.
The next step could see British participation in the distribution of natural
gas in the Republic, just as Flogas is already doing in the UK.
