FT  20 NOV 92 / Technology: Edging ahead by a neck - Della Bradshaw explains
how electronic memory cards are helping weavers react swiftly to changes in
fashion
Your best silk tie may boast an international name such as Gucci, Polo or
Aquascutum on the label. But there is a fair chance that it was woven in a
small market town in Suffolk.
Vanners Silk Weavers make some 30,000 silk ties every week, 80 per cent of
which are sold overseas. Keith Parker, technical director of Vanners,
ascribes the company's success in the fast-moving fashion industry to its
application of the latest technology. 'It's the only way we can stay ahead,'
he says.
For Britain's mills, once called dark and satanic, the job has not been
easy. Until a few years ago, Vanners had to store details of all its tie
designs on miles of punched cards - the likes of which have been in use
since the jacquard loom was invented in 1803.
Now the Sudbury-based company is converting to memory cards, which have
recently proven popular in the portable computer and electronic diary
markets. In opting for memory cards, Vanners has skipped whole generations
of computer storage technology.
The basic problem for weavers was the noise and vibration of the giant
jacquard looms - Vanners has 64 of them - together with other environmental
hazards such as dye works. These meant that the more fragile floppy or hard
discs could be easily corrupted or destroyed.
The steel-encased memory cards, on the other hand, are much more reliable.
'You can drop them from six feet on to a concrete floor and they will still
retain their data,' points out Sherry Garber, product co-ordinator at US
market forecasters Instat.
For Vanners, the move from punched card to memory card will save both space
and money. Today, three bays at the Sudbury mill are completely taken over
by the punched cards: a wadge of cards nearly a foot thick can represent a
single pattern. In contrast, one memory card - a mini printed circuit board
packed with memory chips and a battery - can store eight designs.
More important, the technology will help Vanners react more quickly to
changes in tie fashion. The company needs to produce four collections a year
for spring, summer, autumn and winter wear.
There are also national variations, explains Parker. Although every country
may want brighter designs for spring and summer, customers in Italy favour
different variations from those in Japan.
Once the sales staff has shown the latest fashion designs to customers,
changes may be needed in the pattern or the colour - Vanners has 480
different coloured silk threads to choose from. If that happened it could
take up to two hours to produce the cards needed for a complicated design -
a peacock paisley, say - using the punched card system.
There are up to 50 new designs produced every week. And the problem is
compounded on a long production run, where the paper card can become dirty
and damaged and so a second one has to be made.
With the memory cards, it takes only three seconds to feed the data from the
design room through a computer network to the individual loom, or weaving
machine. There it is stored on an S-Ram memory card. These incorporate
static random access memory chips, on which data can be stored and then
erased so that the card can be used again. (Master copies of the design are
held on optical or floppy discs.)
The process is so quick, reports one of Vanners designers, that just
one-and-a-half hours after a group of customers entered the mill with their
design they were able to see the tie, albeit a simple pattern, roll off the
loom.
The toughness of computer memory cards has found them a ready home
elsewhere, such as in point-of-sale applications in shops or pubs, where
they are used to log purchases for stock control purposes. Another example
of memory cards being used in data collection is at Bristow Helicopters.
The basic problem for the helicopter company, says David McKay, software
manager, was how to monitor and record the performance of various components
when the craft was in flight, in order to prevent component failure.
The memory card is inserted into the dashboard of the helicopter for the
flight and then taken by the pilot, on landing, to a personal computer at
the landing station. There the data is analysed.
But it is in the mobile computer marketplace, in machines such as the Sharp
or Hewlett-Packard palm-tops or the Amstrad notepad, that memory cards have
shown most potential. Unlike a floppy disc, the steel-encased cards can be
slipped into a jacket pocket without fear of damage.
The impetus behind the take-off of memory cards in the PC industry has been
the ratification of standards, so that cards from one manufacturer can be
interchanged with those from another.
It was with this in mind that the Personal Computer Memory Card
International Association (PCMCIA) was set up in 1989. It issued its first
standard in September 1990 and a new format for the standard will be
released on December 1 this year. Members of the PCMCIA include
Japanese-parented companies such as Mitsubishi Electric, Toshiba and Fujitsu
as well as US chip and PC companies like Apple, Intel and Texas Instruments.
Although the cards based on S-Rams are popular now, they look set to be
eclipsed by cards incorporating flash memory chips. Unlike S-Ram cards,
these retain information when the power is switched off without the need for
a battery. Flash memory chips are erased by a flash of electricity that
takes less than a second.
Flash memories also have a higher storage capacity. Today's
commonly-available S-Ram cards have up to 2Mbytes of memory - enough to
store 2m alpha-numeric characters - although cards with twice this capacity
will be widely available next year, says Colin Mason, engineering manager in
the semiconductor division of Mitsubishi Electric in the UK.
For weaving applications, a group of S-Ram cards suffices in most cases,
says Jay Hale, sales and marketing director for Bonas Machine Company, which
makes Vanners' electronic machine.
But for more widespread applications - where a computer user would transfer
a memory card from the desk-top machine to a portable to an electronic diary
 -more memory will be needed for storing programs and data. Today's flash
memory cards can store up to 20Mbytes but the technology has drawbacks.
Flash memory cards are power hungry and data can only be erased in chunks.
With S-Ram cards, individual bits of data can be erased - as with a floppy
or hard disc.
Both these drawbacks are already being addressed by chip makers. As a
result, Walt Lahti, vice president on Instat, says that the worldwide market
for flash memory cards, worth just Dollars 7m (Pounds 4.6m) worldwide in
1991, could be worth Dollars 33m this year and Dollars 903m by 1997.
Lahti predicts the big growth market will be in what he calls the 'sneaker
net' market, where users will take a disc out of one PC and then run around
with it, using it in several other machines.
Mobile phones could be another potentially enormous market, as could home
photography, where the photographer would use the memory card in a camera
instead of film and then transfer the pictures on to an optical disc or
other long-term storage device so that they could be viewed on the
television screen. Both Eastman Kodak and Polaroid are members of the
PCMCIA.
As PCs work their way into the factory environment, replacing today's
minicomputers and servers, flash memory cards will also find more widespread
industrial applications, predicts Mason.
Meanwhile, back in the weaving industry S-Ram technology has still a
potentially huge market waiting for it, explains Hale. 'Ninety per cent of
the world's jacquard machines still use punch cards.'
