FT  30 JAN 92 / Appointments: Electric atmosphere in Northern Ireland
While Northern Ireland's electricity privatisation programme remains mired
in political difficulties - with the possibility, into the bargain, of a
reversal of the entire endeavour in the event of a Labour victory in the UK
election - some of the key players are taking up their positions for the
forthcoming fray.
Northern Ireland Electricity, which is set to become a public limited
company at the end of March, with possible flotation towards the end of the
year, lost its Yorkshire-born chief executive Tony Hadfield who was lured to
Newcastle last October as the new managing director of Northern Electric.
NIE has now found a replacement in 41-year-old Ulsterman Patrick Haren
(below left), who has been in Dublin in recent years as new business
investment director of the Electricity Supply Board in the Republic.
As NIE battles its way between the competition-minded department of economic
development and an array of Ulster politicians fearful of job losses and
fighting to defend the 'public sector ethic', it is far from clear quite
what sort of organisation Haren will head from March 31.
Meanwhile, economist Geoffrey Horton (below right) is to become director
general of the province's electricity regulator which is designed to come
into being on April 1.
Stephen Littlechild, director-general of Offer, the electricity regulator in
England and Wales, had declined the northern Ireland post saying his
workload was too heavy.
The Northern Irish Offer will be a separate entity, but with close links
enabling it to tap into the experience of the longer established regulator.
Horton himself will be based in Birmingham, spending perhaps two days a week
in the province.
Horton, who is 40, has also been working part-time as a consultant to the
National Economic Research Associates although he will give this up when he
takes on Northern Ireland.
He previously worked at the Department of Energy and played a significant
part in the re-organisation and privatisation of the electricity industry in
England and Wales, as well as being involved in setting up the regulatory
regime for Northern Ireland.
