FT  06 AUG 92 / Japan's day labourers pay price of recession: Emiko Terazono
reports on the economy's outcasts
IT'S 'a recession, it's really hard finding good paying jobs now,' says Mr
Kazuo Hara, a 51-year-old day labourer and one of 8,000 workers in Tokyo's
day-labourer district. He says he sleeps on the streets because he cannot
afford a room.
Unlike Japan's middle-class office workers, who are guaranteed a life-time
job by the company, the outcasts of the Sanya district in east Tokyo are
feeling the impact of Japan's economic downturn.
However, the the number of tehaishi and their mini-vans have declined.
Mr Hara, who looks older than he is as a result of years of harsh labour,
says you need connections to find a daily job. 'If you make friends with one
of the recruiters, he'll take care of you.'
His clothes, a blue corduroy shirt and worn out trousers, were given him by
a nearby Catholic volunteer centre, but Mr Hara says he would rather not
work than be cheated by the recruiters, who are often connected with the
yakuza, or gangsters.
Some of the more small-time recruiters and employers have started to take
advantage of the decline in jobs to exploit the workers. 'They'll give us a
weekly job contract, but will charge unrealistic prices for meals, toilet
paper, and cigarettes, so we'd end up with only Y4,500 (Dollars 36) for a
day's job,' says Mr Hara. Some employers, usually subcontractors of small
construction companies, he says, lock workers up in a room so they cannot
run away.
At the height of the economic boom in the late eighties, day labourers could
earn as much as Y13,000 daily for clearing and digging land. This enabled
them to move into 'business hotels' with air conditioning and television
sets for around Y4,000. However, the business hotels, a luxury by Sanya
standards, are also facing a decline in patronage as an increasing number of
workers opt for cheaper flophouses costing Y800 a night, or the streets.
Those who fail to find a job with a recruiter move on to the district's
employment centre, a grey concrete building where day jobs are posted from
6.30am. However, even at the centres, the number of jobs have fallen, with
employment offers at the three employment centres in the Sanya district for
the last fiscal year falling 16 per cent from the previous year.
A day for a labourer who has not found a job begins with glasses of sake and
beer at one of the drink stands which open as early as six in the morning.
By their sides are sports bags containing their belongings. Many are
alcoholic, some are tubercular. Because of poor living conditions the local
incidence of tuberculosis is more than 20 times the national average.
Mr Hara, who is trying to give up drinking, came to Sanya, second in size
only to Osaka's Nishinari day labour district, at the beginning of the
construction boom in the mid-1960s following the Olympic Games in Tokyo. He
says proudly that he helped build the Budohkan, a martial arts auditorium in
central Tokyo, when he had just started as a day labourer.
'But now it's worse than the oil shock periods,' he says as he queues at the
welfare centre in the centre of Sanya for a food ration consisting of a loaf
of bread and two small cartons of milk. Mr Noriyasu Okamoto, a manager at
the Jouhoku Welfare Centre, says that the number of homeless workers who
have come for counselling and aid have increased during the past year. The
monthly figure rose above 3,000 cases last January for the first time in
eight years.
'What about Miyazawa's (the Japanese prime minister)supplementary budget?'
asks Mr Okamoto, adding that an economic package to boost the economy by
frontloading public works projects should increase jobs for labourers. 'No
way,' says Mr Hara, waving a hand mutilated by past accidents at steel
mills. 'Miyazawa's not going to change anything. Things are going to get
worse next year. I can feel it.'
