FT  19 MAY 92 / OECD Annual Meeting: EC insists on US trade talks
concessions - Andriessen stakes out tough negotiating position
THE European Community yesterday underlined that an early and successful
conclusion to the Uruguay Round of trade liberalisation talks will depend on
US concessions. Mr Frans Andriessen, European Commission vice-president and
top EC negotiator in the Round, yesterday rejected the notion that Community
concessions on agriculture alone would open the way to a deal.
Mr Andriessen, who was attending the annual ministerial meeting of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, is due in Washington
shortly for talks with Mrs Carla Hills, the US special trade representative,
and possibly with Mr James Baker, the secretary of state.
He staked out a tough negotiating position, insisting that the EC would be
unable to accept any deal that did not include acceptable terms on services
and market access, where the US is holding up agreement, as well as
agriculture, where the EC acknowledges it has problems making concessions.
He He also laid down other conditions. The EC wanted a 'peace clause' that
would exempt any agreements on agriculture from the terms of a new subsidy
code under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, guarantees of
compensation for EC farmers reducing output, and comparable rules governing
the reduction of internal farm subsidies and support for exports.
The EC was prepared to make concessions on agriculture, Mr Andriessen said,
provided the US also shifted its position on the remaining areas of dispute.
But he raised the temperature in the transatlantic war of words over trade
by attributing the Round's problems to the US because it had pressed from
the start for 100 per cent elimination of farm support.
This brought a barbed response from Mr Rufus Yerxa, US deputy trade
representative. He pointed out that the US had shown 'quite a lot of
flexibility' in the talks. 'I hope he's not indicating that the EC is not
prepared to tackle the problems of the common agricultural policy because
that is what is needed for a successful Uruguay Round.'
The potential benefits of the stalled Round were highlighted yesterday by
Mrs Barbara Franklin, US commerce secretary. Achieving an agreement could
boost US gross domestic product by a trillion dollars over the next decade
and lift the world economy by five trillion, she said.
But it was the impasse over trade which overshadowed yesterday's talks on
how to boost growth and cut unemployment. 'There clearly is impatience that
agreement should be reached,' said Mr Michael Portillo, the UK's chief
secretary to the Treasury.
