FT  12 AUG 92 / Civil servants' pay offer withdrawn after row
THE GOVERNMENT has taken the unprecedented step of withdrawing a pay offer
to a group of civil servants after members of the National Union of Civil
and Public Servants rejected terms for the reform of pay determination.
The move by the Treasury demonstrates growing ministerial impatience with
the 114,000-strong union's opposition to Citizen's Charter proposals to
extend per-formance-related pay and devolve pay bargaining.
It raises the possibility that the government will freeze the pay of NUCPS
members at last year's levels. A more likely option would be to implement
rises lower than the 4.1 per cent initial offer and introduce a
performance-pay scheme that provides a smaller role for the union.
The NUCPS might be left without a long-term pay agreement. The previous
agreement ended in May and was due to be replaced by a package taking the
performance pay and pay bargaining changes into account.
If the Treasury was no longer bound by a long-term agreement, it would be
free to abandon a formula linking pay rises to previous increases in the
private sector. In recent years the formula has helped civil servants to win
rises above the rate of inflation.
Previously the Treasury has imposed pay agreements when it has been unable
to win union approval for them, but it has not withdrawn them.
Some union leaders believe the withdrawal of the NUCPS offer is intended by
ministers to serve as a warning to other civil servants.
Of the Civil Service unions, only the CPSA has so far accepted a deal
similar to that rejected by the NUCPS.
Leaders of the FDA, IPMS and IRSF unions are recommending similar deals.
Ballots have still to be held. At the IRSF, which represents tax staff, many
members are unenthusiastic about their offer because of dissatisfaction over
previous performance-related pay arrangements.
The NUCPS has in recent years adopted a more hostile stance on pay than
other unions. It rejected last year's pay proposals.
The Treasury decision to withdraw the pay offer followed a vote among NUCPS
members to accept the 4.1 per cent increase in pay rates but reject the
amended long-term pay agreement. The Treasury had refused to separate the
two issues.
Mr Leslie Christie, NUCPS general secretary, told members in the union's
journal that the union could not accept the break-up of national pay
bargaining.
The Treasury is unlikely to outline its intentions on pay for NUCPS grades
until other unions have voted on their pay proposals next month.
