FT  29 FEB 92 / Hurd attacks opposition proposals for Scotland
MR HURD, the foreign secretary, yesterday led a Tory offensive against
opposition proposals for constitutional change in Scotland, labelling
Labour's plan for a devolved parliament as 'disingenuous and devious'.
He also attacked the Scottish National party's proposal for an independent
Scotland within the EC.
His remarks came as serious divisions arose among supporters of a devolved
Scottish parliament. In Edinburgh, disagreements emerged over the electoral
system for a Scottish parliament at a public meeting of the Scottish
Constitutional Convention. The convention, composed mainly of Labour and
Liberal Democrat politicians, has been drawing up a blueprint for a Scottish
parliament.
The convention proposes that the parliament would have two members for each
of the 72 Scottish constituencies elected by the first-past-the-post system.
On top of those 144 MPs, between 36 and 50 members would be elected from
party lists, bringing the total number of seats won by each party more
closely into line with the votes cast. This would make a total of between
180 and 194 MPs.
To ensure gender equality, parties would be under statutory obligation to
put up equal numbers of men and women. The additional member system would be
used to enforce the same principle.
Mr Murray Elder, secretary of the Labour party in Scotland, confirmed that
Labour accepted the abandonment of the first-past-the-post system to elect a
minority of members of the Scottish parliament. However, he said, the total
number of MPs being proposed was too big to be workable.
Mr Christopher Mason was one of several Liberal Democrats, including a
number of women, who disagreed with the proposals for gender equality. He
said it was 'a democratic nonsense' that a person who received fewer votes
might be elected in place of someone with more votes because of being the
'wrong' sex.
Mr Hurd, speaking at Renfrew near Glasgow, accused Labour of backing a
devolved parliament in order to take power in Scotland.
It also intended to improve its chances of governing the UK by 'retaining
arrangements at Westminster incompatible with devolution', he said.
It was 'patently absurd and unfair' to 'strip the Westminster parliament of
the right to legislate on most Scottish matters, but then let Scots MPs
determine those same areas of policy for England, Wales and Northern
Ireland'.
As for the SNP's policy of independence in Europe, it was a fantasy that
'Scotland could slide out of the UK and slide simultaneously into the EC as
an equal and independent state'. It would probably have to negotiate entry
into the EC, he said.
Editorial comment, Page 6
The Conservatives trail Labour by half a point in a Gallup opinion poll
published in today's Daily Telegraph. Labour is on 37.5 per cent, Tories 37
and Liberal Democrats 20. Last week's Gallup survey gave the Tories a
two-point lead. Page 22
