FT  06 NOV 92 / Survey of Ireland (4): Yes, we have bananas - Joe Gill notes
some important changes in the food industry
OVERSEAS fund managers might be surprised by what markets and investments in
the Irish food sector could expose them to.
One Irish company operates at the leading edge of food ingredients'
technology in the US. Another handles one in every three bananas in Britain,
and will shortly handle most the supplies for Sweden's largest banana
importer. Yet another manufactures processed cheese used for over half of
all cheeseburgers in leading UK fast food chains.
Common market agricultural reforms since 1984, privatisation, and a hectic
programme of mergers and acquisitions have transformed the scale and
structure of the food sector.
Many companies have moved to the stock market as a source of funding for
their expansion. Chief among these are the farmer-controlled co-operatives
which have dominated Irish agribusiness in the past. Prior to 1986, none of
them considered the stock market as a viable funding option.
Thanks to the development of a co-op/plc hybrid structure - which was a
first in the world co-operative movement - no fewer than five co-ops have
now adopted plc status. These companies - Avonmore, Golden Vale, IAWS,
Kerry, and Waterford Foods - form the core of the quoted food sector, which
has a combined market capitalisation of IPounds 1.4bn.
Overall, the sector represents 33 per cent of the Irish industrial index. By
comparison, as recently as 1986 just three food companies were quoted on the
stock market - with a capitalisation of only IPounds 77m.
The imposition of milk quotas in 1984, under EC common agricultural policy
(CAP) adjustments, acted as a trigger for fundamental change. Faced with a
ceiling on organic growth in their core dairy divisions, food manufacturers
were forced to pursue diversification strategies both at home and abroad.
This led them to the UK and the US, traditionally the stamping ground of
expansion-minded Irish corporates. Acquisitions in these markets, combined
with domestic restructuring, has produced a new breed of Irish food company.
Aside from dairy processing, these corporates have acquired interests in
beef, pigmeat, poultry and animal feed. Their international acquisitions
have been in associated industries. Kerry Group has followed its casein (a
powder formed from skim milk) export trade to the US and acquired
dairy-based food ingredient businesses. Avonmore has bought cheese companies
in both the UK and the US. Waterford has number two position in the northern
England liquid milk market.
The recently agreed overhaul of the CAP is likely to accelerate the trends
of domestic rationalisation and overseas expansion. It will reduce the value
of food products and limit volume growth, a sure recipe for consolidation.
Although Irish farmers will be largely compensated for a fall in farm prices
by direct subsidies, food manufacturers will have to reduce costs and
acquire, if profit growth is to be sustained.
Ireland is highly dependent on agriculture and food processing. It accounts
for 12 per cent of GDP; 24 per cent of exports. Domestic farming is
dominated by the meat and dairy sectors. Together, these represent over 80
per cent of agricultural output.
The quoted food companies have now assumed a leading role in these
industries. Almost 60 per cent of the dairy industry, over half of the
pigmeat sector, and about 30 per cent of beef processing is controlled by
quoted companies. This proportion is likely to grow over the next few years,
as companies continue to expand abroad, and further increase the scale of
their domestic businesses.
Outside the quoted sector, certain co-operatives retain a key role in the
industry. Dairygold, with 20 per cent of the milk pool, also has interests
in beef and pigmeat processing. Bord Bainne, the dairy marketing co-op, owns
the Kerrygold brand and has itself made acquisitions in continental Europe
and the US. In the beef sector the Goodman organisation remains important,
despite its financial difficulties.
Alongside the changes in the co-operative sector, Fyffes, the fruit company,
and Greencore the former state sugar company, have also used the stock
market for funding purposes. Fyffes (formerly Fruit Importers Of Ireland)
now has over 80 per cent of its sales coming from Britain, following the
successful purchase of Fyffes itself.
The future of the food industry is inextricably linked with its performance
outside Ireland. Over 70 per cent of dairy and beef output is dependent on
export markets.
In Britain, effort is largely being directed at building a share of the
own-label food market, with particular emphasis on developing relationships
with the primary multiple retailers. If they can survive the crucible of
food retailing in the UK, probably the most competitive and sophisticated
retail market in the world, Irish companies can expand and succeed
elsewhere.
Historically, Irish agriculture and Irish food companies form both sides of
the same coin. Agribusiness was largely an extension of domestic on-farm
activity. That relationship has now fundamentally changed. While domestic
agriculture remains a key variable in the structure of Irish food companies,
their future is largely dependent on establishing profitable positions in
the international food market.
Joe Gill is a food industry analyst with Riada-ABN/AMRO Stockbrokers, Dublin
