FT  01 AUG 92 / Cadbury is backed by Exchange
THE London Stock Exchange yesterday issued an unqualified endorsement of
recommendations to improve the performance of company boards proposed by the
Cadbury committee on corporate governance.
The Exchange also said it was considering whether one of the committee's
recommendations  - that balance-sheet information be included in interim
financial reports  - be made a condition of listing.
The committee, which considered financial aspects of corporate governance,
issued a report in May calling for companies to comply voluntarily with a
code of best practice for directors.
The committee was formed at the instigation of the Financial Reporting
Council, the accountancy profession and the London Stock Exchange, and
included representatives of industry, shareholders, academia and the Bank of
England.
Among its key recommendations was a Stock Exchange listing requirement under
which companies would be required to disclose the extent to which they
complied with the voluntary code of conduct and where they diverged from it,
explain themselves. While those companies that fail to comply would risk
delisting, it is considered unlikely that the Exchange would do more than
censure such a company for failure to comply.
The listing requirement was the only enforcement mechanism proposed by the
committee and has been criticised by shareholder groups as falling short of
what is needed to improve corporate governance.
Yesterday the Exchange spelt out how it intends the listing requirement to
work. The code of practice itself will not form part of the Exchange's
so-called Yellow Book of rules, only the provision that the extent of
compliance be disclosed. The rule would apply to companies seeking listings
for the first time as well as those already listed.
The listing requirement has also been strongly criticised by the
Confederation of British Industry. Sir Michael Angus, CBI chairman, said the
new listing requirement might lead to additional layers of bureaucracy for
business.
THE Cadbury committee on corporate governance contains 'serious omissions'
on enforcement and internal auditing, the Institute of Internal Auditors
said yesterday.
The institute said effective corporate control could not rely on external
auditors and required professional internal auditors employed by directors
to advise on controls within the company.
Mr Harold Izzard, institute spokesman on corporate governance, said:
'Cadbury is really a top-down review while we approach the comapny from the
bottom up. But non-executive directors are very vulnerable without internal
auditors.'
The submission to the Cadbury committee argues that external auditors are
restricted by the level of their fees, and mainly concentrate on financial
controls.
