FT  09 NOV 92 / Bonn faces bitter dispute on refugees: Debate on dealing
with outsiders brings back bad memories
GERMANY today commemorates Kristallnacht, when synagogues and Jewish
businesses were ransacked by the Nazis in 1938. It also celebrates the
collapse of the Berlin Wall in 1989.
However, any sober reflection of these two events has been smothered in an
emotional and bitter dispute between the main political parties about how to
deal with the rapid influx of refugees seeking asylum in the country.
The debate is partly in response to the growing number of assaults by
right-wing extremists on foreigners, as well as increased vandalism of
Holocaust memorials. But it is primarily about the effect unification of the
two Germanys has had on the country's asylum policies.
'We now have an open border to the east,' said an official at the Interior
Ministry. 'We have a border which stretches nearly 1,300 kilometres. It is
impossible to guard this border. Those who cross, mostly from Romania,
Bulgaria, and the former Soviet Union, are claiming political asylum. That
is their right. We cannot turn them back. But many are coming here for
economic reasons,' he added.
The number of people seeking asylum in Germany has swelled over the past
three years, rising from 193,063 in 1990, 256,112 in 1991, to 319,674 for
the first nine months of this year.
The opposition Social Democratic party reckons that if additional refugees
fleeing from the former Yugoslavia (100,000), settlement of the ethnic
Germans from eastern Europe (200,000), unification of families (100,000),
and illegal immigrants (between 100,000 and 200,000) are taken into account,
nearly 1m people will have arrived in Germany by the end of the year.
The strain on the economy is growing, with the Interior Ministry estimating
that shelter for each refugee costs DM15,000 (over Pounds 6,000) a year.
Anyone can claim the right to asylum which is enshrined in article 16 of the
Basic Law, or Constitution, which states that 'persons persecuted on
political grounds shall enjoy the right of asylum.' Only about 5 per cent of
applicants are successful, but it can take three or four years for cases to
be dealt with.
About 30 per cent of those rejected under article 16 eventually claim asylum
under the more liberal terms of the 1951 UN Geneva Convention on the status
of Refugees.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union party, and the
opposition SPD, are close to agreeing to amending Article 16 in a way which
would qualify the basis for refugee status. A proposed amendment would
include mention of the Geneva Convention, which defines a refugee as 'any
person fleeing from well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of
race, religion, nationality . . .'
The amendment would also make reference to the European Community evolving a
long-term policy on refugees.
However, at last weekend's annual congress of the Bavarian-based
conservative Christian Social Union, a junior partner in the coalition, it
voted to restrict the right of asylum and to appeal, echoing similar views
held by the Republican party.
According to a recent opinion poll, the latter party could win more than 10
per cent of the vote in an election now.
Whatever amendments are adopted, however, many believe it amounts to a
temporary measure because the government - and the opposition - remain
reluctant to address the fundamental issue: the absence of any immigration
legislation.
Government officials, so far, have ruled out any such law. 'If we had a
quota system, we would no longer be an open country. Our 1949 constitution
would be undermined. Quotas, or any form of selecting immigrants would
recall the Nazi period,' a ministry official said.
In addition Germany does not want to be seen as a country for would-be
immigrants.
Instead, the government may fudge the issue by amending the constitution,
and then later rely on Brussels to draw up plans to restrict the
European-wide flow of refugees.
'This will not solve the problem of how we will be able to cope with more
economic refugees, and genuine refugees coming from the former Soviet Union,
if it becomes more unstable there,' an economist said.
