FT  09 JUN 92 / Leading Article: A state well worth saving
THE COLLAPSE of communism has already led to the destruction of two federal
states - the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia. The results of the weekend
elections in the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic suggest that
Czechoslovakia might go the same way. It is a prospect which politicians in
both republics should seek to avoid, and towards which western Europe cannot
remain indifferent.
Czechoslovakia is no longer the 'far away country about which we know
little', left to its fate by Britain and France in 1938. Even then it was
the most successful state in eastern Europe. Now it is a potentially
prosperous associate member of the EC. It should be able to call on the
Community for support at this crucial time, even though the main
responsibility for building a workable federation rests with the
newly-elected Czech and Slovak leaders.
Their principal objective should be to create the economic and political
conditions for Czechoslovakia to become a full member of the EC by the turn
of the century. That way lies prosperity and freedom for both peoples.
The danger that an independent Slovakia would slip back towards the
turbulent 'east', while the Czech lands forge ahead towards EC
compatibility, was recently highlighted by President Vaclav Havel. It is
recognised by a majority of Slovaks who, according to opinion polls, still
prefer to retain some form of link with the Czech lands. Most Czechs are
also in favour of keeping the 74-year-old federation. This reluctance to
break the union must be taken into account by Mr Vladimir Meciar and Mr
Vaclav Klaus, the main election victors, as they start their talks today.
The election results also show that economic policies made largely in Prague
have hurt Slovaks, while Czechs, with more hope for future prosperity, have
given their support to market reforms. These divergent responses reflect
real economic and social differences which have to be recognised and allowed
for.
Mr Klaus agrees that the original policy of halting arms exports and cutting
arms production was nave and damaging to Slovakia. If almost everyone else
is busily selling arms, it is difficult to see why Slovakia should not. He
also recognises that Slovakia's communist-era legacy of dependence on
Comecon markets and heavy industrial bias, as well as distance from EC
markets, make it particularly vulnerable.
But the Czech lands already subsidise Slovakia by more than Dollars 500m a
year. Prague and Bratislava could legitimately team up to ask the EC for
more help.
In recent months, for example, the Kosice steel plant in eastern Slovakia
has found new outlets in France, Greece and other EC markets. Last week,
this led to threats of anti-dumping duties. However politically difficult,
the EC should keep its markets open. It should also provide assistance for
radical improvement in Slovakia's communications with the west. EC funds are
under great pressure, but helping keep Czechoslovakia together should be a
high priority.
Where compromise seems impossible is over the powers of the federal
government. The Czechs are prepared to devolve more powers to the republican
and local governments. But Mr Klaus insists on a common currency, a single
central bank, close co-ordination of monetary and fiscal policy, rapid
privatisation and other market-oriented reforms. Without such powers, it is
difficult to see how a federal state could work, or indeed how the economic
reforms, now starting to show results, could continue.
If no agreement can be reached, both sides may find themselves facing what
they hope will be a 'velvet divorce'. They should beware. Divorces have a
nasty habit of becoming vicious. This is an old, established and hitherto
successful marriage. Each side should be prepared to make the compromises
needed to keep it going.
