FT  16 NOV 92 / UK Gilts: Treasury's mood change brings on the jitters
WHAT A difference four months makes when it comes to UK public spending]
The change in mood at the Treasury about the UK economy in between its
assertions in July about public spending and last week's Autumn Statement
has caused jitters in the gilts market.
The nervousness concerns the large rise in government borrowing that seems
likely over the next few years, on account largely of the much longer than
expected nature of the struggle to lift the UK economy out of recession.
Back in July, the Treasury was relatively optimistic about progress being
made towards a recovery.
It had not then fully disowned its projection made at the time of the March
Budget that the economy would grow by about 3.1 per cent in 1993, ending the
period of economic decline that started around mid-1990.
However, in the Autumn Statement, Treasury forecasters had changed their
tune. They pencilled in growth next year of 1 per cent, after a 1 per cent
contraction this year.
As part of the price of higher spending and reductions in tax income,
government borrowing in 1992-93 is forecast to be Pounds 37bn, well up on
the Pounds 28bn projected in the Budget. The deficit could rise to Pounds
44bn in 1993-94, according to Treasury estimates.
The extra borrowing worries gilt practitioners, on account of the large
volume of gilts that will have to be issued over the next few years. Even
though last week prices for gilts traded in a narrow range - with a small
increase in yields at the short end of the yield curve after the much
expected reduction in base rates from 8 per cent to 7 per cent  - there is
some fear that prices may drop over the next few weeks as realisation about
the volume of issues sinks in.
The Treasury had some success last week in partially disguising the degree
to which government spending is likely to rise over the next few years as a
result of the recession and its aftermath.
Most attention focused on its new control total for public spending - which
excludes social security spending reckoned to be related to the economic
cycle such as unemployment pay. According to the Autumn Statement the
control total is to climb from Pounds 232bn in 1992-93 to Pounds 263.3bn in
1995-96, an average increase of 1.4 per cent a year in real terms, using the
new assumptions for inflation sketched in as part of the statement.
The yearly increases in real terms envisaged by the Treasury are similar, as
the table shows, to those which it pencilled in in July, as part of its
initial thinking about control-total spending over the period in question.
However, in the case of general government expenditure (GGE) - which
includes all payments by local and central government - the story is
different. Back in July, the Treasury was talking about limiting increases
in GGE (excluding privatisation proceeds) to 2 per cent a year on average in
real terms during the three-year period to 1995-96. The new figures outlined
by the Treasury last week are significantly bigger, according to which the
real increase is an average of 2.6 per cent a year over the period.
The worry for the gilt market is that what the Treasury has revealed in its
Autumn Statement puts an over optimistic gloss on what is the true likely
state of government finances over the next few years.
According to calculations by Mr Michael Saunders of Salomon Brothers,
borrowing could be bigger than the Treasury projects, rising from Pounds
40bn in 1993-94 to Pounds 58bn in 1994-95 and Pounds 65bn the year
afterwards.
