FT  10 NOV 92 / The Matrix Churchill Case: Trial collapse prompts US
questions
THE collapse of the Matrix Churchill trial triggered an immediate political
reaction in Washington, where the Bush Administration has been accused by
members of Congress of covering up its knowledge and possible involvement in
the activities of the UK company's Ohio affiliate.
Mr Henry Gonzalez, chairman of the House Banking Committee, has accused the
White House of covering up the entire Matrix affair, especially as the
machine tools maker was financed by the Atlanta branch of Italy's Banca
Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL).
The BNL affair, along with the role of Matrix and other companies, has been
dubbed 'Iraqgate' in the US. Mr Bill Clinton, the president-elect, called
during his campaign for a special prosecutor to investigate the affair.
Congressional investigators have compared the trial of Mr Paul Henderson,
the former Matrix managing director who worked for British intelligence
services, to the US court hearings concerning Mr Christopher Drogoul, the
former BNL Atlanta manager who said he lent Dollars 5bn to Iraq with the
knowledge and approval of US government officials.
The US assets of Matrix - which was the linchpin of Iraq's clandestine
military procurement network - were frozen two years ago by the US Treasury,
as were the assets of Mr Anees Mansour Wadi, an Iraqi associate of Matrix
whose California company (Bay Industries) was also identified by the US
government as part of Baghdad's arms supply network.
Congressional investigators said yesterday the disclosure in London that the
UK government also knew of Matrix's relations with Mr Carlos Cardoen, the
Chilean arms supplier of Saddam Hussein, appeared to contradict previous
denials by the White House that Washington gave covert support to Mr
Cardoen.
Mr Dennis Kane, the House Banking Committee staffer who has led
Congressional investigations into the Iraqgate affair, said the developments
in London were of signal importance. 'President Bush, Brent Scowcroft, his
national security adviser, and other officials have claimed it was not US
policy to arm Iraq. Revelations in the Matrix Churchill case raise serious
questions about the veracity of their statements and raise the question of
whether the US in fact illegally helped to arm Saddam Hussein.'
