FT  19 NOV 92 / World Trade News: Statistics and contraries muddy Gatt farm
deal - Unknown variables make search for agreement almost an impossible
quest
IF MR Ray MacSharry can bring back a package resolving EC-US food export
disputes and opening the way for a Uruguay Round trade reform deal from
Washington, he will have to show it is compatible with the EC's reform of
its Common Agricultural Policy (CAP).
Mr MacSharry, EC farm commissioner, who knows the figures of Europe's top
farm bureaucracy, the European Commission's directorate-general VI,
thoroughly, is sure he can. France, which opposes a deal, says it will be
lopsided against EC and French farmers, and has sent officials to Brussels
with satchels of figures to say he cannot. The US, from which Mr MacSharry
and the EC have to extract a deal to avert trade hostilities next month,
wants proof he can deliver: a tough proposition when the sceptical French
are the EC's main food exporters.
The swirl of Commission figures, and contrary French statistics on the
impact of CAP reform and the farm trade obligations of a Gatt deal, will not
easily settle into a stable pattern accepted by all. If economic forecasting
and industrial trends are acknowledged to be sub-scientific, predicting the
course of agriculture, vulnerable to vagaries such as the weather, is near
impossible.
For the purposes of a Gatt deal, the reformed CAP looks like a gamble. But
it is one agreed by all 12 member states in May, and passed into law in
July. The bet is on future prices and production levels for food. Yet it is
a bet in a new framework, containing four main elements: two linked
variables, and two constraints.
Brussels claims CAP will cut the exportable surplus of cereals - linchpin of
the reform and the most inflammatory part of the Uruguay Round farm chapter
 -to 19m tonnes in three years. It says Gatt would still allow subsidised
exports of 23.5m tonnes after six years, assuming a worst-case outcome to
the Washington talks of a 24 per cent cut in subsidised sales abroad (21.5
per cent is more likely).
France says CAP production cuts will be exceeded if export volume restraint
exceeds 18 per cent. Beyond this figure, land taken out of production, or
'set aside' under CAP, would have to exceed the 15 per cent currently
agreed. France may be right, up to a point. For the set-aside regime, which
they also agreed to, is variable, up or down depending on whether output is
over or within EC projections.
Which brings in the second variable: price. The CAP aims to set EC prices at
or near world market levels after three years, mainly by dropping cereal
prices by a third. This is for premium grade grains; at least a third of
output will be below this price. In such circumstances, the Commission
argues, there will be little Gatt restraint on exports, and EC produce will
compete favourably with imports.
'The whole philosophy of the CAP reform is to become more competitive
externally and internally,' Mr MacSharry insists. 'There's no limit on
unsubsidised exports.' France perceived this in its initial enthusiasm for
the new CAP when it was agreed in May; the disquieting prospect of a highly
competitive EC farm sector is the unstated element in Washington's
insistence on the firmest curbs on EC exports. French concern in May was
that prices would not be cut enough, thereby imposing an informal quota
through set-aside. If world market prices are reached by 1996, set-aside can
be reduced; if not, France may be in the lead of a drive for lower prices if
output exceeds expectations.
Added to these two variables, the CAP has two constraints, a rigid budget
and the new regime's freezing of crop yields eligible for subsidy. The 12,
including France, agreed to budget 'guidelines' based on Brussels' output
projections. These ceilings are contained in the 'Delors II' future
financing package, yet to be agreed, but reaffirmed by the 12 heads of
government in June. Thus, if output exceeds projections, there will be no
money to subsidise exporting the excess.
France is moving its argument from querying the compatibility of Gatt with
the CAP, to seeking extra compensation for farmers for any deal on the
Uruguay Round and the oilseeds dispute with the US. But even if the budget
goes up, Brussels insists the extra money will not go towards exports. Since
the budgetary system was reformed by Commission president Jacques Delors in
1988, the Commission has resisted breaching the farm spending ceiling.
The second constraint is that compensation for price cuts, and subsidy, is
linked to past crop yields which are frozen. This is a disincentive to
farmers spending on fertiliser and pesticide to extract higher tonnage for
which they will not see a return. Yields are already falling. French figures
claiming 38 per cent set-aside would follow a 'split-the-difference' deal on
oilseeds with the US (fixing output at a de facto 9.5m tonnes a year) are
based on 1991 yields of 2.48 tonnes a hectare, whereas oilseed yields are
down to 2.08 tonnes.
The argument is likely to develop into an examination of whether the new CAP
mechanisms are compatible with any Gatt deal with the US.
