FT  21 SEP 92 / Maastricht - The French Vote: Cautious response from Europe
business leaders
FRANCE'S narrow Yes vote last night drew a cautious and non-committal
response from European business leaders. After the buffetings suffered by
the Maastricht Treaty during the last few months, industrialists believed
the small French margin was unlikely to change the uncertain outlook for
full implementation of the treaty.
Typical of the guarded comments last night was the reaction of Mr Heinz
Schimmelbusch, chief executive of Metallgesellschaft, the Frankfurt-based
metals group.
He said: 'I don't know if this will calm down financial markets. I rather
doubt it, as it is too close. If it had been a 56 or 57 per cent vote in
favour, then that would have been a clear vote. I feel that there is a
general lack of certainty which is now a common denominator in industry,' he
added.
'We are in a situation where caution adds to the long lists of negatives in
the international climate. I feel the great variety of regionalists are
rapidly gaining momentum - regionalism is an overwhelming feature of Europe
right now. We are in danger of losing European momentum.'
Mr Peter Davis, chairman of Reed International, the UK's largest publisher,
which has just agreed to merge with Elsevier, the Dutch publisher, said: 'I
think the French vote became irrelevant for us when we pulled out of the
ERM, and my own view is that we should stay out. We now know that when push
comes to shove Germany supports Germany.'
Mr John Robb: chief executive of Wellcome, the pharmaceutical group, said:
'The vote was not something that I was apprehensive about, and the result is
unlikely to have a major effect on our busi ness.'
A more confident tone was struck by Mr Carlos Ferrer Salat, chairman of
Unice, the Confederation of European Employers' Organisations: 'This result
allows us to go forward.
'We, the businessmen of Europe, have always defended the Maastricht
programme. We needed to know where we were going.
'A lot still remains to be done and clearly there are errors in the
Maastricht programme that need to be rectified. But at least we still have
our game plan.'
Mr Oscar Fanjul, chairman of Repsol, Spain's publicly-controlled energy
group, expressed relief at the outcome, in spite of the narrow margin.
Pointing out that Spain would have suffered disproportionately from a French
No, he said: 'This is a good result for an economy like Spain's. It means
that the Madrid government will be able to accelerate convergence with the
stronger European economies.
'A No would have meant a loss of market confidence in Spain. The Bundesbank
is already de facto the European central bank. It must now start to act like
one.'
Mr Ulf Hoegland, Swedish-born chief executive of the Tudor Group, the
Spanish industrial battery producer, which has 15 locations in Europe, was
one of the few industrialists to voice good cheer last night.
'This is going to make my life a lot easier. Let's hope it speeds up the
unification process that Europe needs, and that the Danes will reconsider
their rejection of Maastricht. There is no way of planning a pan-European
business without Maastricht and without a strong unified European
leadership.'
