FT  14 APR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Coffee prices tumble on pact
disappointment
COFFEE PRICES tumbled in both London and New York yesterday as the markets
registered their disappointment at last week's International Coffee
Organisation meeting.
Lengthy squabbling over the make-up of the ICO negotiating group led only to
an announcement that the council would meet again on June 22 to start
discussions on a new international coffee agreement with economic clauses.
As one weary delegate said on Friday evening: 'If it's taken us this long to
agree on something as insignificant as this, how on earth are we going to
agree on export quotas'.
Much of the argument was over form, one delegate said yesterday. 'There were
no major breakthroughs. The awkward and sensitive issues have still to be
addressed.'
The July robusta contract on the London Futures and Options Exchange closed
yesterday at Dollars 828 a tonne, a fall of Dollars 36. In late trading in
New York the July arabica contract was more than 3 cents down at 68.10 cents
a lb.
Observers pointed to remarks by Mr Arnoldo Lopez, chairman of the ICO
Council, which effectively pushed the timetable for any economic measures to
support the coffee markets back to September next year.
Many people in the market, particularly in New York, were convinced that
last month's decision by Brazil, the world's biggest coffee exporter, to
back a new coffee agreement would lead to something more concrete emerging
from last week's meeting.
But Mr Lawrence Eagles, analysts with GNI, the London futures brokers, said
yesterday that the markets now realised there was 'a lot of time and a lot
of coffee to be sold before the ICO can even contemplate approving a quota
system'.
This was not necessarily bad for the prospects of an agreement, however.
'There is nothing like economic pain to forge a new agreement,' he said.
The abandonment of export quotas in July 1989 is thought to have cost Latin
American coffee producers about Dollars 6bn in lost revenues.
