FT  05 JUN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Tory rebels see a turn of the tide
 -Where the anti-federalists go from here
I TOLD YOU so. The refrain echoed around the corridors of the House of
Commons yesterday as the Conservative party's Euro-sceptics celebrated the
threatened collapse of the Maastricht accord.
For Mr John Major, it was a reminder that the divisions in his party over
Europe had been submerged rather than banished by his skilful negotiations
in December.
After the lengthy spell in the political wilderness that followed the
enforced departure of their mentor, Mrs Margaret Thatcher, the opponents of
closer European integration were claiming that the tide had at last turned
in their favour.
The 23 Conservative MPs who defied Mr Major last month to vote against the
Maastricht treaty were claiming that another 50 or so were ready to demand a
renegotiation of the deal on political and economic union.
Led by veteran anti-federalists like Mr William Cash, Mr Teddy Taylor and Mr
Michael Spicer, they backed their claim with a parliamentary motion bearing
the signatures of 70 colleagues who were ready to call for a 'fresh start'
to map out the future of Europe.
The rebels were confident that by today the number would reach close to 100.
Privately, some junior members of the government were adding their voice to
the assessment that the careful consensus that Mr Major had built up around
the Maastricht accord was now shattered. 'There is a feeling of liberation
around the place. The agreement is dead,' one said.
He added that up to a dozen Euro-sceptics within the government were
planning to convey that message to the prime minister through the party's
managers at Westminster.
The party's managers were more sanguine, emphasising that the Danish
decision had created an over-excited mood, particularly among new MPs.
Senior ministers were quick to point out that the motion - signed by around
20 of the new intake - was not an outright repudiation of Maastricht. Its
call for a new direction for the EC during the British presidency was easily
reconcilable with Mr Major's determination to put the completion of the
single market and enlargement at the top of his agenda.
The prime minister meanwhile emphasised his view that any attempt by Britain
to re-open the deal in the wake of the Danish referendum would carry as many
hazards as potential benefits.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, Mrs Gillian Shephard, the employment
secretary, and Mr Peter Lilley, the social services secretary, were said to
be among those arguing that the second thoughts in the rest of Europe
represented a belated vindication of Britain's negotiating stance.
They were joined by others in pointing out the risks of a sizeable Tory
rebellion if Mr Major was seen to be trying too hard to rescue a treaty that
Britain had never sought. After all, the Irish or the French could yet sink
it permanently.
So the message from the party managers was that the government would pause -
probably until after the Lisbon summit - before retabling the legislation to
implement the treaty. By then, they hope there will be a deal with Britain's
partners to rescue the accord - and a more soberly realistic mood among the
government's supporters.
