FT  16 SEP 92 / The ERM and Maastricht: Time for prayer in Mitterrand camp -
A No vote would put the president under great pressure to resign
The primary issue at stake in next Sunday's French referendum is the life or
death of the Maastricht Treaty on European union; but a vote against the
treaty would also have explosive effects on the French political scene, and
could even determine the political survival of President Francois
Mitterrand.
If the French vote against Maastricht, the treaty will undoubtedly be dead.
But the implications of a No vote for Mr Mitterrand are less easy to
predict.
It is commonly assumed that Mr Mitterrand's personal unpopularity has been
responsible for the swing in opinion polls against the treaty. The
government's fear is that the Mitterrand factor could become a decisive
consideration in the polling booths on Sunday, so that many who might have
voted Yes to Europe may instead decide to vote No to Mitterrand.
Hindsight suggests that it was reckless of Mr Mitterrand to have chosen to
put the treaty to a popular referendum. After all, the normal route for
ratifying a treaty, as provided in the French constitution, is a law
submitted to parliament. A popular referendum is a perfectly legitimate
alternative, but it is not inevitable.
Moreover, when Mr Mitterrand announced in June that he would call a
referendum, his deep unpopularity, as registered in the opinion polls, had
been virtually constant since he appointed Mrs Edith Cresson as prime
minister in the spring of last year, and his own standing had remained
deeply depressed even after he replaced her with the more popular Mr Pierre
Beregovoy. He must have been aware of the danger that he could drag down the
treaty.
Yet it has been clear for over a year that Mr Mitterrand intended to hold a
referendum this autumn, precisely as a way of restoring his battered
personal authority. He needed to stake out a political battleground on which
he could take on, and with luck defeat, his political adversaries; and such
a battleground could only be an issue of high political principle.
Last November he indicated that he would put forward a reform of the
constitution, including some form of shortening of the presidential mandate
(currently seven years renewable).
That project now appears to have been shelved, or at least postponed, as a
result of the decision to hold a Maastricht referendum. But in tactical
political terms, the only thing which has changed is the question being
submitted to the voters. In both cases, he evidently thought, not without
reason, that a referendum would embarrass the opposition parties, but could
nevertheless be counted on to produce a Yes vote.
Most mainline political leaders in France have long argued for some
shortening of the presidential term; and most mainline political leaders
have now come out in favour of the treaty, even though it has exposed
passionate divisions within the Gaullist party.
But if Mr Mitterrand thought he could restore his authority by picking a
high political issue for a test of strength with his adversaries, his
calculations seem now to be in double jeopardy.
A French No vote would obviously represent a rejection of Mr Mitterrand's
vision of a quasi-federal Europe, to which he is deeply committed; but it
would also look like a disavowal of the president himself. With a large No
vote, the disavowal would be profound, and must place him under considerable
pressure to resign.
But would he? By temperament (health permitting) Mr Mitterrand is a fighter,
a lawyer and a European; and each of these characteristics will tell him to
stay.
He is a legalist, who frequently and pointedly reminds audiences that he was
elected for seven years, and by implication intends to stay to the end of
his term by which time he will be 77. His commitment to European integration
is the most constant element in a very long political career.
He might therefore decide that duty required him to remain at his post, so
as to rescue the irrational mess created by a No vote; that the powers of
the French presidency and the remaining two years of his mandate still gave
him enough space to do so; and that resignation would be a major betrayal of
France and of Europe, because it could create the opportunity for the
election of the Gaullist leader Mr Jacques Chirac, who has no firm
convictions on Europe, and half of whose party is deeply hostile to the
Community model.
But Mr Mitterrand might draw the opposite conclusion. After a large No vote,
he might no longer have the credibility, either at home or abroad, to engage
in any operation to put together a substitute for the ruined Maastricht
Treaty; the general election next March is likely to produce a conservative
government with a Gaullist prime minister and an overwhelming majority; and
in any case a post-Maastricht recovery could take much longer than the two
years remaining to him.
According to this logic, his only remaining strategy is a Parthian retreat:
he may be able to serve the European cause better by leaving than by
staying. If he were to resign suddenly, the Socialist party would quickly be
able to endorse a strong single candidate: most probably the former prime
minister Mr Michel Rocard, or perhaps Mr Jacques Delors, EC Commission
president. But the conservatives would be caught divided, and would probably
go into the campaign with several rival candidates, including Mr Chirac and
former President Valery Giscard d'Estaing.
In the resulting melee, the Socialist candidate might well win, and would
certainly call early general elections. And unlikely as it may seem today, a
convincing presidential victory by a socialist president could well have the
effect of transforming the outcome in the general elections.
The most recent analysis of voting intentions leaves Mr Mitterrand with a
deep dilemma. On the one hand, it indicates that his personal unpopularity
is only a marginal factor in the recent anti-Maastricht swing in the opinion
polls; on the other, it would seem to indicate a serious indictment of his
performance, if a majority of voters should turn against a European treaty
in which he passionately believes.
The central finding of the analysis, by Mr Jerome Jaffre of the Sofres
polling institute, is that virtually all (93 per cent) of those who are in
favour of the treaty will vote Yes, whether they are socialist or
conservative, while virtually all those who are against the treaty will vote
No, again regardless of their political affiliation.
If Maastricht is threatened by a Mitterrand factor, it only comes from the
20 per cent who do not believe the treaty will make any difference: in this
camp, 66 per cent of conservative voters will vote No; only 65 per cent of
socialist supporters will vote Yes; but socialist supporters will vote No if
they have lost confidence in Mr Mitterrand.
In the circumstances, the president has only one good option: to pray for a
Yes vote.
