FT  25 JUN 92 / Delors promises decentralised EC
MR JACQUES DELORS, the European Commission president, yesterday struck a
conciliatory tone ahead of the Lisbon summit which begins tomorrow by
promising a more decentralised European Community. He also promised to scale
down EC finance plans and predicted the Community's early enlargement.
In uncharacteristic vein, he publicly apologised for the 'mistake' he
recently made in warning Denmark, on French television, that it might lose
EC farm subsidies if it failed to ratify the Maastricht treaty.
He claimed he said this because he had been 'so traumatised' by the fuss
French farmers have made about EC agricultural reforms. 'Henceforth', he
told a pre-summit press conference, 'I will say nothing about Denmark and
its future'.
Addressing the Lisbon summit's three big themes - EC financing, enlargement
and subsidiarity (making decisions at the lowest appropriate level of
government) - Mr Delors predicted the meeting would set 'concrete
guidelines' for a financing settlement by the end of the year.
He conceded the Commission had been 'over confident' in asking governments
to raise EC spending by one-third by 1997. He backed a compromise to stretch
revenue increases through to 1999.
The Lisbon summit, Mr Delors forecast, would agree that entry negotiations
with European Free Trade Association states could start once the EC reached
budgetary agreement and ratified Maastricht. Other applicants and potential
applicants in east Europe would have to wait.
By contrast, in his pre-summit letter to fellow leaders, Mr Anibal Cavaco
Silva, the Portuguese prime minister, who will host the Friday-Saturday
meeting, saw a budget settlement as the EC's only precondition for opening
enlargement talks. He did however stress the importance of consolidating
Maastricht decisions.
UK officials yesterday stressed their belief that Maastricht ratification
need not be wrapped up before talks with the Efta countries begin.
Danish rejection of Maastricht has aggravated tactical divisions over
enlargement, as well as spurring a growing over subsidiarity. Mr Delors
widened this debate yesterday by suggesting that, even in natural areas of
transnational legislation like the environment, responsibility for ensuring
compliance with EC rules could be handed to individual governments.
Asked whether uneven compliance might compromise the EC's vaunted single
market, he replied: 'The best (the single market) can be the enemy of the
good (subsidiarity)'. Part of the single market plan, the mutual recognition
by member states of each other's diplomas and technical standards, was based
on trust, he said. Perhaps, this 'climate of confidence could be extended to
other fields, such as competition and state aids rules'.
Mr Delors raised eyebrows by suggesting that, with state aids, 'below a
certain amount, there will not be any monitoring or policing by the
Commission'.
Sir Leon Brittan, the competition commissioner, has recently exempted small
public aids from any review by Brussels.
Germans urge rethink of European union, Page 2
