FT  21 MAR 92 / The Texas king who would be president
EVERY time Mr Ross Perot, the Texas businessman, appears on US television,
viewers ring in to ask him to run for president.
If he decides to do so, as an independent, he will not have to worry about
the factor that caused Mr Paul Tsongas to drop out of the Democratic race
this week - lack of money.
Mr Perot, who sold his EDS computer services empire to General Motors for
Dollars 2.5bn (Pounds 1.44bn) in 1984 and owns a large slice of his native
Texas, is one of the wealthiest men in the US. He could easily finance a
presidential bid out of petty cash.
This week he virtually launched his campaign with a speech on what he sees
as wrong with the US government.
Scores of volunteers are busily gathering signatures to get his name on the
ballot in all 50 states - a condition Mr Perot has imposed before formally
declaring his candidacy.
Mr Perot's appeal is largely based on his well-burnished image as a rare
combination of boy scout and business leader, on the assumption that he
could do for the US what he did for EDS.
However, to the average voter, his best-known achievement is the rescue of
two EDS employees from an Iranian jail - an episode glamourised in 'Wings of
Eagles', by Ken Follett, the British novelist.
As a candidate, he would combine this reputation for derring-do with an
intriguing blend of political standpoints.
There would be a little of Mr Tsongas's call for sacrifices to tackle the
country's economic problems; a little of Mr Jerry Brown, the former Governor
of California, with his attack on the political contributors who finance
electoral campaigns; and a little of Governor Mario Cuomo of New York, whose
public musings over whether or not to run for president kept the US
entertained last autumn.
The public may not be so appreciative when it discovers he wants to
eliminate the federal budget deficit by raising taxes - and improving tax
collection - and slashing spending.
The core of Mr Perot's message is that the American people are owners of
their country and must take responsibility as if they were shareholders.
He also proposes a constitutional amendment barring Congress from raising
taxes or voting on its own pay rises. Such measures would have to be decided
by referendum.
However, Mr Perot is used to wielding unrestrained power as chief executive,
and would find the constitutional limitations of the presidency extremely
constricting.
Some commentators believe there is a possibility, though a remote one, that
Mr Perot could come to symbolise the 'real change' option to many voters,
siphoning votes away not only from President Bush but also from Governor
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the likely Democratic nominee. 'There has been no
time in modern American history more ripe for a candidate to run for the
White House against both parties,' wrote Mr Charles Cook, a Washington
political analyst, in Roll Call, Congress's village newspaper.
All the same, the odds are heavy that Mr Perot will find candidacy too
constraining a role and discover some pressing reason to withdraw.
He has not yet made it clear if as president he would ban beards and
moustaches in the civil service, as he did at EDS.
As one former EDS employee put it: 'He'll never run for president - he's
already king.'
