FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (16): Tougher sentences urged on neo-Nazis
 -In east Germany, violent attacks against asylum-seekers have shifted to
smaller towns, largely in the north where economic conditions are worse.
Now there are pressures on the Bonn government to ban the east German
neo-Nazi party, Deutsche Alternative
FRANK HUBNER, leader of the east German neo-Nazi Deutsche Alternative (DA),
carefully inspects my business card and passport as he sits in the front
seat of my car.
In the rear-view mirror I can see two of Hubner's large colleagues lingering
in the background. The 27-year-old leader's black hair is fashionably
cropped and he wears an expensive-looking black leather jacket, shirt and
trousers.
'You will be billed DM450 for a one-hour interview,' he says, speaking
softly. He certainly belies the popular image of a rabble-rousing fascist.
'It's for my loss of earnings during the time,' he explains politely.
I reply that we do not pay for interviews. Did he only give them for money?
'It's a matter of principle,' he says without blinking.
Hubner strolls back to the cramped flat he shares with a wife and baby in,
ironically, Bertolt Brecht Strasse, named after the anti-Nazi German
playwright. It is located in Sachsendorf, a sprawling housing district of
Cottbus where militant right-wing youths on four consecutive nights last
month hurled Molotov cocktails and stones at an adjoining hostel for asylum
seekers.
Sachsendorf's endless rows of bleak pre-fab apartment blocks are home to
nearly 30,000 east Germans. Several thousand of them watched approvingly
when the hostel was under siege.
Hubner's Nazi views are available to anyone who reads the Brandenburger
Beobachter, the DA newspaper which bristles with crude racist propaganda and
anti-semitic cartoons.
Security officials in Brandenburg state are convinced that he exerts a
decisive influence on about 150 young DA supporters in the Cottbus area
which borders on Poland. But in his public statements, Hubner appears
reasonable, divorcing himself from the wave of violence against asylum
seekers.
He is fully aware of the growing pressures on the Bonn government to ban the
DA as a neo-Nazi party. This he wants to avoid at all cost, as the party
would then be unable to contest future local east German elections.
The unbroken attacks against asylum seekers have shifted to smaller towns,
largely in the north where economic conditions are worse. But Ms Simone
Wendler, a politically-active resident of Sachsendorf said all the elements
still exist for a revival of violence there.
This is so despite the fact that unemployment in Cottbus is lower than
elsewhere and most young people have apprenticeships. The causes of the
violence were not primarily economic she suggested.
'The GDR's past is the key to understanding the present,' Ms Wendler says.
She recalls the trial in Cottbus last year of a neo-Nazi accused of torching
a youth hostel. He told the court that in history class they were taught
that only the Communists were good and that other Germans were bad. This was
a lie, the young man protested.
Many east Germans react similarly to the black-and-white view of the world
which was pounded into them for more than 40 years, Hubner himself was
imprisoned in 1986 as a militant skinhead and bought free by the west German
government. He subsequently linked up with Michael Kuhnen, the late West
German neo-Nazi leader.
A further explanation for the eruption of nationalism among east Germans was
the previous suppression of their German identity by the Communists, Ms
Wendler says.
The final reason is socio-economic. The GDR was an egalitarian society and
many east Germans who had enjoyed a middle class life style were plunged
into an economic and social underclass after 1989. The resulting insecurity
and fear was widespread.
Ms Windler insists that it is wrong to punish the 15-year-olds who threw
stones at the hostels while failing to prosecute the neo-Nazi ideologists
who stirred them up.
'But no-one in the German government appears willing to stand up and condemn
the neo-Nazis on moral grounds,' she complains.
Even the Christian Democratic Mayor of Cottbus, Waldemar Kleinschmidt, while
condemning the attacks on asylum seekers, previously tried to woo over the
rightwing extremists to democracy.
At the entrance to the hostel for asylum seekers - which formerly housed the
families of Soviet army officers - one of the occupants had poignantly
scrawled the misspelled words: Azilant Gut ('Asylum-seekers good').
Most of the 900 or more residents at the hostel are from Romania and
Bulgaria of whom 60 per cent are gypsies.
After wading across the nearby Neisse river from Poland, a single word -
asyl (asylum) - spoken to a German official, sufficed to get them into the
hostel where they were given clothing, living quarters and money. A large
family can receive up to DM450 a month which enrages many east Germans who
say they get no more in welfare payments.
Nearly 30 battered cars purchased by occupants of the hostel stood outside
the gates along with several trucks being loaded with goods for Romania.
Across the broad Lipezker Strasse, which last month separated the hostel
from hundreds of rightwing assailants, are rows of German flats with flower
boxes and neat curtains.
Michael Michelfeit and his wife Ulrike were visiting his mother in one of
the flats. In the past, he said the asylum-seekers had rummaged through the
garbage bins of the Germans in search of useable items. During the dry
summer their children set fires between the rows of garages and frequently
snatched the purses of elderly women.
'Sometimes you catch yourself agreeing with some of the rightwing slogans
against the asylum seekers,' Ulrike admits.
She said the authorities would have to clamp down more forcefully on the
extremists who were exploiting the dissatisfaction among young people. In
fact, the Brandenburg authorities have taken a tougher line toward the
neo-Nazis than officials in adjoining Mecklenburg-Vorpommern.
Gunter Noack, who was loading tools into his car, said he and most other
people in Sachsendorf disapproved of the attacks on the hostel.
'They were destroying material assets,' he said, pausing briefly, '. . . and
endangering lives. The asylum-seekers are people, too. But the government
must stop them from pouring in and hand down tough sentences on the
neo-Nazis,' he says, reflecting a widely-held view in east Germany.
