FT  27 OCT 92 / Kidnap gangs hold Philippines economy to ransom: Manila's
campaign to attract new foreign investors is being undermined by a law and
order crisis
PHILIPPINE officials are finding out that improving the country's economy
and taming the political opposition are not enough in attracting more
foreign investment. Efforts are being stymied by a rash of kidnap-for-ransom
incidents involving rich businessmen and their relatives.
Most of the victims have been Manila-based businessmen of Chinese descent,
along with a number of Americans and Japanese, and other expatriates in
Mindanao in the southern Philippines. Worried Chinese-Filipino traders have
taken defensive measures, and some families are packing up and taking their
assets elsewhere.
If security for businessmen is not improved and the kidnapping gangs
dismantled, the effect could be disastrous. The increasing lawlessness,
according to analysts, could be disastrous for the government's campaign to
woo new investments, deemed essential in perking up an economy that in the
first half of this year was stagnant.
The Philippines had failed to cash in on the surge in foreign investment
flows into South-East Asia in the late 1980s, owing to the repeated coup
attempts at the time that portrayed instability in the country. Missing the
boat again could permanently cripple Manila's attempt to catch up with its
fast-growing neighbours.
After the peaceful elections and orderly transfer of power some five months
ago, there has been a steady stream of trade and investment missions
visiting Manila, including Chinese companies based in Taiwan, Singapore, and
Hong Kong. However, the investors' safety has persistently surfaced as a
serious concern.
The government of Mr Fidel Ramos, who on October 8 completed his first 100
days in office as president, is aiming for an annual average of Dollars
2.5bn of investment over the six years to 1998, during which it hopes to
record average economic growth of 8 per cent a year.
At one local business presentation recently conducted by Mr Rizalino
Navarro, the trade and industry secretary, the audience of foreign diplomats
based in Manila asked mainly about specific government measures that would
ensure the safety of investors.
In the first eight months of this year, a total of 29 kidnappings were
reported to the police, most of them ending with the victims' families
paying up millions of pesos to the kidnap syndicates. No arrests have been
reported and the cases have remained unsolved.
The number of cases reported was double that in the same period three years
ago, according to an official report. Among the latest unreported cases,
according to a group of Chinese-Filipino professionals, were the kidnappings
of 22 of their group over August-September alone, and which reportedly
involved pay-offs of some 50m pesos (Dollars 2.1m) to the kidnap gangs.
Early this year, the Senate defence committee reported that in 1991 there
were about 50 kidnap-for-ransom cases, most of which had been unreported
owing to the victims' fears of further harm. The kidnappers 'earned' a total
of up to 300m pesos (Dollars 12.5m) in these activities, the report said.
Some of the payments were reportedly made abroad.
A serious stumbling block towards solving the problem is the suspected
involvement of police and military officers in the 'lucrative' kidnappings.
On the other hand, the newly organised Presidential Anti-Crime Commission
(PACC), supposedly a 'super-body' against lawlessness and headed by Mr
Joseph Estrada, the vice-president, had been hamstrung by inadequate
financing and alleged 'leaks' in its operations.
Mr Estrada was thought to have gained an important breakthrough last month
with the arrest of two senior police officers, one directly in charge of
anti-kidnapping operations. A third police officer had admitted to Mr
Estrada his involvement in kidnappings allegedly planned by the senior
officers, and has turned state witness in the court cases against the two.
The PACC has also made some arrests in recent weeks of alleged kidnap gang
members. However, the arrests represent a small proportion of a reported
total of some 40 kidnap gangs operating in metropolitan Manila alone.
Confidence in the government's drive has also been tarnished by the recent
'confession' by an arrested gang leader of the alleged involvement of some
'10 generals in the police and military in his group's activities'. This was
hastily retracted.
The police involved with the kidnappers reportedly have connections in the
local Chinese community, along with suspected members of Chinese organised
crime syndicates operating in Hong Kong and Taiwan. It is alleged they
identify prospective targets for kidnapping operations. Successful
entrepreneurs active in the community as leaders are also coming under
suspicion.
The kidnapping syndicates are so sophisticated that some ransom notes are
said to be accompanied by photocopies of the victim's bank statements.
Yesterday police released a list of the 12 'most-wanted criminals' which
included a number of alleged kidnap gang leaders. On the list were
Chinese-Filipinos said to be the kidnap syndicates' connections in the
Chinese community. Big rewards were offered for their arrest. The PACC's
image was badly tarnished when a gang in late August kidnapped a Manila
businessman's son, a godson of Mr Estrada. The family refused to co-operate
with the police for fear of jeopardising the boy's safety and after several
days paid a reported 25m pesos (Dollars 1.04m).
Last month two teenage sons of Chinese-Filipino merchants were killed even
after the payment of a ransom of 1.7m pesos.
These incidents have caused anger and outrage in the Chinese-Filipino
community. However, government officials apparently have succeeded in
talking leaders of ethnic Chinese businessmen out of plans to set up
vigilante forces manned by foreign mercenaries.
Mr Ramos may also have contributed to the anxiety by declaring that he was
'not satisfied' with the performance of the PACC, which prompted an offer by
Mr Estrada to resign. Mr Ramos quickly reiterated full confidence in his
anti-crime leader and ordered immediate financing for the PACC, including
protection for witnesses. Mr Ramos, a former general who headed the
Philippine Constabulary has also declared an 'all-out war' against the
kidnap syndicates.
The outcome of that war will go a long way to determining the shape of the
country's economy in the coming years.
