FT  02 NOV 92 / Omens bad for Angola's future
MR Jonas Savimbi, the hard-line leader of the rebel Unita movement, has the
future of Angola in his hands. The choice between renewed civil war or an
11th-hour negotiated settlement now lies firmly with the 58-year-old
guerrilla chief, whose troops have engaged in heavy fighting in the capital
Luanda and several other provincial towns.
Nobody, however, not even his former backers in Washington and Pretoria,
seems to know what the mercurial Mr Savimbi wants.
Is he determined to fight his way to power against seemingly impossible
odds, throwing the vast country of 10m people back into suffering and
incurring global opprobrium? Or is he still able to pull Angola from the
brink of renewed conflict, swallowing electoral defeat and seeking
reconciliation by hammering out a power-sharing deal?
Unless the ceasefire announced late last night turns into a solid diplomatic
breakthrough, Angola seems doomed to renewed conflict, with earnings from
its oil exports of 500,000 barrels a day fuelling war, rather than
rebuilding the country.
The omens are bleak. The recent eruption in fighting was the worst since Mr
Savimbi disputed the results of democratic elections in September, which he
lost to President Jose Eduardo dos Santos and the ruling MPLA party.
Since the elections, attempts to broker a summit of the two leaders, work
out a power-sharing deal and hold the second round of the presidential
election have floundered amid mutual suspicion and historical antagonisms.
Instead of committing itself to a negotiated settlement, Unita has mobilised
its troops throughout the country, apparently for a full-scale offensive.
The events of the past month, culminating in the fighting of the past 72
hours, suggest that Mr Savimbi and his hard-line generals are unable to
accept electoral defeat and participation in a government of national unity,
unless Unita is given a big slice of power.
Throughout the cold war, Unita was supported by South Africa and the US in
its battle against the Marxist MPLA, which in turn was supported by the
Soviet Union and 50,000 Cuban troops. Since the elections, though, both the
US and South Africa have made clear they are no longer interested in
fuelling an African civil war and have pressed Mr Savimbi to negotiate.
He, however, has spurned mediation efforts by both Mr Pik Botha, South
African foreign minister, and Mr Herman Cohen, US assistant secretary of
state for Africa. 'The US has no influence on Savimbi despite the hundreds
of millions of dollars they have given him. They created a Frankenstein
monster,' said one western diplomat.
Western observers remain puzzled. They point out that, even if Mr Savimbi
returns to full armed conflict, it would be impossible for Unita to win.
For all that, Unita can do great damage, having kept at least 20,000 troops
and huge stockpiles of sophisticated weapons, say military observers. In the
first weeks of fighting, Unita could seize the strategically vital
provincial towns of Huambo, Cuito and possibly the railway town of Benguela,
which all eluded Unita during the civil war.
The capture of these central towns, which all voted solidly for Unita in the
elections and are the stronghold of Mr Savimbi's Ovimbundu tribe, would
split the country in two and prepare the ground for a possible secession of
the south.
Unita could also create chaos in Luanda, though the oil-producing enclave of
Cabinda is harder to disrupt, most installations being off-shore.
Despite this short-term capacity, Unita would find it very hard to hold
territory beyond its southern strongholds. Western nations have already
warned that any government Unita organises in the south would be isolated
diplomatically and economically.
Diplomats hope Mr Savimbi will heed these realities and pull Angola back
from the precipice of disintegration. Despite last night's ceasefire Mr
Savimbi's behaviour in the past six weeks and the level of violence have
given little reason for such hope.
