FT  13 MAR 92 / US envoy joins Nixon attack over help for CIS
MR Robert Strauss, the US ambassador in Moscow, has berated Americans from
both parties for ignoring the situation in the former Soviet Union in the
primary campaigns.
'I find it amazing,' he told a Senate hearing,' to come back in the middle
of a presidential campaign and find that a subject as important as what we
ought to be doing with respect to the republics of the former Soviet Union
hasn't been the subject of any appreciable discussion at all.
'The Russians want our leadership and the Europeans want to see us lead and
I think that can be put together,' he said. 'If it isn't, the great debate
we'll be reading about one of these days is why we blew it.'
The language is similar to the warnings issued this week by former President
Richard Nixon. But coming from a prominent Democrat appointed to Moscow last
year by Mr George Bush, a Republican president, Mr Strauss brings a certain
objective weight to the argument.
He stressed yesterday that aiding former Soviet republics ought not to be a
partisan political issue.
At a dinner on Wednesday night following a conference organised by the Nixon
Library, Mr Bush declared that 'we must find a way to square leadership with
the requirements of domestic renewal.' However, he said little about what
the US practically would be doing to assist Russia and the other republics.
Earlier, at his press conference, he had emphasised: 'We're living in a time
of constrained resources. There isn't a lot of money around and we are
spending too much of it as it already is.'
Though Mr Bush and Mr Nixon were careful to play down any differences
between them, the former president renewed warnings of the dangers of 'a new
isolationism.'
If Russian President Boris Yeltsin were to be overthrown, he would certainly
be replaced by a more unpleasant form of despotism, which would end up
costing the US much more to combat.
Mr Nixon's intervention, widely seen as another stage in his rehabilitation
after the disgrace of Watergate, has attracted widespread interest.
Wednesday night's conference dinner, attended by many members of his
Administration, was reported in the US press as much as a social and
political event as for its policy substance.
Even some of his inveterate opponents were moved to approve of what he had
to say. Senator Alan Cranston of California, for example, said he agreed
with Mr Nixon for the first time in years.
Seeking to exploit this in his inimitable manner, Mr Strauss argued that
'there is nothing more important that we can do' than provide full US
backing and funding for the International Monetary Fund's new focus on the
republics.
Proposals to help create a stabilisation fund for the rouble and on a new
IMF facility are currently held up in Congress and also the subject of
internal divisions inside the Administration.
