FT  11 JAN 92 / Minding Your Own Business: Bloodsuckers discover a
profitable market niche - David Blackwell meets Roy Sawyer, an American with
a passion for leeches who has found a home and a sympathetic business
environment in south Wales
'IF THERE'S anything in the world I hate it's leeches - the filthy little
devils,' cries Humphrey Bogart as he lugs the African Queen through the
swamps.
But Roy Sawyer's picture of the lowly bloodsucker is very different. Leeches
are his lifetime passion and he has created a thriving and unique small
business from both breeding them and putting them to use in modern medical
science.
In 1984 he started Biopharm in Swansea, south Wales, with Pounds 80,000,
including a Pounds 45,000 government guaranteed loan and a Pounds 10,000
loan from the City of Swansea.
While the company is reticent about profits, it has had an average annual
turnover of Pounds 200,000 in the two years to March 31 1991. Most of the
profit is put into research, which has soaked up Pounds 1.5m in seven years,
including grants and and licensing payments.
From a breeding stock of 30 leeches, Biopharm now has 50,000, stored in rows
of tanks in a specially built unit. They are fed only once every three
months on blood sausages made from pig's intestines - the present site of
the farm was chosen partly for its proximity to a slaughterhouse.
'I grew up with leeches and I never lost interest in them,' says Sawyer, who
was raised in South Carolina, in the US, where leeches are common.
He arrived at Swansea University because there was nowhere in the US where
he could study the creatures. His relatives tried to divert his interest and
his US professor talked disparagingly of 'that 19th century biology.'
Sawyer's studies led him to write the definitive three-volume work on the
leech, published by Oxford University Press in 1986. 'I can't imagine anyone
else being so stupid as to devote so much prime time to such a subject,' he
grins.
But it was work on the book which convinced him that the world's 650 species
of leech had a lot of pharmaceutical potential. The company was founded 'to
develop potential drugs which we perceive to be in the saliva of leeches and
other bloodsuckers.'
As he explains, the chemicals in leech saliva are pre-adapted to human
physiology. The problems are how to make them useful and how to get enough
to make a drug?
The sale of farmed leeches (Pounds 7 each) has surprisingly provided a sound
cashflow base for the company. When it started there was a small market in
the universities which was being satisfied by what Sawyer describes as very
erratic and diverse sources. By giving a steady service, Biopharm has become
the chief supplier.
'Our very existence created a market I never dreamt was there,' says Sawyer.
Leeches are also sold to hospitals where they are used to help tissue
reconnect after micro surgery to rejoin severed parts of the body. If a
leech is applied to a wound for 30 minutes the wound will bleed for up to 10
hours. Keeping the blood flowing prevents infection and gangrene from
setting in.
In the company's biochemical laboratories chemicals and enzymes are
extracted from leech saliva and niversities.
The third source of income targeted by the company is the pharmaceutical
market itself. There are possibly as many as 10 potential drugs from leech
saliva, mostly anti-coagulants. A variant of the enzyme hirudin has been
licensed to an Italian company for the manufacture of a drug which stops
thrombosis in potential heart attack victims. Haementin, another enzyme, has
been shown to be a potent dissolver of blood clots.
The company's patent bill is a source of worry to Sawyer. It has already
paid out Pounds 60,000 in patent fees and is expecting the figure to reach
Pounds 100,000 soon.
The cost of taking out patents was met by winning several Department of
Trade and Industry Smart (Small firms Merit Award for Research and
Technology) Awards worth a total of Pounds 260,000, all of which has gone
into patentable products.
Meanwhile turnover has doubled every year and the company was in profit from
the third year of operations. It has moved from its original premises to an
atmospheric Victorian mansion on the outskirts of Swansea and has opened
sales offices in the US and Europe. The UK side employs 11 people.
The business appears to be recession proof. 'I keep thinking it will
plateau, but there's some years of growth yet,' says Sawyer.
While his wife Lorna manages the financial side of the business, he remains
an active managing director. 'I spend too much of my time worrying about
trivial things.'
One distraction has been another unexpected source of income: tourism. He
says people find the leech's obnoxious and repugnant side fascinating. Last
year he opened the premises on Thursday afternoons in the summer and was
overwhelmed at the response.
Now he wonders if he should have designed the farm to exploit the public's
curiosity. 'At the beginning I should have identified the tourism side,' he
says. 'This is such a strange business.'
Biopharm, 2/8 Morpha Road, Swansea, South Wales, SA1 2HT; Tel: 0792-467536
