FT  28 OCT 92 / Himalayan obstacle to Indo-Pakistani ties: Kashmir remains
the main issue preventing good relations between two neighbours
LAST WEEKEND, Kashmiri separatists again attempted to storm the border
between India and Pakistan, the third such effort this year. The march,
initiated by political parties in Pakistan-held Kashmir, was aborted when
Pakistani troops opened fire on the marchers, reportedly injuring 28, and
arrested their leader, Mr Amanullah Khan.
Despite its failure, however, the attempt has caused a further setback to
relations between the two countries, which had appeared to be improving
after talks in August.
India accuses Pakistan of not doing enough to defuse tension on the border,
though Pakistan claims it could do no more to deter marchers.
Both sides do agree that neither could allow Kashmiris to violate the Line
of Actual Control, one of the world's most heavily guarded borders. India's
defence minister, Mr Sharad Pawar, stated categorically that India would
repulse any violation of its borders. Pakistan said before the march that
'Pakistan shared the sentiments of the people who desire to cross', but at
the same time was 'aware of its responsibilities'.
Kashmir has been the dominant issue preventing good relations between the
two neighbours since the partition of the subcontinent in 1947. They have
fought two wars over it, and the situation remains very tense.
Both sides face domestic pressures to hold on to their respective parts of
the troubled Himalayan territory. Neither Delhi nor Islamabad is
particularly concerned about apparently growing desire among disillusioned
Kashmiris for an independent state.
India regards the 1972 Simla Agreement (an instrument of peace signed by the
two after Pakistan lost a war on the Bangladesh issue in 1971) as the basis
for further bilateral negotiations. Pakistan insists on interpreting the
instrument of peace in the light of a United Nations resolution of 1948,
providing for an internationally supervised plebiscite, through which
Kashmiris could choose between India and Pakistan  - there is no third
option.
In August, talks at the level of foreign secretary  - top civil servant  -
generated more optimism than any such exercise in the past. Yet the mutual
suspicion built up over four decades has subsequently clouded the
improvement in relations, raising doubts about whether any real progress
could be made. The most significant outcome of the August talks was
agreement to discuss the Kashmir issue, under the Simla Agreement, breaking
a 26-year deadlock.
The initiative came from Pakistan, but both sides privately admitted they
were responding to increasing international pressure, especially from the
United States, which traditionally supported Pakistan in the cold war era
but now has improving relations with New Delhi.
India, which has 400,000 troops in Kashmir to control the insurgency there,
contends that Kashmir is a 'domestic dispute'. It demands that Pakistan
stops supporting terrorism in the Kashmir valley, and India's northern state
of Punjab. India also wants Pakistan to desist from internationalising the
issue  - there has been tremendous global pressure on India to improve its
human rights record in Kashmir.
Mr Shaharyar Khan, Pakistani foreign secretary, on a recent visit to New
Delhi, denied any 'government-sponsored support' from Pakistan. 'Terrorism
is a problem we have to tackle jointly,' he said.
In an atmosphere of deep mutual recrimination, Kashmir has virtually crowded
out other bilateral issues.
However, there has been progress even since June this year, when an Indian
diplomat was abducted, beaten and expelled from Pakistan and India responded
by expelling two Pakistani diplomats.
The two countries have signed a code of conduct on the treatment of
diplomatic personnel between the two countries. They have also agreed on a
range of military confidence-building measures.
Both India and Pakistan would benefit greatly from a further improvement in
relations.
Economic reform programmes initiated by both countries require a stable
political climate, and cuts in defence expenditure would help increase the
slow pace of economic growth. Trade between the two neighbours, which is
virtually non-existent, would also augment both economies.
