FT  29 APR 92 / Japan seeks closer ties with CSCE
MR Kiichi Miyazawa, the Japanese prime minister, will propose the
establishment of formal relations between Japan and the 51-member Conference
on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), in his talks with head of
state in Paris and Bonn this week.
Mr Miyazawa yesterday began a two-day visit to Paris and Bonn. He is due to
meet French President Francois Mitterrand today and German Chancellor Helmut
Kohl tomorrow.
His trip is intended to raise the profile of Japan in the forging of a new
international order to replace the old Cold War relationships - in which
stronger bilateral ties with the European Community, and closer involvement
with other international organisations such as the CSCE, are seen as
crucial.
Japan has so far not spelt out precisely what it means by a formal
relationship with the CSCE, which officials describe as 'an institutional
framework for the reinforcement of its relationship' with the organisation.
Pointing out that the group now stretches from Vancouver to Vladivostok,
they say that inevitably its concerns on security, disarmament and human
rights all concern Japan closely.
Mr Miyazawa emphasised yesterday that closer relations with France and
Germany were 'essential for the establishment of a new international order.'
It is understood Japan and the EC will have a summit meeting just before the
Group of Seven (G7) world economic summit in Munich in July to co-ordinate
their positions more closely. The G7 meeting is seen in Tokyo as the most
important forum in which Japan is a full participant.
After the G7 talks in Washington, at which Japan, as well as Germany, were
pressed to boost economic growth, Mr Miyazawa is keen to persuade Mr
Mitterrand and Mr Kohl of the genuine efforts to do this.
Today in Paris he will also meet Mr Pierre Beregovoy, France's new prime
minister, which will provide an opportunity to improve relations with Tokyo,
damaged by fierce criticisms of Japanese trade practices by Mrs Edith
Cresson, former prime minister.
