FT  24 NOV 92 / Killings force Bonn to look at curb on neo-Nazi groups
ACTION to halt the proliferation of racist, neo-Nazi groups in Germany is
under urgent consideration, following the murder of a Turkish woman and two
girls in an arson attack at the weekend.
As Germany reacted in shock and dismay yesterday to the news of the worst
racial killing since unification, Mr Rudolf Seiters, the interior minister,
announced that the security services were gathering evidence for a
clampdown. Action would be taken in the near future, he said, but refused to
give details for fear of undermining its effect.
Thousands of Germans staged spontaneous anti-racism demonstrations in
several cities including Hamburg, Berlin and the northern town of Molln,
near Lubeck, where the killings took place. Berlin's protest was
co-sponsored by its 140,000-strong Turkish community.
The government's top criminal prosecutor announced that he was taking
personal control of the investigations into the killing of the 51-year-old
Turkish woman, and two girls aged 14 and 10.
They died after two houses occupied for many years by Turkish migrant
workers were set on fire. The police were tipped off by two informants, both
of whom yelled: 'Heil Hitler.' Nine other occupants of the building were
taken to hospital.
The attack was condemned as 'shocking' and 'disgusting' by politicians on
all sides of the political spectrum, except for Mr Franz Schonhuber, leader
of the extreme rightwing Republicans, the largest far-right party in the
country, who declined to comment.
'Hatred of foreigners is hatred of human beings,' Mr Bjorn Engholm, leader
of the opposition Social Democrats, declared.
'The state must act with determination against all terror and crime . . .
The powers and competence of the police to fight right-wing terrorism must
be strengthened and concentrated.'
Chancellor Helmut Kohl expressed outrage on German television. On a state
visit to Mexico, Mr Richard von Weizsacker, the federal president, who has
repeatedly warned against racial violence, expressed grief over the victims
of 'senseless, disgraceful violence'.
The attack also sparked renewed charges that the government had failed to
take firm action against a rash of violence against foreigners, and had
instead become bogged down in an interminable debate on how to stop the flow
of asylum-seekers into the country.
The latest victims were not asylum-seekers, but long-time Turkish residents
in Germany. At least one of the girls was born in the country and had lived
all her life there.
The three deaths bring to at least 14 the number of deaths from racial
attacks in Germany this year. Two other murders were attributed to neo-Nazi
gangs at the weekend - one of a German who was allegedly burned to death
because his skinhead attackers thought he was Jewish.
