FT  04 APR 92 / Motoring: Renault passes road Czech - Stuart Marshall enjoys
driving the new Safrane to Prague
AS THE Renault Safrane bumped over the tram tracks and splashed through the
puddled, patched tarmac, the rain turned into sleet. Pilsen last week looked
about as inviting as a Welsh mining town on a wet March day.
Superficially, nothing seemed to have changed much since last I drove in
Czechoslovakia 10 years ago. Then, although we had all the right paperwork,
it took more than an hour for the frontier guards to allow us in.
As we waited, we watched their dogs sniffing the undersides of lorries
hauling gravel over the border into Germany, while more guards probed the
loads with steel rods. They took care in those days that no Czech citizens
escaped.
When we flew out of Prague, there were locked security doors through which
to pass before reaching the airline check-in desk, and again at immigration.
The city was beautiful, but Czechoslovakia was not a happy country. Every
10th person seemed to be a uniformed official.
One difference now is that Prague taxis are new Volkswagen Passats, not
creaking old Volgas, and there has been an import boom in second-hand German
cars. Czech motorists no longer have to choose between an appalling Trabant,
Moskvich or Wartburg or, if luckier, a rear-engined Skoda or a Lada.
There are plenty of newish Renaults, Opels, Fiats and VW Golfs on the
lightly-trafficked roads,although aged and battered Skoda Octavias survive
in rural areas.
This time, though, I did not even have to stop at the border when leaving
the country. A guard, seeing my British passport held up, just smiled and
waved me through. That was when I realised things really were different.
The new Renault Safrane I drove from Prague to Zurich made its debut at the
Geneva show last month and will reach Britain by autumn. It is a replacement
for the Renault 25, which never made much of a mark in the UK. That was not
the case in France where, even in the last year of its life, it outsold the
much newer Peugeot 605 and Citroen XM combined.
The Safrane is Renault's bid for a larger slice of the market for
top-of-the-range, volume-produced cars. Rivals include the BMW 5-Series,
Rover 800, Saab 9000 and, of course, the 605 and XM from the PSA Group.
Last year, 1.8m of the nearly 13.5m cars sold in Europe were in the
Safrane's size and price class. The affluent Germans bought nearly 44 per
cent of them; France, Britain and Italy took around 11 per cent each. So,
while Renault's main target clearly is the German buyer, it hopes to sell
about 7,000 Safranes in the UK each year.
Initially, Britain will be offered only two-litre, four-cylinder and
three-litre, V6 models. Mainland Europeans will have a much wider choice,
including a petrol 2.2-litre and a pair of turbo-diesels.
The Safrane could be taken for a saloon with a separate boot but, like the
25, is actually a five-door. This seems odd when you recall how Ford was
bruised by adverse reaction to its hatchback-only policy for the present
Granada/Scorpio range. (It added a four-door a couple of years ago, and its
long-awaited estate car version arrives in a few days). But Renault, while
admitting that some Germans are not too keen on large hatchbacks, thinks the
Safrane's virtues will overcome this drawback.
In two days and more than 500 miles (800 kms) of driving on everything from
dry roads to packed snow, and in weather ranging from brilliant sunshine to
blizzard, you get to know a car quite well. Both the three-litre V6s - one a
five-speed manual, the other a four-speed automatic - impressed me as
vigorous, comfortable and, above all, very quiet and refined mechanically.
Their suspensions dealt nobly and almost silently with rough roads. At 130
mph (210 kmh) and over, they felt reassuringly stable and still ran quietly
on the Autobahn.
Next day, I switched to a Safrane with a 2.2-litre, 12-valve, four-cylinder
engine developing 140 horsepower compared with the V6's 170 bhp. It went
nearly as well as the V6 on the Autobahn but, with little more than half the
three-litre engine's torque (pulling power), lacked a certain urge on hills
and demanded more gear-shifting.
The Safrane is a roomy five-seater with a generous boot. At the bottom of
the range, ABS brakes will be an optional extra; but the poshest V6 will
come with everything from leather seats to a self-levelling suspension that
lowers the car automatically for high-speed driving.
UK prices have not been fixed, but it would be surprising if a two-litre
Safrane with automatic transmission were priced at around the present
tax-break figure of Pounds 19,250.
