FT  28 APR 92 / International Company News: Gencor profits hit by weak
commodity markets
CONTINUING weakness in world commodity markets caused a 26 per cent drop in
earnings at Gencor, the South African mining house, in the six months to the
end of February.
Attributable income dropped by 26 per cent to R562m, (Dollars 195.8m) with
earnings per share down by a similar margin to 47.8 cents from 65 cents in
the same period last year.
Mr Brian Gilbertson, chairman, said: 'The results reflect the difficult part
of the commodity cycle we're in.' He noted that if transaction profits were
stripped out of the 1991 results then the earnings decline was much more
modest, from 52 cents to 48 cents per share.
Mr Gilbertson did not forecast a quick turnround, and said earnings for the
second half 'will not easily match the level just reported'.
He said, though, that all the companies in the group were well positioned
for an upturn. Malbak, Sappi and Gencor have all recently made rights
issues.
Although most commodity markets remained depressed, Mr Gilbertson discerned
some optimistic pointers. On the ferro-alloys side, ferro-silicone and
ferro-chrome prices have firmed recently.
Sappi, the paper products group, has confirmed a turnround in pulp prices,
while stainless steel order books at Middelburg Steel and Alloys have picked
up. However, Mr Gilbertson said: 'It's only one or two swallows. The summer
is not here yet.'
Gencor has two very large capital projects on hand: the Columbus stainless
steel joint venture with Anglo American, and the Alusaf aluminium project.
Mr Gilbertson said he would be surprised if both projects, with a cumulative
cost of over R6bn, did not receive the go-ahead. A decision on Alusaf is
expected during July, while Columbus should get the go-ahead this calendar
year.
Following a R2bn rights issue earlier this year, the Gencor group had
considerable cash on hand, and Mr Gilbertson said he was still hopeful
Samancor would be able to finance its share of the Columbus project without
recourse to shareholders.
Responding to ongoing speculation about links with Lonhro, Mr Gilbertson
said that they were in discussion with Lonhro with a view 'to achieving
future synergies between our different platinum operations'.
He said these talks had been going on for a long time and were nothing new.
He added that the platinum assets, over which Gencor has pre-emptive rights,
were the most attractive asset in Lonhro, but that they would also be
interested in other mining assets, such as the Ashanti gold mine in Ghana,
should they be on offer.
Other Lonhro interests such as motor-dealerships, tea and hotels were 'not
our natural scene'.
