FT  10 FEB 92 / Economics Notebook: High hopes of a good decade for growth
IT WILL be of little comfort to politicians in the US and Europe facing
elections this year in grim economic conditions - but the 1990s will be a
good decade for economic growth in the OECD countries and potentially an
excellent one for the reforming economies of east and central Europe.
This is the conclusion of Mr Andrew Britton, director of the National
Institute of Economic and Social Research in London, in a recent study for
the United Nations of postwar economic growth in the market economies.*
Mr Britton argues that, while ultimately growth is driven by technological
advance, countries can expand far more rapidly than this implies over many
years both through technological 'catch-up' and through moves to freer
markets and thus more efficient use of resources.
Between 1950-73, known in retrospect as the 'golden age', western Europe and
Japan benefited from both factors. Labour productivity, measured by GDP per
hour worked, rose 5.3 per cent a year on average in France, Germany, Japan,
the Netherlands and Britain, compared with 1.6 per cent from 1870 to 1950.
By contrast, the 2.5 per cent annual growth of GDP per hour worked in the US
in 1950-73 was little different to that between 1913 and 1950.
Operating closer to the technological frontier (with an absolute level of
GDP per hour worked higher than any of the five countries cited) and with an
already largely deregulated economy, the 'golden age' passed the US by.
'It seems likely that the distinguishing characteristic of the 'golden age'
was not the more rapid acquisition of new knowledge, so much as its faster
diffusion, and a more efficient use of knowledge already acquired,' the
study says.
This process was aided by the dismantling of international trade barriers
and high rates of investment, especially in Japan and Germany.
The golden age was followed by 'an age of disappointment and confusion'. Mr
Britton gives short shrift to 'oil-shock' explanations of the worldwide
slowdown after 1973, citing evidence that the direct impact was small. He
argues that the slowdown was inevitable.
The scope for technological 'catch-up' in relation to the US was largely
exhausted. Indeed, by the 1970s Japan already surpassed the US in many
sectors. There was little more to be gained from switching resources from
agriculture to industry, while the shift to services may have actually
reduced productivity growth. There was also a halt to progress on trade
liberalisation.
Mr Britton dismisses claims made by the OECD and others that economic growth
was stifled by a burgeoning public sector. Government receipts as a
percentage of GDP rose from 32.1 per cent in 1973 to 35.6 per cent in 1984,
not enough significantly to affect productivity or growth, he says.
Similarly, he is reluctant to accept explanations that put all the blame on
government actions to restrain demand in order to curb inflation. Countries
which avoided the worst of the inflation in the 1970s, like West Germany and
Switzerland, did not have a better growth performance. Countries with
continued low unemployment (relatively high demand) in the 1970s still
suffered from the general fall in productivity growth rates.
However, Mr Britton says growth after 1973 became more volatile. The loss of
output in the recessions of the mid-1970s and the early 1980s was not made
up by faster growth in subsequent years.
Thus in the 1980s, the decade of the 'conservative revolution' in Europe and
America, average OECD output growth of 2.8 per cent a year was almost the
same as in 1973-79 when economic expansion was supposedly fettered by
rampant growth of the nanny state.
But the recession precipitated by tight money policies to defeat inflation
cost the OECD countries 2.5 per cent of GDP, a loss which may prove
permanent.
The 'conservative revolution' was intended to allocate resources more
efficiently through deregulation of markets rather than boost the underlying
rate of technical progress, for which markets are not necessarily best
suited. But even here it has failed to achieve 'a general and sustained
acceleration in productivity growth'.
OECD labour productivity area rose 1.7 per cent a year on average in the
1980s, though in particular sectors in particular countries gains were more
impressive.
In spite of this, Mr Britton is 'cautiously optimistic' on the outlook to
the end of the decade. He believes the 1980s have left the market economies
in relatively good shape to take advantage of growth potential.
In the absence of big increases in investment (low savings) or in labour
supply (population ageing), this will depend mainly on technical progress
and/or the more efficient use of resources.
Indulging in some crystal-ball gazing, Mr Britton believes the slowdown in
military spending following the end of the cold war could reduce the pace of
technological advance in the long term, though in the medium term growth
could benefit from more productive use of liberated resources.
European economic integration will further boost efficiency, though against
that is the possibility that the world trade talks may fail. Finally, Mr
Britton expects a move to the political centre from the right in the US,
Britain and Germany, but no return to more interventionist policies.
In eastern Europe the parallel is with western Europe in the 1950s. The same
potential exists for a rapid rise in productivity, combined with reduced
regulation and an expansion of trade. There is the same need to catch up
with existing technical knowledge and the same need for capital.
In western Europe the parallel is with the US in the 1950s. It is not
expected to experience anything like the possible boom in the east but the
National Institute is predicting annual growth of 2.6 per cent in 1993-95
and 2.8 per cent in 1996-99 for the big seven economies.
'We are not forecasting a new 'golden age' of rapid growth in the market
economies, but we do foresee continuing progress and overall a better
performance than that of the 1970s or even the 1980s', Mr Britton says.
*Economic Growth in the Market Economies 1950-2000, by Andrew Britton.
Discussion Papers Vol. 1, No. 1 (New York, United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe, 31pp).
