FT  11 APR 92 / The Lex Column: Painting the town blue
For the City's market operators, yesterday was Christmas and birthday rolled
into one. The Tories were back in charge, business was booming, sterling was
strong, Tokyo finally staged a recovery and US interest rates were down.
Perhaps equally important, they were no longer faced with the loss of maybe
a fifth of their take-home pay; indeed, many had received their bonuses
early to keep the cash out of Mr John Smith's clutches. But for all the
exuberance, it was noteworthy that equities, sterling and the money market
only returned to where they were when the election was called a month ago.
Is there a case for the markets going higher again?
The principal argument, of course, is that a month ago the spectre of a hung
parliament - with the likelihood of another election again  - was in itself
a burden on the economy. Not only has that burden been lifted, there is also
some evidence that the economy is finally struggling to life on its own.
Tesco and Next made confident noises about an end to recession this week,
while heavy truck sales have shown their first rise since 1989.
Never mind that there is no real indication yet of how robust the recovery
will be. The timing seems established, and that is worth something on the
price in itself.
It is quite possible that these arguments will prove persuasive, and that
the more optimistic broking houses are right in expecting the FT-SE to be
somewhere near 3,000 by the year end. But there are counter-arguments. A
month ago the Tokyo market was 17 per cent higher than it is now, despite
yesterday's sharp recovery. The UK commercial property market has taken a
series of further downward lurches, threatening a degree of damage to the
domestic banking system. And despite the modest rise in sterling yesterday,
market talk of an imminent cut in base rates owes more to general euphoria
than to logic.
And, of course, there is a formidable increase in the scale of government
borrowing. Strictly speaking, that has been in the market since budget day a
month ago. But the position has been greatly obscured since then by
competing claims from the parties over the cost of manifestos and the threat
of higher Labour borrowing again. Now that the threat has been lifted, it
need not follow that the market will warm to over Pounds 30bn of new gilts
from a Tory administration, however greedily it snapped up the surprise
issue in the small hours of Friday morning.
Traditionally, the equity market has tended to rise sharply to greet a Tory
victory and to drop back thereafter. That need not be the pattern in this
case, since the victory came as a genuine surprise and may not yet be fully
in the price. All the same, the market has risen almost 180 points in the
space of two days. It is asking a lot for it to maintain the pace.
