FT  06 MAY 92 / London Stock Exchange: Footsie falters on brink of record
CONFIRMATION of the widely expected half-point cut in UK interest rates saw
the FT-SE 100-share Index burst through its previous all-time closing high
but fail by less than one point to penetrate its record intraday high.
After failing to push through the peak, the market quickly ran out of steam
and saw an early strong rise turn into a minor loss, before closing
moderately higher.
Dealers kicked off the shortened trading week by pushing share prices up
sharply, anticipating another flurry of institutional buying interest after
the rate reduction.
Further impetus to the London market came from Wall Street, which had raced
up to record levels during London's bank holiday period.
The Footsie topped its previous closing high  - 2,679.6 reached on September
2 last year  - opening some 20 points stronger at 2,679.8 and quickly moving
up to 2,683.0, or 23.2 ahead, within minutes of the start.
But the market was unable to build on this, as profit-taking from
institutions anxious to lock in big profits achieved on the general election
result saw equities retreat for most of the remaining session.
Specialists said the market's reversal stemmed from a general feeling of
anti-climax and worries that the market may well need to consolidate before
launching another attempt at piercing its all-time high. There was also
widespread concern about the German economy and the possibility that Wall
Street may have run too far too quickly. The US stock market opened easier
yesterday and continued to drift off as London closed.
Dealers also spoke of at least two programme trades in London, both weighted
on the sell side, and lingering worries about the possibility of sizeable
rights issues.
Selling pressure in London reached its peak just before Wall Street opened.
At that time the Footsie fell into negative territory, reaching the day's
low of 2,658.4, or down 1.4. Thereafter it managed to claw its way back to
end a busy session a net 2.4 higher at 2,662.2.
The trading session was spiced by another big placing. Smith New Court, the
London market's bought deal specialist, acting in conjunction with Panmure
Gordon, acquired and easily placed Sir Ron Brierley's 29.7 per cent stake in
BSG International. The placing of the BSG stake, comprising some 60m shares,
accounted for 120m of the market's turnover, which reached 638.1m shares.
Pharmaceuticals were in the spotlight, with Glaxo delivering another
sparkling performance as the UK authorities granted approval for the group's
Zofran anti-nausea drug. SmithKline Beecham moved higher in sympathy with
Glaxo, but Fisons was aggressively sold late in the session following news
that the group had failed so far to win US approval for its Opticrom drug.
Most senior dealers said the market had already factored in the rate cut and
was seeking further stimulation. 'We have had the good news for the time
being; short of some bid activity we are due a period of consolidation,'
said one.
