FT  20 JUL 92 / Rover's new plant dispels speculation over Cowley
ROVER GROUP, the carmaking subsidiary of British Aerospace, today opens a
Pounds 200m manufacturing centre at its Cowley complex in Oxfordshire  - the
company's biggest single production investment since its privatisation in
1988.
Construction of the centre, which includes a large assembly hall and new
robotic systems to make car bodies, dispels years of speculation that
Rover's long-term intention was to close the sprawling Cowley operation with
the loss of its remaining jobs. The 220-acre site employs more than 3,000
people.
The investment, which provides Rover, formerly BL, with what it claims is
one of Europe's most advanced and flexible car plants, underlines the
company's 'total commitment' to manufacturing at Cowley, according to Mr
John Towers, Rover managing director.
The plant, capable of producing 110,000 cars a year on two shifts, has begun
producing the latest versions of Rover's 800-series executive car range in
the last few weeks, but is being opened today by Mr Michael Heseltine, trade
and industry secretary.
Later this year the 360,000 sq ft assembly hall will also start producing
the Synchro, a medium-sized saloon developed jointly with Honda.
Assembly of the ageing Maestro and Montego models is being moved from the
nearby Cowley South Works to a 'lower-volume' assembly facility within the
new complex, which will also produce a limited edition MG - the RV 8 - to be
launched in September.
Cowley North Works, where the Rover 800 has been built for the past six
years, is ceasing car assembly and the South Works is to close by the end of
the year. The only job losses will be through natural wastage.
The new facility is not expected to add significantly to Rover's output. Mr
Towers said the company expected combined production from Cowley and its
Birmingham plants not to exceed 550,000 a year for the foreseeable future.
Rover had no intention of seeking to regain its former status as a volume
manufacturer.
Rover said that planning permission had just been received for the two old
Cowley sites to be turned into a business park expected to create 5,000 jobs
for a variety of companies.
Less bark and more bite, Page 5
