FT  05 OCT 92 / Transport safety and the high price of human life: The
sensitive question of whether too much is spent on reducing the risks of
travelling by public transport
It is a hard question to ask after air disasters such as last night's crash
in Amsterdam and last week's in Nepal: but is there a limit to how much
should be spent on transport safety?
The instinctive answer is that no sum can be too high if it results in the
saving of a human life. In Britain, however, a body of opinion is daring to
argue not only that a limit exists, but that in some cases it may have been
reached.
Britain's current attitudes to transport safety were shaped by a series of
horrific transport disasters in the late 1980s, such as the Clapham rail
crash and the London Underground fire at King's Cross. These were followed
by reports demanding hundreds of millions of pounds' worth of measures to
improve transport safety.
The spending duly came, and has continued since. Last year, for example,
British Rail spent Pounds 225m on safety projects, equivalent to more than
10 per cent of total passenger receipts. London Underground's outlay of
Pounds 120m was, proportionally, higher still at nearly 20 per cent of
sales.
Even at these levels, safety spending is sometimes criticised as inadequate.
But ministers, fearful of the political consequences, dare not question the
sums it absorbs. On the contrary, they publicly insist that no safety
project put forward by BR or London Underground is ever refused.
Last month, however, came a watershed when Mr Brian Appleton, a retired
industrialist, produced a report for the Health and Safety Executive on the
Underground's response to fire and bomb alerts.
One of Mr Appleton's conclusions was that the risk of station fires on the
Underground had been so greatly reduced since the King's Cross disaster that
further spending on fire precautions could not be justified. The money would
be better spent on, say, new signalling systems to reduce the hazard of
train crashes.
This was not the same as saying that safety spending overall should be cut.
Nevertheless, the report broke new ground by acknowledging that there may
come a point in any area of safety where risks become tolerable and further
spending is wasted.
Emotional responses aside, the argument has logic. There is, after all, no
such thing as total safety: even lying in bed has its hazards (the ceiling
might fall in, or an electrical fault could set the house on fire). What
matters to people is that the level of risk should be acceptable in relation
to the benefits derived.
One example of this principle is people's attitude towards the relative
risks of travelling by car, bus or train. Most people know that it is far
safer to travel by public transport than by car, yet they are prepared to
accept the greater risk of car travel for the benefits of comfort and
convenience it brings.
This is not to say that public transport, already very safe, could not be
safer still. The trouble is, further progress is becoming ever more
expensive. This is because, over the years, the cheapest and most effective
options for cutting casualty rates have gradually been used up, so that each
progressive advance in safety saves fewer lives at greater cost.
This might matter little if money for safety came out of a bottomless pit.
But the constraints on BR's financial resources mean that every pound spent
on safety is at the expense of investment in other things valued by
passengers, such as faster and more reliable trains, or lower fares.
So how can we be sure that money spent on safety is being spent wisely?
Economists such as Prof Michael Jones-Lee, a specialist in transport safety
at Newcastle University, say the answer is to give safety benefits a
monetary value so that they can be properly evaluated against other options
for the allocation of resources. This, however, requires some sort of value
to be put on the cost of a human life.
Obnoxious as this concept may appear, it has been with us for years. Courts,
for example, award compensation for the loss of loved ones (and their income
streams), and the National Health Service is constantly required to decide
whether it can justify the cost of carrying out expensive life-saving
operations.
In fact, the Department of Transport has quietly been putting a monetary
value on the cost of human casualties since 1968. It uses the figures to put
a value on the safety benefits of road schemes, so helping it decide whether
the costs of schemes are justified.
In the early years, the department's calculation of the cost of a fatality
was based mainly on the value of a victim's lost production. However, this
method faced objections because it failed to reflect the value that people
attach to life itself; so in 1988 the department changed to a
willingness-to-pay approach.
Under this system, attempts are made through interviews and other techniques
to determine what amounts of money people are prepared to pay for a given
decrease in the risk of a fatal accident. As a result of studies carried out
for the Transport Department by Prof Jones-Lee, the value attributed to a
marginal reduction in the risk of a road accident fatality is now set at
Pounds 683,000.
Although this figure is used to assess the safety benefits of road schemes,
no attempt has yet been made to carry out any cost-benefit analysis of
safety spending in public transport. But working backwards from calculations
of how much is being spent on safety and how much the risk of fatalities has
been reduced, BR and the Underground estimate that the cost is running at
around Pounds 2m per fatality saved.
Is that too much? If the Transport Department is right about how much people
are willing to pay for a reduction in fatalities, it is way over the top.
Yet, as Prof Jones-Lee argues, it is not quite as simple as that. If asked,
people would probably attach a higher value to public transport safety than
road safety because public transport requires them to yield their fate to
the care of another party. People are also inherently averse to being
involved in an air, sea, rail or Underground crash because of the fear that
their doom may be certain and ghastly.
If anything is clear about the levels of safety spending in public
transport, it is that no one knows what they should be. But BR and London
Underground both privately acknowledge that the cost of some safety measures
 -for example, some of the more elaborate fire precautions required by law
in the wake of the King's Cross fire - is out of all proportion to the tiny
reductions in risk they produce.
Instilling a rationale into safety spending need not be particularly
difficult. If only the Transport Department would commission a study into
what levels of safety were required of public transport and how much people
were prepared to pay for them, implementation would be easy. BR and London
Underground would welcome such a move: so, too, might the government, if it
found itself saving money. It could, however, prove harder to sell to the
electorate: and harder still after the next transport disaster.
