FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (8): The money rolls in -
Capitalist world offers a helping hand
THE ULTIMATE success of the emerging Baltic region will depend on how fast
the former Soviet countries on its eastern shores can become market
economies.
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania are beginning to win support from
international financial institutions.
Its scale does not compare with the post-war Marshall Plan, but any help is
better than none.
The most important intervention comes from the Washington-based
International Monetary Fund. This autumn the IMF approved stand-by credit
arrangements for all three Baltic states. Latvia was allotted Dollars 82m
over the next 12 months to back its economic and financial reform programme
drawn up under the IMF's direction.
It aims to liberalise prices and trade; to accelerate privatisation of the
defunct state-owned sector; and to reduce inflation by June next year to a
bearable level.
The IMF realises that this coincides with a sharp contraction of Latvia's
trade with Russia and a rise in the cost of its energy and raw materials.
In Estonia the IMF is providing Dollars 41m of stand-by credits for the next
12 months. Estonia's reform programme has been set specific targets - to
limit the fall in industrial output by July 1993 to 15 per cent; slow the
annual inflation rate to 6 per cent by the end of the period; and raise
gross foreign reserves by mid-1993 to a level equivalent to more than two
months of imports.
Estonia's adoption in July of the convertible kroon as its sole currency
suggests that it stands a better chance of progress towards a free market
economy than its Baltic neighbours.
Lithuania has been awarded Dollars 82m worth of IMF stand-by credits - the
decision was confirmed only days before the election of the former
Communists back to power. The IMF aim in Lithuania is to reduce inflation to
2 per cent by next July and keep the fall in real GDP to about 22 per cent
for the 12 month period.
The World Bank is also providing loans and credit guarantees to finance
urgently needed imports and technical help. This autumn it earmarked Dollars
30m for Estonia, with Lithuania and Latvia getting Dollars 60m and Dollars
45m respectively.
In Estonia Dollars 29m will fund imports for the energy, agriculture,
transport and health sectors (Dollars 7m will cover imported drugs, vaccines
and other medical goods). A large part of Latvia's loan will help assure
heating and electricity this winter with the help of imported fuel oil.
Lithuania's loan will also support energy and medical services and pay for
imported feed grain, protein meal, packaging and chemicals for the dairy
industry.
All three World Bank loans are expected to be co-financed by the
Export-Import Bank of Japan to an amount yet to be determined out of the
total World Bank package for the Baltic. Sweden is also providing aid to
Latvia and Lithuania while Finland is providing a grant to help train local
experts to carry out the technical work involved in administering these
loans.
This is only the start of the World Bank's involvement in the Baltic. It
will soon open an office in Riga to co-ordinate its activities in the
region.
It intends to provide a safety net to ease the social pains of economic
transition; build up a core of mamagement to run a market based economy; and
promote medium-term investments to improve efficiency and protect the
environment, particularly in the energy sector.
In October the London-based European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
agreed to invest Ecu1.5m in the Estonian Investment Bank. This represents a
third of the Estonian bank's capital.
This is the first equity investment made by the EBRD anywhere in central and
eastern Europe. Similar developments can be expected in the other two Baltic
states.
The EBRD has also approved a number of technical cooperation projects in the
Baltic states. These are mainly concerned with preparing plans for the
long-term restructuring of the energy sector.
A total of Ecu1.8m has been allocated for this purpose in Estonia with
Ecu1.7m for a similar project in Lithuania and Ecu1.5m in Latvia. But
consultants have to be selected for these plans.
The European Community itself is also involved in providing direct financial
assistance. This year Estonia received Ecu10m under the Community's Phare
programme to help in privatisation, private sector development and financial
reform, social securtity and gathering statistics. Supplies of wheat for
making bread, barley, wheat flour and sugar have also been sold with the
proceeds going into social welfare provision.
Emergency investment is also being considered. A total of Ecu43.4m would
help to repair Estonia's energy supply and reduce emissions from power
stations and district heating plalnts, finance emergency oil import
facilities and reduce demands for oil and gas. Similar programmes in Latvia
and Lithuania are to receive Ecu37.060m and Ecu 43.100m respectively.
In March, the Nordic countries agreed to create a Baltic Investment
Programme with Ecu75m to develop the private sector in the Baltic states
initially over the next three years. The strategy will be monitored by a
Nordic Baltic investment committee.
The Helsinki-based Nordic Investment Bank is also playing an active role in
financing projects in the Baltic states. Last month it granted its first
loan worth Ecu4.5m to Estonia to help develop small and medium-sized
enterprises. The funds are being channelled through the recently established
Estonian Investment Bank in Tallinn which will be responsible for the
allocation of those funds.
This first Baltic Investment Loan was granted within the framework of a new
Ecu30m loan facility entrusted to the NIB to administer with the Nordic
countries fully guaranteeing the loans. Mr Ulf Hindstrom, the NIB's vice
president, claims there is already a great deal of interest with 60 projects
already in the pipeline.
The NIB has been entrusted with a Ecu5m three-year fund for technical aid to
the investment banks in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. This will provide
support for management and institutional activities
The Helsinki based Nordic Project Fund - established in 1982 to help Nordic
private companies in international activities - is also backing studies in
the Baltic countries through an Ecu5m fund for technical assistance. This
fund is to be administered by the EBRD and no project must exceed FIM700,000
with conditional interest-free loans covering 60 per cent of the cost.
