FT  14 AUG 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Alouette smelter ready for
first shipments
THE ALOUETTE smelter in Quebec is ready to dispatch its first big batch of
aluminium only 36 months after construction started on a greenfield site.
About 4,500 tonnes will be shipped out to Rotterdam for European customers
on August 20.
The smelter, about 850 km (530 miles) north-east of Montreal on the north
shore of the mouth of the St Lawrence river, was brought into production
within a very tight schedule but under the CDollars 1.4bn (Pounds 610m)
budget.
It will produce 70,000 tonnes of metal this year and by December be running
at its full annual capacity of 215,000 tonnes.
The budget included most of the preparation work for a second phase to
double annual output. Mr Otto Niederhofer, president of VAW Aluminium
Canada, said that the partners in the Alouette Consortium were 'broadly in
favour' of going ahead with the expansion. VAW of Germany is technical
manager of the project.
However, present low aluminium prices and uncertainties about aluminium
production in and exports from Russia is holding up a final decision.
Along with VAW, partners in Alouette, each with 20 per cent are: Austria
Metals Hoogovens of the Netherlands; a joint venture between Kobe Steel and
Marubeni of Japan; and SGF (Societe Generale de Financement), the
Quebec-base industrial agency.
While the smelter, which will employ 530 workers, will be one of the lowest
cost - and least polluting - in the world, the partners are giving no
details because Alouette has signed a confidentiality agreement with the
Quebec-owned Hydro Quebec, which is supplying power under a 25-year risk -
and profit-sharing contract. This also covers the second phase of the
project - but only if a decision is made by the end of 1994.
Alouette is among several projects which cost a total of nearly CDollars 4bn
and boosted Canada's primary aluminium production capacity by 26.5 per cent
in 1991 and another 16.5 per cent this year. The country now has about 2m
tonnes of capacity, all but 200,000 tonnes of it in Quebec, drawn to the
province by its abundant low cost, renewable, non-polluting
hydro-electricity.
In the past year 690,000 tonnes of new capacity has come on stream to worsen
the aluminium over-supply situation created by recession in most
industrialised countries and increased Russian exports.
Mr Niederhofer said the partners considered lengthening the schedule for
Alouette's start-up but this would have increased costs substantially.
In any case, most of Alouette's metal would be absorbed by the partners'
downstream activities, mostly in Europe as it is cheaper to ship aluminium
from the smelter to Europe than to truck it to the US.
SGF would retain some metal in Quebec where it wants to encourage new
aluminium fabricating businesses to be set up.
A Venezuelan company, Cabalum, has cleared a site next to the Alouette
smelter for a CDollars 45m aluminium cable plant, but work has been halted
for a year, reportedly because of the cost of financing the venture.
VAW took over management of the smelter project in 1989 after Reynolds
Metals of the US dropped out of the consortium. Now 97 of Alouette's 264
'pots' are working and the smelter is producing 200 tonnes of metal a day.
Mr Niederhofer said that for the smelter to have moved so swiftly to a
smooth start-up was 'amazing', given the numbers of people involved the size
of the project and the remoteness of the region.
