FT  01 MAY 92 / Leading Article: Ever less standing room S9SFOther
Here is an unhappy little scene, played out in Washington on Tuesday. It was
the 43rd meeting of the joint development committee of the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund. Several delegations, including the Dutch,
asked whether something about population growth might perhaps be mentioned,
just as an environmental matter. The counter-attack, led by the Saudis, was
decisive. No reference to possibly the most pressing issue facing the world
was allowed.
A farce with the same script has been enacted during the preparations for
the Earth Summit in Rio. The rich countries want to register the link
between population growth and the destruction of the environment; the poor
do not.
This is absurd. According to yesterday's report from the UN Population Fund
(UNFPA) the planet is about to be overrun by mankind. We are headed for 40
years of the fastest growth in human numbers in history. Never mind the UN's
high or medium projections. On its low curve the world's population will
increase by at least 2 1/2 bn within the lifetimes of present-day university
students. That is the most optimistic forecast. It assumes that fertility
rates will fall to replacement level everywhere tomorrow morning. It is more
sensible to accept the medium expectation, that today's 5.4bn population
will double, to 10bn, by 2050.
Some idea of what this means was stated by Prince Charles last week. 'I
don't, in all logic, see how any society can hope to improve its lot when
population growth exceeds economic growth,' he said. For hundreds of
millions of Indians, Africans and Latin Americans the consequence will be
short lives of poverty and near-starvation. But the rest of us will not get
off lightly. A recent joint report from Britain's Royal Society and
America's National Academy of Sciences, quoted by the prince, described
'unrestrained resource consumption for energy production and other uses' as
likely to lead to 'catastrophic outcomes for the global environment'.
That is what to expect with 5.4bn people trying for higher living standards.
Double the number, and you double the threat. Nor is the global effect - the
one that hits us all - on the environment alone. The social and economic
consequences can already be seen in increased migration: there were 2.8m
refugees in 1976, 17.3m in 1990. Over the next 35 years, western Europe's
indigenous labour force will fall by 14.5m; North Africa's will rise by
56.6m. North America's workforce will not increase, other than by
immigration; Central America's will shoot up, by 50.5m.
That's enough demographic nightmares. The question is, will we see solutions
in the morning? One's first instinct is to get tough. Tell recipient
countries what's what. No family planning plan, no economic assistance. If
aid can be tied - as it increasingly is - to the practice of democracy, why
not tie it to the lessons of demography?
The answer given by contemporary best practitioners is subtle. The strategy
of Britain's Overseas Development Administration is 'children by choice not
chance'; its brochure of that title speaks of enabling women to take greater
control over their lives. The ODA will contribute Pounds 9m to UNFPA
projects this year; the US Agency for International Development shells out
not a cent, owing to a tight reading of a 1985 Congressional amendment to an
aid bill and a misplaced connection between UNFPA and enforced
sterilisations and abortions in China. That ancient quarrel should be
patched up. The AID administration can do it. Meanwhile, the US remains the
world's largest donor of bilateral aid for population programmes, at Dollars
250m this year. It, too, focuses on the status of women.
This is understandable. Women who are educated choose to have fewer
children. Better health and ante-natal services also reduce the voluntary
birth rate. A hard-faced demand from rich countries to poor ones to restrain
population growth would be counter-productive; a willingness to help release
women from constant childbearing and hard labour is broadly acceptable.
Some, however, reject even that. Catholic countries, as in Latin America,
are under the sway of Rome's doctrine on birth control. Can this be right?
Only the Devil could want to destroy the world by overpopulating it. Others,
like Malawi, will not see that there is a problem to be faced. The two
giants have followed different paths. China, with its uniquely harsh
measures, has cut its fertility rate to 2.3 per woman; India, which is
making good progress for a democracy, has only managed to get it down to
4.1.
The focus on womens' rights works well, but a little nudge from big lenders
might also help. In the World Bank's 1991 economic report on India there is
a table devoted to family planning methods and estimates of 'births
averted'. The cumulative total of the latter since 1956 is 136m. That is at
least a start. The Bank could do more, if its members would let it.
