FT  13 NOV 92 / The Autumn Statement - Analysis: Jury is out on whether the
slump will end - Housing
THERE was a welcome among housing professionals and mortgage lenders for the
measures in the chancellor's Autumn Statement to bolster the housing market.
But opinion appeared divided over the likelihood that the package could end
the worst housing slump in a generation.
Last month saw house prices fall 2.7 per cent, according to the Nationwide
building society - following a 1.4 per cent fall in September. This means
that house prices were on average 6.6 per cent lower than in October last
year, with a fall of 27 per cent in real terms since July 1989 and 12 per
cent in nominal terms.
Mr Mark Boleat, director-general of the Council of Mortgage Lenders, said
that the 1 percentage point cut in interest rates would help reduce arrears
and ease repossessions.
'It will also raise demand,' he said. 'Lower interest rates have so far
escaped the public's attention - I expect to see some very attractive offers
from developers and lenders in the next few weeks.
'Buying is now cheaper than renting - and we will see some renters who have
been holding off from entering the housing market making the jump.'
The National Association of Estate Agents described the package as 'a recipe
for recovery'. However, Mr John Wriglesworth, the housing analyst with UBS
Philips and Drew, the stockbroker, was sceptical of the impact that a
further cut in interest rates would have on the housing market.
'Building societies have been offering 8.5 per cent interest rates for a
couple of months now,' he said, 'and house prices have fallen 4 per cent. An
extra 1 percentage point off the rate is unlikely to create a rush towards
the estate agents.'
Mr Wriglesworth cited as the main causes of the continuing fall in house
prices fear of unemployment and fear of the debt trap created by negative
equity. The Bank of England recently estimated that more than 1m homeowners
owed more on their mortgage than the value of their homewere.
He also questioned whether the scheme to spend Pounds 700m on removing
20,000 empty homes from the market would make much impact.
'The numbers sound big, but there are 200,000 empty homes on the market,
70,000 of them repossessed. In any case, many of the repossessed ones are
unsuitable for housing the homeless - either because they are flats for
single people or in the wrong place.
'The market is in total dereliction. The government is sitting in a car with
a flat battery fiddling with the keys. It would be better to get out and
give it a push.'
There was a welcome from housing professionals for the release of local
authority receipts on future sales of council houses for capital spending.
'It is a change of heart on the part of the government which we have been
calling for since the first sales of council houses under the right-to-buy
scheme,' said Shelter, the housing campaign.
'We are disappointed, however, that by only allowing receipts from future
sales to be released, the government has pointedly rejected the opportunity
to free up over Pounds 5bn currently sitting in local authority bank
accounts.'
The Institute of Housing estimated that freeing up future receipts could
produce an additional Pounds 1bn for housing over the next three years.
However, the government plans to reduce the amount it allocates for local
authority capital spending by an estimated Pounds 400m, which will reduce
the net benefit to Pounds 600m.
'In effect housing spending is being brought forward to counter the effects
of the recession,' said the institute's director Mr Peter McGurk.
Funds are also being brought forward to pay for the scheme to buy up the
20,000 empty properties. This is not new money, but is part of the funds
allocated in the next two years to the Housing Corporation, the quango which
finances housing association homes.
This appears to break the government's manifesto commitment to spend Pounds
6bn over the next three years on building extra houses. The level of subsidy
to housing associations for building homes for rent will be cut from 75 per
cent of costs to 67 per cent.
But the chancellor appeared confident that cheaper land prices, lower
tenders from hard-pressed building contractors and reduced interest rates
will allow housing associations to build the 153,000 homes promised.
'It's good news for 20,000 families in desperate housing need,' said Mr Jim
Coulter, director of the National Federation of Housing Associations. 'The
cash for 1993-94 has been cut in line with falling costs, but it will still
allow housing associations to start the 50,000 homes previously announced.'
