FT  11 JAN 92 / Travel: Miami: twice as nice, without vice - A haven of
civilisation on Florida's coastline
A LONG week-end in Florida? The suggestion whipped up apathy, with visions
of sweaty queues at Disney World, Epcot and Orlando airport. In north Miami?
Images of innocent vulgarity changed into headlines proclaiming a violent,
drug-ridden, racially-troubled hispanic sanctuary.
Then I read the small print: to the name of Turnberry Isle Yacht and Country
Club was appended: 'A Rafael Resort.' I have only met Georg Rafael once, and
that briefly. But my respect has mounted with the reputation, and some
personal experience, of the 11 superb hotels he has created in just five
years.
The handful dotted through continental Europe, such as Geneva's Hotel du
Rhone and Dusseldorf's Breidenbacher Hof, together with the Mark, on New
York's Madison Avenue, have set the tone - mostly smallish,
once-grand-and-famous establishments, restored to under-stated elegance,
discreet, little advertised yet increasingly chosen by choosy globe-trotters
who spread the word by mouth.
Turnberry Isle offered the chance to sample one of the six Rafael holiday
retreats, the others being scattered in Asia and the Pacific. Half-an-hour's
freeway drive from Miami airport, the handsome complex was wrapped around
courtyards, swimming pools and al fresco eating. The surrounding miles-long
green vistas, stretching to clutches of yacht marinas and condominiums, were
quite unrelated to the overblown, bizarre palaces lining Miami Beach, ten
miles to the south, and to the area of highest-risk streets east of the
airport.
In fact, Turnberry's semi-rural setting dispelled notions of enforced
confinement prompted by its blurb's description of 'exclusive Aventura' as
'an enclave'. In fact it occupies getting on for half of Aventura district's
785 acres, which were swampland 20 years ago before being transformed into a
haven for the affluent.
Though guards man main gates, only quiet, unfenced roads border the two vast
golf courses that encircle the hotel-cum-country-club building. These two
championship 7,000-yard courses, predominently flat with only gentle,
man-made undulations but lots of water, plus 24 tennis courts (18 lit for
night play), a spa, and a marina, beach facilities and yacht club only a
shuttle bus ride away, do indeed provide many of the customers with a
one-stop holiday.
We, however, had plans for forays downtown in pursuit of a special treat
whose flavour, but not location, I vividly recalled from many years ago -
stone crabs. That, the locals said, must have been at Joe's, and be there by
six or you will have to queue. En route to this southernmost extremity of
the Beach, there were distractions to smooth away preconceptions of Miami's
harshness.
Bal Harbour embraces, surely, one of the most stylish shopping malls in a
country that specialises in them, bringing together the cream of US and
European up-market stores and designers. Beyond, the flamboyance of the
opulent apartment blocks and hotels lining the famous shoreline gives way to
the stucco friezes, ornamental plasterwork, pinnacles and finials that
compose the Art Deco district.
Our Saturday evening at Joe's Stone Crab Restaurant turned out to be
fortuitous, for next day the restaurant was to close for Miami's off-season,
the waiters dispersing till October. The menu had an arm-long selection of
seafood, but nearly everyone seemed to order the delicious crabs which come
from the waters of the Florida Keys.
The architecture of Miami is one of its greatest delights, and not just for
the oddity of Art Deco. The main other styles, 'Cracker' and 'Mediterranean
Revival,' would be worth a day to themselves in the Coconut Grove and Coral
Gables areas. But we could not give them that. Anyway, we got diverted in
Coconut Grove by the agreeable scene at Monty's Raw Bar.
Here the convivial Sunday afternoon crowd sat in the sun, sipping and
munching, tapping their feet to West Indian rhythms, watching the deep-sea
fishing boats coming and going and little girls holding their skirts while
they bobbed in front of the guitarist. No one looked like mugging anyone or
starting a riot.
We would have liked to have soared over the Rickenbacker bridge to Key
Biscayne, sample the pavement cafes of Coconut Grove, see more of the
vernacular houses around the university in Coral Gables, stay for one of the
many festivals, visit the Playhouse Theatre, eat Cuban food, study the art
of the local artists.
A long week-end in Florida? It wasn't nearly long enough.
At Turnberry Isle, daily room rates are upwards of Dollars 245 (Pounds 134)
and suites Dollars 360-Dollars 1,350 to late May. They drop to Dollars 125
and Dollars 200-Dollars 950 in the low summer season. Everything else is
extra, including the sports facilities. Green fee and caddycar for hotel
guests: about Dollars 65 in winter, Dollars 44 in summer.
