FT  04 FEB 92 / Government Bonds: German bunds slide after early gains on
pay deal
NEWS yesterday of a pay deal for German steelworkers pushed German
government bonds down and out of their recent trading range yesterday in
heavy volume. At the opening, news that a compromise had been reached,
averting the threat of a strike after the uncertainty of recent weeks,
pushed up bunds, with the March contract on Liffe opening higher at 88.18.
But details of the deal, when they emerged, quickly changed sentiment. Some
aspects seemed to suggest that the deal will have little application to the
current German pay round: the full 6.4 per cent pay rise does not take
effect until this autumn, and applies only to 130,000 workers.
However, the market was not slow to grasp the underlying message, that the
Bundesbank's upper limit for pay rises of 6 per cent could well prove to be
a floor for future deals. That pushed back hopes of an interest rate cut
this spring.
Bunds held up well in early trading, hardly testing the floor of 88.03 above
which the Liffe futures contract has been trading recently. At one stage,
the futures had risen to 88.32. However, in early afternoon trade the market
moved swiftly down to breach its technical support level. It eventually fell
to 87.87.
FEARS of supply in the coming weeks haunted the UK government bond market
yesterday, though gilts remained generally firm. After recent issuance,
traders were left guessing whether the Bank of England would choose to fund
next year's needs in advance, and if so, at what maturity.
Guesses were split between issuance at the short end on the one hand, and a
smattering of issues across short, medium and long maturities on the other.
Only the ten-year level, where there has been a recent issue, is clear of
the threat of immediate supply. In light trading, the benchmark gilt
maturing in 2003/07 moved up  1/32 at 115 27/32 , for a yield of 9.395 per
cent.
IN THIN trading, Japanese government bonds closed marginally down on the
day. With the next interest rate cut already fully discounted by the market,
traders said little new economic news was likely to set a new direction for
the market until the next Tankan survey of industrial expectations, due a
month from now.
Meanwhile, the Ministry of Finance announced measures aimed at supporting
the flagging Japanese stock markets, leading to some switching into
equities. The benchmark no 129, which opened at a yield of 5.33 per cent,
closed at its low of the day of 5.37 per cent.
US Treasuries were weighed by concern about Wednesday's Treasury refund ing
announcement and failed to post gains yesterday morning in spite of signs of
continued weakness in the manufacturing sector.
In late trading, the Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond was  5/16 lower at
102 5/32 yielding 7.81 per cent, while shorter-dated maturities posted
slimmer losses.
The Federal Reserve entered the open market to arrange three-day matched
sales when Fed funds were trading at 3 15/16 per cent. Although the move was
unexpected, it was seen as a technical measure to address a daily drain
need.
Treasuries firmed briefly yesterday morning on news that US construction
spending had fallen 0.2 per cent in December when most economists expected
an increase of 0.5 per cent. Also, the purchasing managers report for
January provided further evidence of an eroding economy.
But the overriding concern of the bond market remains the amount of
financing required by the government, to be announced on Wednesday.
In the high-yield junk bond market, Macy was one of the few active issues
yesterday morning. The company's 14.5 per cent subordinated debentures rose
about  3/4 point on rumours that Mr Laurence Tisch, CBS chairman, might make
a second takeover bid for the retailer.
Macy filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection last week after a bid by Mr
Tisch failed.
