FT  07 OCT 92 / Banking payments delays to be eliminated by 1995
A RADICAL overhaul of the UK's banking payments system, aimed at reducing
the risk of a domino effect if a bank collapses, was announced yesterday by
Mr Robin Leigh-Pemberton, governor of the Bank of England.
Delays in the settlement of big payments between the clearing banks are
planned to be eliminated by 1995. At the moment, large value payments
between banks, which are carried out through Chaps, the Clearing House
Automated Payments System, take place only at the end of each business day.
The Bank of England believes this delay in settlement of interbank payments
is one of the most worrying flaws in the banking system.
Only substantial interbank payments - as opposed to the transfer of funds
linked to the clearance of cheques for personal customers - will be affected
by the reform. If a bank were to run into financial difficulties now and was
unable to make its end-of-day payments to other banks, those other banks
could also run into severe financial difficulties.
Mr Leigh-Pemberton said: 'Intra-day exposures (between banks) can be massive
 -sometimes exceeding the capital of the banks concerned.'
Three years ago Mr Leigh-Pemberton encouraged the banks to work on a way of
reducing their exposure to each other. The best way was to introduce a 'real
time gross settlement system', said Mr Leigh-Pemberton at the payments
systems international conference in London.
Members of Chaps are this year introducing limits on the size of their
exposures through the payments system to individual banks. However, the Bank
of England believes this should only be a temporary solution because it
could have adverse effects on bank customers.
At the moment, any non-bank institution receiving a big payment through the
banking system can receive the funds as soon as the transfer order has been
placed. For example, if a customer of Midland pays Pounds 100m to a Barclays
customer, Barclays may credit the funds to its customer as soon as it
receives the order, even though it will not actually receive the funds from
Midland until the end of the day.
However, if Barclays were to breach its limit on the amount of intra-day
credit it can give to Midland, it might delay transferring the funds to its
customer.
Editorial Comment, Page 18
