FT  28 FEB 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Chile's giant copper mine to
boost production
LA ESCONDIDA, the giant copper mine in the Atacama desert owned by BHP of
Australia, RTZ and a group of Japanese smelters, plans to step up its annual
production by 25 per cent and process the extra 80,000 tonnes into pure
copper cathodes using a revolutionary technique that does not require
smelting.
Mr John Hannah, La Escondida's president, said the open-cast mine would
continue producing copper concentrates, a semi-refined product, to meet
long-term contracts with smelters in Japan and Europe. La Escondida
currently produces the equivalent of 320,000 tonnes of pure copper a year in
the form of concentrates. It is the second-biggest copper mine in the world
after Chuquicamata, also in Chile.
Mr Hannah said the feasibility study for the extra output would be completed
by mid-year. 'If the study shows that the expansion is commercially viable,
construction could start as early as September,' he said at a news
conference in Santiago. La Escondida's expansion plans, which come just 15
months after the mine became operative, will require an investment of
Dollars 200m. It will be financed from the company's cash-flows, Mr Hannah
said.
The company is testing its innovative method to obtain refined copper at a
pilot plant beside Coloso, its loading port just south of Antofagasta. It is
a hydrometallurgical process that dissolves the copper concentrate in a
solution with ammonia. An electric current is then passed through the
solution, which causes the copper to precipitate.
Mr Hannah said the cathode plant was a non-polluting alternative to
conventional smelting and refining. It will also be much cheaper than having
to build a smelter. La Escondida decided to embark on the production of
refined copper, he said, because it was a more marketable commodity than
copper concentrates.
If all goes to plan, the cathode plant could be ready by mid-1994. Mr Hannah
believes it will be the only plant of its kind in the world. La Escondida is
in the process of patenting its new technique.
At the mine itself, located 180 km (110 miles) south-east of Antofagasta,
the capacity of the concentrating plant will have to be expanded to deal
with the extra output. Negotiations are also under way with power generating
companies in northern Chile to ensure the supply of extra electricity for
the cathode plant.
The expansion plans do not come as a surprise. The mine sits on the richest
copper deposit in the world. Its geological reserves of 1.8bn tonnes could
keep it productive well into the 22nd century. The ore is also very rich in
copper, which allows La Escondida to have one of the lowest production costs
in the world.
Management and union leaders at El Teniente, the troubled copper mine owned
by Codelco, the Chilean Copper Corporation, were meeting yesterday in an
attempt to break the impasse over an unpopular redundancy scheme. Work has
returned to normal after Monday's wildcat strikes, but copper workers are
threatening more protest actions unless 100 colleagues who were sacked at
the weekend are reinstated.
Codelco says it needs to shed 800 jobs at El Teniente to reduce overmanning.
It currently employs 9,400 workers at its second-largest division, which
last year produced 278,765 tonnes of copper, about a quarter of Codelco's
total output. The corporation said yesterday that production costs had
almost doubled in six years - it now cost 75 US cents to produce a lb of
copper. El Teniente's future was in jeopardy unless it succeeded in
streamlining the operation now.
Union leaders, meanwhile, have called for an 'emergency congress' of the
Copper Workers Union to discuss the threat of redundancies and a
controversial law that will allow Codelco to sell surplus mining property
and form joint ventures with private mining companies. In the minds of
copper miners, these two issues are linked.
