FT  26 SEP 92 / Hong Kong protests over armed confrontation at sea
HONG KONG protested to China yesterday over an armed confrontation between
marine officers from both sides on a fishing boat in Hong Kong waters, the
Government Information Service (GIS) said, Reuter reports from Hong Kong.
The Hong Kong Political Adviser's office summoned a representative of the
New China News Agency, China's de facto embassy in the British colony, to
express 'grave concern over an incursion which took place in Hong Kong
waters and the dangerous behaviour of the Chinese officers involved.'
The GIS said police received a report that a fishing vessel inside Hong Kong
waters had been boarded by a number of armed Chinese officers after it had
been stopped by a Chinese security forces vessel.
When Hong Kong police boarded the fishing boat they were surprised by three
Chinese police officers who threatened them and confiscated film when they
tried to photograph the incident.
The stand-off, near Waglan Island in southeast Hong Kong, lasted nearly two
hours.
It ended when the Chinese officers returned to their speedboat and left for
Chinese waters.
No shots were fired and there were no injuries.
Earlier, government-run RTHK radio said armed Chinese security men boarded a
Hong Kong police launch and confiscated a film the police were making of a
speedboat towing another vessel.
The waters around the British colony have this year become increasingly
dangerous for shipping after 13 armed incursions and at least 14 raids on
ships bound for Vietnam. Nearly all the incidents involved Chinese gunboats.
Relations between Hong Kong and China, traditionally wary, have further
soured over financing plans for a new airport in the colony and the issue of
greater democracy for Hong Kong ahead of its 1997 return to Chinese
sovereignty.
Governor Chris Patten has abandoned the diplomatic approach of his
predecessors and openly attacked China's foot-dragging on the airport.
He has not commented on the incursions which officials said were apparently
not officially sanctioned.
