FT  16 APR 92 / Survey of Swindon (9): Nerve centre for advance into Europe
 -Profile: Motorola
MOTOROLA, the US-owned electronics and telecommunications manufacturing
group, has made Swindon the nerve centre of its drive to profit from the
next advance in mobile communications. This, in essence, will make the
mobile telephone internationally transportable. Calls on an international
handset can be made anywhere in Europe and billed back home.
The mobile cellular communications systems established in many European
countries during the 1980s - such as Cellnet in the UK - are based upon
analogue radio technology for which different national standards operate. As
a result, a cellular telephone from one country will not usually work in
another.
But for the next generation of mobile telephones, most European countries
have agreed a common standard based upon digital radio technology.
The new pan-European GSM (global system of mobile communications) standard,
as well as allowing the user to roam abroad, also offers better speech
quality and supports more subscribers for a given allocation of the radio
spectrum.
Motorola in Swindon, led by Mr David Hughes, general manager Europe, is
charged with carrying forward this new advance while also continuing to
service the requirements of its analogue customer base. Swindon has overall
management responsibility for developing the new GSM pan-European market and
also manufactures the radio frequency base stations required to pick up the
signal. More than Pounds 30m has been invested in the Swindon site for the
project.
An interesting development also being master-minded from Swindon is
Motorola's exploitation of the new markets in eastern Europe. Former Soviet
bloc countries are still using landline copper wire telephone systems.
Motorola has been offering a number of these countries proven analogue radio
technology as a rapid way of modernising their telecommunications at
reasonable cost.
While it may make sense, on the face of it, to leapfrog and adopt the GSM
standard straight away, the radio frequencies required are invariably held
by the military. Also, for some of these countries, digital radio technology
is still subject to Cold War trade restrictions.
