FT  29 FEB 92 / Books: Dredging up Dreyfus
DREYFUS: A FAMILY AFFAIR 1789-19 45 by Michael Burns Chatto &amp; Windus Pounds
20, 572 pages
THE JEW ACCUSED: THREE ANTI-SEMITIC AFFAIRS 1894-1914 by Albert S. Lindemann
Cambridge Pounds 24.95, 311 pages
FRANCE IN the 19th century seemed a promised land for its Jews. At the time
of the revolution in 1789, the majority of French Jews had lived in Alsace.
Here they were barred from living in the largest cities, their occupations
were strictly limited and they were subject to special taxes.
These discriminatory laws were swept away with the old regime. In 1791 Jews
became citizens, equal with all other Frenchmen. More than this, the
progress of French commerce and industry opened opportunities for Jews
possessed with ambition and armed with cash.
Generations of the Dreyfus family had both. By the 1870's, the family's
position was secure enough for Alfred to forsake commerce and devote himself
to his country. He joined the army in the wake of France's military
humiliation in the Franco-Prussian war. There he pursued the revolutionary
promise of a career open to talent. But if 19th-century France was good for
the Jews, some people wondered whether the Jews were good for France.
Parisian shopkeepers and small businessmen were threatened by economic
depression in the 1880's. Catholic control of education was attacked by
anti-clerical republicans. Anti-Semites encouraged both groups to attribute
their misfortunes to the corrupt and Jew-ridden conditions of life under the
Third Republic.
The Jewish conspiracy appeared to be confirmed in 1894. Alfred Dreyfus, the
Jewish super-patriot, was disgraced as a traitor. His alleged crime was
selling military secrets to the German government. Dreyfus's trial was
accompanied by a campaign of anti-Semitism. His guilt was arrived at by a
process that combined conspiracy, prejudice and blunder. But five years
later, thanks to the efforts of his brother Mathieu and the honesty of
isolated French officers, Alfred was set free.
The Dreyfus Affair crystallised the opposing forces in French political
life: Catholics and anti-clericals, monarchists and republicans, socialists
and the military, battled over Alfred's fate. Their hopes and fears for
France were poured into the man.
Historians have followed contemporaries in preferring Dreyfus the symbol to
Dreyfus the man. Michael Burns redresses the balance. He has written an
account not only of Alfred Dreyfus but of his family as it rode the
vicissitudes of French history between revolution and liberation.
Half a century after Alfred was first accused, his grand-daughter Madeleine,
a worker in the French resistance, perished in Auschwitz. Burns wants us to
find in the Dreyfus case a training ground for the more deadly assault on
the French Republic and Dreyfus's descendants perpetrated by the Vichy
regime. But the contrast between Madeleine's fate and Alfred's underlines
the differences, not the similarities, between the circumstances they
confronted and the choices they were offered.
This contrast is reinforced by Albert Lindemann's stimulating study of The
Jew Accused. Apart from the Dreyfus Affair, Lindemann focuses on two other
trials before the First World War in which Jews were falsely accused of
terrible crimes. In Kiev, Mendel Beilis was charged and acquitted of the
ritual murder of a Christian boy. In Alabama, Leo Frank was lynched in the
belief that he murdered a young woman who resisted his sexual advances.
In view of his subject matter Lindemann's optimistic conclusions are
surprising, but they are also convincing. He is at his best on the Dreyfus
Affair. For as he says, what is most significant is that Dreyfus was
released, pardoned and, finally, vindicated. The Affair culminated with the
forces of anti-Republicanism and anti-Semitism in defeat and disarray.
