FT  11 AUG 92 / Arts: Functional fittings and fixtures
PINNING modern sculpture to office blocks as though it were costume
jewellery was a misalliance contracted in the Sixties. The idea of
compensating for the elimination of decoration and ornament from Modernist
architecture seemed to turn into a desperate bid to humanise bleak urban
piazzas of concrete and glass. All too often, the result was to dehumanise
what might elsewhere have been deemed perfectly good art.
The past decade has seen a shift towards a more subtle integration of art in
the environment. This new kind of public art, although less 'heroic' in
intention than monumental sculpture, has a far better chance of success.
Developers and planners are inviting the best of contemporary sculptors,
craftsmen and designers to turn their talents towards the functional: the
fixtures and fittings of our urban and rural landscapes. Railings, fences,
gates, benches, bollards, bridges, planters, paving, playgrounds. . . the
list is surprisingly long. The solutions are unexpectedly various.
Applied art in public places is the subject of the Crafts Council's current
exhibition, 'The Furnished Landscape'. It focuses on several schemes and
works that have already been commissioned across the country, largely
through 'Percent for Art' initiatives, plus recent pieces yet to be placed.
It argues a convincing case for encouraging collaboration among
artists/craftsmen, architects, planners, engineers and, more cautiously, the
community.
Britain has been slow on the uptake. In the US, Philadelphia boasts more
sculpture than any other city, thanks to the privately-funded and
public-spirited Fairmount Park Art Association (FPAA) which was founded in
1872.
The city launched a pioneering per-cent scheme as long ago as 1959, under
which 1 per cent of the cost of construction work on Redevelopment Authority
land was to be spent on works of art.
By 1980, the FPAA was inviting the likes of Siah Armajani, Dan Flavin and
Robert Irwin to propose schemes for improving specific inner-city sites in
Philadelphia; in 1986, it was asking for proposals for creatively lighting
the city. (A comparable scheme with light installations by 30 European
artists will transform Edinburgh from October 22 until January 4.)
Public art in the US has always tended to have a social conscience. The
sculptor Isamu Noguchi, for instance, began designing playgrounds as early
as 1933, although the first was only built in 1975.
A notion of what might be called serviceable sculpture took root. It is
represented in the exhibition most impressively by a model of one of the
American Dan Graham's large outdoor pavilions constructed out of clear and
reflecting glass, structures that continue to intrigue, surprise and delight
as one walks in and around them.
The show is, however, more concerned with the useful. Of all the avant-garde
sculpture-cum-furniture by Scott Burton (steel), Marc Camille Chaimovicz
(steel, teak and granite), Paul de Monchaux (St Bees sandstone) and Floris
van den Broecke (glass reinforced polyester), Rod Arad's stainless-steel
armchair, 'Big Easy Volume II', stands out not only for its lack of
Modernist streamlining, but by aiming to be user-friendly. 'If you can't do
a chair that's more comfortable than the last one,' Arad is quoted as
saying, 'it isn't worth doing.'
Given the English tradition of apparently artless 'natural' gardening, where
landscape is moulded and then enhanced by all manner of Picturesque follies
rich in allusion, it is not surprising that so much here looks well in the
rural landscape.
Jim Partridge and Liz Walmsley's pleasing rough-hewn walkway in Grizedale
forest, small footbridge in Argyll and a rustic bench, and Howard Bowcott's
Oak Leaf seat in Gwynedd, re-invent the formal language of the Picturesque
and its harmony with Nature. The lettering of Richard Kindersley and that
commissioned by Ian Hamilton Finlay from Creative Letterwork, takes up its
literary allusions.
De Monchaux's smooth and Moore-ish slab of sandstone, 250 million years old,
is as much landmark as bench. Richard La Trobe-Bateman's taut, minimalist
green oak and stainless-steel wire footbridges also combine a Modernist
aesthetic with natural materials.
It is with the urban landscape that these artists and craftsmen undoubtedly
face their greatest challenge. The Victorians proved adept designers of
street furniture, but they were not obliged to temper anything of the scale
of London's Canary Wharf development. Some of the most exciting work in the
show was commissioned for this, the world's biggest commercial development,
by Olympia &amp; York.
Bruce Maclean's railings are almost anarchic in the way their frenzied
calligraphic lines and floating spheres defy the regular geometries of the
office blocks behind. The fact that they are one-off and hand-made is
defiant in itself. Guiseppe Lund's railings are more Art Nouveau than
abstract expressionist, but here what looks like convolvulus is rising up
and encircling the railing posts with its insidious stems.
John Maine's faceted granite end-posts and highly sculptural cast-iron
bollards were commissioned by the London Borough of Lewisham as part of its
comprehensive redevelopment of the town centre.
Elsewhere we find images of, say, mosaics inserted into paving in Sheffield,
or banners hanging between the columns of Nottingham Town Hall which gave
the community an opportunity to personalise its own surroundings.
There is humour too. A particularly engaging finale is Jon Mills' whimsical
'Weatherplane' created for Burford School - a weathervane Biggles-style. The
forged steel plane comes hurtling through the air, propeller spinning, flags
fluttering and its begoggled bird pilot aghast. It has to be said that
committees often make lousy patrons; here there is plenty of evidence to the
contrary.
'The Furnished Landscape' continues at the Crafts Council, 44a Pentonville
Road, Islington, London N1, until August 23. The Crafts Council is happy to
provide advice and help to organisations or individuals interested in
commissioning art or craft work.
Tel: (071) 278 7700
