FT  19 NOV 92 / Survey of Lancashire (1): Waiting and worrying - Lancashire
faces an economic reconstruction during the 1990s. Previously cushioned by
its defence industries, now threatened by the new world order, its prospects
depend crucially on the EFA
ACCORDING to Ms Gillian Beeley, Lancashire is one of Britain's great
secrets. About 43 per cent of the workforce is in manufacturing, most of it
high technology. The worry at present is of the secret being carried to an
early grave.
It is not so much the recession, but the end of the cold war, for much of
the industry is in the defence sector, and most of that is aerospace,
accounting for 21,000 jobs and 34 per cent of the county's manufacturing
output. No other county in Britain has more jobs in the aerospace industry.
Lancashire has one-eighth of the national total.
It does not stop there. Mechanical and electrical engineering between them
account for another 15 per cent of output, rubber and plastics another 5 per
cent. These sectors depend heavily on aerospace for work, making 54 per cent
of the local economy vulnerable in some way to the international recession
and changes being wrought by the new world order.
Just how things have changed from the county's traditional image is shown by
only 6 per cent of output now coming from textiles. Footwear and cloth,
another traditional Lancashire sector, produces only 4 per cent now.
Chemicals, food and drink, paper and publishing, are all bigger industries.
Past official secrecy and geography help explain why Lancashire's transition
to a place at the leading edge of technology has remained relatively unsung.
The county is on the periphery of England, with many communities dotted
about the hills, dales and moors of the western Pennines. This made it
difficult either to reach or bomb in the second world war, but comparative
remoteness has also limited national perceptions today.
As Ms Beeley, deputy director of East Lancashire chamber of commerce, points
out, few appreciate that the letter B in the RB211 jet engine stands for
Barnoldswick, the small town between Pendle Hill and the Yorkshire Dales
where Rolls Royce has one of its most advanced factories.
Today, the future of the European Fighter Aircraft (EFA) - a joint venture
between Britain, Germany, Italy and Spain - dominates Lancashire's
prospects. Germany has left EFA out of next year's national defence budget
and its future is in doubt as the other partners look at ways to trim costs
and manage on their own.
The second prototype sits in a hangar at Warton aerodrome near Blackpool.
The first is in Germany and is supposed to fly first. The Lancashire
aircraft has been towed out and has revved up its twin Rolls Royce EFA EJ200
engines on local television, as though challenging the reluctant Germans to
take off.
Lancashire needs EFA to carry on where production of the war-proven Tornado
will leave off. There are worries about the latter, too, with an order from
Saudi Arabia awaited, but EFA is Lancashire's future.
Mr Michael Hynes, managing director of Lancashire Enterprises says as many
as 40,000 local jobs probably hinge on it. 'Many companies have already
tooled up for EFA sub-contract work,' he says. 'They had to invest well in
advance to be sure of the work. They cannot just switch to something else.'
Lancashire Enterprises, which was set up 10 years ago as the economic
development arm of Lancashire County Council, is now an independent regional
agency, having privatised itself by flotation when the government stopped
local authorities from trading.
It cut its teeth on large local casualties of the 1980-82 recession, such as
the withdrawal of Turner and Newall (now the T&amp;N group) from the centre of
Lancaster, the collapse of the Fleetwood fishing industry, and decimation of
the footwear, leather and textiles industries in the Rossendale Valley.
Mr Jim Mason, Lancashire Enterprises' chairman, says: 'We are in the
unemployment business. We know a lot about it; how to avoid it, how to fight
it. The Lancashire economy will be devastated if EFA stops. From our very
extensive experience of this sort of work, we can't see it being possible to
regenerate the regional economy for at least a decade if EFA goes down.' Ms
Beeley says: 'It's jobs lost, rather than unemployment, that matters,
because of difficulties in ever being able to re-employ or re-use skills
that go with the jobs concerned. We are talking of 3,000 in Blackburn, 2,200
in Burnley and 2,000 in Pendle.'
Even if it were possible for people to move, the scale of exodus from these
small towns would cause domestic property markets to collapse, leaving
widespread dereliction and local economies ruined. In any event, national
recession inhibits mobility. The large numbers involved are also their own
argument against solving the problem by inward investment or trying to grow
small businesses to fill the gap.
In spite of these threats, much of Lancashire's industry and commerce has
weathered recession. Mr Jim McKinstry, director of the East Lancashire
chamber, says some companies in export markets such as carpet-making
machinery, have been 'laughing all the way to the bank.'
A survey last month of 300 companies in the county by Latham Crossley and
Davis, a leading indigenous Lancashire firm of accountants based in the new
town of Chorley, showed 80 per cent confident of upturn within nine months.
Three-quarters believe north-west England as a whole would be better placed
than the south-east to take advantage of recovery when it happens.
The names of some of the companies located in Lancashire give a clue to the
county's success in resisting recession: ICI chemicals and polymers at
Fleetwood, Baxi, the gas fires and central heating boiler manufacturer at
Preston, Crown Eyeglass, the spectacles manufacturer at Blackburn, where the
Scapa Group of specialist-niche engineering companies is also based.
Defence spending has also cushioned Lancashire, just as cutbacks threaten it
now. The role of giants such as British Aerospace and Rolls Royce is obvious
but more than 50 other substantial, highly skilled businesses are part of a
widespread, interdependent, intertrading network.
This base of sound, well-run companies did well for the county in the latter
half of the 1980s, when unemployment in the Clitheroe travel-to-work area
fell at one stage to 3 per cent - or full employment, for all practical
purposes.
Recession has bitten, but in some places the effect has yet to show much in
the statistics. Clitheroe's jobless rate had risen to 4.9 per cent by the
time Britain left the ERM in September but Burnley's, at 8.8 per cent was
only 0.4 percentage points worse than in July 1989.
Lancashire as a county reported 8.6 per cent unemployment in September,
compared with 10.8 per cent for north-west England and 9.9 per cent for
Britain as a whole.
This has produced an interesting reversal of previous north-south divide
conventions. 'Everyone is checking up very carefully on whom they do
business with because of the risk of giving credit to someone who is put
into liquidation before they can pay you,' Mr McKinstry says.
'The majority of the companies most at risk these days are in the
south-east. You have to be very careful about accepting non-cash customers
from that part of the country,' he adds.
This is no cause for complacency. Whether or not EFA survives, Lancashire
has too many eggs in one basket; long term, it must spread its risks. Better
infrastructure is seen as crucial.
Improved roads have cut the journey to Manchester to half an hour. Mr
McKinstry says extension of the M65 across the moors to Leeds would open
high technology skills to West Yorkshire's diverse opportunities and improve
access to the Humber ports.
He also echoes a widening northern view: the channel tunnel will be
irrelevant to most northern businesses; Mr McKinstry believes they would do
better from an improved west coast main railway line and a second runway at
Manchester Airport.
