FT  05 DEC 92 / Finance and the Family: On the right side of the law -
Expatriates
FEW expatriates doubt the undesirability of falling foul of British tax law.
For most, the certainties end there. But how do you become liable to UK tax
and what are your duties then? What means do the Inland Revenue have to
enforce the law - or as it is more frequently expressed, 'how will they
know?'
People who are neither resident nor domiciled in Britain pay income tax only
on certain types of UK source income, and inheritance tax on UK-based
assets. At the other end of the scale, permanent residents are liable to tax
on world-wide income, gains and assets. In between are various degrees of
liability according to which status of UK resident, ordinarily resident or
domiciled, applies.
The British tax system operates principally on trust. Consequently, if you
are liable to income tax or capital gains tax, you are required respectively
by sections 7 and 11A of the Taxes Management Act 1970 to declare that. When
you do so, you will be issued with a tax return requiring you to certify
that the particular information given is correct and complete. You should
consider these obligations in the light of the dictum that 'ignorance of the
law excuses no-one'.
In most cases, what needs to be declared on your tax return is self evident.
But that is not always so, a fact which caused the Keith Committee report on
the enforcement powers of the Revenue departments to recommend that
taxpayers should be required to give the Inland Revenue details of any item
in respect of which they had 'taken the benefit of any doubt.' While heavy
criticism prevented this particular proposal from being enacted, the fact
remains that great care must be taken in all cases where doubts exist.
When deciding whether or not you need to declare any particular item you
must, of course, have regard to the precise terms of the legislation
concerned. Nor can you ignore the Inland Revenue's stated interpretation of
it - even though this may be disputed by tax practitioners.
Cases involving those who bought offshore personal bonds, and have
subsequently become UK residents, frequently provide examples of both
points.
In the teeth of opposition from many tax advisers, the Inland Revenue claims
it has the power to 'look through' such bonds and assess the individual on
the underlying income, even though in the year concerned he takes no
benefits. In these circumstances, failing to make a declaration would be
unwise.
Nevertheless, some bondholders may be tempted to pursue this course on the
grounds that their circumstances are covered by one of the two exemptions
available. But these exclusions apply only if the board is satisfied.
However, once you have made a complete and correct return, your duties are
at an end. Consequently, if the Inspector of Taxes charges too little tax
or, indeed, fails to assess you at all, the law does not require you to
prompt him. Bear in mind, though, that knowingly to retain an excessive
repayment of tax brought about by an error of fact - ie a mistake in your
sums as opposed to an incorrect application of the law - could be a criminal
offence.
Not surprisingly, the Inland Revenue does not make a point of publicising
its monitoring procedures, although some aspects, for example the reporting
to them of claims made under double taxation treaties or where offshore
settlements are formed for non-UK domiciliaries by British advisers, are
well known. It seems highly unlikely that any attempt is made to monitor
that factor which is so important for the determination of residence status
 -the periods which expatriates spend in the UK.
There can be little doubt that, if expatriates are minded to evade the law,
they are presented with more opportunities to do so without discovery than
UK residents. It must be said, though, that simple failure to appreciate
what the law requires is also likely to be greater.
Declaring what you need to declare and no more is no easy task. On the other
hand, failing to keep within the law of the country where you live or intend
to live has little to recommend it. While the Inland Revenue's powers of
'discovery' in relation to incomplete Returns, or the levying of interest
and penalties in cases of fraudulent or negligent conduct, failures or
errors, will no doubt serve to concentrate the mind, you may think there is
a more important factor: the ability to sleep at night.
Donald Elkin is a director of Wilfred T. Fry Ltd of Worthing, West Sussex.
