FT  15 APR 92 / Creditor confident on O&amp;Y exposure
CANADIAN Imperial Bank of Commerce, Olympia &amp; York's biggest creditor, is
confident that the property developer's troubles will have only a limited
impact on its earnings, the bank's chairman said yesterday.
Mr Donald Fullerton said that at the worst, CIBC's exposure to O&amp;Y was 'not
of a size that's going to take more than a bite out of our earnings'. Mr
Fullerton added that all the Canadian banks, four of which have large
exposures to O&amp;Y, are in a 'reasonably strong position' compared with the
early 1980s when several of them were hit by the Third World debt crisis and
by loans to troubled western Canadian energy companies.
CIBC, Canada's second biggest bank, is believed to have an exposure to the
property developer of around CDollars 1bn (Pounds 477.5m). In 1991, it made
after-tax profits of CDollars 811m.
Mr Fullerton declined to discuss the details of O&amp;Y's negotiations with its
100 banks. Other bankers said they did not have enough information from O&amp;Y
to decide if they could accept the company's proposal to defer payments of
interest and principal on USDollars 5bn (Pounds 2.83bn) of loans to the
parent company and defer principal payments on a further USDollars 7bn of
property loans.
O&amp;Y met all the banks on Monday and will now negotiate with 12 smaller
groups. At noon yesterday, lenders to O&amp;Y's UK Canary Wharf office project
met in Toronto for their first detailed discussions.
Bankers said that before they agree to defer interest or provide new funds
to O&amp;Y, they need information on loans provided by other banks, which they
have not yet received. One banker said he could not decide whether it was
fair for his bank to provide new money until he had details of other banks'
existing loans, the security on them and the destination of those loans.
Bankers said it would take 'years' to complete the restructuring of O&amp;Y's
loans. All O&amp;Y could hope for in the next 90 days, they said, was an
agreement to provide Pounds 100m for work to continue at Canary Wharf, a
further CDollars 100m for the Canadian interests, a freeze on principal
repayments and a framework for deciding which loans would have their
interest payments deferred. But O&amp;Y cannot be certain of winning that
agreement.
