FT  11 MAY 92 / Competing claims of man and nature: The US is striving to
find a sensible balance between economic progress and environmentalism
When Larry Mason tore up his suburban roots back east and set out for the
vast green forests of America's Pacific shore, he was following an
imperative as old as US history: go west, tame the land, and make your
fortune.
And Mr Mason did just that, in a modest way: he set up in business as a
sawmill owner in the remote little logging community of Forks, a scruffy
scattering of bungalows and mobile homes amid the wooded mountain slopes of
Washington state's Olympic Peninsula.
Over 20 years, Mr Mason, whose luxuriant moustache, coarse-cut beard and
beady eyes give him a passing resemblance to a 19th-century pioneer, built
up a company with annual sales of Dollars 3m, employing 40 people.
But today the sawmill is shuttered and Mr Mason's life is in ruins,
casualties of a new and very different American national imperative: to save
the continent's remaining flora and fauna, which are increasingly endangered
by economic development.
Mr Mason's particular nemesis is Strix occidentalis caurina, alias the
Northern Spotted Owl, a shy, retiring bird that inhabits what remains of the
ancient forests which used to blanket the coastal north-west.
The Northern Spotted Owl was declared a threatened species by the US Fish
and Wildlife Service in July 1990 and this, coupled with a tangle of legal
cases over its protection, has brought logging to a halt in the vast tracts
of western forest owned by the federal government.
The result: a sharp reduction in western timber production; national lumber
prices at record levels; ruin for the Larry Masons in dozens of rural
communities from California up to Washington; and a triumphant environmental
movement.
The human cost of protecting man's feathered friend is all too visible in
Forks, which lies a three-and-a-half hour drive east of Seattle beyond the
serenely beautiful Olympic National Park. Unemployment, marital strife and
children's behavioural problems have risen sharply in past few years, while
house prices have plummeted to 1978 levels. 'The environmentalists,' says
Mrs Patty Vaughan, a local teacher, 'have destroyed many people's lives.'
There is also a psychological price. Lumberjacks used to be regarded as the
archetypal American macho male heroes. Suddenly, says Mr Mason, who now runs
a local timber lobbying group, 'they're being told by the press they're
forest rapers, one step above child molesters'.
Industrial decline is always painful, but what makes the Pacific timber
workers particularly angry is the fact that they are casualties not of
broad, comprehensible economic forces beyond anyone's control, but of strict
US environmental legislation, which implicitly favours plants, animals and
fish ahead of human endeavour.
The protection of the Spotted Owl is by far the most sweeping application
yet of this legislation, and the case has sparked off a national furore over
how to strike a sensible balance between economic progress and
environmentalism.
This will reach a new pitch next week when Mr Manuel Lujan, the US interior
secretary, publishes two rival proposals for owl conservation, one of them
preserving timber jobs at the expense of owl habitat.
With so many developed countries grappling with similar issues, the debate
has universal lessons. So too does the fact that the owl controversy is
fuelling a nascent backlash among US consumers and corporations against what
critics of the environmental movement say is its uncompromising idealism.
Or, as an embittered Larry Mason puts it: 'Those guys are out of their
minds. They think the government can shoot the cow and still get the milk.'
The battle has its origins in 1973 when Congress, in a fit of environmental
penitence, passed the Endangered Species Act. This obliges the federal
government to monitor the nation's wildlife and maintain lists of species
deemed to be 'threatened' or, more seriously, 'endangered' with extinction.
More than 600 species and sub-species have been listed since then by
government agencies, including such exotica as the Puritan Tiger Beetle and
the Oregon Silverspot butterfly and the (now extinct) Dusky Seaside Sparrow.
In each case, the government is obliged to designate 'critical habitats'
vital for the creature's conservation and produce plans to help its numbers
recover. Many environmentalists believe the legislation is a model for the
rest of the world.
However, the law excludes any consideration of economic factors (other than
a little-used appeal mechanism which permits a team of federal government
ministers - known as the 'god committee' because of its power of life and
death - to exempt specific projects). This fact was brought home forcefully
in the late 1970s, in the celebrated case of the Tennessee snail darter, a
three-inch fish with a fondness for devouring snails, which was found at the
site of a Dollars 100m dam construction and listed as endangered.
Work on the dam ground to a halt. The owners fought the case up to the
Supreme Court, which declared that Congress's aim in passing the act had
been to prevent the extinction of a species, irrespective of the cost.
The dam was eventually built, thanks to special legislation exempting it
from the act, but the legal groundwork was laid for a larger clash over the
Spotted Owl.
Environmentalists adopted the bird in the 1980s as a surrogate for a much
larger concern - the rapid depletion of the 'old growth' forests of the
north-west under the loggers' saws. 'Old growth' means areas that have never
been harvested, containing trees hundreds of years old, making up a forest
with a many-layered canopy. They are distinct from 'secondary growth' -
reforested areas of much younger, more uniform trees.
The environmentalists argue that huge swathes of old-growth forests must be
preserved, both for aesthetic reasons and because they comprise a unique
ecosystem, supporting a huge variety of wildlife that does not survive well
in areas of secondary growth. The Spotted Owl, labelled an 'indicator'
species for the health of old forests, is said to need a variegated canopy
to hunt effectively.
The environmentalists also argue, with justification, that the forest
industry's method of 'clear-cutting' - removing all the vegetation in a
logging area - creates soil erosion and chokes fishing streams.
Since virtually all the old growth on private land has already been logged,
the battle has centred on the vast tracts of woodland owned by the federal
government and managed principally by the US Forest Service.
This agency, which is required to manage its lands for 'multiple use', has
come under increasing criticism from conservationists for being
hand-in-glove with the timber industry, by both selling lumber at less than
market prices and allowing too many trees to be felled.
With the listing of the owl, logging has halted on Forest Service lands
while rival plans are put forward for the bird's preservation. Some of these
would ban timber harvesting across 6m acres - roughly equivalent to 10 per
cent of the British Isles.
The timber industry argues that this is far too much, and points out that
about 3m acres of old growth are already permanently set aside in areas such
as national parks, which are out-of-bounds to logging. It asks: just how
large a 'nature museum' does the US need? The environmentalists reply: a
very large one, to preserve the delicate ecosystem.
Yet much remains unclear about the fundamentals of the ecosystem. There is
controversy, for example, as to whether the Northern Spotted Owl is a
distinct sub-species from its common cousin, The Californian Spotted Owl.
Even the theory that the Spotted Owl is an indicator species for old-growth
forests is disputed by the timber industry, which points out that many of
the birds nest happily in the secondary-growth trees which they are supposed
to hate.
Many of those nesting trees are on private forest land, and that causes big
headaches for the owners because the Endangered Species Act requires them to
create a large 'no-logging' zone around every owl residence.
As a thick, dour report from the Forest Service puts it: 'The set of factors
affecting long-term viability of the Northern Spotted Owl are complex and
not precisely known.'
The competing claims of the two sides raise issues not only of fact but also
of national policy. Yet critics point out that the Endangered Species Act,
with its worthy insistence on restoring every species, irrespective of the
cost, refuses to acknowledge that tough trade-offs have to be made between
economic development and conservation.
Nor does it provide any compensation for property owners who suddenly find
themselves out of pocket because of conservation moves - a situation that
underlies much of the growing anti-environment backlash. Says Mr Lynn
Michaelis, chief economist of Weyerhaeuser, one of America's biggest forest
products companies: 'If society wants to save the Spotted Owl, that's fine,
but it mustn't impose an implicit tax on private landowners by taking away
their right to manage the land and not compensating them.' Compensation, he
adds, would have the further advantage of making environmental trade-offs
more explicit.
Next week, the interior secretary will produce a recovery plan for the
Spotted Owl, as he is required to do by the Endangered Species Act. It is
likely to entail the loss of at least 30,000 jobs in the north-west.
Troubled by this, Mr Lujan will also offer Congress the option of passing
legislation which would exclude the owl from the Endangered Species Act and
merely preserve its numbers. This would sharply cut job losses to about
15,000. This plan is reported to include reducing the owl's protected range
which might allow a resumption of logging on the Olympic Peninsula and to
the north-east of Seattle.
Coincidentally, the Endangered Species Act is itself up for re-authorisation
by Congress in October. But in an election year in a country where urban
conservationists vastly outnumber those making their living from the land,
the politicians can be expected to proceed on both issues about as fast as
Utah's endangered Kanab Ambersnail.
Even if it did move quickly, it would be years too late for the Larry Masons
of the west.
