FT  30 SEP 92 / Survey of Personal Computers and Software (11): Dealers
dogged by spanners in the works - The channels for computer distribution are
becoming increasingly confused
COMPUTER distribution channels today are probably more confused than at any
point since they were set up in the early 1980s.
The sedate 'manufacturer to distributor to dealer to customer' tiered
distribution model has been modified and flattened as channels matured, but
in the past two years numerous spanners have been thrown into the works.
Where two years ago dealers and distributors could talk about channels
evolving in an orderly fashion, the developments of the past few months in
particular suggest that many parts of the channel have in fact been
shattered, and rather than evolving, are being rebuilt from the ground up.
Historically, the quests for economies of scale and critical mass have led
to a series of acquisitions and mergers, where, for example, British
distributors Frontline and Software were acquired by German company Computer
2000 and American combine Ingram respectively.
This in itself threatened the smaller distributors, as the larger companies
quite reasonably view their most effective route to market as being to
maximise volume and efficiency, and to win on margin.
The other historical trend has been towards dealer-distributor status, where
a dealer chain, such as Computacenter, grows large enough to be able to deal
direct with the manufacturer at more advantageous margins, while selling
direct to large corporate customers at prices that smaller dealers can't
match.
The view - widespread in the City two years ago - that distribution needed a
direct sales arm to survive, has now been more or less discredited.
Nevertheless, it is clear that the use of direct sales provide distributors
with access to price-sensitive sectors of the market that the traditional
distributors have trouble in addressing, and still pose some difficult
questions for trade-only distributors.
Mr Chip Lacey, president of Ingram, takes the view that in order to succeed
in distribution you have to be in the top one or two in the markets in which
you operate, but he qualifies this by broadening the area to cover
specialist sectors as well as geographical territories.
Ingram, as a broad-based distributor, needs to come first or second by
volume in each country, 'but for example you could be one of the top two
printer distributors in a given country'.
In the UK Northamber, which has historically been spoken of as both a target
for Ingram and - being trade-only - as one of the companies that will have
most difficulty surviving the rise of the dealer-distributor, but Mr Lacey
clearly thinks that its solid base in printers is enough to see it through.
In the view of Northamber chairman Mr David Phillips, the main problem for
the trade now is more finance than margin erosion. Computer dealers are
being hurt by banks tightening up on overdrafts, and he suspects that the
banks' motivation in providing credit ratings these days is all too often to
shift the debt from the bank to the computer distributor.
'Dealers need three distributors - one to love, one to hate and one to go to
when you're on credit hold,' he says, and in his view, given the parlous
state of European credit insurance, distributors are now largely on their
own when it comes to assessing the risks of doing business with particular
partners.
The most recent, and for the trade the most ominous, development in
distribution channels is the trend for the manufacturers themselves to take
control of the distribution channel.
This is partially a response to direct-sell specialists such as Dell, and
partially to the host of followers, small assembly operations which have
taken an estimated 20 per cent of the market by selling computers directly
off the page and over the phone.
Earlier this year the head of IBM's personal computer division (recently
floated off as the IBM Personal Computer Company) Mr Jim Cannavino said IBM
would be present in all channels, and this has culminated in a series of
initiatives that constitute varying degrees of threat to traditional
channels.
The company has used Europe as a test market for new approaches to channels
that have been, or shortly will be, applied to the rest of the world.
In the UK the first stage was the establishment of the PS/1 entry-level IBM
brand through mass-merchandisers such as Dixons, and more recently through
superstores, and this was followed up by the launch of the Ambra brand, an
IBM clone built by Singapore manufacturer Wearnes, and sold by a separate
company owned by IBM, ICPI, into the areas of the market that IBM had lost
to the clones.
The success of Ambra has been compared unfavourably to that of Compaq's
low-cost range (the theory for this was based on research of BMW's launch of
the 3-series), but IBM has plenty more shots in its locker.
It is expected later this month to launch a series of souped-up PS/1s and
another line of low-cost clones (this time built by the Korean company
Samsung), along with a full-blown telesales operation.
Mr Howard Ford, head of the company's UK personal systems division, stresses
that the indirect channel remains IBM's 'primary route to market', but IBM's
efforts to recoup business lost to the indirect channel will not in
themselves help shore up that channel.
The challenge for the indirect channel remains to 'get big, get niche, or
get out', and any company without either an area of specialisation or
sufficient mass to benefit from economies of scale is threatened.
'The guys who are in trouble', says Ingram's Mr Lacey, 'are the ones who
haven't yet picked a specialisation'. And interestingly enough, Mr Lacey
feels one of the areas most likely to see problems is the US, not Europe.
The US channels have historically seen 20 per cent annual growth, 'and
that's what's been keeping smaller distributors around,' he says.
'As soon as growth stops, we'll begin to see failures in the second tier'.
Adjusting to lack of growth is one of the few problems the UK market does
not face.
