FT  30 DEC 92 / Glaxo wins US approval for migraine drug
GLAXO, the UK's largest pharmaceuticals company, yesterday secured approval
in the US for the sale of what will be one of its biggest selling drugs of
the 1990s, sumatriptan, a migraine treatment.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA), which controls drugs sold in the US,
approved the injectable version. The tablets are likely to be approved late
in 1993.
Approval came more quickly than some observers had feared: the drug does not
treat a life threatening condition and so was thought to be low on the FDA's
list of priorities.
Approval helped Glaxo shares rise 27p to 774p. Trading was heavy in London
and New York, where the shares are also quoted.
Sumatriptan should be available on prescription in the US by late March
under the name Imitrex, Glaxo said. Its brand name in most other markets is
Imigran.
Some 33 countries have already approved the drug, in spite of criticism,
especially in France, of its price. Glaxo can charge a high price - about
Pounds 40 for two doses - because sumatriptan is much more effective than
rival treatments for most patients.
In Glaxo's last financial year, to June 1992, sales of sumatriptan reached
Pounds 43m. Analysts believe sales for the current year will more than
double.
Within five years, the drug could be a 'blockbuster', usually defined in the
industry as having sales of more than Dollars 1bn (Pounds 600m) a year.
About half should be in the US.
US approval is important for Glaxo, the world's second largest drug company,
because its best-selling ulcer treatment, Zantac, is losing market share to
a new rival, Losec, made by Swedish company Astra.
However, sumatriptan is unlikely to replace Zantac as the company's main
source of profit. Zantac sales are still growing, while sumatriptan is only
one, albeit the most important, of a new generation of Glaxo drugs. The
others are Serevent, an asthma treatment, Zofran, which reduces nausea in
chemotherapy patients, and Flixonase, an anti-inflammatory designed to help
people with allergies.
Between them, these four could account for 25 per cent of Glaxo's sales
within five years, said Mr Jonathan Gelles, an analyst with New York
stockbroker, Wertheim Schroder.
London Stock Exchange, Page 26
