FT  14 OCT 92 / Banks row stifles Russian oil output
A ROW between western bankers has blocked finance for desperately needed
equipment to help Russia arrest its rapid decline in oil production.
The European Bank of Reconstruction and Development has a plan to finance
purchases of oil and gas equipment through credits from western commercial
banks and the US Exim bank.
Oil output has plunged from a peak of 570m tonnes in 1987 to about 395m this
year and an estimated 340m-350m in 1993. Russian oil producers in the Tyumen
region have a Dollars 1.5bn shopping list for production equipment, 5bn,
although so far only Dollars 150m of that has been costed and agreed.
However, the entire project has been held up by objections from the World
Bank. The issue, over which body has first call on repayments, now has to
solved by Mr Lewis Preston, World Bank chairman, and Mr Yegor Gaidar, the
acting Russian prime minister.
The Russians aim to pay back the credits with revenue gained from the extra
production which the new equipment will bring, a pledge which the EBRD, Exim
Bank and other banks are willing to accept.
However, under the World Bank's 'negative pledge' rule, it will not permit
other lenders to be treated more favourably than it in the repayment of
credits - and sees a pledge of future oil output to the EBRD, when no such
pledge has been made to it, as more favourable treatment.
The World Bank is providing more than Dollars 1bn of credits for various
projects.
The issue is important, since the World Bank must protect its 'Triple A'
credit rating from possible dilution by such deals. Russian officials are
now suggesting deals of this kind to other future lenders, but are being
held back by the World Bank's objections.
Efforts by the World Bank and the Russian government to circumvent the
problem have met stiff resistance from the Bank's lawyers. The nervousness
of all concerned is rooted in the perception that Russia now is a high risk
debtor, suffering from a chronic lack of hard currency and unable to pay
either principal or interest on existing loans.
Russian President Boris Yeltsin has intervened to lift the travel ban on Mr
Mikhail Gorbachev, the former Soviet president, on 'humanitarian grounds' so
he can attend the funeral of former West German Chancellor Willy Brandt in
Germany at the weekend. Russia's constitutional court imposed the ban in an
attempt to force Mr Gorbachev to appear at hearings deciding the fate of the
Communist party.
