FT  21 JUL 92 / Pounds 1bn Mersey barrage receives setback
THE PROJECT to build the Mersey Barrage, a Pounds 1bn electricity-generating
dam between Liverpool and the Wirral to harness the Mersey's tidal power,
has failed to win government backing.
Whitehall is understood to have last week told Sir Desmond Pitcher, chairman
of the Mersey Barrage Company, that it would provide no further cash. The
barrage would not qualify for public funds to subsidise the cost of its
electricity.
Shareholders will meet in Liverpool today to decide whether to try to keep
the 10-year-old project alive with an injection of Pounds 14m. About Pounds
7m has been spent so far by the public and private sector.
Supporters of the project say Whitehall's decision raises questions about
the government's commitment to environmentally friendly power generation.
The government is likely to have been swayed by the project's high energy
costs and by shippers who use the three Mersey ports of Liverpool, Garston
and Manchester Ship Canal. They fear the project would threaten navigation
of the estuary.
A feasibility study is being carried out on the project. Although studies
are incomplete their general findings are already known.
Environmentalists have mixed feelings. They favour renewable sources of
energy but are worried about the environmental impact of such big schemes.
The decision whether to subsidise the barrage went to Mr Michael Heseltine,
trade and industry secretary. The government wants to shelve the scheme for
later consideration, but supporters say this would kill the project off
because its design teams - numbering up to 40 people - could not be easily
reassembled.
Shareholders include Alfred McAlpine, Allied Steel &amp; Wire, Barclays Bank,
BICC, Blue Circle, Costain, Ocean Marine, Rolls-Royce Engineering, Royal
Insurance, Shell, Tarmac and Trafalgar House. Local shareholders are
represented by Littlewoods, Mersey Docks, Manweb, Trinity International and
Liverpool University.
The crucial issue for funding the barrage is the price that could be charged
for the electricity generated. This needed to be about 7p per unit, of which
4p would be offset by the non-fossil fuel levy. A price of 3p per unit would
only allow about 40 per cent of building costs to be raised from the private
sector.
The barrage was expected to have a capacity of 700MW, enough for
three-quarters of Liverpool's needs. It would also have been a substantial
contribution to the legal obligation of Manweb, the electricity supplier, to
take 20 per cent of its electricity from non-fossil fuel sources.
David Lascelles writes: The Department of Trade would not comment on the
state of the project last night. Last year it authorised 122 renewable
energy projects with a total capacity of 472MW. These ranged from landfill
gas plants producing electricity at 5.7p a megawatt to windmills producing
power for 11p.
The Mersey Barrage is by far the largest renewable energy scheme close to
going ahead. If it were approved, it would take the government past its
target of 1,000MW of new capacity by the year 2000.
