FT  22 JUL 92 / Spratly dispute over shadows Asean meeting
CHINA'S recent reaffirmation of its claim to the disputed Spratly islands in
the South China Sea overshadowed the start of a meeting of the Association
of South-East Asian Nations (Asean) in Manila yesterday. Ministers expressed
'grave concern' about the threat to regional security.
'We cannot any more postpone the urgent necessity to seriously seek a
solution,' President Fidel Ramos of the Philippines said in a speech to open
the meeting of Asean foreign ministers, 'lest the unsettled situation lead
to perilous developments'.
Mr Abdullah Badawi, the Malaysian minister, said his country viewed the
matter with 'grave concern'.
The ministers of Asean - grouping Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, Singapore and Thailand - raised the Spratlys issue at a meeting
yesterday with Qian Qichen, their Chinese counterpart.
They also spoke of their worries about the progress of the United Nations
peace plan in Cambodia, where the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge faction is
refusing to disarm its guerrillas.
Most Asean ministers emphasised security concerns and gave second place to
economic co-operation.
The Spratlys, a scattered group of islets, atolls and coral reefs, have
become a particularly sensitive issue since May, when China granted an oil
exploration concession to Crestone Energy of the US in an area claimed by
Vietnam.
Six countries have laid claim to all or some of the Spratlys (China, Taiwan,
Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei and the Philippines), but China passed a law in
February reaffirming sovereignty over the islands of the South China Sea and
reserving the right to use military force.
In his meeting with Asean yesterday, Qian reiterated China's view that
territorial differences should be 'shelved' in favour of joint development
of the area, but he apparently did not explain how this fitted in with
China's recent actions.
According to Filipino officials, he suggested a security dialogue with Asean
to enhance trust and rejected accusations that China was seeking to fill a
power vacuum left by the collapse of the Soviet Union and the closure of US
bases in the Philippines.
'It is not necessary for any country to fill up this so-called vacuum,' Qian
said on Monday. He also told the Asean ministers that the dispute was being
exaggerated, and that it would be better not to discuss it in public to
avoid increasing tension. In 1988, China sank three Vietnamese naval vessels
and killed 72 Vietnamese in a battle over the Spratlys.
