FT  01 SEP 92 / How freight hopes have finally been derailed: The collapse
of Charterail last week calls into question the future of railfreight in the
UK
Last November Mr Malcolm Rifkind, then transport secretary, visited a
pioneering railfreight operation called Charterail and declared: 'I have
seen the future and it works.'
Unfortunately, he was wrong: it doesn't. Charterail, hailed by a succession
of transport ministers as a revolutionary means of getting freight back onto
the railways, last week called in the liquidators. The question left in the
wake of its collapse is whether rail has any future as a means of carrying
freight in Britain.
One reason why the question deserves an answer is that there is a
near-universal desire to see freight switched from road to rail. Lorries are
noisy, smelly and unsightly; they clog up the roads and frighten other road
users; and the goods they carry could often be transported by rail at much
lower cost to the environment.
For more than a century, between the demise of the canals and the rise of
motor transport, rail dominated freight transport. Even the smallest rural
town on the rail network had its goods shed or siding. Freight going from
one town to another would be loaded into a rail wagon and hauled to a
marshalling yard, where it would be assembled into a train with other wagons
going in the same direction and eventually delivered to its destination.
The trouble with this kind of operation was that it consumed vast resources.
A locomotive and crew were required to get the wagon from the town to the
nearest marshalling yard; vast tracts of land, locomotives and manpower were
required to operate the marshalling yard itself; and a wagon might have to
go through the marshalling process at several different yards before being
delivered by another locomotive and crew to its ultimate destination.
Road transport, once it had got into its stride, was easily able to outstrip
railfreight on both speed and price. All the road transporter needed was a
driver and a lorry to pick up the goods and take them directly to their
destination. By 1955, road had replaced rail as the main means of inland
goods transport. It has been widening the gap ever since.
Today, operating without the benefit of state subsidy, British Rail's
loss-making freight operations have been pruned to the point where they play
an almost insignificant role in the transport of goods. The few remaining
areas where they still give road transport a run for its money are mainly in
the point-to-point delivery of trainloads of goods going directly to a
single destination: for example, coal going from coal mines to electricity
power generating stations, or containerised goods going from ports to inland
distribution centres.
Under growing environmental pressure, successive UK transport secretaries
have expressed a desire to reverse railfreight's seemingly terminal decline.
The difficulty is that most goods have to start and end their journey by
road, which means incurring heavy handling costs at the start and end of the
rail section of the journey. So great are those costs in relation to the
total that they can only generally be justified over distances of around 200
miles or more, where rail's greater speed comes into play. In a country as
small as Britain, the average journey length is much shorter than this.
The revolution Charterail offered was to bring handling costs down by
introducing special road trailers that could be driven straight onto
swivel-action rail wagons without the need for costly lifting equipment. The
consequent reduction in handling costs should have made rail competitive
over shorter distances.
Operationally, Charterail's services were a success. The experiment failed
because Charterail could not make the business pay in the face of cut-throat
competition with road transport. The main reason for that, the company said,
was that it relied on British Rail not just for the use of its railway
tracks, but for the supply of locomotives and crew; and it could not afford
the rates BR was charging for the total haulage package.
The failure of the Charterail experiment paints a gloomy picture of the
outlook for railfreight. The so-called intermodal transport service it
offered was regarded as the best last hope for the revival of domestic
railfreight in Britain. As a private company - albeit 22 per cent owned by
British Rail - it was also held up as an example for other private sector
freight operators to follow.
On the face of it, it might seem that the prospects for operations like
Charterail's would improve after privatisation. Charterail, after all,
claimed that excessive charges by BR were to blame for its demise. In a
privatised environment, the railways' new owners might prove more responsive
to the market.
Unhappily, it will not quite work like that. Under the plans currently
proposed, BR will remain owner of all Britain's railway tracks after
privatisation. Even if freight train operators like Charterail are able to
supply their own locomotives and crew, they will still have to pay whatever
BR asks for the use of its tracks: and these costs seem likely to go up
rather than down.
This is because BR's present method of charging an extra train to run on its
tracks is a somewhat arbitrary one based on the marginal extra costs it
incurs as a result of the presence of the train. After privatisation, BR -
or Railtrack, as it will then be called - will be required not only to
introduce a system of charging every train operator the full commercial cost
of its use of the tracks, but also to charge enough to deliver an 8 per cent
return on its assets.
Higher track charges seem inevitable, with obvious consequences for
railfreight. Even under the existing regime, BR's Railfreight Distribution
subsidiary contrived to lose Pounds 118.7m on turnover of Pounds 174.9m in
the year to March; so although the private sector might be expected to be
rather more effective at making freight profitable than BR, the implication
is that there is a lot more pruning yet to come.
One compensating factor is that the opening of the Channel tunnel will open
up new opportunities for railways to attack the market in long-distance
freight to and from the Continent, where rail's speed advantage over road
will come into its own. But Continental freight represents only a tiny
proportion of Britain's total. The rest seems destined not only to stay on
the road, but to grow at rail's expense.
The process is not necessarily inevitable. Environmentalists and the rail
lobby point to a sharp disequilibrium between charges to road users and rail
users. For a lorry owner, access to the roads, in the form of the annual
vehicle licence fee, typically represents only 4 per cent of total operating
costs, while for BR, track costs amount to 48 per cent of the total.
The playing field could be levelled by one of two means. Railways could be
made like roads by giving train operators free access to them on payment of
an annual licence fee. Alternatively, roads could be made like railways by
introducing heavy charges for their use through some form of electronic road
pricing. Either, however, would take an act of considerable political
courage. Neither seems forthcoming.
