FT  28 JUL 92 / BR offshoot to oversee Channel link
BRITISH RAIL has created a wholly-owned subsidiary called Union Railways to
take responsibility for building the planned Pounds 4.5bn rail link between
London and the Channel tunnel.
Mr John Prideaux, formerly managing director of BR's new ventures division
and chairman of the new company, said the aim was to give people working on
the link more focus and motivation.
However, it is also likely to be seen as paving the way for the managers of
the project to bid for control of it under the government's proposals to
privatise BR.
Several attempts to start the link culminated last year in the government's
decision that BR should produce revised proposals for a route taking an
eastern approach to the capital through Stratford, east London.
The government said that once the route had been decided, the private sector
should take the project forward; but it is not yet clear whether the private
sector will be interested.
Mr Prideaux said he expected to set out the main options by the end of the
year, complete with economic appraisals and options for public-sector and
private-sector funding.
The government, he hoped, would safeguard the route in May or June next year
so a hybrid bill could go to parliament at the end of the year. If
construction started as soon as the bill had been passed, the line could be
ready by the turn of the century, he said.
Mr Prideaux added that he thought the private sector would only want to get
involved in the project after a bill had been passed, so Union Railways
should have a life of at least three years.
He said he had 'no idea' whether he or Union Railways would then bid for the
project. 'I would only be interested in bidding if it was going to be a
profitable proposition,' he said.'
Apart from Mr Prideaux, the board of Union Railways comprises Mr Gil
Howarth, project director; Mr James Jerram, British Railways Board director
with responsibility for finance; and Professor Sir Frederick Holliday, the
conservationist.
The white paper on rail privatisation emphasised that BR employees would be
encouraged to take a direct stake in the privatisation of the railway.
Advice would be available to help them put together bids, it said.
