FT  25 FEB 92 / Arts: Parsifal - Houston
The most adventurous of the big US opera companies, Houston Grand Opera, is
in a period of forced restraint. Recessionary hard times have been made
harder by the financial shortfall (at least Dollars 500,000 - Pounds 285,700
 -according to rumour) of last May's Mozart festival. One 1991-92 production
has already been cancelled; the number of works to be performed next season
is set to shrink from 12 to seven.
Plainly, this goes against company grain, and that of its general director
David Gockley, a man who has gained the city its worldwide reputation as a
place where artistic risk pays off handsomely. The way he prefers to do
things can be evidenced from such past Houston splashes as the 1989 British
Opera Festival, which included the premiere of Tippett's New Year, and this
month from a boldly out-of-the-ordinary repertory mixture.
Parsifal, staged by the celebrated modern-theatre director Robert Wilson (in
a production first given at the Hamburg Staatsoper last year), has just
completed its run in the company's big theatre; while Desert of Roses, a new
Beauty and the Beast opera by the American avant-garde composer Robert
Moran, alternates in the smaller with Gretry's 1771 version of the same
fable, Zemire et Azor, in a pop updating. (I shall review these two
'Beauties' in a second Houston report.)
The combination of Wagner and Wilson has caused an enormous nationwide stir
and, locally, a gratifying shortage of tickets. The cool,
abstract-sculptural Wilson style, made internationally famous by (among
other things) Deafman Glance, Einstein on the Beach, and the CIVIL warS, has
recently been confronted with 'classic' opera - Gluck's Alceste in Chicago,
The Magic Flute in Paris, Lohengrin in Zurich (on which Andrew Clark
reported on this page).
But Parsifal, most complex and musically rarefied of all great operas,
presented Wilson with his largest challenge so far. He has faced it in a
manner at once raptly serious, elevated, and unfailingly elegant to behold.
The worlds of Kabuki and Noh, Balanchine (a confessed Wilson influence), the
early Surrealists, and the American visual Minimalists meet in his
production, for which Wilson himself designed the set and (with Jennifer
Tipton) the lighting, and Frida Parmeggiani the costumes.
Needless to say, simple representation of the Parsifal locations - forest
clearing, castle hall, magic garden, flowery meadow - finds no part in it.
Rather, the stage becomes a 'Parsifal space', a bare canvas on which
selected images are graved while light intensities of magically clean focus
slowly grow and fade and singer-actors undertake a carefully choreographed
set of motions complete with ritualised hand- and body-language.
Sometimes the mise-en-scene 'fits' with the narrative events: a vast
wing-shape sailing down across the back-screen after the swan's death; an
illuminated white flying saucer with a hole, like a gigantic Polo mint,
landing stage-centre during the Grail rites. Sometimes the connection proves
elusive, and the images, never less than ravishing, stay locked within
Wilson's inner Parsifal vision.
Because it is all so seamlessly made, so graceful in physical unfolding, the
'what does it mean?' puzzle never becomes an irritant; but the decision to
avoid entirely the big gestures of Wagner's drama proves more problematic.
For Wilson those 'klutzy knights walking around with this cup' are
'ridiculous, disturbing, all wrong'; the chorus is banished to the theatre's
highest balcony, and there is no cup - and later no kiss, no anointing, no
dove. The eschewing of all facial expression provided an odd counterpoint to
the shrieks of Kundry, the agonies of Amfortas, the pained growth to wisdom
of Parsifal. (Rather than translating snatches of the German text that might
in some way contradict the staging, the Houston surtitling machine simply
left them out.)
For all its visual wonders I found this Parsifal a frustrating experience.
For many it has allowed a liberation of the drama from the banalities - and,
indeed, the worrying aspects - of its libretto surface. For me it was, in
the end, a cop-out. The many meanings of Parsifal are not, I think, released
by the banishment of those narrative aspects, religious and political,
inconvenient to the late-20th-century Zeitgeist. Certainly, the vibrant
emotional drama that is its richest and most enduring achievement was
stunted in this sexlessly chic slow-motion reading of the piece.
But a less enervated account of the score might well have redressed the
balance. The conductor was Christoph Eschenbach, chief of the Houston
Symphony, a recent HGO regular, and a passionate Wilson devotee; he
certainly 'went along with' the production, in a way that highlighted its
shortage of red blood-cells. It was strange to hear so well-played and sung
a Parsifal so rhythmically slack-muscled, so lacking in strong contours - at
once 'beautiful' and debilitatingly bland.
The cast was distinguished: Dunja Vejzovic (Kundry), Monte Pederson
(Amfortas), Harry Peeters (Gurnemanz), Richard Paul Fink (Klingsor), and
John Keyes (the young American Heldentenor who recently sang Siegmund for
Scottish Opera) in the title role. The impression of smooth musicality was
admirably uniform. But from the singing - as, indeed, from the whole
experience - a whole universe of Wagnerian musical vitality appeared to be
absent.
