FT  24 DEC 92 / Markets: Icing a rich cake - Wall Street
AS WALL Street's annus mirabilis drew near a close this week, the loudest
noise to be heard down among the tinsel-clad skyscrapers of lower Manhattan
was the rustle of traders, brokers and investment bankers gleefully counting
their bonuses for 1992.
And what a year it has been. The stock markets started brightly, ran into
problems mid-year, but finished strongly as the main share indices either
approached or set record highs.
Trading volume was the heaviest ever recorded as investors rushed out of
low-yielding short-term assets and into stocks. The New York Stock Exchange
broke its annual record of 47.8bn shares - set in 1987 - on December 8.
Since then, trading has been even busier. Only last week, the number of
shares traded on the Big Board soared to 371m, the highest total since the
mini-crash of October 1989.
New corporate stock and bonds were also issued in huge amounts during the
year, thanks to the lowest interest rates in three decades.
In the first nine months of this year alone, Dollars 668bn in new corporate
financing was raised on Wall Street. This outstripped by far the Dollars
586bn raised in all of 1991 - itself a record year.
With such favourable market conditions, the securities industry reaped
record profits from a boom that is about to enter its third year. Record
profits, of course, meant record bonuses.
All this, and a new president who speaks in sentences and knows what an
inverted yield curve looks like. Wall Street is hugging itself with joy.
The only cloud on the horizon is the certainty that taxes on the rich -
which means anyone who counts on Wall Street - will be going up next year.
This explains why all the big firms have been doling out the bonuses early.
The idea is that their hard-pressed employees can keep their money safe from
those dangerous socialists who will occupy the White House from next month.
Not that 1992 was all plain sailing, by any means. Just ask the senior
executives at International Business Machines, Boeing, General Motors, Sears
Roebuck, American Express and Westinghouse Electric.
All of them were forced to embrace structural change to address serious
strategic weaknesses in their businesses.
None had a more disastrous year than IBM - one that matched the royal
family's for its catalogue of horrors.
A series of restructurings and redundancy programmes failed to reverse IBM's
long-term decline as the dominant force in a fast-changing world computer
market, and did nothing to impress investors, who fled the stock in big
numbers.
From a high this year of just over Dollars 100, IBM shares have dropped to
around Dollars 50, wiping more than Dollars 28bn off the company's market
value.
That the markets fared so well despite the problems at IBM, and other
so-called 'blue-chip' corporations, testified to the resilience of investor
confidence in the longer term outlook for both the economy and stock prices.
On occasion, that confidence was sorely tested, most notably during the
summer and early autumn, when unemployment and consumer confidence continued
to move in opposite (and wrong) directions.
Some clever economist even coined a new term to describe the peculiar funk
the economy had found itself in - a 'growth recession'.
Although it sounded like a contradiction in terms (which it was), economists
insisted that 'growth recession' best described the conditions of the day -
an economy that was growing so slowly that it was unable to create new jobs
or lift incomes.
Despite the mid-year trough in market confidence, there was no mass
desertion of stocks by investors.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell only 8 per cent from its June peak of
3,413.21, and has regained almost all of that lost ground since then.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500, a broader measure of market performance, never
dropped much more than 5 per cent from its early-year high - a peak it
eventually surpassed comfortably in mid-November.
This was because for every IBM, there was an Intel, for every GM, an
American Telephone &amp; Telegraph. Not only did a significant number of big
stocks have a good year but so did plenty of small-capitalisation growth
stocks.
As a group, these returned to favour in the latter half of 1992 after a
sticky period in the second and early third quarters.
Consequently, the Nasdaq composite index, which contains many small-cap
growth stocks, has had a splendid 1992, rising more than 12 per cent.
Yet what of 1993? As ever, Wall Street, home of short-term thinking, is
looking no further than its nose - a nose that is buried deep right now in a
trough of the finest champagne and the richest Christmas cake.
As they say in New York - Happy Holidays.
