FT  18 JUL 92 / German MPs recalled for emergency debate on military
GERMAN members of parliament will be summoned back from their summer
holidays next week, at considerable expense, for an emergency debate on the
use of a German destroyer to monitor United Nations sanctions against
Serbia.
The move, inspired by the opposition Social Democrats (SPD), seems unlikely,
however, to reverse the government's decision to widen the involvement of
German military forces in international operations.
The SPD has also tabled a formal constitutional charge against the action,
in which the destroyer Bayern (Bavaria) and three reconnaissance aircraft
have joined ships from Nato and Western European Union countries in
monitoring the embargo.
Estimates put the cost of the emergency Bundestag meeting at around
DM300,000 (Pounds 103,450) because of the need to bring parliamentarians
back from holidays or fact-finding trips abroad. They began their summer
recess at the end of June.
However, the opposition regards the issue of involving the Bundeswehr in
international operations as fundamental, while the ruling Christian
Democrat-Free Democrat coalition has been steadily expanding foreign
operations.
Luftwaffe helicopters were involved in relief flights for the Kurds in
northern Iraq; German military medical units are operating with UN forces in
Cambodia; and now the German navy is being included in a strictly limited
monitoring operation in the Adriatic.
The German constitution is ambiguous on the subject, leaving it unclear
whether German troops can operate outside the Nato area.
The SPD has tabled a constitutional amendment which would allow their use in
UN peacekeeping operations, and nothing else. The government regards such a
definition as too restrictive. Germany said yesterday it would start
destroying 10,000 pieces of military equipment next month under agreements
to reduce conventional armaments in Europe, Reuter reports from Bonn. The
first to go would be 1,481 armoured vehicles and 54 battle tanks.
