FT  21 FEB 92 / FT Law Report: Ship's first arrest has priority
THE RUBI SEA
Queen's Bench Division (Admiralty Court):
Mr Justice Sheen:
February 5 1992
A PLAINTIFF who arrests a ship in good faith in the first of two actions in
rem, preserves it within the jurisdiction for the benefit of all other
claimants and therefore, after the Admiralty Marshal, has a priority claim
for payment of the costs of arrest out of the proceeds of sale of the ship
sold by court order in the second action.
Mr Justice Sheen so held when giving judgment for caveators, Ince &amp; Co and
another, on an issue as to priority of entitlement to payment out of monies
in court representing the proceeds of sale of Rubi Sea, on an application by
the plaintiff, Hambros Bank Ltd, for payment out in respect of its action in
rem against the ship.
HIS LORDSHIP said that on June 7 1991 a writ in rem against Rubi Sea was
issued out of the Admiralty and Commercial Registry.
The claim endorsed on the writ was for Dollars 121,641 for goods and
materials supplied to Rubi Sea at the port of Houston at her owners'
request.
On the same day a warrant of arrest was issued.
The ship was arrested by the Marshal's substitute on Saturday, June 8 1991,
at her berth at Simon Storage, North Side, River Tees.
On June 10 a writ was issued by Norton Rose on behalf of Hambros Bank in
respect of a claim for Dollars 3.38m and interest due to the bank, secured
by a mortgage on Rubi Sea.
On June 12 Ince &amp; Co released the ship from arrest.
She was immediately re-arrested in respect of the claim by Hambros Bank.
On June 18 Hambros Bank applied for and obtained an order for leave to make
payments to the master, officers and crew of Rubi Sea in respect of wages
and repatriation expenses.
On June 27 the court adjudged that the mortgage was valid and gave judgment
for Hambros for Dollars 3.4m, and costs.
The court ordered that Rubi Sea be appraised and sold by the Admiralty
Marshal.
In due course the ship was sold for Dollars 3.5m, less the Marshal's costs
amounting to Pounds 15,619. Her bunkers were sold for Dollars 21,129, less
the Marshal's costs of Pounds 127.
The proceeds of sale had been brought into court.
In addition to the two claims there were also seven caveats against release
of the funds.
Ince &amp; Co had incurred Pounds 1,126 costs in connection with the first
arrest.
It was argued on behalf of Hambros Bank that Ince &amp; Co were not entitled to
recover their costs of arrest because they had not shown, and could not
show, that that arrest conferred a benefit on the mortgagees.
In The Falcon (1981) 1 Lloyd's Rep 17 his Lordship had said that the
proceeds of sale of a ship sold by court order should be used first to pay
the Admiralty Marshal's charges and expenses; and second, to reimburse the
plaintiff, who had incurred expense in preserving the property by arresting
the ship and maintaining that arrest.
He said: 'If there is more than one action and if the ship is appraised and
sold by an order made in a second or subsequent action, the plaintiff in the
first action should make application to the court for reimbursement of the
expenses of preserving the property. The court will so order unless he has
acted in bad faith.'
The argument advanced for Hambros Bank was that they would have arrested the
ship on June 12 in any event, and that no property was preserved for them by
the arrest by Ince &amp; Co. A solicitor who acted for a client with a claim in
respect of which an action in rem might be brought against the ship in
connection with which the claim arose, had a duty to his client to serve
that writ on the ship and arrest the ship at the earliest opportunity.
A warrant for arrest would not be executed until there had been lodged in
the Marshal's office an undertaking to pay on demand the fees of the Marshal
and all expenses incurred by him in respect of the ship's arrest and the
care and custody of it while under arrest (RSC Order 75 rule 10(3)).
That undertaking was normally given by the plaintiff's solicitor personally.
In such circumstances the solicitor could not be expected to delay giving
instructions to arrest while he made inquiries as to whether a claimant with
a higher priority was intending to enforce his claim and, if so, whether the
ship would remain within the jurisdiction of the court long enough for that
other claimant to arrest her. The 'other claimant' might change his mind.
The plaintiff who first arrested the ship preserved the property on behalf
of all claimants by arresting the ship within the jurisdiction.
There was no suggestion that Ince &amp; Co acted in bad faith.
Accordingly the order would be that they should recover their costs of the
arrest in priority to all claims other than the Admiralty Marshal's charges
and expenses.
For Hambros Bank: Simon Kverndal (Norton Rose).
For two of the caveators: Ince &amp; Co and Ingledew Brown Bennison &amp; Garrett.
