FT  30 JAN 92 / Survey of Saudi Arabia (8): Rulers under pressure - Domestic
consequences of the war
THE DOMESTIC consequences of the Gulf war with Iraq and the presence of
several hundred thousand non-Moslem troops in Saudi Arabia are still being
played out nearly a year after the fighting ended.
The military conflict served to put the ruling elite under pressures which
they had not experienced before, while providing opportunities for activists
at the edges of Saudi society to press for more emphatic changes in the way
the country is run.
Saudi society and its closed family-oriented political structure is
ill-equipped to respond quickly to demands for change. There is no public
debate and very little official information. The role of the media and the
ministry responsible for information appears designed to support that
objective. The royal families and the technocrats who serve them in
government much prefer to resolve issues privately and to act decisively
only when majority opinion appears to demand it. It is a measure of such a
society that the two issues which have most gripped public attention during
the past 18 months are both at the limits of western comprehension, but at
the heart of Saudi Arabia's social and political evolution.
First was the decision in November, 1990, by 45 Saudi women, many of them
graduates, to drive in 15 vehicles through the centre of Riyadh in protest
at the continuing ban on women drivers. It was a public challenge to
authority, an almost unheard-of event in the kingdom. The women were
detained, interrogated, forced to pledge never to repeat the protest, and
dismissed from their jobs. Some have since been allowed to return to work.
Second, came the backlash from the other end of Saudi society, the religious
right. Already disturbed by the sudden influx of so many non-Moslems -
including no small number of American women soldiers who not only drove
vehicles but carried guns - the mutawwa, the civilian enforcers of strict
adherence to Islamic behaviour, began to hit back.
During the last three months of 1991, they made the most simple aspects of
daily life outside the home increasingly irritating for both nationals and
expatriates. The dominant topic of conversation at expatriate gatherings
was, and probably still is, the latest reported excesses of the mutawwa in
harassing women deemed to be incorrectly dressed, or men failing to observe
prayer-time.
Their activities reached such a peak, particularly in the capital, that many
people stayed at home and shopkeepers reported a sharp decline in business
during the traditionally buoyant sales period leading up to December 25.
At this point, the authorities intervened. Precisely how, it is not clear,
but the number of mutawwa on patrol dropped sharply. Diplomats interpreted
the official response as part of a wider move to dampen the activities of a
growing group of younger clergy whose ambitions appeared to go beyond
traditional limits.
Saudis have been aware for some time of the emergence of younger ulema
(preachers) who had been better educated than their predecessors and were
far more aware of the religious implications of Saudi Arabia's international
action. 'They are not very sophisticated people, but, unlike the old men
before them, they have made it their business to know about oil policy and
they watch things like our relations with the US and how this ties in with
the Palestinians and Israel,' said a local businessman.
International human rights organisations have reported that two or three of
the more politically challenging ulema have been detained and several have
been warned or prevented from preaching on Fridays. The religious
establishment has also weighed in with a series of statements issued by
Abdel-Aziz bin Baz, the country's leading cleric, reaffirming Islam's
traditional role.
The longer-term significance of the challenge by the militants is unclear.
Some Saudis insist that it is part of a cyclical pattern and will quickly
fade. Others are less confident and predict that Saudi Arabia's rulers will
have to contend with increasingly less pliant clerics who have already shown
that they reject the line that was previously thought to have been drawn
between religious and political activities.
They also stress that the challenge is not coming as had been expected from
the historically more militant Shia minority in the eastern province, but
from within the Sunni majority.
The hatred expressed by Saudi Shias for Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, both
as a result of the eight-year Iran-Iraq war and because of the way their
Iraqi co-religionists were subsequently crushed by Baghdad, is said to have
made them among the most committed government supporters during the past 18
months.
King Fahd has simultaneously faced renewed demands from the country's
liberals, often western-educated graduates, for a more open system of
government that better reflects the changes that are taking place in the
kingdom and in the outside world.
Petitions from such groups in the past year appear to have spurred the King
into announcing a firmer commitment to creating a Consultative Council,
something he has been promising since his accession to the throne a decade
ago. Most Saudis now believe that details will finally be announced before
the end of February and consider that a further postponement would not be
easily accepted.
There is no indication yet as to the likely size of membership, from what
sections of society it will be drawn, or what the role of the council will
be. However, it is assumed that an attempt will be made to balance the
different political and social forces at play and where grievances can be
aired without making any commitment to initiate policy changes.
Liberals would prefer to see it, however, as the first step towards a
properly elected assembly which, while not directly rivalling the authority
of the ruling family, might eventually take greater responsibility for the
daily administration of the nation.
'No one in Saudi Arabia can ignore the fact that we are becoming more, not
less, like other countries,' said an economist employed in the private
sector. 'We are never going to be so rich again. The budget is in persistent
deficit. We are having to borrow internationally. Hard decisions will have
to be made in the future, and, if the people are to support them, then they
will require explanations.'
Saudi Arabia's planned consultative council is in line with trends elsewhere
in the Gulf. Of the six members of the Gulf Co-operation Council, Kuwait
consistently led the way until it dissolved parliament in 1986. It has
promised free elections in the latter part of this year.
King Fahd's announcement seems to have been well received by the extended
ruling families, difficult though it is to make such assessments. Among the
ultimate arbiters of power in Saudi Arabia, there is no indication that they
feel their grip on power may be weakening. As one elderly family member
patiently explained, the only real threat to the House of Saud would come
from divisions within, not challenges from without.
