FT  23 JUN 92 / UK Company News: BM withdraws from Thwaites purchase
NEGOTIATIONS on the possible sale of Thwaites, the site dumper manufacturer,
are to continue following the withdrawal yesterday of a proposed purchase by
BM Group, the acquisitive construction equipment manufacturer.
BM's decision to pull out followed a referral earlier this month of the
proposed bid to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
The Department of Trade and Industry had maintained that a takeover raised
competition issues in the supply of site dumpers in the UK market, but
yesterday BM said any proposed merger would not be against the public
interest.
However, it did not wish to 'devote the considerable management time or
incur the excessive cost in presenting the case to the MMC for such a small
potential acquisition.'
Consequently, BM has ceased discussions with privately-held Thwaites, which
announced in February that it had hired Robert Fleming, the merchant bank,
in connection with a possible sale.
It is thought that BM would have had to pay Pounds 10m-Pounds 12m for
Thwaites, which would have brought BM some new products and an efficient
factory at Leamington, recently reorganised.
Close observers of the situation say BM's withdrawal was a disappointment
but not a big surprise, once the referral was announced. An inquiry would
have taken some months, and an eventual defeat for BM would have been
embarrassing.
However, there are other 'irons in the fire,' according to a source close to
the discussions. The BM approach was no further advanced than those by other
companies, and the lifting of the uncertainty caused by the referral could
bring other negotiations to a head.
Thwaites' core site dumper business has been badly hit by the construction
industry recession, and depends primarily on the UK market. But its
manufacturing facilities make it an attractive acquisition candidate for an
Asian equipment producer seeking a European production base - not
necessarily for site dumpers.
A purchase by a Korean producer remains a possibility, but is not expected
to happen quickly - Asian purchasers are traditionally slow to reach a
decision.
Additionally, the worldwide recession in the construction industry is only
now beginning to lift, and conditions are hardly ideal for selling equipment
manufacturers. Thwaites has stressed from the outset that it will remain
independent if acceptable terms cannot be negotiated.
