FT  10 NOV 92 / Technology: Prawn crisps and politics - From next year, the
EC will have 412 approved food additives. Charles Arthur examines their
contents and asks why we need so many
You may think the meals you eat are full of taste and goodness, but they are
usually full of something else as well - additives, the host of flavourings,
sweeteners, preservatives and colourings used by the food industry to
enhance or disguise their products and make them last longer.
To the average consumer, the number of approved additives in the UK,
currently 300, might seem more than enough for a healthy digestion. But next
year, when the Single European Act comes into force, it will jump to as many
as 412.
The logic behind permitting such a big leap in the array of 'E' numbers
which describe each additive is hard to follow. None of the extra 112
additives that might appear in people's food is a new chemical that has been
discovered in the past couple of years. Some are banned in the UK at the
moment: in the case of the sweetener cyclamate, since the 1960s.
Nor does the UK presently have a more rigid set of standards for allowing
additives than other countries. It is the least restrictive, with the
longest 'approved' list in Europe. Germany, by contrast, allows just 150,
while Greece allows only 120. For these countries, the shock will be even
greater. 'What's being allowed isn't the lowest common denominator,' says
Erik Millstone of Sussex University's Science Policy Research Unit. 'In fact
it's lower than that. Even standards in the UK will decline, as they will
across the EC.'
Millstone often lobbies against the food industry's interest in putting what
he sees as unnecessary chemicals into foods. He is up against considerable
competition. The food industry in Europe is comparable in size to the
defence industry. In the UK the spending on additives alone is worth Pounds
453m; throughout the EC it totals Pounds 1.8bn.
But why are additives used at all? There are two principal reasons: people
want food that will last longer (meaning it can be transported further and
stored for longer), and manufacturers have discovered that the taste-buds
are surprisingly easily fooled.
The first reason led to the development of antioxidants (which stop oils
turning rancid) and preservatives (which discourage the growth of
micro-organisms). The second has led to the real boom area: colourings,
flavourings and sweeteners.
A few decades ago, food manufacturers looking to cut costs discovered that
they could use lower-quality raw foodstuffs if, later in the manufacturing
process, they added colourings to make them look more like the target
product: red for tomato-based products, yellow for cheese, and so on.
Flavourings could provide taste that was not there before. And sweeteners
could compensate for 'rough' flavours: the tongue is highly tuned to the
taste of sugar (or sugar-tasting products such as saccharin) which masks
less pleasant ones. That is why sugars and sweeteners are the most common
added ingredients in processed foods. It is also why food companies keen to
promote a quality image emphasise the additives they leave out of their
products.
The rapid multiplication of additives has led to careful scientific testing,
with products fed to laboratory animals to make sure they cannot be
dangerous, even when consumed in huge quantities. This process caused the
banning of cyclamate in the UK: experimental evidence suggested it caused
rats' testicles to shrink.
Yet some additives that have been approved are now strongly suspected of
causing side-effects: the best-known, tartrazine (E102), is a bright
orange-yellow colour commonly found in orange squash concentrates which is
now thought to make some children hyperactive and disruptive. Monosodium
glutamate, used widely in Chinese food, can cause nausea and headaches.
The process of drawing up a Europe-wide list of approved additives has been
carried out over the past three years by the EC Scientific Office, overseen
by the EC Scientific Committee on Food, an international group of
scientists.
Part of that work includes setting out rules for how much of an additive may
be used in a food and in which foods each of the additives can be used, in a
wide-ranging ruling which at one stage threatened an essential part of the
British way of life, no less a product than the prawn cocktail crisp.
Certain additives will only be allowed in particular foods: for example,
erythrosine (E127), a red colouring (used in many kinds of confectionery)
only in glace cherries; a pinkish colouring only in the 'saucisson de
Strasbourg' of France's Alsace; and Brown FK (E154), a colouring widely used
in all sorts of fish products, only in particular fish.
The prawn cocktail crisp came under scrutiny because an early version of the
list of approved sweeteners said certain strong additives could not be used
in any snack. However, sweet crisp flavours (such as prawn cocktail) contain
traces of aspartame or saccharin.
As can be imagined, the bargaining and lobbying at EC level over which
additives should be allowed and in which foods has been intense. The
political fighting has also been prolonged. 'You can say that again,'
remarked a spokeswoman for the UK's Ministry of Agriculture, Food and
Fisheries.
The EC argued that the flavour of prawn crisps was artificial. 'But
sweeteners is a minefield, and has been for some time.' The scientific
committee relented after the UK said jobs would be lost; the day was saved
for prawn cocktail crisps.
Yet to speak to some in the industry, the burgeoning list is hardly a matter
for excitement. Malcolm Jones, managing director of Bensons Crisps of
Kirkham in Lancashire, says: 'We don't see a dramatic change coming. But it
has to come to fruition yet.'
His company, which employs 700 people and has sales of Pounds 25m, is the
UK's fourth-biggest crisp-maker - behind Pepsico, Dalgety and United
Biscuits. 'A lot of representation has gone on through countries and vested
interests,' he says. 'But nothing suggests that we've got problems.'
Similarly, the Snack and Crisp Manufacturers' Association reckons it has
headed off any difficulties. 'We have done our homework,' says Keith
Nightingale, its director general. 'It looks like we will be able to use the
products that we wished to, in the future. We will be able to live with what
ultimately emerges.'
The word 'ultimately' is carefully chosen: the legislation enabling all
these changes has still to work its way through the European Parliament.
Nightingale suggests this means that the 412-strong list will not become law
from January.
However, others in and outside the industry disagree: the Single European
Act, they reckon, means that the list must come into force after the end of
this year, and the scientific committee can add more numbers to it - and,
possibly, subtract a few - as it goes along.
But it has still left some annoyed. 'It has been a political rather than a
scientific process,' says Millstone, who belongs to a lobby group called the
Food Additives Campaign Team. 'The negotiations have been between industry
and government, and communication with consumers has been excluded. The EC
didn't call a meeting of the Food Consumers' committee for five years;
people speaking for consumers were systematically excluded from the talks.'
Millstone agrees that some of the extra additives are harmless. But, he
says, 'consumers had felt some progress was made in the late 1980s with the
reduction in the number of additives such as colours. Now we will have
synthetic colours such as tartrazine and amarynth (E123) on this list'. The
fight against the Es could be ready to start all over again once the clock
strikes midnight at the end of 1992. So hang on to your prawn cocktail
crisps.
