FT  27 JUN 92 / London Stock Exchange: Heavy setback in BP
THE COLLAPSE of British Petroleum (BP) shares following Thursday evening's
stunning resignation of Mr Robert Horton, chairman and chief executive, came
as no surprise to marketmakers in London after a slide in the US overnight.
The price opened at 205p, compared with the previous day's close of 243p,
and shaded to 204p in a frantic trading session before stabilising and
closing a net 34 down at 209p. Some determined buying of the shares was
believed to reflect large scale support from a number of institutions from
the UK, but not from the US, according to dealers. Turnover was a massive
110m shares.
Many analysts continued to take the view that the company would cut the
quarterly dividend when it announces its second quarter results in late or
early August. But there was debate as to the size of any reduction, with one
leading broking house suggesting that the dividend is likely to be
maintained.
The oil team at County NatWest said Mr Horton's resignation was 'not a
specific signal that the dividend will be cut' but cautioned that with BP
'overgeared and overdistributing, ultimately a rights issue and/or a
dividend cut will be needed.' Worries about the need for a rights issue have
long been circulating in the market.
It was also said that any cut in BP's dividend would be very badly received
in the US. American investors have been big buyers of BP in recent months
and are now thought to hold getting on for 10 per cent of the equity, or
around 500m shares. One sector analyst commented that 'If BP cut the payment
then a lot of those shares will be on their way back across the Atlantic in
double quick time.' BP director Mr Steve Ahearne, is scheduled to address a
meeting of the Society of Investment Analysts in London on Tuesday.
Wellcome hit
Pharmaceuticals group Wellcome hit its lowest level this year as dealers
focused on reports that US scientists had made an important discovery in the
development of an AIDS drug which would compete with Wellcome's Retrovir.
Scientists at Yale University claim a drug called Nevirapine has fewer side
effects than Retrovir, which represents a fairly small proportion of
Wellcome's turnover but has a high profile because of AIDS. Wellcome said it
foresaw no threat to its drug from the findings.
The shares were down 37 at one stage and closed 27 off at 887p as brokers
involved in the forthcoming share flotation began their global road show of
presentations yesterday. Some traders fear weak stock market conditions
could force Wellcome Trust to cut the price of its Pounds 3bn international
share offer.
The shares also responded to a weak dollar and speculation that County
NatWest, the only significant UK broker not involved in the flotation, had
turned negative. However, County said it had been a holder of Wellcome since
November and had not changed its stance.
The rest of the pharmaceuticals sector came under pressure in the wake of
Wellcome's slide. Fisons fell 18 to 195p, with US house Salomon Brothers
said to offering stock, Glaxo shed 14 to 693p and SmithKline Beecham eased 6
to 873p.
Trouble continued to dog British Aerospace (BAe), as its broker Hoare Govett
downgraded the group, although the house remains a buyer of the stock. Hoare
refused to detail its revised figures, but talk in the market suggested that
it had halved its pre-tax forecast to some Pounds 75m, before any
provisions.
One factor in the Hoare calculations was uncertainty surrounding the future
of BAe's regional aircraft business. Mr Nick Cunningham at Strauss Turnbull
commented: 'BAe remains a buy for the brave. It is difficult to put any
figures to the group until it can provide some solid information. Until
then, the inevitable uncertainty will be reflected in the share price.' BAe
shares dipped 10 to 262p.
Shell was a big beneficiary of the BP weakness, with the shares moving up 4
to 502p on turnover of 4.6m. There was hectic trading in Lasmo which settled
a fraction higher at 177p on heavy turnover of 13m shares after the
ultimately successful outcome of the public offering of the downstream
interests acquired when it took over Ultramar.
A broker downgrade upset Barclays shares which dropped sharply to close 12
off at 339p on turnover of 3.9m.
Sedgwick was a big casualty in the insurance area of the market as an
institutional seller of a block of 5.9m shares at 174p, well below the
ruling market price, saw the stock retreat to close a net 8 off at 181p.
Turnover totalled 14m shares. Willis Corroon fell in sympathy, closing 12
lower at 220p.
The market's anxiety over the possibility of a cut in BP's dividend prompted
a wave of support for utilities where dividends are seen as safe and above
average.
Regional electricity stocks attracted strong support with Northern 10 higher
at 344p, while Eastern rose 7 to 280p and Manweb 6 to 365p.
Kleinwort Benson was said to have been a big supporter of the water sector.
Severn Trent was the pick of the water stocks, the shares improving 8 to
402p. Anglian edged up 5 to 412p, as did Thames to 429p.
A trade press report that Rolls-Royce may be interested in Allison, the
General Motors' gas turbine subsidiary, was poorly received in the market.
The shares lost 2 to 153p as wary traders eyed the suggested Dollars 750m
price tag with caution, arguing that Rolls would need to issue paper to make
such an offer.
Boardroom changes shook BM Group, the shares plunging 81 to 233p in heavy
turnover of 4.2m.
Poor German car registration figures for May knocked GKN, which tumbled 17
to 369p in exceptional turnover of 3.7m.
Reuters continued to respond to the launch this week of Globex, the
international after-hours screen trading system. The shares were up 6
against the market at 1136p.
Motor and financial services group Inchcape slipped 17 to 463p on talk of a
stock overhang and some profit-taking after recent strength.
One dealer said a line of 2m shares had been overhanging the market.
Kleinwort Benson analyst Mr Bob Carpenter said the motor distribution market
has been difficult in the first half of the year and a weaker US dollar had
an adverse impact on sentiment.
Specialist chemicals company BTP fell 10 to 228p following disappointing
annual results this week. Hoare Govett has cut its forecast for the year
ending March 1993 by Pounds 4m to Pounds 22m.
International drinks groups were hit by downgradings from Smith New Court.
Allied-Lyons slipped 3 to 632p, with Grand Metropolitan losing 6 at 457p,
and Guinness falling 14 to 545p. Mr Mike McCarthy, analyst at Smith New
Court, said the forecasts had been cut for all three against a background of
falling spirit sales in Britain and the US and possible exchange rate
losses, because of a weaker dollar against sterling.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1992
NEW HIGHS (23).
BRITISH FUNDS (3) Fd 3 1/2 pc '99-04, Treas 9pc '12 A, Treas 4 1/8 pc IL
'30, OTHER FIXED INTEREST (1) Birmingham 11 1/2 pc '12, BUSINESS SERVICES
(1) NMW Cmptrs, CHEMICALS (1) Halstead, ELECTRICITY (1) Southern,
ELECTRONICS (1) Blick, ENGINEERING GENERAL (1) Vosper Thornycroft, FOOD
RETAILING (1) Shoprite, HEALTH &amp; HOUSEHOLD (1) Assoc Nursing Servs,
INSURANCE LIFE (1) Britannic, INVESTMENT TRUSTS (3) GT Venture, Malaysia Cap
Select, River &amp; Merc Stppd Pf, MEDIA (1) Ulster TV, MOTORS (1) Central Mtr
Auctions, OIL &amp; GAS (2) Alliance Res, Texaco 8pc Cv, OTHER FINANCIAL (2)
Intrum Justitia, London Scott, PROPERTY (1) Anglo St James, TEXTILES (1)
Dunkeld.
NEW LOWS (123).
AMERICANS (5) Pennzoil, Rockwell, Southwestern Bell, Sun Inc, Utd
Technologies, CANADIANS (1) Brascan, BANKS (6) ANZ, Espirito Santo, Kyowa
Saitama, Mitsubishi, Natl Australian, Sumitomo T &amp; B, BUILDING MATERIALS (2)
Meyer, Travis Perkins, BUSINESS SERVICES (2) African Lakes, Air London,
CHEMICALS (2) Anglo Utd, Caird, CONGLOMERATES (5) CSR, Ensor, Reece,
Trafalgar Hse, Do A, CONTRACTING &amp; CONSTRUCTION (6) Bett Bros, Costain,
Lilley, Mowlem, Try, Wilson (C), ELECTRICALS (1) TDS Circuits, ELECTRONICS
(2) Harland Simon, Norsk Data, ENGINEERING GENERAL (7) BM, Beverley,
Elliott, Hopkinsons, Kvaerner, Meggitt, Victaulic, HEALTH &amp; HOUSEHOLD (8)
Cortecs, Crown Eyeglass, Fisons, Hafslund Nycomed A, Do B, Lilly, Medeva,
Wellcome, HOTELS &amp; LEISURE (2) Intl Media Comms, Kunick, INSURANCE BROKERS
(3) JIB, Sedgwick, Willis Corroon, INVESTMENT TRUSTS (25) Aberforth Split
Level Inc, Abtrust Prfd Inc, Anglo &amp; O'seas, Dunedin Worldwide, Euro Assets,
Exmoor Dual Inc, Flmg O'seas, Flmg Universal, For &amp; Col Pacific, Do Wts,
Gartmore Amer, Kleinwort High Inc, Martin Currie Pac Wts, Murray Intl, New
Throgmorton, Overseas Inv, Do Wts, Primadona, Riv &amp; Merc Amer Inc, Riv &amp;
Merc Geared Inc, SPLIT Inc, Scottish Inv, Second Alliance, Throg Dual Inc,
USDC, MEDIA (2) Home Counties, Storm, METAL &amp; METAL FORMING (1) Sycamore,
MISCELLANEOUS (4) Bimec, Hartstone, Kalamazoo, Ross, OIL &amp; GAS (6) BP,
Presidio, Mobil, Santos, Sceptre Res, Woodside, OTHER FINANCIAL (1) Union
Discount, OTHER INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS (4) Baynes, Marling, OMI, Pacific
Dunlop, PACKAGING, PAPER &amp; PRINTING (2) Olives, Smurfit, PROPERTY (7) Aukett
Assocs, Dwyer, Frogmore Ests, Grainger, Lends Lease, Property Tst, Wates
City Of London, STORES (8) Alexon, Blacks Leis, Body Shop, French
Connection, Liberty, Oliver, Ratners 6 7/8 pc Pf, Sears, TEXTILES (1) Lowe,
TRANSPORT (5) Bergesen, Cons Freightways, Davies &amp; Newman, Mayne Nickless,
Norex, MINES (5) Kloof, Randfontein Ests, Southvaal, Unisel, Western Deep.
