FT  09 JUL 92 / Arts: King Lear in New York - Theatre
The Chichester Festival Theatre has acquired the reputation - somewhat
unfairly - of being a rather middlebrow, Home Counties sort of place where
it is best to play safe. It has been suggested that Melvyn Bragg's King Lear
in New York was brought into the repertory to see if the audience would take
something more risky.
There need be no fears on that account. Bragg's play is as middlebrow as
they come, and none the worse for that. True, there is a sprinkling of four
letter words, a conversation between father and daughter about sex and a
scene involving hard drugs, but these are of the stuff that can be seen
regularly on television and which presumably even Mrs Whitehouse no longer
objects to in decibels.
Nor, on the intellectual side, does appreciation of the play depend on an
intimate knowledge of the original King Lear.
Bragg is a biographer of the late Richard Burton and it is of Burton that
any audience will be quickly reminded. Here is the once stage idol who has
spent too much of his time wasting his talent on screen, women and whisky,
having a go at King Lear before his stage reputation becomes only a memory.
He is doing it not in the mainstream, but off-off Broadway.
The key question is whether the Burton figure, here called Robert and played
by John Stride, will pull it off or even appear at all. Since the play
contains a considerable measure of suspense, I shall not reveal the answer.
Suffice it to say that there are lots of traps along the way, including a
neurotic first wife who turns up unexpectedly, the daughter by his first
marriage who is on drugs, and his estranged second wife who emerges as his
agent with an offer for him to return to Hollywood - provided he does not
risk flopping as Lear.
Far and away the best scene in the play is a late night television interview
in which the TV hostess, Jackie, is given as good as she gets in trying to
exploit Robert's weaknesses.
Jackie is wonderfully played by Kate O'Mara and this whole sequence had the
Chichester audience rivetted.
That is at the end of the first act. Nothing in the rest of the play quite
lives up to it. There is a structural failing in that while Act 1 is a
unity, played throughout in a New York hotel suite which the televison crew
invades, Act 2 dots about too much, changing location some half a dozen
times in manner more suited to the screen than to the stage.
I must add , however, that the element of suspense is never wholly lost.
One of the nicest inventions in the play is a character called Alec, a
friend of Robert, and in some ways the equivalent of Lear's Fool. He calls
Robert Nuncle and is a bit of a conjuror, but is perhaps more of a nurse.
Sometimes he succeeds in keeping his hero off the bottle and as played by
Richard Warwick, this is a very gentle, admirable performance.
Stride's Robert could be a bit wilder. He looks as if he might fail, but
never as if he might go really mad. Perhaps it is fear of the Chichester
audience that is responsible for such restraint. He should wind up a bit
more in future.
The direction is by Patrick Garland, the artistic director of the theatre.
He is having an excellent season. King Lear in New York is not as exciting
as Coriolanus nor as interesting as Christopher Fry's Venus Observed, but it
adds variety.
The Home Counties should flock to it. It is jut the sort of piece that
people like to talk about afterwards - controversial without really
upsetting anyone.
In Repertory
