FT  26 MAR 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Letting Rover off
the leash - The car group is severing relations with existing agencies
'OF COURSE it's completely weird. Advertising just does not happen this way.
And you can take it from me - it's not going to work.'
Such is the verdict of one Saatchi &amp; Saatchi executive on Rover Group's
decision to change the way it advertises and markets its cars in the UK and
continental Europe.
Relinquishing outside agencies, Rover yesterday formally handed the bulk of
its marketing accounts to a new company - Kevin Morley Group - set up by
Kevin Morley, a former commercial director of Austin Rover and now a
non-executive board member of Rover Group.
More than 30 advertising agencies, dealing with television, press and direct
mail, once handled Rover's advertising. The company is reluctant to put a
value on its marketing budget, but an estimate for expenditure in the UK and
Europe might be in the region of Pounds 100m. In the UK, the Rover account
was worth some Pounds 20m annually to BSB, part of the Saatchi group.
As the recession continues, commissions are being squeezed and advertisers
are trying to reduce advertising budgets. Where Rover advances, other large
advertisers may follow.
As the Saatchi executive said: 'Losing business to a flesh and blood rival
is one thing, but to lose it this way is something else again'.
Kevin Morley says that Rover's move had been planned for nine months. 'There
was a need in Rover to cut costs and to have a form of integrated marketing.
We have been trying for a number of years to get an integrated marketing
agency - there are plenty in this country and the US - but not of the size
required to handle Rover. Rover's stance is one name, one standard,
everywhere. You can't have one name and one standard everywhere with 30
different agencies, all with their own objectives.'
Morley's contract with Rover says that KMG will handle all Rover's marketing
business in the UK and Europe. However, initially he will have to use
existing agencies across Europe; it will not become a pan-Europe agency
overnight.
For the time being, BSB - part of the Saatchi group - will continue to act
on behalf of Rover, but through Kevin Morley. BSB Dorland retains Rover's UK
Land Rover account. Zenith, the media-buying wing of Saatchi, will also
continue to act for Rover in Europe and UK.
Kevin Morley has recruited 45 people for his new agency. The staff will
handle strategic advertising, including television, press and direct mail.
That strategic group will place advertising with the sales teams across
Europe.
'It is not common in the motor industry to have pan-European advertising but
in other industries it's been common for years,' says Morley.
'Kevin Morley Group is a separate company owned 100 per cent by me; the
relationship with Rover is merely that we handle all of Rover's marketing
activities. What I am trying to do is to get away from thinking purely in
terms of advertising.
'What clients understand, and I would suggest advertising agencies don't
quite understand yet, is that clients want the one name and one standard
running everywhere throughout all of their activities, from the TV
commercial right the way down to the salesman's handbook in the showroom.'
One area that prompted the new marketing policy is Morley's own encounters
with advertising agencies, which failed to look at what clients required,
including such supposedly unglamorous details as direct mail: 'It was
described to me by one advertising agency chairman as 'the other stuff'.'
Nor is the most important issue cost-cutting. John Towers, managing director
of Rover Group, says that while Rover expects 'a minimum of 10 per cent'
better value for money, that will not necessarily mean a 10 per cent cut in
the marketing budget. Morley says that fees will be lower because there are
less fixed costs associated with one agency rather than 30.
'We can probably also save 10 per cent by group media buying, by having
pan-European media buying done centrally out of London or Paris.'
According to Morley, Rover's decision to unify and slim its marketing plans
is in line with a policy to reduce its suppliers generally, from more than
900 currently to just under 200.
Morley is no longer an employee of Rover Group, though confusingly he will
act as managing director of Rover Marketing, a division within the group. He
is at pains to emphasise that Rover has not simply decided to take all its
marketing in-house: Rover Marketing, with a staff of 100, handles corporate
planning and future product development; KMG will handle what is
conventionally thought of as advertising and marketing.
Nevertheless, a condition of his company's five-year contract for the Rover
business is that he devotes himself to the Rover account.
Morley dismisses suggestions that his role as a non-executive director at
Rover Group and his control of Rover's new marketing supplier could lead to
conflict of interest. He is satisfied that, as Rover Group's marketing
budget is under the control of the group board and is not in the hands of
any one individual, such suggestions are groundless.
His view is that accusations of interest-conflict stem largely from the
advertising world which, he believes, fails to understand what his new
company - and Rover's policy change - entails.
'It has been said that the advertising industry is the youngest on earth
with the oldest ideas. The critics don't understand the move; there is no
conflict of interest.'
