FT  05 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Morland spurns Pounds 101m Greene King
offer
MORLAND, the Thames Valley regional brewer, yesterday flatly rejected the
Pounds 101m takeover bid from Greene King, the East Anglia-based brewer, as
'an opportunistic attempt . . . to acquire Morland on the cheap.'
Sir Humphrey Prideaux, Morland's chairman, urged shareholders not to be
pressured into accepting Greene King's paper offer of 477p a share or the
cash alternative of 450p. 'We have no doubt that the bid undervalues your
company,' he said.
Sir Humphrey accused Greene King of trying to take advantage of Whitbread
Investment Company's enforced disposal of its 43.4 per cent shareholding to
comply with the government's beer orders.
WIC had sold Greene King a 28.5 per cent holding and pledged its 14.9 per
cent balance - but price had been 'a secondary consideration,' Sir Humphrey
said, and other shareholders had no reason to sell on the same terms.
Greene King's offer document had attempted to mislead shareholders on
Morland's performance and prospects, he charged. 'In fact, we have an
excellent financial record and a sound and proven strategy.'
Over the past five years, Morland's pre-tax profits had grown by 18.9 per
cent a year - 'well over twice as fast as Greene King.'
Earnings per share had grown at a compound rate of 17 per cent a year - 'the
best record of all the major regional brewers and pub operators.'
Dividends per share had grown at 16.6 per cent a year compared to Greene
King's 11.7 per cent.
Taunting Greene King with its failure to forecast its profits for the year
to May 3, Sir Humphrey asked: 'Does it have something to hide? Are its
profits up to market expectations?
Mr Simon Redman, Greene King's chairman, said last night: 'We have nothing
to hide. We have issued a full statement about current trading and a final
dividend forecast.'
Morland had not attempted to deny the commercial logic of acquisition by
Greene King, he said. Morland's profit record was no guide to its future in
a beer industry that was changing fundamentally.
Suggestions that Morland had strategic difficulties in coping with changes
in the industry were dismissed as 'nonsense' by Mr Jasper Clutterbuck, chief
executive.
Morland's brewery made a significant contribution to group profits and was
producing ale more cheaply than it could be bought on the open market, he
claimed. Distribution deals with national brewers had opened new markets for
its ales; free trade sales had increased 54 per cent in the past two years.
Greene King had admitted that Morland had 'a good quality' pub estate, and
talks on further acquisitions were being held, Mr Clutterbuck said.
With gearing of only 8.1 per cent - compared to Greene King's 42 per cent -
and cash deposits of more than Pounds 9m, Morland was well-positioned to
take advantage of opportunities arising from the industry upheavals caused
by the beer orders.
