FT  11 FEB 92 / UK Company News: Spurs' shares rise on return to black
TOTTENHAM HOTSPUR, the north London football company which recently returned
from Stock Exchange suspension after a financial rescue, yesterday announced
its first pre-tax profit for two years.
In the six months to November 30, which includes most of the close season,
it made Pounds 810,000 pre-tax, compared with a loss of Pounds 2.14m.
The share price gained 8p to close at 90p yesterday. This is above the 75p
per share that Mr Alan Sugar, head of Amstrad and Tottenham chairman, and Mr
Terry Venables, team manager turned chief executive, paid for control last
summer, but below the recent 125p rights issue level.
Turnover improved to Pounds 9.22m (Pounds 8.9m), although the continuing
football-related business showed a 43 per cent advance. Since the first half
of last year, clothing and other non-core activities have been closed or
sold.
Mr Colin Sandy, finance director, said that cup runs, fees for televised
games, increased attendances and the first year of the Umbro kit sponsorship
deal had all helped. Interest costs fell from Pounds 1.19m to Pounds
750,000, as rates came down.
The rights issue, announced in December and largely underwritten by Mr
Sugar, brought in Pounds 7m, reducing bank debt to Pounds 5.9m.
Mr Sandy said it had since been cut to less than Pounds 5m. This would be
wiped out if the planned sale of Paul Gascoigne, the injured international
player, goes ahead at the end of May after a medical examination.
Profits on the sale of other players, including Gary Lineker, were partly
offset by the purchase of Gordon Durie, leaving Pounds 274,000 (Pounds
249,000) net.
Earnings per share were 8p (losses 21.2p) on 10.2m shares in issue. The
4-for-7 rights issue will add 5.82m shares for just over four months to the
full-year figures.
No tax was charged because of previous losses.
The lack of distributable reserves prevented an interim dividend being paid.
Tottenham said it was planning to restructure the balance sheet to allow a
final payment.
