FT  01 SEP 92 / P&amp;O unveils Channel battle plan
P&amp;O European Ferries, the biggest ferry operator between Britain and the
Continent, is to embark on an aggressive attempt to dominate the
cross-Channel market before the opening of the Channel tunnel next year.
It is to increase daily sailings on the Dover-Calais route by 20 per cent to
an unprecedented 25 each way, with departures every 45 minutes at peak
times.
The aim is to provide so many sailings that there will always be a P&amp;O
vessel loading on the berths at Dover and Calais. That means motorists would
be able to drive straight on to a P&amp;O ferry without having to queue.
The company will cut check-in times from 30 minutes to 20 minutes by
introducing a computerised port-handling system using machine-readable
tickets.
P&amp;O's strategy is aimed at increasing the appeal of its service ahead of the
opening of the Channel tunnel by improving speed and convenience. Heavy
investment in new vessels has also brought higher levels of comfort.
The company intends not only to defend its position against the tunnel but
to take market share from Sealink Stena Line, the other big ferry operator
on the Dover-Calais route.
The opening of the tunnel, scheduled for autumn next year, will bring
over-capacity and fierce competition on cross-Channel services. P&amp;O believes
only one ferry operator will survive.
The company has repeatedly tried to persuade the Department of Trade and
Industry to waive a Monopolies and Mergers Commission ruling and let it hold
merger talks with Sealink, but the department has replied that the opening
of the tunnel is still too far away.
Under its 1993 strategy, unveiled today, P&amp;O seems likely to have a
competitive edge over Sealink on the Dover-Calais route next year. It will
have more sailings (25, against 20 for Sealink); a higher peak-period
frequency (45 minutes, against 75 minutes); a shorter check-in time (20
minutes, against 30 minutes); and faster vessels, giving a shorter crossing
time (1 hour 15 minutes, against 1 hour 30 minutes).
Sealink has indicated that it has no intention of yielding to P&amp;O on the
Dover-Calais route. It has just emerged from an extensive restructuring,
which it says has given it a highly competitive cost base.
Both operators have been enjoying increases in passenger volumes of 20 per
cent to 25 per cent this year, largely because of the growing popularity of
self-drive holidays in France, the growth of short-break holidays and the
opening of Eurodisney.
Tariffs have risen beyond the rate of inflation, but many special offers for
individuals and discounts for tour operators have caused revenues to rise
less rapidly than the growth in volumes would suggest.
Illust. Light at the end ..P&amp;O aims to ensure that its ferry services
survive after the Channel tunnel opens next year
