FT  29 APR 92 / International Company News: USX and Bethlehem post losses on
steel operations
THE two largest steel makers in the US  - USX and Bethlehem Steel  -
underlined the weakness of the market yesterday when they reported
first-quarter losses from their steel-making operations, albeit lower than
their losses in the same period of last year.
USX said its steel group, which has a separate stock market quotation from
its Marathon energy business, lost Dollars 13m, or 27 cents a share, on
sales of Dollars 1.2bn, compared with a net loss of Dollars 308m, or Dollars
6.06, on Dollars 1.1bn of sales a year earlier.
As a group, USX reported net income of Dollars 22m, compared with a loss of
Dollars 237m a year ago, on sales of Dollars 4.1bn, down from Dollars 4.5bn.
Bethlehem reported a net loss of Dollars 45m, or 66 cents a share, up from
Dollars 39m, or 60 cents, in the same period of last year. Sales totalled
Dollars 995.4m, down from Dollars 1.05bn a year earlier.
Mr Charles Corry, USX chairman, said that while the company's results were
much improved, 'recessionary demand levels and excess world steel capacity
continued to push steel prices down in the first quarter'.
Results had also been hit by a plant fire.
Marathon reported net income of Dollars 35m, or 12 cents a share, compared
with Dollars 71m, or 27 cents, down from Dollars 3.4bn to Dollars 2.9bn. The
main cause of the decline was lower crude prices and refined product
margins.
Bethlehem, which forecast continuing losses in the second quarter, said that
while its steel shipments had been significantly higher in the first
quarter, realised prices were lower, offsetting the benefits of higher
volume. The results were also affected by higher labour and interest costs.
Its basic steel operations lost Dollars 22m, an improvement on the Dollars
26m reported a year ago. Average realised prices remained at the extremely
low levels of 1991's fourth quarter, although shipments increased following
completion of a blast furnace reline at its large Burns Harbor plant.
Bethlehem said it planned to generate Dollars 200m from asset sales during
the year, mainly from the previously heralded sale of its coal operations.
It was too early to judge the potential proceeds from the disposal of its
bar and rod operations, which Bethlehem put up for sale at the start of the
year and which were excluded from its reported results.
It added that, while there were some encouraging signs of recovery in the US
economy, it expected to report a second-quarter net loss and anticipated
only moderate improvement in steel demand for the rest of the year.
Nucor, the largest of the US mini-mills, which have been taking market share
from integrated steel makers, yesterday reported first-quarter net income of
Dollars 16.2m, up from Dollars 13.99m in the same period of last year, on
sales which rose from Dollars 351m to Dollars 388m.
