FT  05 FEB 92 / Crisis casts a long shadow / A look at prospects for the
world's steelmakers
The world steel industry probably wishes it could start 1992 over again. It
has got off to a bad start.
In Europe thousands of jobs are being cut. Early last month British Steel
announced plans to close the remaining blast furnaces at its forlorn
Ravenscraig plant in Scotland.
Usinor Sacilor, the French state-owned group which is Europe's largest
producer, last week estimated its 1991 losses at FFr3.1bn (Pounds 317m) and
announced plans to cut 8,000 jobs, about 13 per cent of its workforce in the
next three years.
The normally stable German producers, the heart of the European industry
accounting for about a third of production, are in turmoil. This week's pay
agreement with IG Metall to avert a strike is likely to lead to a faster
rate of job losses. German analysts expect at least 6,000 job losses this
year in the industry's workforce of 130,000.
They will be partly produced by mergers among Germany's string of
steelmakers. By the end of the year Krupp and Hoesch should have merged to
create a second force in the German industry to compete with Thyssen, which
is merging its special steels division into general steel.
The prospect of both these groups cutting their costs is almost certain to
put pressure on medium-sized steel producers such as Klockner Werke and
Peine Salzgitter in Germany and Hoogovens in the Netherlands to follow suit
by gaining economies of scale through partnerships and alliances.
Ilva, the Italian group which is Europe's second largest producer is in the
midst of a plan to sell 20 per cent of its production. But with its profits
plunging and few buyers in the market for inefficient steel plants it seems
almost certain that Ilva will be pushed soon into politically painful moves
to cut costs and jobs, especially at its Piombino plant on the coast
opposite Elba.
The tale of woe from Europe's leading integrated steel producers is echoed
across the Atlantic.
Inland Steel last month reported it made its largest ever loss in 1991 of
Dollars 275m (Pounds 151m). It plans to spend about Dollars 215m in the next
three years to cut about 3,500 jobs.
US Steel, the largest integrated producer which is the steel arm of USX,
reported a loss for the year of Dollars 507m against net income of Dollars
310m in 1990. Bethlehem Steel, the second largest producer, is to cut its
workforce by almost 25 per cent by selling or closing down several
operations.
In the coming months the US and European producers could be joined by
Japan's integrated producers in declaring sharply lower profits. The mighty
Nippon Steel, the world's largest producer has already warned that profits
are under severe pressure.
Yet these three months may mark the industry's low point from which it could
begin to recover.
Demand may be stabilising. The OECD expects steel demand in the OECD
economies to fall by about 1 per cent this year after a 5.2 per cent fall
last year. Prices for steel used in some consumer products are firming in
Europe and the US. The worst may be over as stronger world growth encourages
a revival in investment and output from vital customer industries such as
cars and trucks.
That optimism may be misplaced. The path to recovery is difficult to predict
because the course of the downturn has confounded expectations. In both the
US and Europe the decline in output and demand has been relatively modest
but the impact on the steelmakers' finances has been great.
Mr Christopher Plummer, director of steel services for Wefa, the
Pennsylvania-based forecasting group said: 'The volume of US steel shipped
to customers last year fell by 8 per cent. In previous recessions the fall
was more than 20 per cent. The fall in volumes has been mild but the
financial and corporate impact has been huge.'
The explanation is that in Europe as well as the US structural factors have
exacerbated the fall in output as marginal producers have been able to set
very low prices.
In the US the main complicating factor has been the rise of the low cost
mini-mills, which combine new technology electric arc furnaces with
non-union labour, innovative payment systems and wafer-thin management
layers, to produce low cost steel especially for the construction industry.
Through the depths of the recession the most competitive mini-mills - Nucor,
Chapparal and Birmingham - have been making profits, according to Mr
Plummer.
In Europe the problem has been created by subsidised public sector producers
who cut prices to maintain market share and keep plants running. These
producers have driven down prices for the rest of the industry.
The growing integration of world steel markets has amplified the pricing
problem. For much of the last two years lower demand from the former Soviet
Union and China has forced exporters to find other markets for their steel.
In the next year lower steel demand in Japan and Germany will force their
producers to export more. This could dash the hopes of US and European
producers that 1992 will bring a measure of stability.
This year US exports are likely to fall by 22 per cent while imports to rise
8 per cent sucked in by the expected recovery.
Any recovery this year in the steel markets of Europe and the US is likely
to be halting and patchy. The companies which stand to benefit will be in
the right parts of the steel market, in the right parts of the world.
Long products producers, who supply beams and heavy-duty wire to the
construction industry, will continue to suffer on both sides of the
Atlantic. In the US virtually all the big integrated producers have
withdrawn from this sector in the face of the competitive challenge of the
mini-mills.
The main beneficiaries of recovery will be groups such as Usinor, Hoesch and
Thyssen of Germany which are the biggest flat products makers.
The other factor which should distinguish groups able to take advantage of
recovery will be the geographic spread of their activities. Thyssen should
be hit by slower growth in Germany but it makes 15 per cent of its revenues
in the US which should be recovering, compared with US turnover of 5 per
cent at British Steel.
The boom of the late 1980s which returned steelmakers to profit in the US
and Europe proved shortlived. The effects of the downturn of the early 1990s
will reverberate through the industry for several years to come.
