FT  05 MAR 92 / Political Notebook: Fratricide born of monetary confusion
THERE ARE two quite separate political debates about the case for fiscal
prudence or otherwise in next week's Budget.
The first is the obvious one which will continue to dominate the election
battle between the Conservatives and Labour. But a more fascinating - and
equally vociferous - argument has started on the right of the Conservative
party. It looks likely to run well beyond the general election - win or
lose.
Guardians of the Thatcherite torch have taken to expressing themselves as
unenthusiastic as Mr Neil Kinnock for a cut of a penny or two in the basic
rate of income tax at the expense of another few billion on public
borrowing. This has raised eyebrows among those brought up to believe that
Mrs Margaret Thatcher was more determined than most to give voters the
chance to spend more of their own money.
More seriously, it has infuriated nervous ministers who see an old-fashioned
bribe as the best and perhaps only chance of winning an April 9 election.
The first signs of a row surfaced in some unguarded remarks by Mr Cecil
Parkinson. The former cabinet minister is now chairman of Conservative Way
Forward, a pressure group set up to defend the free-market wisdom of the
1980s. He argued that the government's reputation for economic prudence,
albeit slightly frayed, was far more important to the voters than a
pre-election cut in income tax. With borrowing at well above Pounds 20bn Mr
Norman Lamont should err on the side of caution.
His comments provided the cue for a stream of less temperate attacks on Mr
John Major from Thatcherite acolytes, most notably Professor Patrick Minford
of Liverpool University and Professor Sir Alan Walters, her former economic
adviser.
What has given such voices resonance at Westminster is the perception that
they articulate Mrs Thatcher's own thoughts - offered privately at
gatherings of her supporters in the No Turning Back group.
The former prime minister has said she intends to keep her counsel during
the campaign - she does not want to become the scapegoat for a Labour
victory. Privately, she has scarcely disguised her horror at the prospective
borrowing requirement.
Her starting point is that governments cannot borrow their way out of
recessions. She recalls the 1981 Budget - when Sir Geoffrey Howe raised
taxes at the same point in the economic cycle in defiance of 364 Keynsian
economists - as proof positive.
From there the argument becomes more complicated. Mr Madsen Pirie, the
director of the free-market Adam Smith Institute, is among a number of
erstwhile true believers who have broken ranks to press the case for tax
cuts.
Ironically, Conservative Way Forward has itself published a pamphlet in
which two election candidates reach the same conclusion.
The result is confusion. At least one No Turning Back member (whose own view
is that the political imperative of tax cuts long ago rendered academic the
theoretical arguments) has taken to describing his soulmates as 'all over
the place'.
The apparent contradictions can be reconciled. Mrs Thatcher and her allies
have not suddenly decided that taxes are a good thing. Quite the reverse.
She is as strong as ever in her defence of the individual against the state.
Instead, the debate about the Budget is a proxy for two much more
fundamental rows over economic management.
One centres on Mr Major's decision to add Pounds 11bn to public spending in
the autumn. The other is that familiar bete noire of the right, the exchange
rate mechanism.
For those who have kept faith with 'sound money', Mr Major committed two
mortal sins. The first was to subordinate interest rate cuts to maintaining
sterling's rate in the exchange rate mechanism. The second was to seek to
compensate for that by relaxing the public-spending purse strings.
The successful monetarism of the 1980s, the argument runs, has been replaced
by the failed Keynsianism of the 1960s and 1970s. It is a theme that Mrs
Thatcher is likely to return to when she takes up her seat in the House of
Lords after the election.
