FT  12 MAY 92 / Survey of Angola (13): Opinions differ over future -
Minerals Industry
ANGOLA'S mineral industry is littered with projects abandoned by local and
foreign operators after the onset of civil war following independence in
1975.
A combination of political stability and an attractive business climate
could see a substantial expansion of a sector currently dominated by oil and
diamonds, say local officials.
Western experts are more cautious, concerned about the country's poor
infrastructure and generally weak international markets for many of the
potential mineral exports.
Excluding the two key foreign exchange earners - oil and diamonds - mining
production currently represents less than 3 per cent of GDP and
approximately 6 per cent of total exports. These figures could rise
comparatively rapidly, say industry officials, if abandoned workings are
brought back into production and previously untapped resources are
exploited.
Iron ore exports, for example, earned 11.7 per cent of the then Portuguese
colony's earnings in 1970, making it the fourth-ranking economic activity in
Angola and the country a medium-sized producer of the mineral. Angola also
has extensive deposits of phosphates, copper, quartz, uranium, manganesem
wolfram, gold, mica, sulphur, nickel, limestone and silver which have yet to
be fully exploited, notes Mr Jose Dias, secretary of state for geology and
mining. 'Our mining industry has been neglected for a long time and we are
only at the beginning of its development. No new investment has been made in
mines. Many of our minerals have been forgotten,' he says.
The government, which recently surrendered its monopoly on all mineral
rights, is trying to encourage investment in the sector. This year it
introduced a new mining law which makes it possible for private foreign and
local companies to invest in prospecting and mining.
The state mining companies are also seeking to negotiate more flexible
fiscal terms with private companies which will take into account the cost
and rate of return of developments.
Mr Dias says the government is considering proposals from RTZ, Anglo
American and De Beers on future developments.
Ferrangol, set up in 1981 with the responsibility for exploiting iron ore
and manganese deposits, is now closed and being held on a care and
maintenance basis. A combination of instability caused by the civil war and
the depressed international market made the resumption of iron ore mining
economically unrealistic until recently.
Between 1968 and 1973, exports averaged 5-6m tonnes, but war halted
production at the largest iron ore mine at Cassinga, near the Namibian
border, the centre of an area that was regularly attacked by South African
and Unita forces.
With the establishment of peace, there is a possibility that mining could
resume. However, the extent of iron ore reserves and their value on today's
international market has yet to be established.
Export prices are expected to remain uncompetitive because of exorbitant
transport costs. Road and rail links were prime targets for attack and their
repair rehabilitation has not begun.
Three additional mining companies have been formed since independence:
Fosfang, in 1979, to initiate exploration of phosphate deposits, Minaquartzo
in the same year was given the concession for quartz mining in Cuanza-Sul
province, and Roremina was established in 1978 to take over work previously
done by the sub-commission of quarries.
The quartz mines controlled by Minaquartzo are currently closed. Angola's
quartz competes with comparable products from Madagascar, Sri Lanka and
Brazil. Dunes, the South African-British group, is reported to be considered
a joint venture contract with Minaquartzo. Foreign experts estimate
investment of Dollars 3m would be needed to recover the previous level of
quartz production - about 2,000 tons a year.
