FT  11 FEB 92 / Hillsdown to buy Unigate's chicken operation for Pounds 37m
HILLSDOWN Holdings, the diver-sified food group, has agreed to buy JP Wood,
Unigate's loss-making chicken operation, for a maximum of Pounds 36.7m.
The deal will make Hillsdown Britain's largest chicken producer, with almost
a quarter of production, and will end Unigate's involvement in the industry.
Hillsdown, which already owns the Buxted poultry business, is expected to
start restructuring the merged operations. This is likely to involve
substantial cuts in output.
Hillsdown will pay Pounds 18.5m immediately in cash and a further Pounds
8.2m over three years, subject to a working capital adjustment. In addition,
it has agreed to pay up to Pounds 10m if the merged businesses meet
specified performance targets in the three years after the merger. The
company plans to fund the purchase out of the proceeds of a Pounds 280.7m
rights issue made last autumn.
The deal marks the completion of a nine-month search by Unigate for a buyer
for the JP Wood business, which lost Pounds 6.6m in the year to March 31.
Unigate said yesterday that the losses incurred since then and the
write-down of assets resulting from the sale were covered by an Pounds 87.9m
provision for divestments taken in last year's accounts.
JP Wood, Britain's largest poultry producer, operates three plants in
Scunthorpe on Humberside, Anglesey and Clwyd, in Wales. It also owns
hatcheries, rearing, laying and growing farms and two feed mills.
The Pounds 55m Scunthorpe plant, opened in 1988, is the biggest in the UK
and was intended to be the most efficient in the industry. However, it never
attained the ambitious goals set for it and was unable to achieve
profitability.
Construction of the plant was assisted by grants from the European
Community. Unigate said yesterday that it had been assured by the government
that none of the grants would have to be repaid as a result of the sale.
Mr Ross Buckland, who became chief executive of Unigate in October 1990,
announced plans to dispose of the business soon after he took up the post.
Hillsdown has been caught up in turmoil in the UK poultry market, which has
been aggravated by a surge of cut-price imports from France. The company
reported in September that its operating profit on poultry fell Pounds 12.3m
in the first half to Pounds 13.5m.
Lex, Page 20
Background, Page 22
