FT  19 OCT 92 / Management: Construction groups shaken to the foundations -
The rush to rebuild an industry, hard hit by the recession
Like the crew of a sinking ship, Britain's recession-racked construction
companies are busy hurling overboard anything they do not need to keep
themselves afloat.
Jobs, plants and entire businesses are being jettisoned in a desperate
battle for survival as executives struggle to raise cash to lighten
debt-laden balance sheets.
Overheads, representing hundreds of thousands of jobs, have been chopped,
excess capacity shut down and unwanted buildings and non-core businesses
sold, often at a loss. As a result, businesses may look very different when
eventually they reach calmer waters.
For some it will mean returning to the kind of operations they ran at the
end of the 1970s when profits largely came from building and civil
engineering contracting.
Gone, or much reduced, will be the large speculative house building and
commercial property businesses into which contractors expanded during the
1980s - and which caused them so much trouble when the recession struck.
Also, up for sale are many of the non-construction activities acquired to
provide shelter against a downturn in building and property markets.
As well as raising cash, managers are reshaping their businesses to take
account of changed economic circumstances.
Tarmac, Britain's biggest housebuilder, plans by the end of next year to
have reduced capital employed in its housing operations to just Pounds 300m
from a peak of Pounds 800m three years ago. The company, also a building
materials producer, is pulling out of speculative commercial property
development altogether.
Neville Simms, chief executive, says the group is seeking to raise a total
of more than Pounds 300m from disposals.
Construction companies, also, are reducing the amount of money tied up in
expensive housing land. Sir Lawrie Barratt, brought out of retirement last
year to rescue Barratt Development, Britain's third largest housebuilder,
says the company will in future hold about two years' supply of land,
instead of three years' as is customary in the industry.
Sir Lawrie has made substantial savings by cutting the company's stock of
unsold and part-exchange houses and by sale and leaseback of show homes.
Costain Group provides one of the best examples of a UK contractor which
radically altered the mix of its businesses during the 1980s, subsequently
fell on hard times, and is now trying to regroup around its original
construction business.
Building and civil engineering in 1980 generated more than three quarters of
Costain's profits. By 1988 its share of record pre-tax profits had shrunk to
a fifth. The bulk of earnings came from housebuilding, commercial property
and coal mining operations which Costain had built up during the decade.
Four years later the group has been forced to sell its commercial property
portfolio for Pounds 101m. House building, which in 1988 built almost 2,000
houses, produced just 400 homes last year. And, this summer Costain
announced plans to sell its profitable Australian coal mining business.
John Laing, currently constructing a Pounds 300m privately-financed toll
bridge across the River Severn, plans to take Pounds 20m a year out of its
house-building operations over the next three years. Martin Laing, chairman,
says the company will return to its roots and concentrate on traditional
building and civil engineering.
'The advantage of contracting for large companies,' according to Laing, 'is
that overheads are very low, most of actual work is done by others, and cash
is paid up front, so that main contractors can earn interest on it before
passing it on to the sub-contractors.'
The result is a low margin business with a strong cash flow. Earnings and
dividends, as a result, are unlikely to recapture their previous heights
even when the economy recovers.
For the moment, some contractors are taking on work at a loss just to keep
cash flowing to pay wages and stay in business.
More company failures are expected by the industry as opportunities to win
work continue to shrink.
The Building Employers Confederation says that by the end of this year
450,000 construction jobs will have disappeared since summer 1989. This
represents 580 jobs lost for each working day.
Prices charged by construction companies have fallen by up to 30 per cent
since the late 1980s, according a to survey of contractors, their customers
and construction professionals conducted this summer by the Financial Times
and EC Harris international cost consultants.
The outlook for the industry remains stormy.
