FT  29 JUL 92 / Gambling industry hits jackpot: A casino on an Indian
reservation signals change
only the Indian motifs and some Hiawatha-styled waitresses suggest that this
is a casino with a difference.
Welcome to Foxwoods, a complex in eastern Connecticut which opened its doors
in April and packs in more than 20,000 gamblers a day at weekends. What
makes the casino unusual is that it stands on Indian reservation land and is
operated by the Pequot Tribe. It is a perfect example of why the
traditionally restricted gaming industry in the US is suddenly hitting the
jackpot.
Until recently only two US cities offered legalised casino facilities:
glitzy Las Vegas in Nevada and New Jersey's depressed Atlantic City. Slowly,
in the late 1980s, this began to change.
South Dakotans voted to permit casino gambling in a depressed 'Old West'
town called Deadwood. The result has been tagged 'one of the most successful
gambling ventures in modern times,' with revenues topping Dollars 400m
(Pounds 209m) in the first two years.
The Deadwood example is now spreading to larger conurbations. A few months
ago the Louisiana legislature approved construction of casino facilities on
6.5 acres near the French Quarter in New Orleans. Hotel and casino
operators, from ITT Sheraton to Carnival Cruise Lines, are queueing up for
the licence.
In Chicago a joint plan by three big US gaming operators - Hilton, Caesar's
World and Circus Circus - envisages a Dollars 2bn gaming and entertainment
centre. The ciy's Mayor Richard Daly is supportive, even if Illinois'
governor is not. And on the nation's waterways, Iowa and Illinois have
recently introduced riverboat gaming while similar operations are expected
to start soon in Mississippi and Louisiana.
The reasons behind this new permissiveness - which runs counter to the
deep-rooted disenchantment with gambling stemming from the scandals of the
last century - are mainly financial. Recession has squeezed state budgets
and gambling promises a speedy palliative - both in jobs and tax revenues.
In New Orleans Governor Edwin Edwards has estimated the new casino could
generate 25,000 jobs. The state, meanwhile, is demanding 18.5 per cent of
the property's revenues or Dollars 100m a year - whichever is greater.
But it is pressure from Indian reservations which many industry observers
view as the more immediate force for change. Foxwoods illustrates why.
The Pequots won their right to operate a casino under a 1988 federal law
which permits Indians to engage in any form legal in a particular state.
Connecticut's constitution outlaws 'normal' casino operations, but allows
charities to hold 'Las Vegas nights' with 'casino-style' gaming.
Using the loophole, the Pequots fought a long legal battle against
opposition from the likes of Connecticut's Governor Lowell Weicker. The
arguments only ended when the Supreme Court declined to hear the issue.
No sooner was Foxwoods off the drawing-board than Mr Steve Wynn, one of the
boldest Las Vegas impresarios, proposed building a Dollars 350m gaming and
conference centre in Hartford, Connecticut's depressed state capital. As
with New Orleans, such a scheme would require approval by the state
legislature, and opposition has again been voiced.
Nevertheless, many observers think it is only a matter of time before Mr
Wynn - or someone like him - prevails.
The reasoning is simple; if on-shore gaming exists in the state anyway, why
should the law not be changed to allow taxpayers to get some benefit?
Foxwoods pumps considerable sums into the state's economy, via secondary
spending and the like - some estimates have suggested Dollars 40m a year.
But the state cannot impose any direct taxes on the resort's table gaming
revenues.
The potential losers are Las Vegas and Atlantic City. The latter is about a
three-hour drive from New York City, and Foxwoods can be reached in similar
time. Already New Jersey has retaliated by extending permitted casino hours
 -and allowing round-the-clock gaming at weekends. Las Vegas, which has
weathered recession far better than its East Coast counterpart, faces a less
immediate threat. Nevertheless, about a third of its 20m annual visitors
come from California, and expansion of Indian gaming centres there could
pose competition.
The other potential loser is the punter - or, if fears of mob infiltration
and prostitution prove correct, society at large. So far there has been no
sign of anything so sinister at Foxwoods.
