FT  24 MAR 92 / Technology: Sparks fly over electric car - Fiat is
undeterred by the limits of batter power
Next month Fiat, the Italian car maker, will start selling an
electrically-powered version of the Cinquecento, its new Polish-built mini
car.  At around L26m (Pounds 12,000) in Italy, the Cinquecento Elttra will
cost roughly 2.6 times as much as a well-equipped petrol version.
It will have a maximum range of 70km in urban driving conditions and a top
speed of 80kph.  Where the rear seats of the conventional model will
accommodate two adults in surprising near-comfort, the Elettra has only a
raised platform behind the front seats, beneath which resides a lead acid
battery pack weighing more than 700lbs.  The Elettra is thus strictly a two
seater.
Even the most senior figures behind its introduction, Ettore Panizza,
technical director of Fiat's electrical and electronic systems division, and
Fabio Massimello, production and marketing director of its electrical
vehicles programme, acknowledge that its performance is 'miserable' in
comparison with the Cinquecento's petrol-engined versions.
The Elettra, like an electric version of the more basic Panda which preceded
the Polish-built car into production, exists because it is Fiat's conviction
that Italy's cities will soon legislate and electric vehicle industry into
being.
The legislation will not be identical to that of California, where any
manufacturer wishing to sell more than 35,000 cars a year will have to make
at least 2 per cent of them 'zero emissions' (electric) starting in 1988.
But Massimello forecasts that it will be just as effective.
From 1994-95, he says, cities across Italy will start closing their centres
to all but electric cars.  Limited closures are already taking place in
Modena and Florence, where pollution monitoring equipment shows unhealthy
pollution levels being reached.  But so far they have been mostly haphazard,
temporary or - as in the case of Rome - simply flouted through loopholes.
As the trend spreads, so Fiat sees its electric car sales inexorably rising.
 'At present, I think we will sell only 150-200 in 1992-93, rising to
400-500 in 1994 and 1,000-1,500 in 1995,' says Massimello.  'But then we see
a sharp rise - to 5,000 in 1996, 10,000 in 1997 and 20,000 in 1998.'  By
2000, Fiat expects the Italian market alone to be absorbing 70,000.
Massimello agrees with Jean Yves Helmer, director in charge of the electric
vehicles programme at France's Peugeot, that by the end of the decade Europe
overall will be providing a market of between 200,000-250,000 electric cars
a year.
Like Peugeot, Fiat stresses the financial burden of developing purpose-built
EVs (electric vehicles) for a market that currently does not exist.  'But at
a volume of 10,000-15,000 units a year it becomes financially viable to
develop and manufacture purpose-built electric cars,' says Panizza.
'Ordinary' cars such as Cinquecento or Peugeot 106 are not ideal for
adaptation.  Produced in steel, they are heavy, and lack specially designed
bulbous bodyshell which could compensate for the bulky battery and allow
more room for passengers.
Perhaps the ultimate current demonstration of what purpose-building an
electric car can achieve is provided by the General Motors Impact.
Lightweight composite materials and low-drag aerodynamics give it a top
speed of more than 100mph.  Production is scheduled to start in three or
four years.  However, neither Fiat nor Peugeot is concerned about such high
performance - at least for Euopean Markets.
They see electric cars 'as little car for the city only', says Massimello.
After a great deal of market research, Fiat has found that most people
require a maximum range of 35km per day.  Since the average speed of traffic
in a typical Italian city is 12-15 kilometres an hour, the range seems
sufficient.
Even so, the Elettra is likely to be bought by only the most ardent - and
well-heeled - environmentalist.  Not surprisingly, after more than a year of
availability, the electric Panda has sold almost exclusively in companies
with a vested interest in the electricity supply industry.
To ease the transition, Fiat's EV programme leaders expect future
governments to provide VAT exemption and possibly other fiscal incentives to
encourage EV's.
'It is very important to try to get cost closer to that of an ordinary car,'
says Massimello.  'A customer might be expected to pay 10-15 per cent extra,
not 2.6 times extra,' he says.  Not least, he acknowledges, this is because
there is little prospect of an EV ever being a direct substitute for an
'ordinary' car,  'It will be only the second or third vehicle in a family,'
he believes.
The EV industry's development in Europe has serious implications for
component suppliers.
Fiat believes that a pan-European collaboration is required between
manufacturers.  To help make that possible, there is a perceived need for an
EC legislative framework to deal with safety and other construction and use
implications as the industry develops.
European legislators should be helped by the example of the US, which is
already much ahead in assessiong issues such as the chemical safety of some
advanced batteries - high-temperature sodium-sulphur, for example - and
permissible voltages within the power train.
The electric motors, charging systems, accumulators and other technical
ingredients of the Elettra come from several souces, including in-house Fiat
operations.  In no sense do they represent a long-term commercial supply
structure.
The current price disadvantage of all electric cars requires a big effort to
achieve economies of scale in component production, Panizza stresses.
It should be possible to halve the current costs.  But that means Europe's
car makers agreeing to share core componentry.  For example, although Fiat
has the capability to build an electric drivetrain in house, 'suitable
electric motors need to be produced at a rate of at least 1,000 a day to get
a financial return', says Massimello.  So it would make sense, he suggests,
for production to rest with specialist motor producers already expert in the
field.
There is already a trend in Europe towards sharing research and development
in areas such as batteries, according to Fiat.
And in the US, a collaborative project between General Motors, Ford,
Chrysler and federal agencies is spending Dollars 1.2bn over the next decade
to establish the most promising new battery technologies.
The sharing of specifications at an early stage may mean that the
purpose-built electric cars of the late 1990s will share - under their
differing skins and manufacturers' labels - components that are mostly
common and this relatively inexpensive.
