FT  02 JUN 92 / Survey of The Earth Summit (17): Scientist with impeccable
green credentials / Profile of Brazil's Environment Minister
A NUCLEAR physicist may seem an unlikely choice for Environment Minister,
but Mr Jose Goldemberg's green credentials are impeccable.
One of Brazil's best-known scientists, Mr Goldemberg hit the headlines in
the late 1970s when he came into direct confrontation with government by
opposing the purchase of nuclear reactors under a programme set up with West
Germany in 1975.
Today, charged with conserving the world's largest rainforest, reducing
forest fires, and protecting its 270,000 strong indigenous population from
invasion by wildcat goldminers and loggers, 64-year-old Mr Goldemberg is one
of the longest surviving members of President Collor's government.
Initially appointed as Secretary for Science and Technology he has become Mr
Collor's 'fix-it man,' moving over to head the education ministry at the
beginning of this year after a corruption scandal caused the downfall of his
predecessor, and adding the environment portfolio in April when its
incumbent Jose Lutzenberger, Brazil's leading ecologist, was dismissed.
Mr Goldemberg is already proving his reputation as a practical no-nonsense
man by freeing long delayed money for environmental projects from the World
Bank and Inter-American Development Bank.
He makes no effort to disguise his contempt for what he calls the 'hypocrisy
of the developed world,' particularly when it comes to the Amazon
rainforest, 60 per cent of which is in Brazilian territory.
'We get a lot of advice and very little money - it annoys me tremendously,'
he complains.
As an example he cites debt-for-nature swaps: 'I had a terrible time inside
the government persuading the economy ministry and president to approve the
idea.
'Finally, they agreed to allow up to Dollars 100m, yet to date we've
received offers for only Dollars 6m.' The first Dollars 2m swap was signed
in May this year.
Mr Goldemberg's main hope from the Earth Summit is a convention limiting
emissions: 'I see it as a bargain. Developing countries such as Brazil have
been making strong efforts to cut deforestation and it has been falling ten
per cent a year since 1985.
'We cannot cut emissions because this clashes head on with our need for
development but if we make an effort to decrease the growth of our emissions
the first world should set some targets for reduction of theirs.'
One of Mr. Goldemberg's responsibilities is to harmonise the Brazilian
position for the Rio conference.
His predecessor had considerable difficulties with the Brazilian Foreign
Office over its advocacy of the concept of sustainable development - the
rational economic utilisation of natural resources such as the forest.
Mr Goldemberg believes that outsiders have concentrated too much on stopping
deforestation of the Amazon and too little on sustainable development to
provide a living for its 16m inhabitants.
He warns: 'There's a lot of poetry about sustainable development, but it's a
very tricky thing because it produces a low income.'
Mr Goldemberg is expected to be only a stop-gap minister until after the
Summit and he has no masterplan for the future development of the Amazon.
The Brazilian government is not a Soviet-type government which plans in
detail, he says - 'it's main responsibility is to keep the minimum of law
and order in the Amazon; and the police have enough trouble keeping
transgressors in line.'
