FT  21 JAN 92 / Technology: Breathing easier about new cures - Gene therapy
offers the most promising method of treating cystic fibrosis
Imagine trying to clear your throat of a mucus so thick that researchers
have to cut it with a razor blade for their experiments.
That is daily life for 30,000 Americans and 25,000 Europeans suffering from
cystic fibrosis, the most common genetic disease among Caucasians.
It is likely to kill most of those people before they are 30, yet by the end
of the century this fatal disease may be curable. If so, it will provide an
outstanding success story for biotechnology and genetic medicine.
Ten years of worldwide genetic investigation reached a climax in 1989 when
researchers at the universities of Toronto and Michigan isolated and worked
out the structure of the gene which causes the disease. It turned out to be
a code for a protein known as cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR)
which is involved in carrying chloride ions across the cell membrane.
Scientists then managed to correct the defect in test-tube cell cultures.
This month the journal Cell reported another breakthrough: the National
Institutes of Health in the US had successfully treated rats with cystic
fibrosis by getting the gene into the lungs using a virus to carry it.
Genzyme, the Massachusetts-based biotechnology company, is working on a cure
for cystic fibrosis. It claims to be the first to have built the entire DNA
sequence responsible for directing the protein's production in cells and in
inducing genetically-engineered cells to form the protein.
Gene therapy appears the most promising treatment in the long run, since it
would be permanent. However, Alan Smith of Genzyme says that the one-off
gene replacement operation is 'way, way off'.
Getting the correct gene to the lung site is a difficult job. Francis
Collins at the University of Michigan said on reporting the test-tube
experiments: 'Safe and effective delivery of the gene to a large proportion
of lung cells is the big question now.'
The human DNA has to be fitted into the DNA of a virus made harmless by
genetic engineering, then the virus targeted at the correct cell where it
can copy the human DNA.
However Robert Beall of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, who also leads the
research programme at the NIH, claims to have solved some of the problems.
His team treated rats with cystic fibrosis using an inhalation technique to
get the virus carrying the correct gene into the lung.
The next step is to try the technique on monkeys, with human trials to
follow if monkey treatment is successful. Smith points out that such therapy
as changing a person's genetic material will only be done once the science
has been fully worked out.
As an interim treatment, Genzyme is developing drugs to stop the defective
gene working. Patients would be given these together with the correct CFTR
protein.
Smith reckons that the mutant protein does not fold properly, so it gets
stuck in the cell and broken down there. The problem seems to be caused by
the deletion of one amino acid of the 460 that form the protein. His team is
working on making the protein using transgenic goats, in which the human
CFTR gene is inserted. The protein is released in the animals' milk in
greater quantities than could be achieved in a laboratory.
The next step, he says, is to find out how to get the protein to the
affected sites - which will mean reconstituting it in the lungs, as the body
will break it down elsewhere.
Meanwhile in California Genentech, the US's largest biotechnology company,
has developed a treatment with the more immediate aim of easing the
breathing problems of sufferers whose air passages get blocked by mucus.
Steve Shak, director of immunobiology at Genentech, was struck by reports
from the 1960s of 'extraordinary amounts' of DNA being found in the mucus of
cystic fibrosis suffers, which made it so thick. The researchers found that
a bovine DNase, an enzyme in cows that breaks down DNA, There had even been
uncontrolled experiments on cystic fibrosis patients that showed that the
bovine enzyme thinned the mucus but that some sufferers reacted against the
foreign protein. Shak explains that the work had not been followed up:
'Mucus secretions are not a topic of great scientific investigation'.
Two years of recombinant DNA work led to the isolation of human DNase. Shak
then got some mucus from acute cystic fibrosis sufferers and, having had to
cut it with the razor-blade to get it into test-tubes, found that after 15
minutes mixing with DNase, it 'flowed freely'.
Clinical trials of DNase began in the US last June and final trials began
this month, with approval for sale expected next year. 'We know that DNase
is not likely to be a cure,' says Shak. 'It's likely to be used with other
therapies under development.'
He stresses the part that biotechnology played in its development. 'There is
no way of solving this problem (of thick mucus) other than by recombinant
DNA methods.'
The Genzyme and Genentech treatments are likely to be approved as 'orphan'
drugs, which target diseases afflicting less than 200,000 people in the US.
Orphan drug makers receive tax benefits and a seven-year monopoly on the
drug once it comes to market.
