FT  04 AUG 92 / World Stock Markets (America): Dow keeps to narrow range in
thin trading
Wall Street
US STOCK markets traded in a narrow range yesterday after last week's heady
gains, as investors showed little reaction to the latest report from the
country's purchasing managers, writes Patrick Harverson in New York.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average ended 1.62 up at 3,395.40, having rarely
strayed far from opening values all day. The Standard &amp; Poor's 500 firmed
0.88 to 425.09, while the American SE composite gained 2.02 at 390.87 and
the Nasdaq composite was ahead 1.53 at 582.36. New York SE turnover was
light at 164m shares, and rises led declines by 966 to 774.
Last week satisfied a lot of pent-up demand in the market, the Dow having
jumped more than 100 points in the wake of a sharp fall in long-term
interest rates. Analysts had expected the market to open easier as investors
consolidated their recently won gains.
The day's most important economic news was from the National Association of
Purchasing Management, which reported that its index of manufacturing
conditions rose modestly in July to 54.2, from June's 52.8. The figures
confirmed that the economy is still expanding, but at a painfully slow rate.
The most intriguing part of the report was the decline in the employment
component of the index, which suggested that July's key employment report,
due out on Friday, might display continued weakness in the labour market.
The Commerce Department yesterday reported a 1.5 per cent fall in June
construction spending, a worse figure than expected but one which had little
effect on the market.
Monsanto fell Dollars 1 5/8 to Dollars 53 3/8 in active trading after
broking house PaineWebber lowered its rating on the stock to 'sell' in the
wake of the US Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) decision to approve a
generic version manufactured by rival group Ivax of a Monsanto drug for the
treatment of hypertension. PaineWebber also upgraded Ivax following the FDA
decision, helping the stock climb Dollars 4 3/4 to Dollars 29 on the
American Stock Exchange.
McDonald's also suffered from a broker's downgrade, the fast-food chain
slipping Dollars 1 to Dollars 42 3/4 after Merrill Lynch reduced its
intermediate-term rating on the stock from 'buy' to 'above-average', citing
the discontinuation this weekend of the market testing of new dinner menu
products.
Lincoln National rose Dollars  7/8 to Dollars 65 1/2 after the insurance
holding company reported second quarter net income of Dollars 1.50 a share,
down from the Dollars 1.75 of a year ago but above the mean of most
analysts' estimates.
Plains Resources, in which trading was halted on Friday because of concern
about the state of its Miami Fee oil wells, dropped Dollars 2 5/8 to Dollars
15 on the Amex after saying that its Miami Fee Number 3 well had been
unsuccessful so far.
On the Nasdaq market, Borland International lost Dollars 1 3/4 to Dollars 46
on news that the company will have to pull some disputed features from a
spreadsheet program after a court ruled late on Friday that Borland had
illegally copied part of a Lotus program. Mr Rick Sherlund of Goldman Sachs
cut his earnings estimate for Borland to reflect the ruling's impact on the
company's bottom line.
Toronto was closed for a public holiday yesterday.
