FT  02 JAN 92 / Management: Some food for second thoughts
Fancy some 'No salt added, thin ribbon candy', 'Light and Lean' sausages, or
perhaps a '33 1/3 per cent less sodium' shank of ham?
All were sitting on a Manhattan supermarket's shelves this week - but not,
perhaps, for much longer. Given the voluminous regulations on food labelling
which have gushed from America's Food and Drug Administration over the past
few months, such winning descriptions may be soon be a thing of the past.
The impact of the new rules promises to be substantial. When fully
implemented in mid-1993, for example, every packaged food item in the US
must give full details of its nutritional and calorific content. The
manufacturer must also list such information in terms of a standardised
portion size, permitting comparison with rival lines.
Should it wish to make broader 'health' claims - asserting, for instance,
that a product is 'low-fat' or 'sodium-free' - the boast must meet strict
definitions. Meanwhile, supermarkets will have to display nutritional
background on the 20 most popular raw fruits, vegetables and types of fish.
The only products to be spared this labelling inquisition will be spices,
restaurant food and small packages - no bigger than a packet of
'Lifesavers'. Food produced by very small businesses, where food sales are
under Dollars 50,000 a year and total sales less than Dollars 500,000, will
also be exempt.
The driving force behind this radical overhaul is largely political. Years
of lax regulatory supervision, a growing public obsession with health and
healthcare costs, and the wave of exaggerated claims by manufacturers, have
all combined to make food-labelling a hot topic.
The marketing upheaval has already begun. It is debatable whether the impact
is more onerous for large companies, with sizeable product lines but ample
corporate resources, or smaller manufacturers which lack in-house lawyers
and the like. But it is indisputable that both are significantly affected.
Take Kraft General Foods, part of the giant Philip Morris group. Here, a
bevy of lawyers are pouring through the new rules and trying to assess the
implications for some 7,000 products. Essentially, Kraft says it expects to
divide products into three categories - those which are basically
unaffected, those which it will need to reformulate, and those where
considerable relabelling needs to take place.
Once the 'master-list' is drawn up, R&amp;D staff will become involved in the
reformulations - something which is difficult when proposals only exist in
draft form and there is still scope for industry-wide bargaining over the
FDA's definitions. Kraft says it is too early to quantify the cost of the
exercise, but expects it will run to 'millions of dollars'.
At a different end of the spectrum, Ben &amp; Jerry's, the much-loved
Vermont-based ice cream maker, is publicly stoical. It was the late-1970s
when the two hippie-style founders - Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield -
started producing home-made ice-cream in a small New England town. Today,
the product sells across the US, although the company still wears its social
concerns on its sleeve. No one would deny that the ice-cream is rich,
sinful, and utterly delicious - but won't consumers think twice when they
see the calories spelt out on the label ?
'People who eat our ice-cream aren't doing it for dietary reasons,' says Ben
&amp; Jerry's, hopefully. 'Basically, it's a reward thing.'
Nevertheless, it is worth noting that the Ben &amp; Jerry's 'Light' line is
being phased out, to be replaced by a series of low-fat frozen yoghurt
products. The manufacturer insisted that this would have happened anyway,
but its rationale for the decision is telling. The light ice-cream, it says,
was 'just not low enough', providing upwards of 200 calories per 4fl oz
portion.
In the FDA's brave new world, that is a matter which will be beyond dispute.
'Light', says the FDA, must refer to a food that contains one-third fewer
calories than a comparable product.
