FT  25 NOV 92 / Former editor of Financial Times dies at 90
ARCHIBALD HUGH Tennent Chisholm, editor of the Financial Times from 1937 to
1940, has died at the age of 90.
Although originally a writer in the London office of the Wall Street
Journal, he spent most of his working life in the oil business. When he took
over at the Financial Times the paper was still competing with the Financial
News.
According to Lord Camrose, then the FT's proprietor, Chisholm was picked in
preference to more established journalists partly because of his academic
record but chiefly because it was judged that his manner and bearing would
be likely to make a good impression in the City. So it proved.
Chisholm, whose father had been City editor of The Times, was tall with
impeccable manners and wore a monocle. While the circulation in 1938 fell to
less than 25,000 and profits to less than Pounds 10,000, the FT was still
becoming the main City paper.
One of Chisholm's contributions was to introduce a column called City Men
and Matters, subsequently renamed Men and Matters and today Observer. He
wrote much of it himself. Although the idea was modelled on Peterbor-ough in
The Daily Telegraph, it was the first purely City gossip column. Chisholm
became the first national editor to appear on television on the FT's 50th
anniversary.
A more dubious contribution was to try to turn the paper from pink to white,
but that was firmly resisted by Camrose.
In 1940 the editor left for the war, working for Army Intelligence, mainly
in the Middle East. He was twice mentioned in despatches, became a colonel
and was awarded the CBE (military). When he returned to London in 1945 the
paper was merging with the Financial News and Chisholm chose to go back to
oil.
He was educated at Westminster School in London and Christ Church, Oxford,
where he captained the college soccer team that included Sir Alec
Douglas-Home. After a spell at the Wall Street Journal from 1925 to 1927, he
joined the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, which later became British Petroleum.
He served in Persia for four years, chiefly in Abadan, and learned Persian.
In 1932 he moved to Kuwait, where he was APOC's principal negotiator in the
deal that led to the first Kuwait oil concession agreement. At the time, few
people were confident that oil would be found there in commercial
quantities. Chisholm disagreed. Four years after the deal was signed, one of
the biggest oilfields in the world - about 100 sq miles - was discovered at
Burgan, about 28 miles south of Kuwait town.
After the war the former journalist spent the rest of his career, until his
retirement in 1972, with BP. When Mossadeq of Iran abruptly nationalised all
foreign oil interests in 1951, Chisholm was part of the BP team that argued
the company's case before the International Court of Justice at The Hague.
He subsequently played a shadowy part, which he would never fully discuss,
in the ousting of Mossadeq, masterminded by the US intelligence services. In
1975 he published The First Kuwait Oil Concession Agreement, a scholarly
record of the negotiations of which he was the sole survivor.
He married, in 1939, Josephine Goudge, who was his secretary at the
Financial Times. She died in 1983. They had three children: Anne, co-author
of a recent biography of the late Lord Beaverbrook; Clare, who died in 1975;
and Colin, director of BSI-Thornhill Investment Management.
