FT  20 JUN 92 / Gardening: What men do best - Robin Lane Fox provides some
pointers about plant pots
IT IS a heavenly week for gardening; June and July have been rolled into
one; the season is crazily advanced and the evening light is showing
everything to its best advantage. It is so marvellous that I will even give
in to pressure.
Some of you still want to know where to buy a good garden pot - if you are
not weather-beaten Sloanes and cannot buy unseen from potteries away in
Warwickshire.
Others of you want to know more about crystals which retain water for pot
plants - but you are not in a position to send away for bulk deliveries from
Gloucester.
Last week, I wrote about Things Which Every Woman Does; the men have been
feeling left out but, by the end of this piece, I promise that they will
feel thoroughly wanted with a role that is all their own.
First, the pottery. Scavenging as always, I have headed for the shop called
Patio at 155 Battersea Park Road, London SW8; I owe the tip to Roy Strong
and his wife, who use it for the terracotta pottery in their garden on the
Welsh borders. The shop is not at the smart and newly-Tory end of Battersea
and its stock is not ridiculously over-priced.
Patio's partners import the very pots which make you wish you had brought
the car or left more room in it when you meander round the Mediterranean;
they have lemon pots from Italy, thick country pottery from Provence, and
decorated clay cases from Spain. Some of them are still available after my
pre-emptive strike last week.
Treated properly, the pots ought to be frost-proof in British winters.
Patio's owners will advise you responsibly, but you must stand the pots on
bricks or blocks during the winter. If the rain cannot drain through, it
will form ice and split the bottoms.
No doubt there are little men in the Tuscan hills moulding terracotta lemon
pots for less than Pounds 57 for a 24-inch diameter: nonetheless, you have
to cart them home. I recommend this wide and simple shape because it allows
for a wide range of half-hardy plants.
For looks, I would match these lemon pots with Patio's rope pottery, made in
Spain, up to 14 inches across and finished off with a rope pattern in clay
round the rim.
For another Pounds 10-Pounds 15, you can add very thick pots up to 12 inches
wide, cast with swags and stamped in the self-same village in which those
French peasants begged for rain and said their prayers in the sub-titles of
those two famous films on harsh rural life.
Patio's owners import in bulk and go on pot-hunts in promising corners of
Europe; thus, stocks vary. But their prices fall halfway between those thin,
ugly clays from an ordinary centre and the guaranteed terracottas fired in
one of the top British potteries. I am happy to have bought five big pots
for the sum set aside for only two or three in others' lists.
There are shapes for all tastes, most of which are elegant: blue salvias,
pink verbenas and silver leaves will all trail invitingly over Patio
terracotta which ought to survive frost.
They will trail even more invitingly if their soil is wet and the pottery is
weathered. Wetting the soil is no longer such a problem: if a bulk-buy of
Broadleaf P4 is beyond your means, check the local garden centre for an
alternative which is priced less economically but sold in small quantities.
The most-widely available is Swel Gel, at prices up to Pounds 3: one pack
suffices for two seriously-large lemon pots. Water the soil first and then
work in the dose of Swel Gel like bath salts.
Water again and the crystals will expand, retaining water in the soil,
reducing the boring round of hoses and watering cans to twice a week. (If
only dogs could take it, too, we could all go on holiday or long weekends
with a clear conscience.)
Be warned not to increase the dose. One keen gardener hated watering and
tipped an entire packet into one small flower pot, hoping to settle it for
weeks. He woke up to find that a jelly-like substance similar to frog spawn
had erupted from the soil and run all over the terrace.
Lastly, the weathering. Newly-fired pots look too new for several seasons;
and although people recommend dressings of sour milk, brown fertiliser or
stewed leaves of comfrey, the owners of Patio have a brisk recipe.
Gents, this is your chance to use the most natural weathering method of all.
You can do your very own Thing That All Men Do.
Perhaps this gardening tip was what set Freud off on a characteristic train
of thought. Perhaps you remember the Great Man's explanation of the origin
of the division of labour between the sexes.
Out there, on the primaeval plains, our hunting ancestors lit camp fires;
but when the time came to dowse them and move on, only the men could oblige,
aiming at them in a Freudian bout of competitive male relief.
Women had to drop out of the contest: they, therefore, withdrew to the tent,
got landed with the cooking and, nowadays, with the bother of the picnic for
Glyndebourne.
It is magnificent nonsense, but the male fire extinguisher can re-cycle
itself nowadays as the useful patinator. Choose your moment, avoid the
verbena and, after a few adventures, the experienced owners of Patio assure
me that new terracotta will have P for patina more quickly than by any other
means.
