FT  17 SEP 92 / France and Maastricht: Jack Lang adds style to Yes campaign
THE French are a formal race. The usual mode of address to a cabinet
minister is Monsieur le ministre. But when Mr Jack Lang addressed a meeting
of young people in the insalubrious Paris suburb of Clichy on Tuesday night,
one boy began his question with 'Bonjour Jack]'.
Mr Lang laughed. He may be France's deputy prime minister, the proud
possessor of no fewer than three ministerial portfolios - arts, education
and media - and the longest-serving member of President Francois
Mitterrand's cabinet, but he is also a populist. Moreover Mr Lang, 53, is
canny enough to realise that being addressed in such a manner by a cheeky
adolescent is a small price to pay for his success in the popularity polls.
Pomposity is not one of Mr Lang's failings. During his nine years at the
arts ministry he has been criticised by the French right for everything from
frittering away public money on his pet avant garde art projects, to
toadying to the president (of whom he is a firm favourite). But not even his
fiercest critics have accused Mr Lang of being stuffy.
It was this lack of stuffiness that persuaded Mr Mitterrand to make Mr Lang
co-chairman of the Socialist party's pro-Maastricht lobby last month in an
attempt to breathe life into the Yes camp's lacklustre campaigning efforts.
Mr Lang smiled winningly at the crowd in Clichy's scruffy municipal hall. He
beamed at the champion boxer and sailor he had brought along for the evening
as representatives of his glittering pro-Maastricht celebrity campaign. His
hand lingered for, perhaps, a little too long on the shapely arm of
Stephanie, head of the Clichy branch of pro-Maastricht youth campaign. He
listened attentively to the questions and tried his best not to look too
bored when he had to discuss economics in his answers.
It may be part of a well-worn act. But he did it brilliantly. Mr Lang did
not dwell for long on the pedantic details of the Maastricht treaty. He
leaves that to Ms Elisabeth Guigou, the glamorous, but glacial, minister for
European affairs, with whom he co-chairs the Yes campaign.
Mr Lang sees the Maastricht treaty as an opportunity for France to stamp its
influence over the rest of Europe.
'Why else do you think the other European countries were concerned about
culture being included in the Maastricht treaty?' If one or two languages
dominate the new Europe, Mr Lang was convinced that French would be one,
'possibly with English or German as the second'.
Ms Guigou and the other Europhilic socialists - not to mention France's
European partners - might not see Europe's future in quite such
Francocentric terms, but Mr Lang's demagoguery went down well with his
audience of the converted in Clichy.
The crowd cheered. Teenage girls giggled under the glare of the television
lights. Their boyfriends guffawed at the arts minister's jokes and gazed
admiringly at the boxer and sailor. The young people of Clichy might not
have learnt very much about the whys and wherefores of European union, but
they had spent an evening basking in Mr Lang's reflected glamour.
The French budget deficit for 1993 should be 'tens of billion francs below
FFr200bn', according to Mr Michel Charasse, the budget minister, writes
Alice Rawsthorn. The French government plans to discuss next year's budget
on September 23 if this Sunday's Maastricht referendum delivers a Yes
majority. If the referendum result is negative, the budget discussions will
be delayed until September 30.
