FT  05 FEB 92 / Iraq cancels talks with UN over oil sales conditions
IRAQ YESTERDAY withdrew from negotiations with the United Nations aimed at
allowing the shipment of Dollars 1.6bn worth of Iraqi oil, mainly to pay for
food, medicines and other civilian needs.
A UN spokesman said last night Mr Abdul Amir al-Anbari, Iraq's chief UN
delegate, had notified the secretariat of the decision on the eve of a
second round of talks in Vienna today.
The talks were due to last until Friday, with Mr Kofi Annan, a Ghanaian
senior secretariat official, representing the UN. Mr Al-Anbari and Mr Annan
held their first talks in the Austrian capital early last month in what UN
officials said was a bid to overcome obstacles raised by Iraq to conditions
imposed by the Security Council for a one-time, partial lifting of the oil
embargo.
Asked if the Iraqi decision meant only a postponement of negotiations, with
a later resumption possible, Mr Francois Guiliani, the UN spokesman, said
they were 'cancelled like in cancelled, not cancelled like in postponed'.
However, Mr Anbari was reported to have said privately that further talks
could not be excluded, although Iraq did not think these could be useful,
given the conditions imposed by the Security Council.
In agreeing last August that Iraq could sell some oil in a six-month period,
the council ordered that the proceeds must be paid into a UN escrow account.
The resolution expires next month.
Almost Dollars 1bn was to be released for purchases of food and medicines
and for humanitarian needs, with the remainder to be used to pay for Iraqi
war reparations and bills incurred by the UN as a result of council
decisions.
President Saddam Hussein denounced these conditions and refused to order a
resumption of oil shipments, despite his claim that Iraq was desperately in
need of funds to purchase essential supplies.
Iraq may still possess hundreds of Scud missiles, the US said yesterday,
Reuter adds from Washington. The State Department said Baghdad had
acknowledged purchasing 819 Scuds and, while many of these had been
destroyed in the Iran-Iraq and Gulf wars, 'we estimate that Iraq may still
be concealing a large number of these missiles, probably in the hundreds'.
