FT  18 JAN 92 / Books: Cross-currents in the Gulf - Justin Wintle welcomes
an even handed account of the crisis
DESERT SHIELD TO DESERT STORM: THE SECOND GULF WAR by Dilip Hiro
HarperCollins Pounds 25/Pounds 9.99, 590 pages
IN THE middle of the 1990-1 Gulf Crisis I had the dubious pleasure of
listening to an established moral philosopher expatiate on 'the eternal
righteousness of giving Saddam Hussein a bloodied nose'.
Other people were making similar noises, reflecting a general unwillingness
to comprehend the realities that govern the Middle East: a series of
artificial boundaries created, largely by Britain, with scant regard for
either cultural or tribal homogenity, in the wake of the dissolution of the
Ottoman Empire at the end of the First World War. Without its vast but
unequally distributed oil reserves, and without the further creation of
Israel after the second war, carved out of Palestine, the Arab Middle East
might by now have set its house in order. As it is the oil has guaranteed
continued interference by outside powers.
The spectre that haunts the West is a coalescence of 'local' interests that
would establish autonomous control of oil flow and oil prices. To this
outcome there are two possible avenues: Pan-Arab nationalism, and Islamic
solidarity. Both are fraught with difficulties. The first runs counter to
the entrenched interests of the seven royal families who between them rule
the Gulf, and who have invested their wealth in the West. The second must
also cope with religious differences within the Moslem world, notably
Shia/Sunni sectarian rivalry.
These cross-currents form both the background and theme of Dilip Hiro's
admirable account of the Gulf War, or, as he most properly calls it, the
Second Gulf War: Desert Shield to Desert Storm. While Hiro by no means
attempts to whitewash Saddam Hussein, he does show that, for all his
cut-throat megalomania, the Iraqi leader deserves to be considered as much
the product as a would-be controller of the forces of his times. Conversely,
Hiro also allows the rape of Kuwait to expose the rapacity of western
intentions and the hollowness of George Bush's New World Order.
The first Gulf War was fought between Iraq and Iran, where Ayatollah
Khomeini's Islamic fundamentalist revolution produced precisely the kind of
seismic phenomenon dreaded by the West. In tackling Iran, Saddam was
supported by many of those Gulf states, including Kuwait, which later joined
the anti-Iraq alliance masterminded by Washington. Indeed, during the period
1984-8, the US itself increasingly supplied Saddam, then perceived by the
State Department as a stabilising factor, with arms and economic aid.
The motives for Saddam's seizure of Kuwait in August 1990 were hybrid. The
immediate pretext was Kuwait's collusion with the Saudis in depressing oil
prices, thus reducing Iraq's revenues. But Saddam also promulgated other
reasons, among them the venality of the al Sabah emirate, and its dependence
on America, ultimately perceived as part of an 'imperialist-Zionist plot' to
control the Middle East.
How much of this was conviction, and how much the opportunist rhetoric of a
natural bellicosity, is arguable. Where Saddam came unstuck was in his
misreading of international affairs. He underestimated the will of the
western powers to defend their material interests, and overestimated the
will of a crumbling USSR to take a stand against Washington. He also failed
to force Israel into the ensuing conflict - an event which would certainly
have spoiled the US-led alliance.
At the end of the war Bush, media-awkward wimp turned media-slick crusader,
exceeded his UN mandate by directing Schwarzkopf to inflict punishment on
Iraq's retreating divisions. This included an awful slaughter at Mitla
Ridge. And it emerges that he was only dissuaded from destroying Iraq as a
political entity by his Arab allies' apprehensions of the benefits that
might accrue to Iran in the resultant turmoil. A crippled Saddam was
preferable to no Saddam.
Desert Shield to Desert Storm tells the story as it should be told, from all
sides without prejudice. Hiro writes dispassionately, methodically,
painstakingly, accumulatively. He neither trades nor pulls punches, but
constantly underlines the specificity of any given viewpoint. For these
reasons his book deserves to be regarded as the first good serious study of
its subject, though it needs be said that Hiro's interests are primarily
political rather than military. While the air-war is handled skilfully and
in some detail, the land-war is dealt with perfunctorily. Hiro also fails to
address the question of Saddam's non-use of his chemical weapons, although
in the light of the 700 American nuclear warheads in situ and Washington's
determination to avoid any repeat of its Vietnam ignominy, the answer is
perhaps clear enough. It was Saddam's restraint, not just Israel's, that
averted an absolute holocaust.
