FT  25 FEB 92 / World Trade News: Call for end to German software 'piracy'
US computer software publishers have petitioned Mrs Carla Hills, US trade
representative, to take action to curtail 'pervasive piracy' of software
programs in Germany, Louise Kehoe reports from San Francisco. According to a
US software industry group, illegal copying of software programs in Germany
cost the world-wide software industry nearly Dollars 1.9bn (Pounds 1.08bn)
in 1990.
'Stopping piracy in Germany is the highest trade priority for the US
software industry, and we call on the US government to help our cause by
obtaining a commitment from the German government to solve this problem,'
said Mr Robert Holleyman, managing director of the Business Software
Alliance (BSA), a trade group whose members include the largest US software
companies.
The industry asked Mrs Hills to place Germany on a 'priority watch list'
under Section 301 of US trade law, which requires the government to take
action to resolve the complaint and provides for imposition of trade
sanctions.
Piracy in Germany cost the US software industry an estimated Dollars 721m in
1990, the industry group said. The German government has failed to enforce
copyright laws against individuals and companies that use copied software,
it claims.
Industry executives say the problem stems from rampant software copying in
the former East Germany. Rapid growth of market demand in Germany since
unification is being met by illegal software that is fast achieving a deeper
market penetration than legitimate products, the US group contends.
'Illegal practices of this scale are inexcusable in a country such as
Germany where the economy and business culture are among the most advanced
in the world,' Mr Holleyman said. 'We call on the German government to
implement the EC's directive for the legal protection of software. . .
Further, we call on the US government to address this problem with Germany
as one of our nation's top trade priorities in 1992.'
The group also cites Italy, Taiwan, Thailand, Poland and South Korea as
countries that have failed to implement protection of software copyrights.
