FT  07 JUL 92 / Survey of Italy (16): Hope for crumbling treasures - Arts
and Sponsorship
A SECTION of the ancient walls of Urbino collapsed last month. Urbino is one
of the finest examples of a renaissance city, an outstanding jewel even in
Italy's riches and the unspoilt birthplace of Raphael.
Only two months before, an international conference had been held to discuss
the problems faced in the preservation of Europe's walled cities. All agreed
that urgent action was essential to save Urbino. Nothing was done.
This is only the latest of a series of disasters to befall Italy's heritage
of monuments and artistic treasures: some, like the disintegration of the
Torre Civica in Pavia a few years ago and the tower of Pisa (closed to
visitors since last year, when it began to lean even more alarmingly) are
well publicised. Others, less well-known, like San Severino nelle Marche,
crumble away quietly. Important restorations in Rome, such as the Temple of
Vesta and Constantine's arch, close to the Colosseum, have been left
half-done for lack of funds.
Government funding of general maintenance has been more than halved since
the mid-1980s. Six weeks ago, for instance, cleaning work started on a
section of the interior of the Pantheon, described by William Thomas in his
1549 History of Rome as 'the perfectest of all the antiquities', and the
pinks, greens and pale ochre of the antique marble, taken from all over the
Roman Empire as they emerge from the accumulated dirt of centuries are truly
astonishing.
The work is being done by Edilrestauri of Vicenza, but the two young
restorers, Paola Fanesi and Monica Gheoin and their assistants are working
in the hope rather than the certainty that the funds promised (L300m under
the Roma Capitale law) will be forthcoming. The cost of cleaning the whole
interior is likely to be L40bn, and a sponsor is urgently needed.
Five years ago, the director-general at the Ministry forCultural Heritage
published a report, entitled Memorabilia, identifying the 1,000 monuments
most at risk. He claimed that L2,250bn was the minimum required. Little has
been done since then, apart from a haphazard series of interventi
straordinari, when total collapse threatens. Rather than being a careful
guardian, with a long-term strategy and some sense of priority, the ministry
has recently resembled a demented housewife tearing around in a frantic
attempt to cover the worst eyesores - leaving the rest to rot.
Until the founding of the ministry in 1974, fine arts were a small
department in the Ministry of Education. Today its funding represents 0.7
per cent of the state budget, roughly 0.3 per cent of GDP. This is similar
to the amount Britain spends, but on a far smaller artistic patrimony.
Ministers have not always been sufficiently qualified in the field. A great
many experts, and foremost among them the outspoken Professor Federico Zeri,
feel things were a great deal better before the ministry existed. 'Until the
1970s, good excavations were being done and museums were open at reasonable
hours,' he says.
This is confirmed by Georgina Masson's 1965 Companion Guide to Rome. She
describes visiting the Galleria Borghese by moonlight: Canova's rendering of
Pauline Bonaparte as Venus must have looked splendid. (The picture gallery
of this delightful, small museum has been closed since 1984, after a crack
appeared in the ceiling and was found to have been caused by subsiding
foundations. But it is possible to visit the ground floor rooms between 9am
and 2pm.)
'Now', says Prof Zeri, 'the political situation is stagnant, and union power
is enormous. There is too much knuckling under to their demands, the Brera
in Milan (the city's main museum) has become a battlefield, and is now
almost entirely closed.' He complains of a clumsy bureaucracy, little
autonomy for museum directors, and no adequate cataloguing of Italy's
immense riches. He is convinced that the necessary public money could be
found to support the artistic heritage, but that the political will is
lacking. He also argues that Venice should be taken out of Italian
jurisdiction altogether, and given to the EC.
Prof Giulio Carlo Argan, art historian and ex-mayor of Rome, agrees the
problem is lack of political interest. He wants a commission, with a roving
brief, to tour the country and report regularly on the monuments most at
risk.
But if Italian art treasures are to be saved, it will be thanks to private
investors. An exhibition conference, Art and Sponsors, held in May this year
at Castel St Angelo in Rome, with the laudable aim of bringing together
owners, the state and would-be investors, showed that Italy leads Europe in
terms of sponsorship. In 1989, Italians invested L1,550bn, compared with the
Germans' L900bn, France's L750bn and the UK's L630bn. Last year, total
Italian sponsorship increased to L1,600bn. This includes sport, which in
Italy and Germany is about 66 per cent of the total invested.
In 1992, private sponsorship is expected to rise by 12 per cent. This was
made possible by law 512, passed in 1982, which made investment in culture
and restoration of art works tax-deductible; and also made it possible for
art works to be given in lieu of inheritance tax. In 1984, the law was
slightly amended, sponsors' attention being directed to a list of needy art
works from which would-be-investors could choose. This, it was hoped, would
give the state some control; and direct the funds where they were most
needed.
Of the big corporate sponsors, Fiat tends to concentrate on yearly major
exhibitions at the Fiat Arts Centre on the restored Palazzo Grassi in the
Grand Canal in Venice; the most exciting of which remains Pontus Hulten's
1986 exploration of Futurism. In Turin an ex-Fiat factory, the Lingotto, was
converted by the architect Renzo Piano, and that, too, has become an arts
centre. Fiat did, however, join with the Cassa di Risparmio of Turin to
restore Juvarra's glorious ex-royal hunting lodge at Stupinigi, just outside
the city.
State companies are generous with their investment in art; Alenia, the
starte aerospace group, has provided funds for the restoration of the tiny
church of St Maria della Pace, near Piazza Navona in Rome; but has been
criticised by art historians for using an ugly railing to protect it from
the attentions of tramps. Ilva, the state steel group,provided the steel
supports for the Archangel Michael on the top of Castel St Angelo, and has
now made the steel bands to support the base of the leaning tower of Pisa.
Olivetti is an active and eclectic sponsor, financing exhibitions such as
the recent Mantegna show at the Royal Academy in London (now in New York).
Its particular interest is in fresco restoration: the Brancaccio chapel of
the Carmine church in Florence was unveiled last year. Apart from the
glowing beauty of the colours after cleaning, there was a lot of extra press
attention due to the newly revealed nakedness of the banished Adam and Eve.
Olivetti says that the recession will not interfere with its long-term
projects, such as the difficult restoration work on Leonardo's Last Supper
in Milan. It may, however, be less ready to undertake new projects.
Banks also often play a large part in their home bases. Banca di Toscana is
behind the splendid restoration of the Benozzo Gozzoli frescoes in Palazzo
Medici Ricciardi in Florence (timed for the celebrations of the 500th
anniversary of Lorenzo de Medici's death). Banca Popolare dell'Etruria e del
Lazio is funding a consortium for the restoration of two works by Piero
della Francesca (commemorating the 500th anniversary of Piero's death this
year) as well as the fountain in Piazza del Pantheon in Rome.
Finally, in an unusual launch of a new corporate identity in August, Banca
di Roma, a merger between the Banco di Roma and the Banco di Santo Spirito,
will sponsor L40bn worth of essential repairs to the one of the most
familiar landmarks of Rome, the Colosseum.
