FT  10 OCT 92 / Sport: Vested interests who sustain the big lie over prize
money - Racing
ONE OF the biggest lies in sport is the one that claims that prize money
levels in British horse racing are too low to guarantee the sport's
long-term viability or to offer racehorse owners a fair return on their
investment.
The truth is more prosaic: prize money in British racing is smaller than
some people would like it to be. But that is a mouthful, and not very sexy,
so you almost never hear it.
Instead, the lie itself - that the future of UK racing is being jeopardised
by insufficient prize money - is shouted from the rooftops by those with the
greatest vested interest in perpetuating the whopper: racehorse owners,
breeders and trainers, mainly, plus the hacks of the racing media who fawn
on them like spaniels.
The lie always sounds best in a recession, when the ability of owners to
resist pressures to cut back their racing interests - or quit - is weakest.
The latest muttering and fuss-making was caused by reports that the Maktoum
family of Dubai, which dominates British racing, may consider reducing the
number of racehorses it has in training in Britain (approximately 800), and
sending some to be trained and raced in the US, France and Germany.
The Maktoums would be doing this, the doomsters claim, to boost their
racetrack earnings and thumb a nose at the UK government, which taxes
betting turnover heavily and charges a far higher value added tax on
bloodstock sales than France or Ireland, for example.
Because their racing interests are huge, it would be a wonder if the
Maktoums did not, periodically, assess the size and shape of their racing
empire, and reallocate horses accordingly. But the claim that low prize
money is endangering the sport's future in Britain is risible and dishonest.
For a start, racing is a fully international business. It has been so for
decades. To listen to the whingers and special pleaders, you would think
that UK racehorse owners were restricted, by decree, to running their horses
in Britain, where prize money is less generous than elsewhere. In reality,
owners are free to send their horses on lucrative raids to mop up foreign
prize money - and they do so, with a vengeance.
The reason that most UK owners have most of their horses stabled and trained
in Britain is so they can visit them in the training yards and watch them on
British tracks. But horses that are good enough can range far and wide. They
have their own passports. They jet to Europe, or America - sometimes Japan.
Having grabbed a foreign prize, their owners jet them back again - back to
their British yards, to weary, run-down Britain.
Take last weekend. In Paris last Sunday the British-bred, British-owned,
British-trained star filly, User Friendly - a multiple classic winner -
finished second, beaten a neck, in the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe, Europe's
greatest race, and earned Pounds 205,550 in French prize money to add to her
career haul (six races: unbeaten) of Pounds 523,905.
But User Friendly was not the only UK raider at Longchamps last weekend.
Last Saturday, UK-trained horses finished third and fourth in the Prix de
Royallieu, second and fourth in the Prix du Cadran (won, as it happens, by
Lord Weinstock's French-trained Sought Out), first and second in the Grand
Criterium, third and fourth in the Prix Dollar and third in the Prix de
Lutece.
Last Sunday, in addition to User Friendly in the Arc, UK raiders finished
second, third and fourth in the Prix du Rond-Point, third in the Prix Marcel
Boussac, first, second and third in the Prix de l'Abbaye, and third in the
Prix de l'Opera.
How much prize money did these 18 horses collect for two wins, five seconds,
seven thirds and four fourths in 48 hours at Longchamps last weekend?
Answer: Pounds 595,477 in crispy French francs. Nor was that all. A
UK-trained horse won in Florence last Sunday and another won in Milan. The
day before, Perpendicular, owned by Lord Howard de Walden and trained at
Newmarket by Henry Cecil, won a Pounds 98,246 race at Hoppegarten, Germany,
while the UK-trained Sheikh Albadou was second in the Vosburgh Stakes at
Belmont Park, New York.
In short, UK-based horses are capable of winning sackfuls of foreign prize
money, most of which is repatriated to Britain where owners are free to
recycle it in any way they choose - more racehorses, possibly.
To claim that British racing is in jeopardy on the grounds that prize money
is relatively stingy when averaged out among thousands of runners is
simplistic nonsense. What has to be acknowledged as part of the equation is
UK owners' ease of access to foreign prizes; their considerable success on
foreign tracks, and the prestige and enjoyment they derive from owning
horses in the first place.
All owners are rich, by definition, and most like a gamble. Sometimes these
pay off. Yet the rewards of racing are usually reported in isolation, on the
sports page, the day after a big race. Seldom are they incorporated into
subsequent media discussion of prize money levels or acknowledged by the
numerous pressure groups that make racing Britain's most squabble-driven
sport.
What owners fantasise about is buying or breeding a horse of the supreme
quality of User Friendly - and sometimes they succeed. User Friendly's prize
money total is now Pounds 729,455. Moreover, she stays in training next
year, when her winnings could soar well past Pounds 1m.
Her training costs to date - ball-park figure - are probably a little over
Pounds 15,000 (she was not raced as a two-year-old), plus big-race entry
fees. Net earnings to date, therefore: approaching Pounds 700,000. She was
sired by an English Derby winner, Slip Anchor, so she cost her
owner-breeder, Bill Gredley, a goodly sum to produce. Yet her capital value,
this weekend, far exceeds her production cost, and cannot be far short of
Pounds 1.25m.
With potential rewards of that magnitude, you would think owners would be
more circumspect in their constant pleading for far higher UK prize money.
In that you would be wrong. Many of them beg shamelessly - especially the
aristocrats.
In recent times, UK prize money has see-sawed, because of the recession. But
now it is rising again. In July 1991, the Horserace Betting Levy Board,
which levies bookmakers' turnover and allocates funds for the benefit of
racing, said that its prize money contribution in 1992 would total Pounds
17.5m, a fall of Pounds 5.6m on the revised 1991 allocation. However, four
months ago, because of changed circumstances, the board said its 1992
allocation would be raised by Pounds 1.7m, to Pounds 19.2m, and that its
1993 contribution would be boosted to Pounds 25m.
For sure, UK prize money levels are poor when contrasted with those of other
leading racing countries. Arguably, the UK government still creams off a
disproportionately large slice of betting turnover in tax. Arguably, too
much money is siphoned out of racing by bookmakers, whose leech-like
tenacity and greed have cost the sport amazingly dear.
But at least UK racing is more professionally run that it used to be. And
there is no evidence that it won't survive the recession in reasonable
shape, just as it always has. The Maktoums may move a few horses hither and
yon. But the tears being shed on their behalf are crocodile's.
