FT  22 MAY 92 / Major's chance to take a lead in the east
Nothing prepares you for your first sight of Budapest. I offer this thought
to Mr John Major, who will come here for the first time next week, following
his maiden visits to Poland and Czechoslovakia.
The bit western first-timers see is close to home, with its excellent
hotels, its range of shops from Benetton to McDonald's and its many imported
cars. The British prime minister will probably not have the necessary hours
to spare for an excursion down the Danube; if he did, he would take notice
of the boat houses and dachas that, with their owners at play in the sun
last weekend, reminded me of Florida's waterways. Stand on the riverside in
Pest and contemplate the wealthy suburbia in the hills of Buda and you could
persuade yourself that all the talk of a new third world on the European
Community's eastern border is misplaced; that, rather, this is one of the
fairest cities in what will surely become the Greater West.
The fancy could be elaborated. The democratically elected coalition
government includes Christian Democrats. It appears to be conservative,
cautious, apparently suited to Mr Major's taste. There is a functioning
opposition and a free press. The rule of law is slowly being re-established.
The prime minister, Mr Jozsef Antall - a comfortingly grey personality - has
maintained stability during these difficult early stages of establishing a
parliamentary democracy. Hungary is the most popular eastern destination for
western private capital. Foreign investment is pouring in, not only from
Germany and Austria but also from the US and even Britain. Earnings from
tourism and foreign trade are rising rapidly.
Mr Major will not wish to be bamboozled by the stage set components of this
picture. His Foreign Office brief will surely prevent that; alternatively,
common sense should be enough. The Hungarians deserve help and
encouragement, but this should not be allowed to disguise the fact that they
are only in year three of what could be a generation-long struggle to build
a prosperous, free and open society. Away from the shops and restaurants of
central Budapest, the visitor finds dark rows of ill-maintained buildings;
away from the capital itself the low standard of living of many Hungarians
is evident. On one rough estimate, 30 per cent of the people are better off
than they were under the communists, about a fifth are living at about the
previous standard and the remaining half are worse off.
Unemployment is rising: it could reach 15 per cent this year, according to
the Economic Research Institute. Inflation is falling, but might still end
up at 25 per cent in 1992. Productivity, national output and consumption are
all decreasing. The anecdotal evidence is of families crowded in dingy
flats, widespread job losses and, in compensation, the flourishing of a
black economy first developed under communist rule.
The new democracy's roots are fragile, and in thin soil. Plum positions are
still allocated on an old boy network; former communists get their
disproportionate share. Civil society, with its plenitude of independent
institutions, has been corrupted over the past 40 years; it could not be
re-established overnight. Most of the politicians are painfully
inexperienced. Their factional quarrels, shown on television, have
disenchanted a public for whom, in some quarters, there is a nostalgia for
the certainties of communist rule. The turn-out in recent by-elections has
fallen below 20 per cent. Mr Antall, accused by his opponents of incipient
authoritarianism, clearly has no patience with the partisanship of the
opposition press. His attempts to treat the heads of the official radio and
television networks as paid employees of a politicised civil service have
been frustrated by the president and the constitutional court. It is not the
third world, but it is not the first either.
Yet it undoubtedly belongs within the west European family. Mr Major's
primary task next week is to assure the heads of the Polish, Czechoslovak
and Hungarian governments that he not only believes this, but that when
Britain assumes the presidency of the European Community in a few weeks he
will behave as one who regards their eventual full membership as certain. As
Mrs Margaret Thatcher said in Bruges in September 1988: 'We must never
forget that, east of the Iron Curtain, peoples who once enjoyed a full share
of European culture, freedom and identity have been cut off from their
roots. We shall always look on Warsaw, Prague and Budapest as great European
cities.'
This makes Mr Major's task clear, but awkward. He must affirm EC and UK
support and sympathy while yet reminding his hosts in all three capitals of
what it takes to become a thriving democracy. Mr Antall is most at home in
German; his relationship with Chancellor Helmut Kohl is close. The Hungarian
prime minister may accept private advice from Bonn but is unlikely to
respond well to anything that would resemble public preaching from London.
He might, characteristically, defend himself by emitting a cloud of
verbiage, most notably on the bloodshed in Yugoslavia, where many Hungarians
are trapped by the war. He can present his republic as a tranquil island in
a potentially inflamed central Europe.
Yet Hungary sees eventual EC membership and the protection of a European
security umbrella as the principal aims of its external policy. This is the
logic of its history: it has ever been the vassal, the colony, or the client
state of one or another giant neighbour. It does not wish to repeat the
experience. It can thus reasonably be kept aware of the necessary
qualifications for membership of the various European clubs. Press freedom
is one of them. The International Press Institute, meeting in Budapest this
week, urged political leaders in former communist countries to accept a free
role for the media, since the new governments would be judged on their
attitudes to political expression. Mr Major will see the value of
reinforcing this message.
To leave it at that would, however, be to lose an historic opportunity. With
President Bush pre-occupied with his election campaign and the French
president and the German chancellor both weakened by domestic political
difficulties, the British prime minister is in a unique position to propose
a new course for western policy in the post-communist age. We knew what we
wanted in the half-century after Yalta: it was to roll the Soviets back. But
now someone has to explain, in language as vivid as Mrs Thatcher would use,
why it is in our interest to move the boundaries of the west eastwards over
the coming decades.
