FT  23 APR 92 / Final uphill push for the treaty: The EC should forge ahead
before Maastricht is ratified
The odds are that the Maastricht treaty on European political and monetary
union will come into force on January 1 1993, if only because no country
will want to risk incurring the wrath of its 11 EC partners by bringing down
the whole temple.
But this year the treaty must run the gauntlet of ratification by each of
the 12 states. The ratification, which got under way yesterday when the
French cabinet adopted its draft revision of France's constitution, was
always going to be a tortuous business. But it has been made more tense by
the emergence of an anti-Maastricht backlash in countries such as Denmark
and Germany, and by the way the treaty's fortunes have become entangled with
extraneous domestic factors such as the political fate of President Francois
Mitterrand and the Socialists in France, and the ferocious abortion debate
in Ireland.
The change in mood from the euphoria of last December's Maastricht summit
stems not from second, but first, thoughts. Incredibly, many countries are
only now thinking through the implications of what their leaders agreed last
year. It is now too late to make modifications; in practical, if not legal,
terms, the only option for national parliaments is to vote the treaty up or
down, without amendment.
Mr Jacques Delors, the European commission president, had seemed perverse
when on several occasions in the long run-up to the Maastricht agreement he
pointedly praised the UK as the only country conducting a national debate
about the implications of political and monetary union. At the time, the UK
debate seemed to create only headaches for Brussels. In retrospect, Mr
Delors was right.
'It was far better to have done the arguing before, rather than after, the
treaty was signed,' said a Delors aide this week. The proof is that there
was hardly a whisper about Maastricht, or EC issues, during the UK election,
and that the UK, having won its Maastricht opt-outs on monetary and social
policy, is one of the few countries where the treaty's ratification seems
assured.
By contrast, many Germans are only now complaining about their hallowed
D-Mark being replaced by the ersatz Ecu. German touchiness on this was
farcically illustrated recently when the European Commission had to reprint
its German version of the Maastricht treaty. The initial print-run referred
to the 'Ecu' as a word, when Bonn and most other EC governments had wanted
their national language versions to refer to the 'ECU', making it clear that
this was only an acronym for European Currency Unit and not necessarily the
eventual name of the single currency.
In Germany, and to a lesser extent in Belgium, regional governments are
unhappy that Maastricht may detract from their powers. There is growing
unease, particularly in France and Luxembourg, about the Maastricht
provision giving all EC citizens the right to vote, and stand as candidates,
in local and European parliamentary elections across the Community. And, as
if Maastricht were not hard enough to get ratified on its own terms, Spain
is toying with the idea of making ratification conditional on the north's
agreeing to the Delors proposals for more 'cohesion' funding for the south.
Further complicating the picture are the losses that governing parties in
France, Italy, Germany and Belgium have suffered in recent elections. While
these may not in all cases endanger ratification, they may compromise the
treaty's implementation. Weak and unstable governments are not best placed
to impose the economic austerity needed to fit their countries for monetary
union. The bond markets have caught a whiff of this pessimism. The interest
rate gap between Ecu and D-Mark bonds, which had narrowed after the
Maastricht agreement, has widened again in the past month.
There are four big danger points: One of the highest hurdles is also the
first - the June 2 referendum on the treaty in Denmark, the result of which
will bind the Copenhagen parliament. After weeks of polls showing a majority
of Danes against Maastricht, the tide may be turning, with a Gallup poll
last Saturday showing a 37-32 per cent split in favour. A similar about-turn
in public opinion happened just before Denmark's 1986 referendum on the
Single European Act and, in contrast to six years ago, all the big political
parties and newspapers back the latest EC integration move. But the polls
also show many Danes undecided on, or opposed to, many aspects of Maastricht
 -its currency, defence, foreign and internal security provisions. As one
senior Commission official put it, the Danish debate on Maastricht 'is not
confined to any precise item that we could try to defuse'. In contrast, the
June 18 referendum in Ireland (the only other EC state set to put Maastricht
to a plebiscite) seems to turn on just one issue. Ireland put into the
Maastricht treaty a formal protocol, stating that nothing in it would negate
its constitutional ban on abortion. But a subsequent row over a 14-year-old
rape victim's wish for an abortion in the UK led a majority of Irish supreme
court judges to state that, in general, the rights of an unborn child took
precedence over the EC-enshrined right to travel.
To offset this ruling, Dublin wanted to add one sentence to the protocol,
upholding its citizens' right to travel and receive information on services
(ie, abortion) legally available elsewhere in the EC. Fearful of opening a
Pandora's Box of revisionist demands, Dublin's EC partners refused to allow
even this tiny tampering with the treaty, but have now agreed to an
interpretative 'declaration' saying the same thing. In addition, the Irish
government has promised a separate abortion referendum later this year.
France has the most complex procedure for revising its constitution, partly
because President Mitterrand has a choice. The revision can either be done
by a three-fifths majority of both chambers meeting in joint session at
Versailles, or by referendum (which Mr Mitterrand desperately wants to avoid
lest it pronounce a vote of no-confidence in himself).
Much of the French debate so far has centred on the provision of rights to
foreigners to vote in local, but not national, elections. France has a
problem in that its local officials also have a national executive and
electoral role; mayors in its smaller towns have a police function, which
has national implications, while regional councillors form part of the
electoral college that chooses its Senate. But Brussels officials believe
the problem is soluble. Maastricht gives the 12 states an extra year to
decide, by unanimity, on the exact form of the new voting rights, and there
is plenty of scope for exceptions, as the Commission proposed in a 1990
draft directive. This would, for instance, give special leeway to
Luxembourg, which has some communes where citizens from other EC states are
in a near-majority.
Germany's ratification decision will probably come last, around December,
and will be the most eagerly awaited, because of the country's central role
in monetary union. It looks as though Chancellor Helmut Kohl will eventually
get the co-operation from the SPD opposition that he needs, both to revise
the constitution (by two-thirds of both houses) and to ratify Maastricht
(requiring a simple majority, which he does not command in the
SPD-controlled Bundesrat).
But Mr Kohl will have to make concessions. These are likely to include
giving the 16 Lander that make up the Bundesrat a veto over any future
transfer of their powers elsewhere, whether to Brussels or to Bonn, and
promising a government report by 1996 on the fitness of countries to enter
monetary union.
It is a measure of how important Germany is to monetary union that Brussels
fears a non-binding report by Bonn in four years on monetary union more than
the British opt-out clause already enshrined in the Maastricht treaty.
'Letting the German parliament take a second look at monetary union could
remove the dynamism from the process,' moans one EC official.
This is because Maastricht still leaves much scope for argument about how
far member states have to bring their spending, debt and inflation to common
levels before they can enter monetary union, set for 1997 or at the latest
1999. States are supposed to show a 'substantial and continuous' decline in
their yearly public deficit to no more than 3 per cent of gross domestic
product, and a reduction in public debt 'at a satisfactory pace' to no more
than 60 per cent of GDP. Germany is likely to interpret 'substantial' and
'satisfactory' differently from many of its partners, particularly those
from among the weaker southern economies.
But that is an argument for the future. What is striking about the
'convergence' discussions among EC finance ministers this year is that they
seem to be taking the Maastricht criteria seriously, even before
ratification. 'What Maastricht does is establish a time frame of five to six
years in which member states have to make a real effort,' says Mr Henning
Christophersen, the EC economic affairs commissioner with responsibility for
shepherding countries down the convergence path. This may seem quite a long
time. But countries such as Greece or Portugal, with double-digit inflation,
or Ireland, Italy and Belgium, with debt that matches or exceeds their GDP,
cannot afford to delay action until they see whether Maastricht gets a final
thumbs up or down by the end of this year.
So, one by one governments are putting forward 'convergence' plans for
discussion with their EC partners in Brussels. The Ecofin (finance
ministers) Council discussed Italy's convergence plan last November,
Portugal's in December and Ireland's in February; it will probably discuss
Germany's next month, Spain's in June and the Netherlands' plan in July or
September. Britain's turn will come early next year, after its forthcoming
EC presidency. It is too early to know whether this form of peer pressure
influences governments, but it is not too early to try it, given the
rigorous goals and timetable set out in the Maastricht treaty.
The Community is having to forge ahead this summer with other items on its
post-Maastricht agenda, such as trying to agree a financial framework for
1993-97, drawing up a strategy for taking in new members and planning how to
operate the 'common foreign and security policy' that Maastricht has
committed it to. In part, this reflects a basic optimism that the treaty
will still be ratified. But in truth, Brussels and the member states have no
option but to act as though Maastricht has already been ratified, and to get
on with their crowded agenda.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                        HOW THEY RATIFY AND WHEN
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Denmark:          June 2 referendum
Ireland:          June 18 referendum
France*:          three-fifths parliamentary majority, or referendum;
                  summer
Portugal:         simple majority of parliament; summer
Luxembourg:       two-thirds parliamentary majority; summer
Spain:            two-thirds parliamentary majority; autumn
Britain:          simple majority of parliament; autumn
Belgium*:         two-thirds majority of parliament; autumn
Netherlands:      simple majority of parliament; late autumn
Germany*:         two-thirds parliamentary majority; late autumn
Italy:            simple majority of parliament; timing unclear
Greece:           parliamentary approval; timing unclear
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
* Special majority needed to revise constitution
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
