FT  13 JUN 92 / The poisoning scandal that haunts Japan: Hundreds are still
seeking damages for the Minamata mercury disaster 36 years after the first
deaths
SABURO Hashiguchi, a retired fisherman, sighs bitterly. 'How long must we
wait? We will die and our children and grandchildren will have to take up
our case.' He is talking about his fight to be compensated for Japan's worst
outbreak of industrial pollution. His fingers shake uncontrollably, evidence
of the damage done to his body by mercury poisoning.
Hashiguchi is one of hundreds of Japanese still seeking compensation in a
case dating from 1956. The fishermen of Minamata, a seaside town in southern
Japan, were poisoned when they ate fish tainted by toxic mercury dumped into
the sea from a plant owned by Chisso, one of the country's biggest chemical
companies. The world was shocked in 1972 when a delegation from Minamata
went to the first United Nations environment conference, in Stockholm, with
photographs of how the worst-affected victims looked. Their deformed bodies
were portrayed widely as the price Japan paid for its economic miracle.
Now, 23 years after the first court claim was filed and 36 years after the
first deaths, the people of Minamata are still waiting for their claims to
be settled. To the embarrassment of the Japanese government, other victims
attended the UN's latest conference on the environment, in Rio de Janeiro,
to re-state their case.
The heaviest responsibility for the tragedy lies with Chisso. Not only did
its plant pour untreated mercury sludge into Minamata bay - it also ignored
warning signs and covered-up evidence for 15 years. The injustice was
compounded by years of obstruction by the central government - even now, it
refuses to admit that it shares any responsibility with Chisso - and local
authorities in the Minamata region. The courts also failed to reach an
acceptable settlement.
The victims - there are 13 separate support groups - contributed to their
own misfortunes, splitting into competing factions and allowing themselves
to be hijacked by political interests, including the Japan Communist party
(although these quarrels were the natural product of years of frustration).
The splits have arisen over differences of strategy, dating from the 1960s
when half the victims opted for court action and the others for negotiation.
At one stage,Chisso fostered dissent by favouring some victims over others,
wining and dining them in Tokyo and handing out souvenirs.
In the early post-war years, Minamata was a boom town. Its future seemed
assured by Chisso's investments and the company even got a seal of approval
from Emperor Hirohito, who visited the plant in 1951. But then, in the
mid-1950s, the first cases of what became known as Minamata disease began to
appear - patients lost control of their arms, legs, speech and eyesight.
Finally, scores died in great pain. Dr Hajime Hosokawa, Chisso's factory
doctor, suspected the mercury waste was responsible for the illness and
carried out experiments in 1959.
They proved his suspicions were well-founded. He sprinkled waste on cats'
food and found they lost control of their bodies, rather like the human
victims. But when he reported the results to his superiors, he was ordered
to stop the experiments, destroy the cats and stay silent. Chisso continued
to pump waste into the bay.
The authorities - including the powerful Ministry of International Trade and
Industry - also ignored a study carried out in 1957 at Kumamoto university
hospital, near Minamata, which discovered traces of mercury in dead victims'
brains. But officials did nothing, so great was the government's commitment
to pursuing high-speed economic growth and its ignorance of the
environmental dangers. The town council was reluctant to put pressure on
Chisso, Minamata's biggest employer. Politics clouded the dispute when some
of the victims turned for support to the Communist party. Only in 1968 did
the Ministry of Health and Welfare admit that mercury waste was the cause of
Minamata disease, and only then did Chisso stop pumping. By then, 100,000
people had eaten poisoned fish.
One group of victims launched a lawsuit against Chisso, while others stepped
up campaigns demanding negotiations with the company. The actions culminated
in violent demonstrations at Chisso's Tokyo headquarters. The company held
out, trying to minimise its responsibility. But much of its case was
destroyed, however, when Dr Hosokawa told court officials the truth about
the cat experiments as he lay dying in hospital in 1970.
Even then, the excruciating slowness of Japanese judicial procedures meant
that it was not until 1973 that the Kumamoto district court found Chisso
guilty of negligence and ordered it to pay damages of between Y16m-Y18m,
depending on the severity of victims' disabilities. The verdict was not the
end of the legal battles, though.
The court left it to a government-appointed panel of doctors to establish
the medical criteria under which compensation would be paid. Under these
rules, 3,000 people have been certified as victims. They include all the
most serious cases, including children who were poisoned before they were
born when their mothers ate tainted fish. Many of these foetal cases
suffered hideous congenital deformities. But a new dispute erupted when the
authorities, using the government doctors' criteria, started rejecting
claims from many people who thought they had been poisoned. To date, 12,000
patients have been turned down.
The rejections spurred more lawsuits. Some claimants sued Kumamoto
prefecture, successfully, for negligence in handling testing procedures;
this forced the authorities to accelerate the examinations. Early in the
1980s, other groups filed precedent-setting suits claiming damages from the
prefecture and the national government as well as Chisso. The suits accused
the authorities of being negligent in failing to monitor properly the water
quality in Minamata bay. The authorities retorted that, at the time of the
incident, the law did not require either the prefecture or the government to
carry out such checks. (Japan's tough anti-pollution laws were not passed
until the early 1970s).
The claimants won a major victory in 1987 when the Kumamoto district court
ruled that the authorities had indeed been negligent. But the joy proved
short-lived. The government and prefecture appealed to the high court in
Fukuoka, the biggest city in southern Japan; five years later, the case is
still under review.
Early this year, though, a judge hearing a parallel case in the Tokyo
district court ruled in favour of the government and prefecture - and
rejected claims of negligence. The victims' groups were furious because a
verdict given in Tokyo, even at district court level, has a powerful
psychological effect on judges elsewhere.
Judge Shinji Arai did, however, give two other key rulings. He awarded
damages of Y4m to 42 of the 64 claimants before him - even though none had
passed the official medical test procedures. This gave judicial support to
their long-held argument that the official tests were framed too tightly.
Arai also urged the government and the prefecture to settle out of court
since they bore 'political responsibility' for the incident. That remark was
aimed squarely at the Tokyo government.
Although he did not say so, Arai knew as he gave judgment that Kumamoto
prefecture was willing to talk peace with the victims. In 1990, the
prefecture, led by then governor Morihiro Hosokawa, had broken ranks with
the national authorities and started to seek a negotiated settlement.
Hosokawa, a maverick politician who has since resigned, says: 'What we did
was unbelievable for the (national) government. I had to go to Tokyo to
explain my decision personally.'
The nub of the argument is what to do about claimants who have some symptoms
of Minamata disease but fail to meet the official criteria. Ten years ago
they were dismissed as malingers by, among others, Yasushi Morishita, a
former leading official of the ruling Liberal Democratic party, who said:
'I, too, would like to live in Kumamoto prefecture and be certified as a
victim.' Today, public officials are more cautious; but the doubts remain
because symptoms, such as a loss of control over limbs, can be a sign of
other conditions.
Hosokawa says 8,000 more people could become eligible if the criteria were
extended. The people in this 'grey zone' could receive smaller payments than
the original minimum of Y16m - perhaps Y4m, as awarded by the Tokyo court.
The prefecture would agree to such a settlement. So, probably, would Chisso,
which would pay the lion's share. But the national government refuses to
agree, even though the money would not be described as 'compensation' but as
some form of ex-gratia payments.
The view of the Environment Agency, which is responsible for Minamata
although it was not founded until 1975, is that even taking part in talks
would be an admission of responsibility. 'The government cannot enforce laws
which did not exist in the 1950s,' says one official. But some senior
politicians would like to force the bureaucrats to make a settlement. One
former minister notes: 'We should say this was the responsibility of the
whole country since the whole country prospered from economic growth.' Such
suggestions horrify government officials, who fear a precedent might be set
for scores of other claims from the post-war years.
To be fair the government has, implicitly, accepted some moral
responsibility by guaranteeing the compensation payments being made by
Chisso. It has also poured public money into a Y485bn scheme to dredge the
contaminated sludge out of Minamata bay and build a waterfront memorial
park. But even with the best efforts from all sides, settlement of the last
claims remains far in the future. Hiroki Ouzumi, general manager of the
environmental department of Kumamoto prefecture, says: 'It will take five
years if the conciliation talks succeed and 10 years or more if they fail.'
While the lawyers argue, Minamata bleeds. Since the 1950s, the town's
population has fallen from 50,000 to 36,000. Young people leave to study and
do not come back. Fishing, which once employed a third of the work force,
virtually has ended. Employment at Chisso has dropped from 3,000 to 800; the
company keeps its factory open only because closing altogether would seem
like abandoning Minamata. While the rest of southern Japan enjoys an
investment boom, new companies shun Minamata.
The damage has penetrated deep into society. Tsuginori Hamamoto, another
disabled former fisherman, says that people making arranged marriages avoid
potential partners from victims' families. Youngsters going to live in
Kumamoto or elsewhere like to forget they ever came from Minamata. Amid such
gloom, it is hard to find hope there. The town council and the victims'
associations cannot even agree on sharing their records to establish a
Minamata disease museum. The fruit of 30 years of bitterness is yet more
bitterness.
