FT  11 MAY 92 / Management: Losing patience with private medicine - The
soaring cost of healthcare insurance is forcing many employers to limit the
benefits that are available to their employees
The costs of private healthcare are catching up with British companies. Over
the past 20 years, private medical insurance has become an increasingly
common - and expected - perk among white collar employees.
But companies are now facing potentially crippling increases in costs as
premiums struggle to keep pace with rocketing claims payments.
Over the past year, premiums have gone up by an average 20 per cent, with
some clients paying up to 40 per cent more.
'The word has got around personnel directors - be very careful what medical
benefits you offer,' says Eddie O'Hara who works with the health insurance
division of Willis Corroon, the insurance broker, and looks after 300
corporate clients.
Many companies are looking at ways of cutting down on claims in return for
lower premiums. Administration is being tightened and employees are being
asked to share some of the cost of treatment.
Some companies are striking deals with hospitals offering treatment at a
specially negotiated rate. Above all, employees who benefit from corporate
healthcare schemes are being encouraged to think of their private healthcare
as supplementing, rather than replacing, the National Health Service.
About 12 per cent of British people have private medical health insurance,
the majority of them through corporate schemes. Initially made available as
an incentive to senior executives during the 1970s, private health provision
cascaded down to the lowliest white collar grades during the 1980s and in
some industries, like pharmaceuticals, is common among blue collar workers.
'It has become almost as common a benefit as paid holidays,' says Mike
Tiler, who heads a health insurance team at Mercer Fraser, the actuary and
employee benefits company.
In corporate schemes, employers pay either the whole or part of the premium
or sometimes simply negotiate a discount - generally about 10 per cent - on
the price available to individuals. Premium income amounted to more than
Pounds 1.09bn in 1990 after a decade which saw the number of employees
benefiting from health schemes increasing by an average of 5 per cent each
year.
But the growth in medical costs has moved up at four times that rate and
shows signs of escalating. More expensive, high-tech treatments are more
common and wage costs have risen.
With interest in health issues rising, employees are much more likely to
claim on policies than they were 20 years ago. Tiler says that the
increasing range of treatments available has also led to some abuse of the
system.
'One pensioner used to spend 10 weeks a year in a psychiatric hospital. She
thought it was a holiday.'
The government's health service reforms have aggravated problems by
encouraging general practitioners to refer patients to private healthcare
wherever possible, leaving the doctors with more resources free for the
treatment of NHS patients.
Until recently, healthcare premiums were kept down by the entry of new
insurers into the market - such as Norwich Union and Orion, a subsidiary of
Nationale Nederlanden - which put competitive pressure on the established
companies - Bupa, PPA and WPA.
This is now beginning to change, following the losses being experienced by
market stalwarts and newcomers alike in 1991.
Medical insurance premiums have now grown to 3 per cent of many companies'
wage bills. The figure is even higher for some companies which have
particularly long-established schemes.
The situation is not yet as bad as in the US, where medical premiums make up
18 per cent of the total wage bill of some companies. Indeed, according to
one recent survey, US companies rate healthcare costs as one of their
biggest concerns
But even at present levels, some UK managers are looking hard at their
programmes.
Modifications now being introduced include:
The introduction of an excess - under which employees pay the first Pounds
50 or Pounds 100 of any treatment. Philip Anderson, marketing director of
Bupa, the country's biggest private health insurer calls it the 'cold shower
effect'.
Better scheme administration and the introduction of central controls.
According to O'Hara, companies sometimes need to find out exactly which
employees have access to which benefit. 'In some cases with companies which
have several locations around the country, employers simply don't know what
the claims record is.'
Vetting of claims by senior managers.
Closer monitoring of the cost of surgery or hospital stays. Mercer Fraser
and other advisers carry out 'medical audits' - adjusting and costing claims
so that they relate the real work done.
Preferred hospital arrangements, by which scheme managers negotiate reduced
prices for the bulk purchase of administration and accommodation with
private or NHS hospitals, are becoming increasingly common, says Anderson.
Persuading employees to use NHS facilities wherever possible with schemes
making payments to beneficiaries for each night they spend in an NHS
hospital, for example.
Willis provides a counselling service to advise scheme members whether to
opt for private or public treatment. 'If for example they want their wisdom
teeth out but are not in any pain, we suggest they wait to have it done on
the NHS, even if they have to wait for the treatment for a couple of
months.'
The scope to tackle one of the biggest problems - the liabilities of company
health schemes to retired employees - is limited.
Almost all schemes now exclude cover for employees once they have retired
but some employers - among them some UK clearing banks - have accumulated
future liabilities.
Premiums paid into schemes by the beneficiaries have almost all been spent
in paying actual claims. There is little left over to fund future care, the
cost of which is growing exponentially.
Employers have bought out some executives by paying them benefits now in
exchange for their giving up future entitlement to private healthcare cover
in the future.
But Tiler warns that in some cases, the liabilities 'could wreck a company'.
'Its a massive issue which people are only just beginning to tackle. It will
call for some creative thinking,' adds O'Hara.
