FT  12 SEP 92 / Sport: Three players audition for role of American Messiah -
Tennis / Three young Americans have reached today's US Open men's
semi-finals. John Barrett asks which one will inherit Jimmy Connors' place
in the hearts of the fans
HANDEL could have handled it. In the idiom of today's entertainers George
Frederick would surely have given us 'Messiah II' to celebrate the arrival
of a new American on the tennis block, a man who will succeed last year's
surprise semi-finalist, Jimmy Connors, as the object of worship in the
hearts of New York's boisterous tennis fans.
But who will fill the starring role now that the 40-year-old, whose birthday
party was spoiled this year by a ruthless Ivan Lendl in round two, has
departed the scene? Will it be the solid, stolid Jim Courier, the
blue-collar battler from Dade City Florida who looks like a grown-up version
of one of those Norman Rockwell straw-chewing, all-American boys in blue
denim shorts, a plaid shirt and tousled fair hair? The 22-year-old was a
finalist here 12 months ago and has already claimed this year's Grand Slam
titles in Australia and France to make himself the world No 1.
Or will Pete Sampras, his stylish opponent in this afternoon's semi-final,
become the next object of worship? The 21-year-old from Florida became the
youngest winner of this title in 1990 with a spectacular display of power
tennis that had crushed in succession Ivan Lendl, John McEnroe and Andre
Agassi. But the shy 19-year-old had not been physically or emotionally ready
to bear the burden of national expectation and had seemed almost relieved
when Courier removed his crown last year at the quarter-final stage. 'At
last the monkey is off my back', he had said.
That was the only occasion in six previous meetings that Courier's
awkward-looking topspin game has prevailed against the smooth-stroking
Sampras. Courier's is a physically demanding game and ever since his second
French win last June, he has looked emotionally drained, unable to commit
himself fully to the punishing training sessions that have brought him his
success. Here, for the first time in three months, Courier has looked as if
he is enjoying his tennis again. He can thank his coach Brad Stine and his
tactical adviser, the former Spanish No. 1 Jose Higueras, for his renewed
zest.
Sampras now looks more like the champion we all thought he would become. He
has filled out to become a formidable figure physically and hits those
crisp, flat drives and pounding serves with much more consistency. He came
here with victories over Boris Becker, Courier, Stefan Edberg and Lendl that
brought him the recent titles in Cincinnati and Indianapolis and has now won
his last 15 matches. You cannot buy the sort of confidence that such
successes bring and Courier's objective will be to dent it early in their
encounter today.
But wait a minute. What about the other young American in action today?
Perhaps it will be the diminutive Michael Chang who will inherit the
Connors' mantle. Certainly no-one will question the 20-year-old's courage.
Standing only 5 ft 8 in and weighing a mere 145lbs Chang is a dwarf in a
land of giants. But he compensates for his size by taking the ball on the
rise to use his opponent's pace and covers the court with electrifying pace.
His fighting qualities have never been in question, ever since he won the
French Open so dramatically at the age of 17 in 1989. He has been outgunned
in his last two matches here this year against fellow American MaliVai
Washington and the improving South African Wayne Ferreira but in each match
he found a way to turn things his way in the fifth set.
The quarter-final against Ferreira had been scheduled as Thursday's night
match but because of the storm that hit New York early in the afternoon it
was moved to the Grandstand Court just before 6pm. This was necessary so
that Stefan Edberg's match against Ivan Lendl could follow the interrupted
doubles semi-final on the Stadium Court in which Jim Grabb and Richey
Reneberg eventually gained revenge 3-6 7-5 7-6 4-6 6-2 against John McEnroe
and Michael Stich for their defeat in the Wimbledon final.
The Chang v Ferreira battle was a marvellous affair, full of spectacular
forehands and expensive losers from the South African (he committed 104
unforced errors altogether), whose thigh injury at the start of the fourth
set was bravely ignored as he won the tie-break that levelled the match. In
the closing stages, however, Chang realised that his opponent's movement was
slightly impaired and he maintained his consistency to win 7-5 2-6 6-3 7-6
6-1 after four hours and 17 minutes of great entertainment. Thus, for only
the second time in his career, Chang would play in the semi-finals of a
Grand Slam Championship. You can be sure he will give a good account of
himself.
'It is important for me not to go into the next match satisfied. I have to
keep my head down, keep working at it give myself the best chance to win
this tournament' he said.
Edberg, the title-holder, took three attempts to finish his business against
the three-time former champion Lendl. Just after midnight, with three hours
of actual play behind them, spread over two sessions that were interrupted
for 50 minutes, the rain returned with Edberg leading 6-3 6-3 3-6 5-7 2-1.
He will not have slept easily, but back on court, the defending champion
took 59 minutes to win the final set tie break 7-6 for victory.
Lendl, a newly naturalised American, drew inspiration from the fervent
support of the crowd to produce some of his finest serves as well as two
crucial volleys. Another match point was saved with a virtual ace and the
despondent Swede then surrendered his own serve and watched helplessly as
Lendl won the set.
So will it be Courier, Sampras or Chang - or will all three have to give
best to a foreign-born adversary? If one of the young Americans does bring
home the Championship you can be sure that 20,000 voices will be ready to
join together in a rendering of 'Hallelujah II'
