FT  19 SEP 92 / Travel: A safari that ends on the beach - Richard Gilbert
divides his Kenyan holiday between the luxurious game lodges of Tsavo and
the Indian Ocean
THE DELICATELY laundered white mosquito net around my bed made the room look
like a bridal suite. I ordered a beer. As I quenched a thirst brought on by
a morning game drive in the bush, I glanced through the window and counted
eight zebra, five water-buck and nine elephants heading towards a
water-hole. It was early February in Kenya's Tsavo national park and the
temperature had not dropped below 93'c Fahrenheit all day.
Tsavo, halfway between Mombasa and Nairobi, is the largest game sanctuary in
East Africa. Thirty-six hours earlier we had struggled through fog to
Gatwick; now we were outbidding each other with sightings of exotic animals.
This was my first two-centre holiday - a week divided between the comforts
of an Indian Ocean beach hotel outside Mombasa and game rides into the bush
of Tsavo and the Taita Hills private game sanctuary.
Seven of us climbed on to a safari mini-bus for a game drive to Salt Lick
Lodge, a sanctuary in the Taita Hills that was once a sisal plantation. The
success of any game drive depends largely on the skills, prescience and
character of the driver-guide. With Hamid, we were lucky.
Off the Mombasa-Nairobi highway, Hamid turned the zebra- striped Nissan down
red dirt tracks surrounded by thorn scrub and short grass. He could
interpret the significance of a lump of animal dung or a patch of
smoothed-down grass with tremendous skill. Following trails and tracks, we
saw giraffes, gazelles, zebra, dikdik and exotic birds that would have
driven twitchers into a frenzy.
The game park lodges for overnight accommodation are a misnomer, having less
to do with Karen Blixen than with Conrad Hilton. Indeed, Salt Lick Safari
Lodge in Taita Hills is owned by Hilton. Built around a natural salt lick,
the clusters of rooms are on pillars to let the animals wander freely
underneath the lodge.
At dawn we set off north for Tsavo, once notorious for man-eating lions and
more recently for the Somali poachers who have plundered the black rhino
population.
Just when you think the views are unsurpassable, you reach Voi Lodge in
Tsavo East. Built on an escarpment, the lodge overlooks a remarkable series
of linked water holes. From my room I watched the gigantic amphitheatre fill
with dozens of elephants, their hides rusted from rolling in the red earth
around the water holes.
Waking at first light the following day, I disentangled myself from the
mosquito net and watched the continuing parade of wildlife, headed this time
by water buffalo and ostriches. The morning was still cool; the scent of
wild flowers filled the lodge.
The last lap of the safari took us to Tsavo West national park, with a
detour past Mzima Springs from where millions of gallons of crystal water
are piped daily to Mombasa. This oasis, surrounded by a valley of arid lava,
is a haven for hippos.
On the rough track to Ngulia Lodge, an inspired diversion by Hamid took us
to a pride of lions in a broad patch of long grass. Two new-born cubs romped
with elder members of the family; then, seeking a feed, they were gently
cuffed away by a lioness.
Ngulia Lodge, in Tsavo West, is a mecca for migrating birds. The lights of
the isolated lodge attract hundreds of species, and there is a roll-call of
rare visitors. Madagascar bee-eaters, penduline tits, hammerkops, wheatears,
warblers and waders are all regulars, together with a species bearing the
memorable name of 'red-cheeked cordon bleu'.
Four days of safari are rewarded with a long weekend of relaxation at Safari
Beach hotel outside Mombasa. How safe is a safari holiday?
The sudden spate of attacks on tourists in the Masai Mara, east of Tsavo,
earlier this year was unprecedented for Kenya and led to increased security.
Operators are insisting on a minimum of two vehicles travelling together on
particular game drives in the Mara's remoter areas. But travellers to Tsavo
 -unlike the Mara, Tsavo is controlled by the Kenya Wildlife Service - have
faced no difficulties. Kenya is still safer than Key West.
Richard Gilbert travelled with Portland Holidays, whose 'Portrait of Kenya'
combined safari and beach holidays start at Pounds 689 per person for a week
(from November 1). The cost for 10 nights' beach plus four days' safari is
around Pounds 823 per person (again, from Nov 1). Address: 218 Great
Portland St, London W1N SHG, tel: 071-388-5111, or 1 Portland St, Manchester
M1 3BJ, tel: 061-228-1188.
