FT  24 SEP 92 / Effects of leaving ERM and cutting interest rates
'THERE are those who think we should slash interest rates, cut loose from
the ERM all together, and let the pound find its own level.
'It sounds simple. After all, the US floats its currency; why shouldn't we
do so too? But there is, of course, a very significant difference. The
British economy is far more dependent on international trade. More than a
third of our national output is exported, compared to just a tenth for the
US. For Britain the threat of imported inflation is very real.
'Many who advocate floating know full well what the consequences would be.
They intend a devaluation of the pound. And they would certainly achieve it.
For the result of leaving the ERM, combined with large cuts in interest
rates, would be a fall in the pound probably unprecedented in the past 40
years. It's the cut and run option: cut interest rates and a run on the
pound.
'Whatever the position may be for other countries, we know from bitter
experience that devaluation doesn't work for Britain. If depreciating the
currency solved anything, Britain would already have been one of the most
successful economies in the world.
In 1966 the pound was worth - amazingly - more than DM 11. But the
devaluations of the past yielded not booming exports but rather a steadily
falling share of world markets.
'Contrast that with the export successes of the strong currency,
low-inflation countries like Germany and Japan. They have shown that the way
to success is to adjust your costs to your exchange rate, not the other way
around.
'The stark reality is that outside the ERM, we would still have to compete
with the ERM countries. Some, like Germany and France, which already have
low inflation and others like Spain, whose ERM membership is helping bring
inflation down. And our initial gain in competitiveness would soon be eroded
as imports soared and pay deals rose. That would do British industry no good
at all.
'Markets should see that, unlike all our major European competitors, Britain
lacked the will to pursue the goal of permanently low inflation. And they
would be right. We would have given up after less than two years. They would
conclude that we were back to our bad old ways; that given the chance we
would always delude ourselves by thinking that with a
little more inflation we could get a little more growth.
'The credibility of our anti-inflationary strategy with businesses and
employers would be in tatters. It would certainly be the end of the battle
with inflation - we would have surrendered. And quite soon interest rates
would have to go back up again - to much higher levels than they are today.'
Norman Lamont's speech to European Policy Forum, July 10 1992
