FT  23 JUL 92 / Interest rate rise on the cards in Spain
THE BANK of Spain may increase its key interest rate, the intervention rate,
at today's tender of certificates of deposit in an attempt to add monetary
muscle to a tough package of fiscal restrictions announced by the government
on Tuesday night.
The central bank intervened yesterday to reduce liquidity in the interbank
market by selling short-term instruments at 12.75 per cent, up from around
12.5 per cent last week. This led to speculation that it was signalling an
imminent rise in its official intervention rate, which stands at 12.4 per
cent.
Analysts do not believe the peseta's controlled slide against the D-Mark in
the past few weeks justifies an interest rate increase. But they say the
government may be looking for an adjustment in monetary policy to boost the
effectiveness of a series of tax increases and budget cuts designed to trim
Dollars 3.26bn off its runaway public deficit this year.
As part of this fiscal package, Madrid has decided not to introduce a new
low tax regime this year, meaning that Spaniards will be paying up to 3 per
cent more tax for 1992 than they had expected. The country's top marginal
rate remains at 56 per cent, one of the highest in the European Community.
The government announced in addition that it was bringing forward an
increase in value added tax from 13 per cent to 15 per cent from January
1993 to August 1. It is also raising, from the beginning of next month, the
amount of tax the revenue service retains on salaries each month.
Mr Carlos Solchaga, the finance minister, also announced cuts in central
government capital and current transfers affecting most ministries but
particularly Defence and Public Works, worth some Dollars 1.4bn for the rest
of this year.
A freeze on hiring in the public sector, fines for abuse of rules
guaranteeing medicines to pensioners, and a measure to force employers to
pay for part of employee sick leave would cut a further Dollars 500m, he
said.
The fiscal measures have been introduced to stem a 40 per cent overspend, by
the end of June, in the planned central government budget deficit. Mr
Solchaga conceded that a worsening economic outlook in Spain meant the
economy would grow at around 2 per cent or less this year, compared with the
3 per cent projected in March.
The VAT increase could mean inflation of 6.8 per cent for the year, wide of
its 5.5 per cent target and a potentially powerful argument for increasing
interest rates.
