FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (11): From
Pavarotti to Nessie / A look at unusual risks
LLOYD'S has long prided itself on being the market where anything can be
insured. Appropriate parts of actors and sports personalities, voices of
rock legends, quest for monsters in Loch Ness, cancellation of the Olympic
games, and raindrops falling on Pavarotti in the park can all be
underwritten at Lloyd's.
The attraction of such risks for Lloyd's underwriters is simple - they
provide welcome publicity and usually make money. Professional stuntmen, for
example, no matter how daring their exploits, make careful plans and take
adequate precautions.
Even a more amateurish piece of daredevilry - a voyage from Dover to Cap
Gris Nez by a merchant navy officer in a bath tub - was covered, on
condition that the bath plug remained in position at all times . . .
In some ways, the writing of such eccentric one offs best defines the hard
to define skills of underwriting - having the feel and flair to take a punt
on the unknown, and getting the rating right to make it worthwhile.
The first question an underwriter must ask, said one expert in the cover of
unusual risks, is 'Who is the client, who is the client, who is the client?'
An honest client means that a risk, no matter how extraordinary, has a good
chance of being rateable. Lloyd's prides itself on asserting that a good
underwriter can put a price on anything and do it in about three minutes, as
the broker waits at the box for the underwriter's verdict. The chances are
that a rate will be given, for after all, as an underwriter commented,
'there's lots of money to be made out of the unusual'.
One of the market sectors in which the unusual and the high value come
together is the insurance of fine art risks. Some of these are necessarily
one offs, such as the huge Van Gogh celebration in Amsterdam in 1990, which
was covered for around Dollars 3bn, or the latest selection from the Saatchi
collection now on show in London which includes a real (dead) shark in a
tank of formaldehyde.
There is also a growing market in covering wealthy households whose home
contents may include collections of art and antiques. Hiscox Insurance
Agencies (HlA), for example, was formed in June, 1990, to underwrite
high-value household business for Syndicate 33 at Lloyd's.
Personal insurance is considered to be a major growth area for the Lloyd's
market, and those individuals likely to own or occupy high-value property
are especially sought after as clients. The 606 High Value House and
Contents Insurance available from HlA includes a specialised all risks
section for fine arts, covering art, antiques or collectible items. The
cover is underwritten by Syndicate 33, which has a capacity this year of
Pounds 129m.
The syndicate writes the UK's biggest thatched house and fine art accounts
and is the leader in Lloyd's fine art risks 'from Rembrandts to classic
Ferrari cars' with an underwriting team 'particularly trained to underwrite
all the personal lines of the rich ..'
The syndicate's expertise has been built up under the supervision of HIA
chairman Robert Hiscox, and illustrates how a personal interest - Mr
Hiscox's is in fine art - can lead to a business opportunity.
ln recent years, however, as the values of fine art and antiques have risen,
so has the incidence of theft. In financial terms, art theft is now second
only to the drugs 'trade', with an annual turnover reputed to be Pounds
500m.
The Art Loss Register, established in October, 1990, with offices in London
and New York, provides a centralised computer register of stolen items. A
commercial enterprise which works closely with international police forces,
its shareholders include representatives of the art trade such as the
International Foundation for Art Research, Sotheby's and Christie's.
Insurance shareholders include Lloyd's (Lloyd's of London Press), Hogg Group
and Nordstern Insurance.
The register aims to deter art theft, aid in recoveries and help the fine
art trade avoid selling stolen property by entering stolen items on the
database. Auction catalogues and sales can be checked against the database
and stolen items located, making it more difficult for thieves to resell
them. The register will also reveal individuals who may have insured with
more than one company in the hope of collecting on multiple claims.
The hope is that by improving recoveries, deterring theft and preventing
fraud, premiums for fine art cover can be held at acceptable levels. The
existence of such a service is thus a useful marketing tool for fine art
insurers. And it works - since January 1991, the register has assisted in
the recovery of paintings by Rubens, Bonnard, Picasso, Basquiat and Twombly,
among others.
So with the Ferrari and the Rembrandt safely covered, the chance of a
relaxing round of golf being ruined by the cost of celebrations for a hole
in one taken care of, and even the likelihood of being hit by space debris
while on the fairway covered, what else could go wrong?
Well, something always can. Nicholas Thomson, underwriter of Syndicate 33
tells of the talking robot developed to teach delinquent pupils in a school
in Harlem, which had been programmed to scream 'Help, I'm being stolen.' But
when the theft eventually happened, it 'just didn't scream loud enough.'
Lynn MacRitchie is editorial manager, FTBI insurance group
