FT  16 SEP 92 / Securities Institute is shaped by the Big Bang / Examining a
professional body as it prepares to carve out an independent role for itself
VERY soon the Securities Institute will emerge from the shadow of the London
Stock Exchange and carve out an independent existence. The new initials MSI
 -Member of the Securities Institute - are beginning to appear on notepaper
and business cards.
The institute's founding chairman, Mr Graham Ross Russell, a former deputy
chairman of the Stock Exchange, says: 'We are trying to create a
professional institute for the securities industry in the broadest sense.'
The physical separation is scheduled to take place at the end of next month,
when the institute will set up its own City of London premises next to the
Monument, including a members' room, a reading room and seminar facilities.
The institute is to launch a recruitment drive to attract applications from
a broader constituency, outside the Stock Exchange membership from which it
has drawn most its initial support.
The founding of the Securities Institute on March 2 was a delayed
consequence of the stock market's Big Bang in 1986. One reform led to
another and eventually the Stock Exchange was reconstituted on the basis of
corporate rather than individual membership.
That change, which took final effect on April 1 this year, created a gap.
Who would look after the professional training of individuals and be
responsible for upholding personal standards of behaviour? The Stock
Exchange was no longer a club or an educational body but a highly
competitive, technology-based international business.
Mr Peter Rawlins, the Stock Exchange's chief executive, unsentimentally shed
several parts of the old imperial organisation, dispatching the traded
options market over to the financial futures exchange, Liffe, and the
private shareholder support team to the new independent body ProShare.
It became logical, too, to send off to a new organisation the 20-odd members
of the section - headed by Mr Tim Nicholson - that had looked after the
individual membership. Some of these had already moved over to the regulator
of Stock Exchange firms, the Securities and Futures Authority.
To get the new institute off the ground the 5,000-odd former Stock Exchange
members were offered a favourable 'window'. They could sign up within 12
months on the basis of a Pounds 100 first year's subscription. They would be
admitted subject only to a check that they were in good standing with the
SFA and other regulators.
Other securities practitioners face more formalities. For full membership
they must show they have up to 15 years' relevant experience, or have passed
Stock Exchange examinations or have gained other professional
qualifications. They will, in addition, be vetted for good character. Lower
grades of associate and student membership have also been created.
Besides stockbrokers, practitioners of investment management, corporate
finance and securities settlement are all seen as potential candidates.
'We are now focusing much more on the wider membership,' says Mr Nicholson,
now chief executive of the institute. 'That is going to be one of our big
tasks during the autumn.'
Mr Nicholson hopes to have boosted the total roll to about 5,500 by next
March, of which about 2,000 would be recruited from outside the Stock
Exchange. He thinks there is the potential to reach a membership of 10,000
over the next five years. The current roll is 4,200.
Membership of the institute confers little except status at present.
The institute does not have a defined position in the regulatory structure,
although certain other professional institutes are accepted by the
Securities and Investments Board as so-called recognised professional bodies
and can authorise their members to conduct investment business.
RPB status, says Mr Nicholson, is far off. 'We may not be on that road, and
it would tie us down at this stage,' he says.
The prime focus at present is on developing the examination and training
programme, which will include not only the basic exams taken over from the
Stock Exchange but also a spectrum of activities ranging from back office
training modules to refresher courses for top securities executives.
There is considerable emphasis on professional integrity. Members are
required to follow a code of conduct and will be expected to follow the
spirit as well as the letter of rules set by various regulatory authorities.
A disciplinary panel will investigate allegations of misconduct.
Regional branches are planned and may acquire a local emphasis. For example,
the Edinburgh branch will probably be dominated by fund managers rather than
stockbrokers.
The membership of the main board, too, is being broadened. Initially
composed of ex-Stock Exchange figures it has taken on an investment manager.
Mr Paddy Linaker, chief executive of M&amp;G, joined in July. This month three
others are being elected: Mr David Burton, ex-chairman of the financial
futures exchange Liffe, Mr John Spencer, deputy chief executive of Barclays
de Zoete Wedd and Mr Richard Broadbent, a corporate finance executive at
Schroders. The whole board will stand down next spring ahead of the
institute's first elections.
Against the background of various City scandals the institute can be seen as
an attempt to build a respectable future for the securities industry.
'We aim to help people to be truly professional,' says Mr Ross Russell.
'Then clients will want to be sure they are dealing with a member of the
institute.'
