FT  08 SEP 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: More clouds gather over
Caribbean export sector - Canute James studies a gloomy report on last
year's performance from the region's development bank
COMMODITY EXPORTING countries in the English-speaking Caribbean will
continue to experience fluctuating output and earnings because of weak and
uncertain markets, and will feel the effects of a prolonged drought last
year, the Caribbean Development Bank has said in its report on the region's
economic performance in 1991.
The Barbados-based bank, which provides project loans for 17 members in the
region, said sugar producers were being affected by reduced access to the US
market; bauxite (aluminium ore) output was being contained by oversupply of
aluminium; oil production had been relatively stable; and banana producers
were worried about competition for their traditional markets.
The region's sugar production would be lower this year because of last
year's drought, the CDB said. Output in the bank's sugar-producing members -
Guyana, Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados, St Kitts-Nevis, Jamaica and Belize -
reached 688,000 tonnes last year, 5 per cent more than 1990. Both Guyana and
St Kitts recorded production increases of more than 20 per cent, reversing
declines in 1990, while in Trinidad and Tobago and Barbados output declined
by 5 per cent and 15 per cent respectively.
'A major concern of regional sugar producers continues to be the reduction
in US sugar import quotas,' the bank reported. 'In October (1991), the US
administration announced a 35 per cent reduction for all regional producers
except St Kitts-Nevis, whose quota was reduced by 9.6 per cent.' The cuts in
US quotas would severely affect some producers, such as Belize, which was
producing more than its quota commitments to both the EC and US markets,'
said the bank. 'Sugar not sold on the preferential markets is sold at world
market prices, which are substantially below preferential prices.'
The report said that with the 'rapid compression' of regional sugar quotas
since 1982, the attention of producers would be focussed increasingly on
improved efficiency to increase export competitiveness and profitability of
their industries.
The weak state of the international aluminium market, caused by economic
recession and unexpectedly high levels of sales by the former Soviet Union,
would continue to have a dampening effect on the region's bauxite mining and
refining industry, said the CDB. While projecting the start of a recovery in
the aluminium market in the second half of this year, the bank expected
continued low prices. 'Taking into account the closure of several smelting
plants, world production is projected to decline slightly in 1992,' it said.
Regional production of bauxite fell 4 per cent last year to 13m tonnes in
response to weak world market prices caused by oversupply, the report said.
The two producers had mixed fortunes. Guyana's production of 1.35m tonnes
last year was 5.5 per cent less than 1990, while Jamaica's grew by 5.8 per
cent to 11.6m tonnes.
The CDB indicated that the region's bauxite output had also suffered from a
shortfall in shipments to the former Soviet Union. That was a reference to
the de facto termination of a five-year contract between Jamaica and a
Soviet importing house for 1m tonnes of ore a year. Shipments were well
below the contracted quantities last year because of delayed payments by
Moscow, followed by the disintegration of the Soviet Union.
The bank's oil producing members also suffered mixed fortunes, with output
remaining stable in Barbados but declining in Trinidad and Tobago, mainly
because of accidents and the need for 'non-routine maintenance' of
refineries, the report said. It gave no figures for 1991 output, but
official figures from the respective governments show Barbadian 1991 oil
output at 1,550 barrels a day, with Trinidad and Tobago's at 147,000 b/d.
In the face of continuing uncertainty over preferential access to the
European market, the bank's banana-exporting members recorded a 16 per cent
decline in volume last year to 300,000 tonnes. The producers are Belize,
Jamaica and the Windward Islands of St Lucia, St Vincent, Dominica and
Grenada.
'All producing countries, except Jamaica, reported declines mainly because
of prolonged drought which also affected fruit quality,' the bank said. 'In
the Windward Islands, the volume of bananas exported to the UK under
preferential arrangements fell by 18 per cent. the decline in performance
was most pronounced in St Lucia and St Vincent.'
The bank forecast expanded production and export of bananas this year,
mainly in the Windward Islands which was expected to ship 300,000 tonnes.
But the report warned: 'Despite this optimistic outlook for production, the
threat of the removal of protection for banana exports after 1992 has
resulted in considerable uncertainty in the industry. Efforts by regional
producers to identify alternative markets for bananas have had limited
success because of intense competition from Latin America.'
The bank suggested that one way in which the regional producers could
cushion the damage was through improved efficiency and competitiveness, and
by agricultural diversification. It noted 'an expansion in vegetable and
other food crop production during 1991'.
Nutmeg production in Grenada, the world's second largest producer after
Indonesia, fell by 2.5 per cent to 2,643 tonnes last year, the bank
reported. 'Since 1990 production has been below the average for the
preceding three years largely because of the soft market for this crop,' the
report said.
US markets were closed yesterday for the Labor Day holiday
