FT  15 MAY 92 / Olympia &amp; York Files for Protection: Not enough fingers to
plug the dyke - Filing for protection prevents creditors' taking control of
assets / Judge orders Dollars 240m payment to Morgan Stanley
MR PAUL REICHMANN, the publicity-shy founder of Olympia &amp; York Developments,
has spent two months struggling to avoid asking the Canadian and US courts
for protection from his creditors under insolvency procedures.
But his bankers became convinced over the past few days that court
protection offers him the best chance of carrying out an orderly
reconstruction of his business, which has properties worth billions of
dollars in Toronto, New York and London.
Earlier this week, Mr John Major, the prime minister, and Mr Robin Leigh
Pemberton, governor of the Bank of England, were alerted to the prospect of
O&amp;Y seeking the protection of the Canadian courts from the competing claims
of its many creditors. The Canadian government and Mr John Crow, governor of
the Bank of Canada, were also told.
But the news was restricted to this small circle. In the unlikely event that
O&amp;Y changed its mind and tried to do without court protection, it was
imperative that its preparations for bankruptcy filing should not leak. As
the world's biggest property developer, with Dollars 12bn of debt, any
premature public disclosure would have shaken the world's property and
banking markets.
By yesterday morning, however, it was becoming clear to O&amp;Y and its bankers
that they had little choice. A long line of disgruntled creditors was
queueing at Mr Reichmann's door in Toronto.
He had just been ordered by a High Court judge in London to make a payment
of Dollars 240m to Morgan Stanley in respect of a contract by which the US
investment bank had the right to sell to O&amp;Y the lease on an office in
Canary Wharf, the Pounds 3bn development in London's Docklands. Although the
payment is in respect of the Docklands property, the liability falls on
O&amp;Y's parent company in Canada.
Morgan's claim was only the latest of several confronting Mr Reichmann. A
syndicate of eight banks led by JP Morgan, the US commercial bank, was
foreclosing on a Dollars 160m loan. Meanwhile, bondholders owed CDollars
325m were furious that O&amp;Y was delaying payment of CDollars 17m in interest
and were threatening to seize rents payable to O&amp;Y by occupants of First
Canadian Place in Toronto.
O&amp;Y also faced a demand for immediate repayment from holders of several
hundred million dollars of commercial paper, short-term debt securities,
which are secured against another Toronto building, the Exchange Tower. As
one of O&amp;Y's bankers' said yesterday: 'There are too many holes in the dyke
and not enough fingers to fill them.'
Since mid-March, when holders of CDollars 800m of commercial paper demanded
immediate repayment, Mr Reichmann has been using up all his fingers - and
his toes - filling those gaps. He ran out of cash and has been having
problems selling assets to raise more.
He and his advisers are convinced that his assets still have a net positive
value - of about Dollars 5bn, according to Mr Reichmann. But these assets,
mostly huge office blocks in Toronto and New York, would not fetch anything
like as much as that if they were sold today.
O&amp;Y's banks, led by Citicorp, Hongkong and Shanghai Bank and Canadian
Imperial Bank of Commerce, advised Mr Reichmann that he needed to create
more time for himself if he is to succeed in producing a workable plan to
realise assets over the long term and gradually reconstruct his business.
By filing for protection from creditors, O&amp;Y puts a block on their ability
to take control of assets. Mr Reichmann's hope is therefore that O&amp;Y will at
some point emerge from the court's protection as a going concern.
Any reconstruction plan will be based on the proposals which O&amp;Y put last
Thursday to its 15 biggest bank creditor, who were representing all 100 of
its banks. Mr Steve Miller, O&amp;Y's chief bank negotiator and a partner in the
US investment bank, James D Wolfensohn, asked the banks to suspend principal
payments on most of the company's Dollars 12bn of debt for five years. There
was also a request that they take new O&amp;Y shares instead of cash interest on
around Dollars 4bn of this debt. If the scheme were approved, the banks
would probably end up owning 20 per cent of O&amp;Y.
At the time of that bank meeting, O&amp;Y's Achilles heel appeared to be Canary
Wharf. It was the cost of building Canary Wharf which drained O&amp;Y of cash in
the first place.
O&amp;Y has told its bankers it needs Pounds 300m from a group of 11 Canary
Wharf lenders to meet costs of finishing the office development over the
next two years. But much of the Pounds 300m was required simply to pay
interest to banks on loans already made. Banks were unhappy about doing
this.
Their chief concern was whether the value of the Canary Wharf buildings  -
in which 40 per cent of space is unoccupied - would increase enough over the
coming few years to make it sensible to lend any new money at all.
Bankers are encouraged that the UK government has been indicating it is
likely to move thousands of civil servants down to Canary Wharf to occupy
about 500,000 square feet of space. But the government has been proposing to
pay only Pounds 10 per square foot, compared with the banks' estimate that a
rent of about Pounds 18 would be necessary to make the project viable.
In the event, the Canary Wharf banks have provided O&amp;Y with Pounds 21m,
enough to meet costs until the end of May. Advised by Ernst &amp; Young, the
accounting firm, and Hillier Parker, the surveyor, they plan to decide by
the middle of next week whether to put up any more money.
Canary Wharf may not go into administration under UK insolvency procedures,
following the Canadian bankruptcy filing, because at the moment no creditors
are threatening to seize the Canary Wharf assets.
If it were the one part of O&amp;Y which avoided bankruptcy filing, Mr Reichmann
would allow himself a wry smile, since Canary Wharf caused the bulk of his
problems. But one banker said of that prospect: 'Theoretically possible, but
. . . '
