FT  03 APR 92 / World Trade News: When Japan finds two's company, more a
crowd - The pressure for bilateral deals
WHEN the US and Japan recently reviewed a co-operative financing programme
in which Japanese money helps US companies to win third-country contracts,
Mr John Macomber, the US Eximbank chairman, lauded Tokyo for a 'tremendous'
contribution that had led to better bilateral relations.
But the co-operative programme, which has seen joint project financing of
about Dollars 3bn in the past year, has also prompted questions about
Japan's fondness for bilateral agreements and its commitment to the
principle of multilateral trade.
The European Community has criticised the US-Japan semiconductor pact and
the Structural Impediments Initiative (SII), among other bilateral
agreements, while the lowering of Japan's 'voluntary' ceiling on car exports
to the US also drew attention to Tokyo's apparent willingness to give in to
Washington.
On co-operative financing, Mr Iwao Okamoto, the executive director of export
insurance at the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Miti), said
that the agreement was 'not in any way exclusive', and the reason Japan has
such co-operation with only the US is that 'we have not received approaches
from other countries'.
Third country concerns over Japan's willingness to do bilateral deals at the
expense of multilateral trade were heightened during President Bush's visit
to Tokyo in January
which resulted in a target for Japanese companies' purchases of US-made car
parts and a widespread fear that the two countries had set an important
precedent for managed trade. European car makers complained at the time, but
the strongest criticism in recent weeks has come from Australia, which
claims that its parts suppliers are unfairly losing out to US companies.
Austrade, the Australian government trade body, has formally warned Tokyo
over 'two to three' recent cases in which Japanese car makers have allegedly
switched sourcing to US companies as a result of trade pressure from
Washington. And Mr John Button, Australia's industry minister, said 'we
would be concerned if trade is going to be based on political considerations
rather than commercial ones'.
But Japanese officials insist they are as uneasy as their trading partners
about bilateralism, and that the country is a firm believer in the benefits
of multilateral trade.
Mr Noboru Hatakeyama, the ministry for international trade and industry
vice-minister for international affairs, said Japan's commitment to the
success of multilateral negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade was shown when it was one of only five countries to meet Gatt
deadlines last month for the submission of tariff reductions on manufactured
and agricultural products.
A senior Japanese trade official said agreements such as that with the US on
car components were an unwanted result of the 'special pressures' arising
from the importance of the two countries' relationship.
He and other Japanese trade negotiators insist that, while SII and the pact
on semiconductor market share are the result of bilateral negotiations, the
carefully worded agreements do not provide specific benefits for US
companies. For instance, the chip pact, again becoming an issue in
Washington, calls for a 20 per cent 'foreign' share of the Japanese market
by the end of this year.
But, as with another agreement on foreign access to the construction market,
Japanese companies sometimes interpret such pacts as an indication that they
should 'buy American' in the interests of reducing trade tension and of
ensuring the US market remains open to Japanese products. Miti, however,
publicly insists that companies should make 'commercial decisions' on
foreign procurement.
In defending the country's multilateral reputation, Japanese officials point
to the extensive work done on new areas such as trade-related investment
measures (Trims) and trade-related intellectual property (Trips) as part of
the Uruguay Round. Tokyo submitted a landmark discussion paper three years
ago on trade-related investment, and has provided detailed submissions in
the debate on intellectual property.
And the Japanese government said yesterday that it wants to end a bilateral
agreement under which the US is able to monitor equipment procurement by
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp (NTT). The agreement, reached in 1980
when NTT was state-owned, has been renewed every three years since then, but
Tokyo argues that the Gatt provides sufficient guarantee of a fair
procurement process.
These often difficult to digest contributions tend to be overlooked when the
political focus is on Japanese trade statistics. Meanwhile, Tokyo has also
been accused by some developing nations of trying to tear down the sorts of
investment and trade barriers used to shield its industries during the
formative years after the war.
US and Japanese negotiators missed a March 31 deadline to finish a market
access agreement for foreign paper exports, but talks continued late into
Wednesday night, writes Nancy Dunne in Washington.
As part of an 'action plan' negotiated during President George Bush's trip
to Japan in January, the Japan Fair Trade Commission was to present a survey
of competitive conditions in the paper sector before March 31.
Under Miti's Business Global Partnership Initiative, the National Paper
Merchants Association announced a voluntary plan to develop business
relations with foreign paper producers and 37 Japanese paper distribution
companies.
In 1990, imports accounted for only 3.7 per cent of Japanese paper and
paperboard consumption compared with 31 per cent in the EC and nearly 15 per
cent in the US.
