FT  18 JUN 92 / International Capital Markets: Interest rate on more foreign
debt fixed by Mexico
THE MEXICAN government, anxious to protect its economy from the impact of
rising US interest rates, has fixed the interest rate for at least two years
on a significant part on its floating-rate foreign debt by using the
international markets in options and swaps.
Mr Pedro Aspe, the Mexican finance minister, said the government had also
hedged against possible falls in oil prices in the derivatives markets.
He said the use of these markets would protect Mexico from unpredictable
external shocks and enable the government to meet budget forecasts.
The Finance Ministry said the government had locked into an oil price this
year of Dollars 14 a barrel, and an interest rate of 6.25 per cent on the
floating rate part of the external debt covered by the Brady debt deal for
this and next year.
As part of the Brady deal with international banks, Mexico fixed in 1990 an
interest rate, also of 6.25 per cent, on Dollars 23.5bn of its foreign debt.
It also issued about Dollars 12.8bn of floating-rate bonds in exchange for
bank debt.
The government first announced that it had hedged against oil price falls
last year, although it did not then disclose plans to extend the programme.
It said the volumes of its purchases 'were very significant in relation to
the size of falls this year'.
As part of its continued debt restructuring, the Finance Ministry has also
retired Dollars 7.2bn of its external debt at a reported discount of 23 per
cent, through swaps and the purchases of debt in the secondary market.
While the debt was officially retired on June 1, the government has been
buying back debt over a period of months and placing it in a special
account.
The government thereby saved around Dollars 400m a year in interest payments
and reduced its external debt by 8.9 per cent to Dollars 73.6bn. The ratio
of Mexico's total debt to GDP has now fallen to 29 per cent.
The government in part bought back the debt with funds raised from
short-term Euro-commercial paper. At the end of May it used the Dollars
1.4bn raised from the sell of shares in Telmex, the telephone monopoly, to
repay short-term debt.
