FT  31 OCT 92 / Arts: Sir Kenneth MacMillan - Obituary
SIR KENNETH MacMillan, principal choreographer of Royal Ballet, collapsed
and died backstage at Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, on Thursday. He was
aged 62.
One of the most influential as well as the most challenging of modern
choreographers, MacMillan sought throughout his career to extend the
boundaries of classical dancing so that it might reflect the psychological
climate of his time. He gave ballet, and especially the repertory of the
Royal Ballet, a new seriousness, and an emotional honesty rare in an art
which he found to be often no more than 'window-dressing' when he started
his career as a young dancer with the Sadler's Wells Ballet.
Kenneth MacMillan was born in Dunfermline on December 11 1929. His childhood
was, as he said, emotionally distressing, and dancing became a means both of
expression and of escape. He applied for admission to the Sadler's Wells
Ballet School, and his first stage appearance was in the production of The
Sleeping Beauty with which the Sadler's Wells Ballet reopened the Royal
Opera House, Covent Garden, in 1946.
MacMillan's professional experience came initially as a member of the
Sadler's Wells Theatre Ballet which Ninette de Valois established at this
time as a nursery for talent. Here MacMillan was recognised as a gifted
classical dancer and a performer of fine romantic presence, and he moved
between this 'second' company and the Opera House troupe, memorably seen in
Balanchine's Ballet Imperial as well as in roles created for him.
But he became increasingly unhappy as a dancer, and in the early 1950s he
made his choreographic debuts in workshop performances. These revealed
undoubted talent, and it is not without significance that his earliest
choreography, Somnambulism, dealt with dreams and emotional unease. His
first professional work, Danses Concertantes, was seen at Sadler's Wells
Theatre in 1955. A dazzling display of inventiveness by a young man
intoxicated with movement, it told of an outstanding creative gift.
There followed a series of commandingly assured pieces for both halves of
what was now the Royal Ballet. Yet even in these early productions MacMillan
was seeking a way towards a more expressive movement language, and a style
that reflected the psychological awareness of the current cinema and
theatre.
The Invitation in 1960, which dealt with adolescent sexuality and marital
unhappiness, identified the seriousness with which MacMillan could explore
the human condition, and his skill in finding dance imagery to expose
feeling. The Rite of Spring (1962) showed his ability to handle large
forces; and with his celebrated realisation of Romeo and Juliet in 1965,
MacMillan displayed a mastery of that full-length creativity which was to be
recognised as central to the identity of The Royal Ballet.
In the following year MacMillan was invited to become director of the ballet
company at the Deutsche Oper in West Berlin. He was joined there by Lynn
Seymour, whose outstanding lyric and dramatic gifts were admirably attuned
to MacMillan's ideals. He was to make many roles for her during the two
decades of their artistic association, including Juliet, and in Berlin she
sustained both the classical repertory which he re-staged, and his one-act
creation Anastasia.
In 1970 MacMillan was invited back to London to assume the directorship of
The Royal Ballet. The next seven years were not easy for him. He was both
administrative director and chief choreographer, though he invited several
other creators to work for the company.
The failure by certain sections of the press to understand the full-length
Anastasia which he produced in 1971 wounded him, and some of his work at
this time was given a mixed reception - even Manon, which has won a lasting
place in the repertory, was initially misunderstood. Nevertheless, under his
guidance, the Royal Ballet was a strong, secure ensemble.
In 1977 MacMillan retired from the directorship in order to concentrate upon
creativity, and his staging of Mayerling in the next year was proof that,
freed from the weight of administration, he was able to produce a new
grandly-scaled work of exceptional power.
His shorter ballets throughout this time asserted his continuing concern
with shaping a dance language that could touch the most serious concerns of
the human spirit. Works as varied as Requiem; Song of the Earth; My Brother,
My Sisters; Valley of Shadows and Winter Dreams told of MacMillan's rare
imaginative force in devising movement. With the full-length Isadora of 1981
he essayed a bravura portrait of modern dance's Earth Mother in the
framework of a daring staging. With Prince of the Pagodas (1989) he paid
tribute to the ideals of Petipa's classicism which were the bed-rock of his
own craft.
In all his work MacMillan was guided by a notable sense of integrity. He
would not, could not, compromise either his talent or his beliefs about the
nature of ballet and his duties towards the Royal Ballet. He understood
choreography in the larger context of the theatre, and wanted ballet to be
clearly part of that theatre. His ability to clothe the psychology of his
characters in ravishing, or searing, or haunting movement, was always
theatrically vivid. His fascination with movement, and with its expressive
potential, was a constant of his creative life. As an analyst he could probe
unerringly into a personality; it was our ballet's good fortune that he
could show what he discovered in such vital dance terms.
His works were staged and admired around the world - during the 1980s
MacMillan was an artistic advisor to American Ballet Theatre - and they
remain one of the most potent examples of 20th-century ballet's expressive
ability. His last ballet, The Judas Tree, produced for the Royal Ballet in
March of this year, characteristically showed how MacMillan could find
increasingly powerful means of exploring the psyche through a dance language
of exceptional precision and expressive force.
Kenneth MacMillan was married to the Australian painter Deborah Williams,
and they had a daughter, Charlotte.
It is assumed that Sir Kenneth's death occurred as a result of a heart
attack. He was at the Royal Opera House for the revival of Mayerling, which
was receiving a magnificent performance from a cast headed by Irek
Mukhamedov. As the curtain calls began, Jeremy Isaacs, General Director of
the Opera House, came on stage with Anthony Dowell, director of the Royal
Ballet, to announce Sir Kenneth's death. The audience stood, heads bowed for
a silent tribute, and left without speaking.
I met Kenneth MacMillan at the time of his first professional ballet, Danses
Concertantes, in 1955, and thereafter our friendship was an abiding joy for
me. His creative career was charted with sympathy and admiration in these
pages: Andrew Porter offered most perceptive appreciation of his work from
the very first, and as his successor in the 1970s I also hoped to convey the
significance of the innovations, the intense perceptions, that marked
MacMillan's choreography. There was an understanding between us, though,
that MacMillan never discussed his work: criticism was unguided by anything
save an interest in the way he extended the boundaries of classic dance as
an expressive language for the theatre.
As a choreographer he was, in his most searching works, custodian of a gift,
his genius, which took possession of him. He made what he made because he
had to. Superb theatre-craft was consciously his, and an unfailing ability
to shape new and stimulating movement, but the creative drive was
deep-seated and mysterious. Talking about The Judas Tree after its premiere,
he said to me 'I sometimes don't understand all that I've put into a ballet
until I've seen it on stage three or four times'.
Standing in silence in the Opera House on Thursday night, sharing the
tangible sense of shock that affected the audience, I remembered so much
about MacMillan. His marvellous ability to grasp the new; his iron
integrity; his humour, and his delight in the improbable and the ludicrous;
his faultless eye for a dancer and his lifelong devotion to the classic
dance. And, centrally, his great joy in his family life. His profound and
compassionate understanding of the human condition gave his choreography
abiding truth. His creations gave a new maturity to ballet in our time. They
are a vital part of our national heritage, and of the dance of our century.
