FT  22 AUG 92 / Arts: Delights beyond Tchaikovsky
TCHAIKOVSKY is one of the household gods of this year's Edinburgh Festival.
But it is, of course, not all Tchaikovsky in the musical schedule.
Additional themes and sub-themes have been developed to amplify it with
exactly the quickened sense of variety that was so badly missed in the
planning of this festival over the last few years.
'Scottish Music Through the Centuries' is one such development: a
five-concert series stretching from austerely beautiful plainchant hymns to
St Columba and motets by Robert Carver (all sung with authority, but perhaps
a touch too respectfully, by Cappella Nova in Greyfriars Kirk) to James
MacMillan's new percussion concerto for Evelyn Glennie.
Another is the infusion into the Queen's Hall morning chamber-concert
programme of important young talent new to Edinburgh, or - in the case of
the young Scots pianist Steven Sloane, who followed hard on the heels of the
Borodin Quartet - new to a wider international audience.
Sloane, a recent Clara Haskil competition winner, gave a recital of Haydn,
Schubert and five of Messiaen's Vingt Regards that was substantial and full
of deep seriousness and musicianly feeling, in spite of a quality of
physical tension (simple nerves?) that seemed for long stretches to invade
his Schubert G major Sonata, D. 894, hardening the sound and limiting the
dramatic range.
Brightest new development of all is the provision of 10.30 pm recitals at
the Usher Hall - epilogues to the main concerts of the evening. At the
first, Ann Murray and Philip Langridge sang Das Lied von der Erde with Peter
Donohoe providing a leonine account of Mahler's own piano score. The absence
of orchestral timbres is at first a severe shock to Mahlerian expectations,
then a challenge that becomes ever more stimulating.
The effect is of encountering familiar images under new lights, clean,
plain, sometimes even rather harsh; while one misses the plangency of
Mahler's scoring, one is provoked to admire afresh the combination of
extreme intensity and economy in the musical inspiration. In purely vocal
terms neither of these distinguished singers was ideally apt for their
lines, yet both tapped resources of quiet eloquence therein unknown to many
more conventionally suitable Mahler voices. (In another late-night concert,
toward the end of the festival, Diana Montague, Anthony Rolfe Johnson and
Charles Mackerras will explore the Schoenberg chamber reduction of the same
score.)
The big Tchaikovsky event of the first festival week was to have been the
concert performance, by Scottish Opera forces under Mark Ermler, of The
Oprichnik, an early (1874), rare Grand Opera on a Russian-historical
subject. But misfortune struck. The title role had been confided to the
Russian tenor Paolo Kudryavchenko, a technically erratic singer at the best
of times; from his very first notes it became clear that he was in poor
vocal health, and though an announcement was made before the second half
craving our indulgence for a throat infection, the damage could not be
contained, and proved ever more extensive.
It would be unwise to form any confidently held opinion of the work on this
evidence alone: the wearisome heaviness of the brass scoring and
tub-thumping squareness of the public scenes, influenced by Meyerbeer, Auber
and Glinka equally, appear to be mitigated by much tenderly felt lyrical
invention for the leading female roles.
If, indeed, the evening was a not a total write-off, that was entirely to
the credit of fine singing from the mezzo-soprano Ludmila Nam and simply
glorious singing from the soprano Galina Gorchakova. That phenomenal Renata
in the Covent Garden Fiery Angel was no fluke: the possibilities of
Gorchakova's singer's instrument - ample, free-ranging, shot-silk in texture
and molten-hot in emotional colouring - now seem absolutely limitless.
