FT  15 JUL 92 / Belgrade's new PM pledges to end war
MR Milan Panic, a US businessman born in Belgrade, was sworn in as premier
of Yugoslavia yesterday, after pledging to end the war in Bosnia-Hercegovina
and take control of the military.
Mr Panic said he would act as his own defence minister, but it was unclear
if he would have enough power to effect his proposed plan to 'call for an
immediate ceasefire and the demilitarisation of Bosnia'.
The new prime minister, who promised to bring democracy to Yugoslavia, is
now on a collision course with Mr Slobodan Milosevic, Serbian president, who
backs Serb forces fighting in Bosnia and appears to support a command
economy.
Mr Panic said his government had four aims: to stop the war and bring
lasting peace to Bosnia, create conditions for a multi-ethnic,
multi-religious society, introduce freedom of the press, and revive the
economy.
He called for the disarming of all forces in the republic under UN auspices.
Saying he respected Bosnian independence, he urged re-estab lishment of
transport, communications and postal connections.
The parliament, dominated by Socialist (former Commu nist) deputies, who
endorsed his candidacy by a vote of 99-33, gave Mr Panic, 62, a mixed
reception. Some deputies attacked him for 'lack of patriotism'. The ruling
Socialists have repeatedly attacked opposition leaders as traitors to
Serbia. Mr Panic stressed he was a patriot.
He called for a financial stabilisation programme, saying he would 'devote
80 per cent of his efforts to getting the UN sanctions lifted. The
already-flagging Serbian economy has been hard hit by the sanctions, imposed
on May 31.
The appointment as minister of justice of Mr Tibor Varady, an ethnic
Hungarian, was seen as Mr Panic's gesture of conciliation towards Serbia's
ethnic minorities. He also said a cabinet position would be set up for
ethnic minorities. Serbs make up 67 per cent of the republic's 9m
population.
Mr Panic was appointed by Mr Dobrica Cosic, the Serbian writer-president of
the unrecognised Yugoslavia. Mr Cosic, viewed as the spiritual father of all
Serbs, told the federal parliament: 'The government's task would be to
change an ideological state and society into a democratic one of free
people'; he appealed for tolerance.
Mr Milosevic gravely listened to the prime minister's calls for rapid
privatisation and democratic transformation. The opposition and university
students have called for the resignation of Mr Milosevic.
Borba, the Belgrade daily, has reported that Mr Milosevic is thinking of
resigning. Diplomats said Mr Panic's call for early elections in November
could offer the Serbian president a graceful exit by declaring he would not
stand then. But the still-popular Mr Milosevic, has not yet showed any sign
of quitting.
A western diplomat said Mr Panic may lack the key instruments to bring about
change in Yugoslavia. 'He will face enormous obstacles. He is a businessman,
not a politician, who has dropped into a snake pit'.
