FT  06 APR 92 / Election 1992: Kinnock speaks up for listening party
MR Neil Kinnock redoubled his charm offensive on floating voters yesterday
by contrasting a Conservative government that 'insists it knows best' with a
Labour administration that 'will heed the people and act for their
well-being'.
In a speech to a gathering of celebrity supporters in London last night, the
Labour leader said voters have a 'straight choice' between change and 'more
of the same'.
The choice, he added, offered 'Conservatives who will continue to divide and
weaken the country and a Labour government which will lead the consensus to
build a confident and capable country'.
Mr Kinnock made a thinly veiled bid for the votes of Liberal Democrats and
other advocates of constitutional change by stressing Labour's readiness to
debate the issue.
While keeping Labour's options open, he acknowledged a 'widespread public
interest' in constitutional questions, ranging from 'intense to the mildly
intrigued'.
Yet the Tories demonstrated 'extraordinary arrogance' by claiming that
Britain had reached a constitutional high-tide mark and that 'the system is
incapable of improvement'.
Laying out Labour's programme of reforms - a freedom of information act,
devolution, a framework for individual rights and a commitment to examine
new electoral systems - he said that the Tories wanted to concentrate
authority and maintain government secrecy. 'They are the party that puts the
preservation of its own privileges and power far above the need to ensure
that democracy gains extra vitality,' he said.
By contrast Labour would demonstrate a willingness to listen, to reason and
to serve all the people, he said.
Anticipating charges of being patronising or paternalist, Mr Kinnock added:
'There is nothing of the 'nanny state' about it. There is everything of the
democratic government about it.'
The Labour leader was applauded by an audience of 'achievers' in occupations
ranging from architecture to the ambulance service. They included Sir Ian
McKellen, Harold Pinter, Roger McGough, Alison Moyet, Vivienne Westwood,
Mike Leigh and Bishop Trevor Huddleston.
Today Labour will return to the economy by reiterating its strategy to
stimulate recovery. Mr Norman Lamont yesterday called on Labour to tear up
its election manifesto, as the Tories renewed their assault on apparent
discrepancies between Labour's spending and revenue-raising pledges.
In a letter to Mr Kinnock the chancellor called on Labour to acknowledge
that it promised to 'increase expenditure massively without increasing
taxation'.
'Without the money to pay for your promises, your manifesto is not worth the
paper it is written on,' he said.
His remarks followed Mr Kinnock's interview on BBC Radio in which he
suggested that many of the promises in the Labour manifesto should be
regarded as 'realistic aspirations' to be honoured when resources allowed.
Joe Rogaly, Page 15
