FT  11 APR 92 / Goodbye Ecu, hello Stroud: A self-help group that deals in
its own currency
and not far behind is the prospect of the single European currency, the Ecu.
However, in the Cotswold town of Stroud, things seem to be going into
reverse. There, the Stroud 'Green pound' is flourishing, and the 155 members
of the Stroud LETS (Local Employment and Trading System) syndicate have for
the past 23 months traded regularly in 'Strouds' as well as pounds sterling.
The Strouds build up as credits which are then used to pay for various goods
and services between members of the scheme. It amounts to a sophisticated
form of bartering. Based on a scheme devised in British Columbia in 1983, it
was successfully copied in rural communities in Australia, New Zealand and
the US before arriving in the UK.
The Stroud LETS system is the biggest and probably the most successful of
the 20 similar schemes operating in the UK. During this year a dozen other
UK communities plan to follow suit.
'Although we did not set it up with the intention of being a long-term thing
we are gaining four or five new members a month,' said a founder member,
Maggie Mills.
The wholefood cafe run by Mills and her husband John in Stroud is the focus
of the scheme. It is there that LETS members, who pay Pounds 7.50 and 10
Strouds to join, take their Stroud cheques or 'credits' to be fed into the
computer programme that controls the system, operated by 'banker' Sandra
Bruce.
'While Strouds are a quasi-currency and a Stroud is roughly equivalent to a
pound there is no coinage, so we are in no way breaking Bank of England
regulations,' said Bruce, who is paid in LETS 'credits' for running the
system and who recently spent 1,000 Strouds through LETS members when she
moved house and redecorated.
There are many advantages in the Stroud LETS system for those who live
around the town. No interest is paid - either by those in debit or credit.
This provides a considerable inducement for members to go into debit, which,
as the 'Green' economists behind the scheme point out, is the key factor to
the scheme.
'It has to be a good thing because the Stroud LETS system runs in parallel
with the conventional sterling economy. People in the system can trade in
Strouds, or sterling, or a mixture of the two,' said Roger Opie, Oxford
economics don and Fellow of New College, who recently spent a day in Stroud
examining the scheme.
'The Stroud LETS system is a non-profit-making community institution run for
the benefit of local people. Therefore there is no need to charge interest,
which in conventional economies is also used as a means of controlling and
regulating the flow of scarce money.
'Since Strouds, or Links (Wiltshire), or Trugs (Lewes), or Acorns (Totnes)
or whatever they call them in other towns can be created by the simple act
of people getting into debt, there never need be any scarcity of them to
regulate in the first place. LETS credits, whatever they are called in
individual systems, are as abundant as people's willingness to share their
skills.'
But what if one of the members goes heavily into debt and then 'disappears'
 -or simply moves away? The official answer is that the remaining members
then share the amount of the default among them. However, in practice this
is unlikely to happen in a relatively small community in which most of the
members of the LETS know each other.
And what happens when a businessman files his income tax or VAT return?
Again, according to the Stroud LETS organisers, there is a simple answer.
For the purposes of tax or VAT the trader simply 'converts' his Strouds
income into pounds and declares the required figure in sterling.
According to Opie, 'what is really impressive about the Stroud pound is
that, as far as I can see, it contravenes no laws or currency regulations,
and it acts as a stimulus to the local economy. It gives the unemployed
something they can trade in when they do not have sterling, and it allows
people to trade their skills for goods or other skills without resort to
cash they might not possess.
'In Stroud the community which LETS has helped to forge is so strong that
the system works. But I think its strength lies in its smallness. It might
not work so well if the network grew beyond a certain size. But I don't
think I'd sell my house for Strouds, even if I were a member of LETS.'
