FT  30 SEP 92 / One in three Germans 'hostile' to foreigners
ALMOST one in three young German adults admits to being hostile towards
foreigners, or at least being susceptible to xenophobic thoughts, according
to a survey published yesterday.
The rest of the nation's youth views antagonism towards foreigners as a
serious problem for society - although second in overall importance to the
state of the environment - but only 25 per cent reject 'all forms of
discrimination' against non-Germans.
The study, which described its sample as 'self-confident, constructively
critical, realistic and informed', involved more than 2,000 people, aged
between 16 and 24, and was carried out by the Institute for Empirical
Psychology. It was funded by IBM Deutschland.
Two years after unification, the study has uncovered converging ambitions
and opinions between young people from both sides of the country, but 80 per
cent of easterners still feel themselves to be 'second-class Germans'.
More than two-thirds also miss some of the good things from their past life
under communism, mainly social welfare and child care facilities.
Half of those in the west and three-quarters of those in the east say their
economic expectations of unification had not been fulfilled.
And while Germany's main problem in the eyes of young westerners remains
environmental protection, 95 per cent of easterners worry most about
increasing unemployment.
The ministry for youth and family responded to the findings with a claim
that other studies showed only 1 per cent of the age group surveyed was
prepared to use violence against foreigners.
However, the report showed how important it was for older people to speak
plainly and openly to foster understanding, said Ms Cornelia Yzer,
parliamentary state secretary.
The study, which appeared as sporadic attacks on asylum-seekers continued,
and followed the weekend fire-bombing on the Jewish barracks in the former
Sachsenhausen concentration camp, showed that 13 per cent were 'resolutely'
anti-foreigner.
In a previous similar survey, made in 1990, less than 30 per cent believed
xenophobia was a serious problem. Since the end of that year, however, the
number of asylum-seekers arriving in Germany each year has almost doubled.
More than 400,000 are expected this year.
There were almost 1,500 violent attacks on foreigners in 1991 - a five-fold
increase - and a further rise is expected this year.
