FT  10 AUG 92 / Leading Article: It can be done
FIRST Angola, and now Mozambique, are within reach of lasting peace for the
first time in three decades. The agreement in Rome last Friday to end the
civil war in Mozambique suggests that patient mediation, honest brokers and
international monitoring can end conflicts in southern Africa. If so, then
there may be hope even for the Somalias of the continent. Of course, the
causes of Africa's wars vary widely. In Mozambique, as in Angola, South
Africa was critical to the peace process. Only when Pretoria ended its
military support for the opposition movements Renamo and Unita was mediation
possible.
But as in Angola - due to hold UN-monitored elections next month - a
settlement in Mozambique was unattainable without outside help, given the
enmity between the two sides and the need for third party monitoring of the
proposed ceasefire. Hence the extraordinary guest list at the ceremony in
Rome last week, when President Joaquim Chissano and Mr Afonso Dhlakama,
leader of Renamo, committed themselves to cease hostilities by October 1 and
to hold multi-party elections under UN-led international supervision in the
presence of a range of intermediaries including Italian government
officials, President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe and Mr 'Tiny' Rowland, whose
company, Lonrho, has business interests in Mozambique.
Even this remarkable combination might have failed were it not for the new
realities to which Africa is adapting, and which helped create the blueprint
for Mozambique's treaty. The era of the one-party state and the centrally
controlled economy is over, as are the days when African governments and
rebel movements could play on superpower rivalries. Economic policy, as
nearly every African government has discovered, must win the approval of the
IMF and the World Bank.
These realities will shape the terms of other peace initiatives in Africa.
The task of intermediaries remains difficult, but southern Africa shows it
can be done.
