FT  04 NOV 92 / Havana, Moscow initial trade accord
CUBA and Russia signed trade and shipping accords yesterday and apparently
agreed to keep open an electronic intelligence-gathering station once run by
the Soviet armed forces on the communist-ruled island, Reuter reports from
Havana.
The Cuban news agency Prensa Latina said the accords, including provision
for a possible sugar-for-oil deal, were signed in Moscow by Mr Lionel Soto,
Cuban vice-president, and Mr Alexander Shokhin, Russia's deputy prime
minister for foreign economic affairs.
The agreements appeared to be the most important reached between Havana and
Moscow since the break-up of the Soviet Union, the Caribbean island's main
political ally and economic supplier for three decades.
Prensa Latina quoted Mr Soto as having said the two sides were also seeking
a third partner to help complete a nuclear power station until recently
being built in Cuba with Soviet aid.
Cuban President Fidel Castro suspended work on the plant on September 5,
saying the country could not afford to accept terms offered by Russia to
finish it.
Mr Soto said guarantees were needed to ensure the supply of nuclear fuel to
the Cuban plant, according to Prensa Latina.
The agency described the accords as 'important for the future development of
bilateral relations'. It quoted Mr Soto as having said they would help to
widen and stabilise ties between the two countries.
Prensa Latina said the bilateral agreements, valid for 1993, covered trade,
economic co-operation, shipping and the 'permanence in Cuba of the ex-Soviet
radio-electronic centre'.
This was a reference to a military signals intelligence facility at Lourdes
and believed to be one of the biggest operated by the Soviet military in the
western hemisphere during the cold war.
Cuba and Russia agreed in September to withdraw the last remaining former
Soviet combat troops on the island. Russian officials said at the time that
the Lourdes installation, now the responsibility of the Russian government,
would be the subject of separate talks.
