FT  18 MAY 92 / Water and sanitation listed as top priorities for developing
countries
MANY of the world's most pressing problems can be traced to one vital
resource: water. All too frequently it is either scarce or contaminated.
The World Bank report puts dirty water and inadequate sanitation at the top
of the developing countries' priorities.
While rivers in high-income countries are becoming cleaner, they are not
improving in middle-income countries, and in poor countries they are
actually getting dirtier.
Much of the contamination is caused by disease-bearing human waste. As
surface water becomes less usable, people turn to ground water. But this too
is liable to increased pollution from seepage of improperly disposed
chemicals and other hazardous wastes.
Although progress has been made in bringing sanitation to the world's
population, little has been done to treat human sewage. In Latin America, as
little as 2 per cent of it receives any treatment. It is estimated that
worldwide 1.7bn people are without access to proper sanitation. It is also
calculated that at least 170m people in urban areas still lack a source of
drinking water near their homes. The number in rural areas without safe
water is put at 855m.
Twenty two countries face a permanent and severe water shortage; 18 more go
dangerously short in years of poor rainfall.
Because of the big role played by water in bearing diseases such as typhoid
and cholera, a clean-up in the water system can bring rapid benefits to
human health.
If all those people now without safe water and adequate sanitation were to
receive it, the World Bank estimates that 2m fewer young children would die
of diarrhoea, and hundreds of millions of people would be spared various
infectious diseases.
But it is an enormous task. In Nigeria, for instance, providing access to
clean water for the whole population by the year 2030 would mean increasing
the number of urban mains connections four times, and of rural connections
almost nine times.
The World Bank recommends an action programme for more efficient management
of water resources. This would include providing at full cost those services
that people want and are willing to pay for, such as supplying water and
collecting waste. Both community organisations and the private sector have a
role to play in providing the right response, the report says.
