FT  21 JUL 92 / Fat chance of privacy
The prime minister was right to refuse Mr David Mellor's offer of
resignation on Saturday night. There was no evident reason why the secretary
for national heritage (or minister of fun, as he is indelibly labelled)
should go. A Sunday newspaper published an account of a private relationship
ascribed to Mr Mellor, but that tells us more about the tabloid press than
about the political abilities of the minister.
Mr Mellor did make one mistake. He issued a statement. He would have done
better to maintain silence. The statement said that he and his wife wanted
to sort out difficulties in their marriage, especially for the sake of their
two young children. 'This I hope we can do in private.' Fat chance.
Yesterday's papers confirmed that the British popular press will do anything
to entertain us. In this it succeeds. At breakfast I found myself savouring
every word the picture papers wrote about our minister of fun. What they
purvey may be correct, but their justification is humbug.
Many of their practitioners are expense-account fiddlers, drunks,
fornicators, cheats, and liars. All of us are some of these. But they steal
the privacy of others. They justify their trade by invoking the pious
phrases 'freedom of the press' and 'the public interest'. They have little
idea of the true meaning of the former and no interest in the latter. What
they are really after is the unfettered right to puff themselves up, to
swear and swagger and break wind. The fact that they do it amusingly - that
they cause most of us to laugh and shake our heads - serves only to
underline the truth about their position in society. They have become the
music hall performers, the burlesque queens, of the 1990s.
That is why self-regulation is a joke. It has not worked, cannot work, and
will not work. Nearly a fortnight ago Mr Mellor asked Sir David Calcutt to
review the effectiveness of the voluntary Press Complaints Commission, set
up in January 1991. It was his way of putting off a decision neither he nor
the government wants to make, which is to place the commission on a
statutory footing. Let such a decision be put off forever. It would be the
beginning of official regulation of the press.
This, like all censorship, should be resisted. On matters of importance  -
the inner workings of every ministry, to take but one example - the British
government is still far too secretive. Mr Major says he will conduct a more
open administration. That sounds fine, but it does not mean very much. The
prime minister's real purpose is to dodge the pressure for a pro-per freedom
of information act. Such pressure should be maintained. We should demand
more information in Britain - and a legal right to extract it, painfully,
molar by molar, from a reluctant civil service.
Meanwhile people do need protection from the excesses of any publication. If
there is to be no statutory complaints commission, what then? I favour a law
enabling individuals to sue for invasion of their personal privacy. It
should be so framed as to prevent the misuse of injunctions in advance of
publication, or the imposition of excessive fines, as happens in libel
cases. But publishers, whether of books, periodicals, or broadcasts, would
have to pay reasonable damages unless they could convince a jury that a
particular invasion of personal privacy was in the public interest. The news
that the secretary for health, Mrs Virginia Bottomley, and her husband had
had their first child before they were married clearly passes the public
interest test. The difficulties facing teenage single parents are the
concern of the department of health, and therefore its political head.
Mr Mellor's case is more complicated. The editor of The People, Mr Bill
Hagerty, would presumably base his defence on his statement, widely reported
yesterday, that the heritage secretary 'said he was unable to write speeches
because he was so tired'. Any jury in its right mind would laugh this out of
court. Counsel might do better to draw attention to the many Conservative
speeches and pamphlets on family values. In this way it might be possible to
build up a public interest defence. Much would depend upon the details of Mr
Mellor's behaviour and the content of his speeches over the years. We can
only guess what evidence might be produced and what a jury would say. But in
most instances powerful people such as ministers would lose. The privacy law
would be primarily aimed at the protection of 'ordinary' people.
What politicians need is a climate of opinion that responds to news about
their private lives with a definitive Gallic shrug. Disraeli, Asquith and
Lloyd George might have been hounded from office by a popular press in a
climate like today's; the then Mr Cecil Parkinson was, for a while. But
opinion may be changing. Mr Paddy Ashdown's popularity increased after his
news broke. If Mr Mellor can stand the increasing heat - a big if - he
should stay in the kitchen.
