FT  08 APR 92 / International Company News: Philips to cut a third of PC
jobs
PHILIPS, the Dutch electronics company, said yesterday that it is to cut one
third of the 1,800 jobs in its loss-making personal computer operation - the
company's last remaining computer activity  - and halt the direct sales of
PCs in the US.
The company will stop selling PCs in the US through traditional outlets and
channels and will, instead, seek to produce computers for other US
manufacturers which will then sell the equipment under their own names.
A company spokesman said that the US has borne the brunt of the malaise in
the industry, forcing Philips to rethink its US strategy as part of its
world-wide restructuring of the sector.
'The main aim of the plan is to bring the company's entire infrastructure in
the field of PCs more into line with existing market conditions and with
Philips' market position,' the company said.
Philips, which sold off its mainly European-based mini-computer division to
Digital of the US last year, said it will redouble its PC sales efforts in
Europe, Canada and the Far East.
The company, which has always been a relatively small player on the computer
market, said it will also be looking for additional opportunities to
manufacture PCs for other computer companies.
The majority of the 600 job losses will be made at Philips' PC factory in
Montreal, Canada.
Under the restructuring plans, Philips' newly opened PC assembly plant in
Tilburg, in the Netherlands, is to stop building computers and will
concentrate instead on packaging Canadian-made computers for the US market.
The Dutch plant will also be given the new task of producing software for
the European market, somewhat cushioning the job losses caused by the ending
of computer assembly.
Philips' previous plans for starting up its own production of notebook
computers in Taiwan have been frozen while the company reasseses the
prospects for this area of the market.
The undisclosed costs of the latest restructuring at Philips will be covered
by provisions already taken by the group as part of efforts to boost
profitability. The company declined to give figures for present and future
PC production, saying only that the sector continued to make losses.
