FT  27 JAN 92 / Economics Notebook: Blunt message with a challenge for
government
The message was blunt: 'The money has stopped coming in, but the spending
demands and the habits of the 1980s are still with us.'
With those words, taken from a briefing booklet, the Canadian province of
Ontario last week acknowledged that it has joined the growing list of North
American regional and municipal governments which are having trouble making
ends meet.
Like New York, California and Massachusetts, Canada's richest province finds
itself squeezed between ever-growing demands for public services and the
strictures imposed by stagnant revenues, a tax-weary citizenry and
spiralling debt-service charges.
But Ontario's predicament is different - and in some ways even more
intractable - than that of the US states.
Canadian provinces have wider areas of jurisdiction, which include schools,
universities, hospitals and social welfare.
Finding ways to cut government spending presents special challenges.
Ontario's 9.7m residents have come to expect a level of public amenities
matched in few other parts of the world.
In Toronto, for instance, every bus-stop has its own telephone number whose
computerised message tells a caller in how many minutes the next bus will
arrive.
The province plans to spend CDollars 385m (Pounds 184m) in the coming year
on a pioneering 'pay equity' scheme to ensure that women get the same pay as
men for work of equal value.
Crime and homelessness vie for politicians' attention with garbage recycling
and greater access to public buildings for the disabled.
Welfare payments are unusually generous. The recipients include thousands of
refugees whom Canada has welcomed in recent years from countries as diverse
as Somalia, El Salvador and Vietnam.
On the revenue side, Ontario is suffering its first decline in tax and other
receipts since 1945.
As Canada's wealthiest province, it has been called on to make the biggest
sacrifice towards helping the federal government rein in its own deficit.
Ottawa's contribution to Ontario's health-care and higher education spending
has shrivelled from 52 per cent in 1980 to 31 per cent this year.
But the province is, for the time being, no longer the locomotive of
national economic growth that it was during the 1980s.
It is paying a heavy price for its dependence on the depressed automotive,
steel, construction and forestry industries.
Output shrank by 2.4 per cent last year, the worst performance among
Canada's 10 provinces.
The real rub to the budget squeeze is that the government now facing fiscal
restraint was elected 18 months ago promising just the opposite.
In its first budget in April 1991, the New Democratic Party (NDP), the most
left-wing of Canada's main political groups, proposed trebling the deficit
from CDollars 3bn in the year to March 1991 to CDollars 9.7bn in the current
fiscal year.
'We had a choice to make this year - to fight the deficit or to fight the
recession,' the provincial treasurer Mr Floyd Laughren said last April with
a bow towards Maynard Keynes. 'We are proud to be fighting the recession.'
In an effort to create work for rising numbers of unemployed, spending on
infrastructure projects jumped 22 per cent this year.
Unionised civil servants, a bedrock of the new government's support, were
given a pay increase well above inflation.
Outlays on low-income housing, pay equity and legal aid all ballooned as the
NDP sought to please its social-activist supporters. About the only thing
that went down was the province's credit rating.
The new government crossed fingers that an improving economy would start
bringing down the deficit in 1992-93. But the protracted recession has
shrunk tax revenues and pushed up welfare payments. The 1992-93 shortfall,
estimated last year at CDollars 8.9bn, is now projected to soar to CDollars
14.3bn. Some analysts suspect even that figure is an under-estimate.
Under pressure from foreign lenders and an already-jittery business
community, the government has begun reassessing the priorities which earlier
earned it the nickname of the People's Republic of Ontario.
To the consternation of many of its supporters, it has already scrapped
plans for a public-sector car insurance scheme and an environmental 'bill of
rights'. Last week, it decided that transfers to schools, hospitals and
municipalities will rise by only 1 per cent in the year ahead.
Cutbacks in the vaunted array of public services have begun. The provincial
health insurance plan, often held up as a model of a universal and effective
health care system, has stopped paying for costly treatment in US hospitals
and drug rehabilitation centres. The Toronto Transit Commission wants to run
fewer buses on many routes. The city is using half as much salt to de-ice
roads this winter as it did last year.
But with the treasurer now saying that a CDollars 14bn deficit is
'unacceptable', some tougher choices lie ahead.
Raising taxes risks delaying the economic recovery and further undermining
business confidence.
Businesses in Toronto's financial district already pay the highest taxes in
North America, except for midtown Manhattan.
Toronto and Ottawa are also finding it increasingly difficult to attract
conventions, one of the pillars of any North American city's tourist trade.
Cutting back further on services however, is not much easier for the
politicians.
The measures taken so far have already aroused a host of vociferous lobby
groups, including many of the government's own supporters, like the
teachers' union.
The next budget in April is unlikely to please anybody.
It will probably include both spending cuts and tax increases, but not
enough of either to satisfy the credit rating agencies.
Ontario is one of North America's biggest borrowers on the international
capital markets.
Having lost its Triple-A credit rating last year, it is almost certain that
lenders will now demand an even higher premium for the CDollars 10bn or more
which the province plans to raise at home and abroad in the year ahead.
As the province's premier Mr Bob Rae put it in a television address last
week: 'We didn't get into this mess in a day, and we're not going to get out
of it in a day either.'
