FT  19 DEC 92 / How to Spend It: Making child's play of choosing - Luxurious
last-minute presents for both the little folk and large
ANYBODY who has ever tried to track down fine editions of the great
children's classics will know how difficult they are to find. Everyman's
Library has come to the rescue this Christmas with a boxed set of 10 of the
great children's classics. Simply but beautifully printed and bound, they
cost Pounds 67.50 for the set and should give any child hours of pleasure.
Included is Alice in Wonderland, Kipling's Just So Stories, fairy stories by
Grimm and Andersen, Treasure Island, Aesop's Fables, Peter Pan, The Wizard
of Oz, A Child's Garden of Verses and Lear's Beasts.
They can also be bought separately at Pounds 5.99 for the smaller tomes,
Pounds 6.99 for the larger. Find them in most bookshops, including WH Smith.
David Plagerson's beautifully crafted wooden Noah's arks and animals are of
heirloom quality. Much too good really to be wasted on children, many of his
toys are increasingly sought by collectors.
Anybody in an indulgent mood and prepared to spend the money his toys cost
will find that Plagerson himself (28 Bridgetown, Totnes, Devon, tel: 0803
866786) will be glad to sell them either a doves' frieze or a cherry frieze
ark with an assortment of wooden animals.
Prices start at Pounds 320 for the ark set in mixed woods, while painted
ones (pictured right) are Pounds 840 for the smaller size with 15 pairs of
painted animals and Pounds 1,330 for the large ark with 25 pairs.
MATTHEW Rice has produced some exceedingly pretty and well-priced card and
paper briefcases for children.
The one photographed here (above) sells for about Pounds 21 and features
Noah's Ark and pairs of wooden animals on the front and a stable of toys on
the back. When the child opens the lid, there is a map of the world.
Also made from card and paper is a sweet, small chest of drawers (again for
children) with chickens and rabbits on the front. About Pounds 14.95, and
ideal for keeping together all the tiny precious things that children love.
Look out, too, for photograph frames, ranging in price from Pounds 5.25 to
Pounds 10.60. The Matthew Rice range is stocked in London by the General
Trading Company, 144 Sloane Street, SW1; Fortnum &amp; Mason, Piccadilly; Graham
&amp; Green, 4 and 7 Elgin Crescent, London W11 21A; Barclay &amp; Bodie, 7 Blenheim
Terrace, NW8. You can kill two birds with one stone and see some of the
delightful glass and spongewear made by Matthew Rice's wife at the same
time, at her shop, Emma Bridgewater, 739 Fulham Road, London SW6. For out of
London stockists or for mail order (still just time]), ring Rice Paper on
071-371-9077.
TARTANS and checks, as if regular readers of How To Spend It needed telling,
are all the rage. In fine Viyella in sophisticated colourways, they make
exceptionally chic nightwear, particularly for chaps. Look for dressing
gowns with tartan cuffs, shawl collars piped in red, for matching
nightshirts, and perhaps most sophisticated of all, look for dressing-gowns
and pyjamas in a Prince of Wales check Viyella, such as the set by Bonsoir
pictured above.
Pyjamas are Pounds 87.50 a pair, the dressing gown, Pounds 105. A little
cheaper, at Pounds 72.50, are the Viyella nightshirts.
For those who prefer to conduct their nightlife in good soft cotton poplin
instead of cosy Viyella, the same designs come in regimental and satin
stripes, paisleys and spots. Pyjamas, Pounds 59.50, nightshirts and
dressing-gowns, Pounds 45 each. Bonsoir is available from most good
department stores.
COCOON produces the most luxurious bedding in the world - silk-lined,
silk-filled, exquisitely finished and embroidered, based on the heirloom
bedding that throughout the great dynasties of China was deemed the right
and proper accompaniment to blissful sleep for the high-born and
well-heeled.
These days, these delicious duvets, pillowcases and bedcovers are beyond the
reach of all but the seriously rich - they start at Pounds 1,665 for a
double quilt but perhaps a doting grandmother might consider Pounds 400 for
a pampered offspring's Baby Bundle?
However, a smashing present for an indulgent chap to give his best-beloved
would be one of the classic silk hoods the company now produces. Made from
sand-washed silk charmeuse filled with pure silk floss, they are the most
glamorous wind-cheaters I know. In dark blue, midnight blue, black, pale
rose and pale blue, trimmed with a dark brown velvet cuff, they cost Pounds
400 each. The Cocoon Collection is stocked by The Monogrammed Linen Shop at
168 Walton Street, London SW3 and in Harvey Nichols of Knightsbridge, SW1,
and by Thomas Goode of 18 South Audley Street, London W1.
TOMLINSONS catalogue is filled with charming ideas for Christmas presents
for all ages and anybody still agonising over lists and decisions can ring
081 944 8348 today from 9am to 2pm and next week to glean ideas. Many of the
suggestions are relatively inexpensive - two beautiful beeswax candles for
Pounds 18.85, painted wooden picture frames for Pounds 10.50, luscious
soft-fringed 100 per cent pure wool checked throws at Pounds 49.95,
long-sleeved white cotton Victorian-style nighties for Pounds 31.95, fat
etched coloured glass pens for Pounds 12.55 each. The wooden book-ends at
Pounds 15.65 and coat-pegs at Pounds 4.95 below would enliven any nursery or
child's bedroom.
It has always been hard to beat a good book as a present and these days
proper hardbacks are expensive enough to be considered treats. For anybody
short of time, Interbook is a godsend - an idea so simple one wonders why it
took so long to happen. Any book ordered before 3pm can be delivered
anywhere in the country the next day. The Interbook telephone line - 081 200
1515 - is manned 24 hours a day, every day except Christmas day, and the
cost is the full published price of the book plus a Pounds 4.99 delivery
charge, no matter how many books are sent. The service includes gift
wrapping, a greetings card, printing of a message on the bookplate,
insurance and hand delivery. Payment is by credit card and books can be sent
abroad.
A ROCKING horse is the classic heirloom present - every adult's idea of the
essential prop for the ideal nursery. The Stevenson brothers are the classic
makers of modern fine-quality rocking horses. Prices start at something like
Pounds 1,000 and go up to Pounds 3,000. As they are hand-made (from
non-endangered woods), they should really be ordered in advance but the
Stevenson Brothers have an Ayres horse, made from popular wood with beech
legs, still available in their workshop (first come, first served, Pounds
1,700, ring 0233 820363). They also have charming teddy-bears, part of a
limited edition of 100, left at about Pounds 170 each. Dolls start at Pounds
70, small rocking horses at Pounds 500.
