FT  12 DEC 92 / Travel: Karaoke and Sumo in remote Ogasawara - A
sub-tropical area of Tokyo
THE NOTICE on the door leading to the upper deck said 'Closed against rough
weather.' It was beginning to seem like an understatement. The ship had left
the comparative shelter of Tokyo Bay and was heading south right through a
typhoon. Waves slapped at the portholes, the curtains swayed, plates crashed
in the galley.
When the ship began to roll while doing a handstand, I knew that my proud
record of never having been seasick was about to founder. Next morning
Typhoon 23 had blown eastwards; the ship settled into a rhythm of lethargic
rolls. By mid-day, craggy islands were growing on the horizon ahead.
The Ogasawara group consists of about 30 islands located from 900km to
1,200km south-south-east of Tokyo in the same latitude as Florida and the
Canaries. Administratively part of Tokyo, one of the most crowded areas on
earth, they could not be more of a contrast.
The largest island, Chichijima (24.5 sq km), the one we were heading for,
has a population of about 1,500 and the second largest, Hahajima, only 400.
There is no airport - one is planned but conservationists could well delay
its construction indefinitely - so the only way to get there is by boat, and
the weekly ferry from Tokyo takes about 30 hours.
The islands were first spotted by the Spanish merchant adventurer Villalobos
in 1543 and over the next 300 years were claimed at different times by
Japan, Russia, Britain and the US. Sometimes called the Bonin Islands
('bonin' is a corrupted form of a Japanese word which means 'empty of
people'), they were first settled by two Americans, an Englishmen, a Dane
and an Italian. This motley crew had known about the islands from their days
on whaling boats and had sailed from America's west coast in 1830, stopping
off for water and women in Hawaii en route. To this day, western features
can still be seen among some of the islanders, and western names are still
evident.
The evening I arrived happened to coincide with the island's 12th annual
Karaoke Taikai, or Grand Challenge Singing Competition. Held on a community
stage in an amphitheatre hacked from volcanic rock beside the Shinto shrine
overlooking the harbour, there were 43 acts competing for a first prize of
about Pounds 425.
The compere announced Savoury Daniel (Japanese give the family name first) -
the great-great-grandson of one of the original settlers. A Rhett Butler
lookalike, complete with black moustache and cowboy hat, bounded onto the
stage; he brought the house down with a country and western song, in
English.
Others were not so well received. One tuneless tubby guy with a T-shirt that
said 'Unsung Heroes' was booed off the stage and helped on his way with a
fusillade of mandarin oranges. Further light relief was provided by a boiled
egg eating competition. The winner gobbled 10 and won a colour TV.
Next day, most people were back for the Sumo Taikai, children during the
afternoon, adults in the evening. On a proper clay ring under a tarpaulin in
the grounds of the Shinto shrine, the wrestlers fought keenly as team
members (the self-defence force, the police, the farmers' and fishermen's
co-operatives) or as individuals. In typical egalitarian fashion, every
wrestler got a prize - a memorial key ring. But the winners were honoured
with extra goodies: rolls of lavatory paper, cans of lager, pens.
Two hours by ferry from Chichijima is the other main inhabited island,
Hahajima. I checked into a minshuku three minutes from the quay, bought a
cold beer from the co-op and sat on the beach, shaded by an hibiscus tree.
The pace of life is even slower on Hahajima but I was not complaining,
having spent the previous two months living with my in-laws in what amounted
to four smoke-filled cupboards in downtown Tokyo.
After a snooze, I began to look around. Islanders make a living from
construction (new roads, breakwaters), agriculture (papaya and zucchini),
tourism (bird and whale watching, diving) and fishing (sport and
commercial).
In the harbour was a large pen. Inside were half-a-dozen turtles flapping
lethargically every now and then, snorting their displeasure at their
confinement when they came to the surface. A fisherman told me that they
sold for Y60,000 and every part of the animal was used. The islanders eat
them, but for how long is debatable. The island's last whaling station bowed
to international pressure and closed in the mid-1980s.
The next day I hiked to the southern end of Hahajima. It was beginning to
blow up a storm. Typhoon 24 (rather unimaginatively, the Japanese do not
give them names, like the Americans, but numbers) was heading right for the
island. The seas on the exposed east side were mighty - great whirls of
seawater topped by orange-coloured froth - and turquoise waves rushed to
dash themselves on the rocks, sending huge plumes of spray right over the
island.
I went underground for shelter. A whole network of caves and tunnels had
been built during the second world war to defend the islands from the
Americans. The defensive positions still have their searchlights and guns,
although slowly the warm tropical sea air is eating them away.
Sugar cane is an ideal crop to grow in subtropical areas prone to typhoons.
It bends but is not flattened. On Hahajima a company has been formed to make
white rum from cane juice. Asafluma san showed me around his spotless
distillery. The first batch of the liquor was not yet ready.
After the tour we settled down to a sampling session which involved cutting
the tops off locally-grown passion fruit, loosening the glutenous pips with
a spoon and topping up with the nearly-ready white rum. A pleasant glow
began to steal over me; by the fourth fruit I sensed a remarkable
transformation - my Japanese had progressed from basic to fluent.
The drink may have had something to do with the misunderstanding. From the
distillery Asanuma san and I made our way to one of three bars on the
island. As the only gaijin in town, I was something of a curiosity. A
stranger came up to me and whispered 'shonyudo' in my ear. I was stunned -
an island of just 400 people and it boasted a nude show. I indicated my
interest. 'Me,' he said, putting his index finger on his nose to make it
clear who was whom, 'guide san.'
I was perking up fast. 'You have flashlight? Rope?' he asked. My goodness, a
nude show that required a torch and rope. 'When?' I asked, trying to enter
into the conspiratorial style of the conversation. 'Eight tomorrow.'
'Tomorrow night?' 'Morning,' he said. 'You what?' I said, but he had gone.
The stalactite grotto hall - shonyudo in Japanese - was the highlight of my
visit to Hahajima. Without a guide it is difficult to find (an
hour-and-a-half walk through the forest), and the entrance so narrow that I
seriously thought I would be stuck there a week until I'd lost weight.
The grotto was a sloping cave about 50ft underground full of stalactites and
mites, the colour of butter toffee. As we threaded our way through them,
tapping them gently with our torches, they rang as sonorously as tubular
bells, and soothed my hangover.
Getting there: the Ogasawara Maru sails five times a month from Takeshiba
pier on the Tokyo waterfront. The dates can be obtained (with a fact sheet
on the islands in English) from the tourist information centre at 6-6
Yurakucho 1-chome, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 100, tel: 03-3502-1461. For July and
August, the busiest months, it is best to book three months in advance. Out
of the peak months, a one-way ticket costs about Pounds 100 (blankets,
pillow and your own floor space in open plan cabin; meals not included).
There are also four-berth cabins. The journey takes about 30 hours. Tickets
can be bought from any Japan Travel Bureau.
Between Chichijima and Hahajima a ferry takes two hours and sails six times
a week.
The cheapest place to stay on Chichijima is the Silver Moon, Y3,500 per
person but with no meals. The Villa Seaside is scruffy but friendly and
costs Y5,500 per person with breakfast and dinner. On Hahajima, Tsuki costs
Y6,500 per person and has excellent fresh sea fish for breakfast and dinner.
Bicycles and mopeds can be rented. Forest trails are well signposted.
