FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (11): Imbalance between young and old -
Population trends / Births down 40 per cent in the east
ECONOMICALLY speaking, a child is a costly luxury. No longer do people need
to breed to ensure that they are looked after in old age or to engender a
home-grown workforce for the fields. Emotional factors alone ensure that
people continue to have children.
This is a phenomenon of all urbanised, modern industrial societies, but the
consequences are felt particularly acutely in Germany, the third least
fertile country in the European Community after Italy and Spain: Germany's
population is growing old, and it would be shrinking but for an influx of
foreigners.
Expressed in pictorial form, a population ought to look like a pyramid: a
broad base of younger people supporting a dwindling number of older ones.
Germany's population now looks more like a Christmas tree, the pyramid
thinned out by the effects of two world wars, but 40 years from now, the
picture will look less balanced: an inverse pyramid where relatively few
young people support layers of older people.
'For the present generation simply to replace itself, 40 per cent of all
married couples need to have three or more children,' says Professor
Charlotte Hohn, director of the Wiesbaden-based Federal Institute for
Population Research.
'But in a society such as ours, most people want to have one child - or two,
at the most.'
Germany's reunification has highlighted the growing numerical imbalance
between young and old: in 1991, the number of births in reunited Germany
fell back by 8.5 per cent, from 906,000 in 1990 to 828,000, a drop caused by
a huge, 40 per cent reduction of births in the former east Germany.
A combination of social unease, migration to the western part of Germany,
plus growing job opportunities, has meant that young women in the ex-DDR
have been reluctant to have children, and hospitals in the east report a
surge in demand for abortions and sterilisations.
The resulting demographic problem is often cited as one of the more serious
difficulties facing Germany in the years to come: Germans have the highest
wages, take the longest holidays, work the shortest hours of their peers in
other industrial countries - and to cap it all there are set to be fewer
people at work to support a disproportionately large elderly population.
The government has taken a number of steps to mitigate the problem, for
example raising the retirement age and adjusting old-age healthcare
insurance regulations.
But this is not enough: in order to shore up the imbalanced population
pyramid, Germany will have to rely more heavily on imported labour.
That the working population of the former west Germany climbed from 28.6m to
29.4m between January and October last year reflects migration from the
former DDR as well as the influx of ethnic Germans (Aussiedler),
predominantly from the former Soviet Union and eastern Europe, who are
entitled to German citizenship.
But more jobs were lost in east Germany than were created in the west and if
the workforce is to grow across the whole of Germany, the number of
foreigners living in Germany will have to expand, as it did in the last
decade when a net 2.2m people migrated into Germany.
Over the longer term the number of foreigners in Germany will grow anyway:
the 5.4m-strong foreign community in Germany now is expected to grow to 8.9m
over the next 40 years, without immigration.
Although not German citizens, these foreigners - predominantly Turks - have
come to look on Germany as home and, having paid their taxes, are entitled
to the same care in old age as other Germans.
Senior industrialists already recognise the imperative of attracting more
skilled immigrants into Germany: some 230,000 apprenticeships are unfilled
and in united Germany there are over 400,000 job vacancies for skilled
manual workers.
Employers and employee associations bend over backwards to say they would
welcome qualified applicants for these jobs, whatever their nationality, and
Mr Rudolf Stumpf, personnel director of BMW, has said that the car company
may as well shut if it were not for its foreign workers.
At a time when the number of ethnic Germans will be shrinking, this growth
may exacerbate social tensions which are already to be felt in the early
1990s in the attacks against asylum homes in the east of Germany.
It is an irony that asylum seekers are not allowed to work even though there
would be jobs for them: they are obliged to sit around doing nothing for
months at the state's expenses while they wait for a decision on their
asylum application, serving to stoke up resentments within the communities
in the midst of whom they are billeted.
As Mr Heiner Geissler, deputy chairman of the ruling CDU-CSU coalition
pointed out this summer in the wake of the attacks, more tolerance is
required and Germans will have to get used to living and working in an
increasingly multi-racial society.
