FT  30 MAR 92 / Volkswagen gears up for cost-cutting: Changes at the top of
German carmaker may herald tough measures for a leaner look
Volkswagen is a proud company. Its cars, including the popular Golf, are
among the best mass-produced models in the world; its record of innovation
is impressive; and it has a high level of environmental consciousness.
The trouble is that compared with other carmakers, its costs are also among
the highest. This is certainly no cause for pride and clearly influenced
those deciding who should take over the driving seat of the German group.
Thus, Mr Ferdinand Piech, a tough and somewhat caustic car engineer, is set
to take over as the chief executive in nine months.
It has been rumoured for some time that Mr Piech would be favoured over his
rival, Mr Daniel Goeudevert, a Frenchman who joined VW two years ago from
the German subsidiary of Ford of the US. Mr Goeudevert, a former Sorbonne
literature professor with unconventional views about the industry, certainly
looked like the heir apparent until Mr Piech's strong engineering
credentials shot him ahead.
Now that Mr Piech, head of the Audi subsidiary, has virtually won the race -
the decision in his favour by a special committee of the supervisory board
still has to be rubber-stamped by the full board on April 10 - the question
is what he will do after Mr Carl Hahn, 65, steps down at the end of this
year.
There is plenty that needs to be done. According to Mr Stephen Reitman,
motors analyst at stockbrokers UBS Phillips &amp; Drew: 'VW has made little
progress in boosting output per employee during a period when substantial
advances have been made by its competitors.' VW, he adds, 'remains the high
cost, high charging producer'.
The original plan was that Mr Hahn, one of the best-known figures in the
German motor industry, should stay on for two years after his normal
retirement date. This would have taken him to the end of 1993.
But those responsible for appointing the top management realised that
competition was becoming fiercer and that drastic steps were needed. 'There
is a growing sense of crisis,' says Mr Reitman. 'The numbers are not adding
up any more.' He estimates that VW's earnings per share slid from DM36 to
DM27 last year, though he expects a slight improvement in 1992. In 1989, the
figure was DM59.
Against this background, it was not surprising that the news of Mr Piech's
takeover as head of the group was coupled with an announcement that 12,500
jobs would be lost from VW's domestic workforce of 130,000 by 1996. VW
insisted that the reduction of 2,500 jobs a year would occur through natural
wastage. It denied a report in Manager Magazin, a German business monthly,
that cuts of 25,000 were planned at west German plants.
VW is not the only German motor company plagued by high costs and a labour
force whose size is out of line with slimmer foreign competition.
Mercedes-Benz is contemplating cuts of around 20,000 people in the next few
years while BMW intends to shed 3,000 people in 1992.
The German motor industry association (VDA) has also warned that job
reductions are inevitable. 'They will be gradual, but over time they will be
substantial,' says Mr Achim Diekmann, managing director of the VDA. In the
last 10 years, other EC members have reduced jobs in the industry by
410,000, while the German industry has had an increase of 79,000.
Components makers have already started cutting employment and shifting more
production abroad in response to increasing competition and the pressing
demands of carmakers for more sophisticated parts and systems at low prices.
In Mr Diekmann's view, the traditional car plants in western Europe, not
just Germany, are under threat from those in newer locations such as Spain
and Portugal; the Japanese transplants in the UK also pose a tough
challenge. VW is trying to combat this by building a new plant in eastern
Germany where it will apply 'lean production' methods, buying into Skoda,
the Czechoslovakian car producer, and teaming up with Ford in Portugal.
It has long been involved in Spain, where it owns the successful Seat
carmaker. VW is also building up its activities in Mexico and China. Apart
from developing new markets, an important reason for this expansion is to
develop output in low cost countries. Altogether, group capital investment
in the next five years will total DM51bn (Pounds 17.9bn).
Inevitably, VW's vigorous foreign expansion has focused a spotlight on cost
levels in its German plants, especially at its Wolfsburg headquarters where
it turns out 4,000 cars daily. Mr Reitman refers to VW's 'ruinously
expensive domestic manufacturing handicap', noting that VW and other
European producers still have to face the full blast of Japanese competition
in the EC.
Mr Goeudevert, the director responsible for the VW marque - accounting for
some 80 per cent of group business - agrees that action is necessary, but
not just at VW. 'Certainly, VW has a cost problem but it is not a typical VW
problem.'
The group has implemented organisational changes to improve financial
transparency and enable it to monitor costs more effectively.
Yesterday, in an apparent extension of this policy, VW said it was
considering the creation of a separate holding company to oversee its
separate VW, Audi, Seat and Skoda marques. It has also been striving to
ensure that its component plants maintain their costs at competitive levels.
None of this is easy, as Mr Hahn well knows. 'We have to keep the pressure
on VW to maintain world standards and not fall asleep in a captive market,
which is the most dangerous thing that can happen. Everybody - workers, shop
stewards, and managers - know they are being measured by the best
international standards.'
It is these high standards that Mr Piech will have to maintain. But in an
increasingly ferocious and fast-moving industry, he will have to do it at
cost levels which do not leave VW at a severe disadvantage to its
competitors. VW needs to slim down to stay up with the leaders.
Nissan president named, Page 22
