FT  28 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Nat Power moves into Portugal
A CONSORTIUM led by National Power, Britain's largest electricity generator,
is to buy and operate a 600 MW coal-fired power station already under
construction in Portugal.
National Power's investment of Pounds 60m in the project is the most
significant yet in a planned programme through which it aims to invest
Pounds 1bn overseas by the end of the century.
The opportunity to run the Pego power station, being built 75 miles
north-east of Lisbon, arose because of the Portuguese government's decision
to open up the electricity generation market to the private sector.
In the UK, liberalisation of power generation means that National Power
expects its 41 per cent share of the UK electricity generation market to
fall in the mid-1990s as independent gas-fired plants come on stream.
The company hopes eventually to derive about a quarter of its income from
abroad. It already has joint venture projects in Pakistan and, more
recently, Malaysia where it announced last month it was investing Dollars
20m (Pounds 13m) in two gas fired projects with a total capacity of 1,500
MW.
National Power's consortium beat off bids from the US, Germany, Belgium and
the UK to win the Pego agreement signed in Lisbon yesterday with
Electricidade de Portugal (EDP).
The consortium has incorporated a joint venture company, Tejo Energy, which
will own the station. The Pounds 700m project will be financed by the
consortium, providing about Pounds 140m in equity, of which NP will control
40 per cent.
Other participants are Endesa, the Spanish utility which is thought to have
about 25 per cent of the shares, and Electricite de France and EDP, with 10
per cent each.
Portuguese investors will also have an opportunity to buy shares.
The station's first generating unit is due to be commissioned in April next
year. Tejo will be licensed to operate the station for 28 years, supplying
electricity to EDP, and coal supplies will be bought on the international
market.
Mr Graham Hadley, National Power executive director, said demand for
electricity in Portugal was growing strongly. The deal provided an
opportunity to construct a further two generating units on the site.
