FT  07 MAR 92 / S Africa's right wing exploits nation's fear: Conservative
referendum tactics
'REJECT the anti-Christ.' That is the level at which South Africa's
ultra-right Conservative Party (CP) has pitched its campaign for a 'no' vote
in next week's referendum on the future of apartheid.
For the most part, the CP campaign is not rational, but then, elections
never are. When it comes to exploiting the emotions and fears of the
Afrikaner, few political leaders are more effective than the CP leader
Andries Treurnicht, who today takes his message to the Afrikaner capital,
Pretoria.
He will address a CP rally from the steps of Pretoria's monument to Paul
Kruger, president of the 19th-century Transvaal republic, and one of
Afrikanerdom's best-loved heroes. If Mr Treurnicht follows the pattern of
previous campaign speeches, he will accuse the ruling National Party of
selling out to the African National Congress (ANC) and its ally, the South
African Communist Party (alias the anti-Christ); he will cite frightening
crime statistics, including murders of elderly Afrikaans farmers; he will
condemn the appalling state of the economy.
Backing his rhetorical skills will be the firebrand Mr Eugene Terre'blanche,
leader of the neo-Nazi Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging (AWB), or Afrikaner
Resistance Movement, himself a powerful orator, and Mr Jaap Marais of the
Herstigte Nasionale Party (Reconstituted National Party). It will be a
formidable array of right-wing force.
For the Conservative Party, this is the mother of all battles; the party
knows it will not lose to fight another day. If the CP cannot muster a
majority for the 'no' campaign, party insiders predict it will split along
fault lines.
Over the past 10 days, an influential group of younger, more moderate CP
members of parliament - led by the witty and articulate Mr Koos van der
Merwe, MP for Overvaal, near Johannesburg - have sought to hijack party
policy from older reactionaries who propose a return to apartheid in all its
glory, and all its lunacy.
Unilaterally, they have announced major reversals of policy which have
caught more senior leaders off guard. Mr van der Merwe has announced that
the CP would not reinstate apartheid. This is largely sleight of hand:
apartheid laws would not be needed in the white homeland which Mr van der
Merwe proposes, because blacks would not be citizens of such a state.
Mr van der Merwe also announced that the CP was willing to negotiate
political reform with blacks. Official party policy has been to boycott the
Convention for a Democratic South Africa (Codesa), the multi-racial forum
which is currently negotiating a new constitution. Mr van der Merwe insists
the party is ready to negotiate its demands for a white homeland, though he
says he would join Codesa only if its voting laws were changed.
The CP has also compromised on its central demand, that there should be an
independent Afrikaner homeland, part of a larger confederation of other
regional - that is, black  - states. That, of course, was the original plan
of apartheid: a constellation of black states federated to a large white
nation. The difference is that old-style apartheid called for whites to
occupy over 80 per cent of South Africa; the new CP policy is in favour of a
much smaller white state.
But many 'no' voters will probably be voting less for a white homeland than
against the prospect that the National Party will hand over power to the
black majority.
The large number of right-wingers who oppose such an outcome will not
disappear even if they lose the referendum. In fact, they could prove even
more dangerous. For if the CP loses, many Conservatives will feel that the
constitutional route to opposing reform has been blocked: a hard core is
likely to resort to violence, while the rest would form a 'new right' which
could be expected to enter negotiations.
