FT  09 JAN 92 / Arts: Royal Academy pins its hopes on Mantegna and revamps
the summer show
'If I had to destroy the work of Monet or Mantegna, I would definitely
choose that of Monet' said that arch modernist Norman Rosenthal, exhibitions
secretary of the Royal Academy yesterday. I am sure he means it, but it also
makes good business sense.
Last year was the best ever, financially, for the RA, with a profit of
almost Pounds 1.5m thanks mainly to the record number of 1.3m visitors, half
of whom were drawn to just one show, the Monet. The 658,000 pairs of feet
managed to wear out the stair carpet. They also spent lavishly in the shop
and restaurant, and bought 65,000 catalogues.
This year's exhibition programme includes no such outstanding shows, apart
from that devoted to Mantegna which opens on January 17, thanks to
sponsorship by Olivetti. This outstanding, wayward, artist of the Italian
Renaissance bears the burden of ensuring that the RA has another good year.
The appearance in the show of eight of his nine canvases of the 'Triumphs of
Caesar', the undoubted masterpiece of his career, which entered to the Royal
Collection in 1629, should ensure a good attendance, but the RA is
optimistic if it imagines that this Old Master can capture the popular
imagination in the manner of an Impressionist.
The other interesting exhibitions are those devoted to the Impressionist
Sisley (July), whose reputation has long been over shadowed by his
contemporaries; Sickert (November), the greatest British post-Impressionist
who has not received a serious show for 30 years; and a display of Tibetan
art, stretching back over 1,000 years, in September.
President Sir Roger de Grey announced changes in its most established
institution, the Summer Show. Honorary foreign RAs, like Robert Diebenkorn,
are to be invited to exhibit in an attempt to raise standards. Although
around 12,000 works are submitted for the Show, very few contributions by
amateur artists are accepted. Sir Roger sees the Show as offering young
professional artists a chance.
Other shows this year are devoted to Alexander Calder, creator of the mobile
and the RA Tom Phillips. Next year there will be major exhibitions of
British watercolourists between 1750-1860; a Pissarro show; and one devoted
to 20th century American art.
