FT  27 JUL 92 / The Barcelona Olympics: US makes an early strike for gold /
A look behind the scenes at swimming precedes disappointment for Britain
EVEN before the sparkling Piscines Bernat Picornell had been filled with
water, it was obvious that yesterday's men's 100 metres breaststroke would
be the most competitive swimming event at the Olympic Games. Nine of the
fastest times ever had been set within the past 12 months, so that Nelson
Mandela's presence in the VIP box merely added to the electric atmosphere at
poolside.
As things turned out, Britain's hopes of a fast start to the Games quickly
fizzled out in the breaststroke final. Nick Gillingham, the world's fastest
man this year, and Adrian Moorhouse - defending the title he won in Seoul
four years ago - could only finish 7th and 8th respectively. Nelson Diebel
of the US took the gold medal in an Olympic record of 61.5 seconds.
Gillingham, 25, whose Commonwealth record of 61.33secs at the trials left
him top of the world rankings, was the most disappointing, though his effort
could have been affected by a long-term groin strain which caused trouble
again after yesterday's heats and needed physiotherapy.
Gillingham had apparently considered pulling out after finishing fourth
fastest qualifier, to save himself for the 200m breaststroke. Instead, he
took the plunge and was always struggling to keep up.
Moorhouse, meanwhile, had entered the Games as an underdog after failing to
record a fast time this year, and was unable to repeat anything like his
best - 61.49secs - trailing home last in 62.33secs.
Hungarian swimmer Norbert Rozsa's current world record of 61.33secs looked
vulnerable, but survived. Among team-mates, Rozsa is known as 'Richie'
because of his striking facial resemblance to the young Richard Burton.
How Hungary has retained its traditional power in swimming is one of the
minor mysteries of post-Cold War sport. Training camps in San Diego and
Mauritius appear to present no financial problem. In 1991 the 11-strong
Hungarian squad broke six world records, while the rest of the world's
swimmers managed only eight between them.
Moorhouse's muscular style seems to have been adopted by Dmitri Volkov of
the former Soviet Union, who set the fastest qualifying time of 61.74sec. As
he churned down the pool beneath the sparkling Catalan skies, Volkov seemed
to create whirlpoools and waves.
If his horsepower were ever harnessed to Gillingham's fluid balletic style
there might be a record to stand for a decade.
However, as always in swimming, there was the might of the US to consider.
Shaven-headed Diebel, 22, had set the second fastest 100m time of 1992 and
looked aggressively determined. Naturally, a freshly shaven pate - complete
with razor nicks - always looks impressive.
After his victory, Diebel, who confesses to having been hooked on soft drugs
from 12 to 16, said: 'Swimming is the path by which my life was turned
around.'
It is a fact of top-class swimming that the era of 13-year-old muppets,
driven to swim hour after hour by wicked coaches, is over.
Most of the US women's team are over 20. Three are even married. As such,
they have the chance to be interesting.
Jenny Thompson, for example, is known around the team as a James Dean type.
'She goes into town, gets the job done and leaves,' said a team-mate.
Unfortunately, Thompson was unexpectedly beaten in the 100m freestyle final.
Britain's favourite female swimmer, Sharron Davies, is also struggling. At
29 and with Olympic memories stretching back to 1976, the leonine Davies
must surely be on her swansong. In qualifying heats of the 400m medley she
came last.
Yet it is a truism that the British love nothing more than a gallant loser.
Davies was mobbed by cameras and microphones. Perhaps her mission as she
left the pool for the Olympic village should have been to counsel the frisky
young Australian females who had performed an impromptu striptease for male
team-mates. The tabloids were slavering.
