FT  30 MAY 92 / Property: Buyers are tempted with extras galore - Moves to
coax life into the market in the north-west of England
WHILE the whole country waits for the start of the house-buying season -
reports of its birth have been somewhat exaggerated so far - the north-west
of England might take comfort in the latest Halifax house price index. It
shows that the region's prices continue to underperform the national trend,
which has been downwards for some time. Prices in the north-west fell by 2.7
per cent in the first quarter of 1992, compared with a 3.2 per cent national
decline, giving an annual rate of 2.3 per cent compared with 4.4.
There is little rejoicing, though, for minds remain concentrated on further
pump-priming measures. The fact is that while those famous ripples of the
late 1980s were smaller at the top end of the M6 than they were in, say,
East Anglia, over-pricing and consequent market inertia are still the
legacy.
Since the autumn, big developers have been courting first- and second-time
buyers with offers of carpets, curtains and almost any fittings they care to
name. There are creative financing packages with low deposits and deferred
initial payments, direct help and costs on the disposal of buyers' present
homes, and legal costs on both sale and purchase. 'If stamp duty comes back
in August,' said one agent, 'they will no doubt pay that as well.'
Part-exchange arrangements abound, although some developers require a
discount on the buying-in price, sometimes as much as 17 per cent on the
average of three agents' valuations. But redundancy cover on mortgage
payments for up to three years has probably done most to boost morale in an
area of unnerving retrenchments by major employers.
Not surprisingly, in view of the money they are spending on advertising and
incentives, most developers now claim an upturn in interest since the
general election, even if this is not always reflected in apparent on-site
activity. Terms are being agreed, they say, as their agents struggle to sell
potential buyers' existing homes.
But while attempts are made to coax life into the starter market, vendors in
the higher price brackets of prime commuter country can only wait and hope.
There is little reported activity above Pounds 200,000 - and that category
is not particularly responsive to massive price reductions in the present
climate, says Alan Kay, group business executive in the Halifax's Preston
office. 'If we reduce prices drastically on houses in the higher brackets,
we still have no proof that they will sell,' he adds.
Manchester commuting has now moved well into the Ribble Valley and the
Fylde, places from where people can reach the city's traffic jams just as
quickly as from the still desirable but now heavily built-up south
Manchester conurbation.
The city is a 40-minute drive from the Ribble Valley (add perhaps another 40
to park) and, during the boom, its picture postcard villages and the market
town of Clitheroe were awash with southern ripples and local executive
demand. Even now, the average three-bedroom terrace costs Pounds 50,000
while the proportion of houses in the Pounds 200,000-Pounds 400,000 range is
probably the highest in the north-west.
Ian Lloyd, of agent Mortimer, Gorse &amp; Ross, detects renewed confidence since
the election. 'Values had certainly decreased by 10-15 per cent since the
boom,' he says. 'But while there is no evidence of a new increase, prices do
seem to be holding now. Only those desperate to sell are reducing prices.'
That probably goes for developers, too, in an area where planning
restrictions mean that developments come in small numbers of select units.
One scheme, in the village of Chipping, has four units backing onto Chipping
Brook which are offered through the Clitheroe office of Mortimer, Gorse &amp;
Ross. One of the four- and five-bedroom houses has been sold and the rest
are available at around Pounds 235,000.
Barn conversions, which tend to clash less with planning restrictions, often
allow scope for a little originality. That is a great asset in the present
market, according to Duncan Raistrick, new homes' director of agent Reeds
Rains. He is offering Huntsman's Chase at Treales, north-west of Preston on
the Fylde. The scheme, by Lancashire Homes, involves barns and other farm
buildings which now comprise seven units with between two and five bedrooms.
In addition, they do not have the problem of small gardens and vast common
areas often found with multiple conversions. Most of these houses carry the
option of an extra four-acre paddock which has, apart from anything else,
commended them to the equestrian set. Three of the seven units have been
sold while the others are available at prices between Pounds 98,500 and
Pounds 195,000.
Out at Cleveleys on the coast, Manchester-based Roland Bardsley Homes has
built 12 luxury flats in a scheme known as Grosvenor Court. This is hardly
Manchester commuter country but, with some units facing directly onto the
seafront and all with a sight of the water, interest has been strong from
the retirement sector. Four have been sold and the rest are available from
Pounds 99,950.
Bardsley's financial director, Keith Spencer, is another noting some general
improvement in demand. He says that while his company averages 300 sales a
year, 35 have been achieved in the past five weeks.
Cumbria, further north, is a case apart, Much of it is national park where
development is unwelcome (except for low-cost housing, for which the Lake
District National Park Authority reports a 'welcome upturn' in applications
recently). But one interesting scheme, which gets as close to the Lake
District as posible without actually impinging on a national treasure, is
Heathcliffe Court at Arnside. This development of 16 flats faces the
Langdale peaks across the Kent estuary and its grounds run down to the
water's edge.
Formed from the conversion and extension of a large Victorian house, it is
the brainchild of Stephen Bernhard. His formative career stages were spent
with the family firm of Geoffrey Bernhard &amp; Sons Ltd of Rugby,
horticulturalists and landscapers.
That experience, and some years in Europe and America, persuaded him that
the original house - which, like many in that part of the country, was
heavy, grey and sombre - needed special treatment if justice was to be done
to the site. 'I did not want to create a retirement home but a place with
mixed abilities and mixed incomes and a place of security, a place where a
community could live,' he says.
The result is four penthouses with three bedrooms, eight two-bed apartments,
and four single-bed flats aranged in two blocks with an intervening atrium.
Prices range from Pounds 86,000 to Pounds 167,000. There is underground
parking for 12 cars; but for those who prefer not to drive, Arnside is just
three hours by train from London.
