FT  19 MAR 92 / Friends Provident agrees to European insurers' alliance
FRIENDS Provident, the mutually owned life and pensions group, yesterday put
the finishing touches to a deal which could ultimately lead to its merger
with three medium-sized north European insurers.
Friends agreed with Wasa, Sweden's third biggest life insurer, Avero
Centraal Beheer, the second largest Dutch general insurer, and Topdanmark,
Denmark's third biggest general insurer, to pool its non-domestic assets
into Eureko, an Amsterdam-based holding company, jointly owned by the four.
Eureko's initial assets of Pounds 450m are modest, but together the groups
will constitute the 25th biggest European insurer.
Mr Carl Hedlund, chairman of the supervisory board, said all the partners
were committed to 'something much more concrete than a marketing alliance or
partnership'.
Warning of possible encroachment by larger predators, Mr Hedlund said: 'We
must have a strategy to safeguard our future at an international level.
'We have structured Eureko to be long lasting,' he said, adding that it
would be difficult for any of the partners to break the alliance.
The deal, which was agreed in outline late last year, follows a similar move
by Royal Insurance, AMB of Germany and Fondiaria of Italy to create a
jointly-owned European holding group.
The partners aim to invite other companies to join them in building a
broader pan-European grouping.
Preliminary contacts have already been made with a number of companies in
France and Germany which, like the existing partners, have a mutual
background.
Eureko will acquire shareholdings in AVCB, Topdanmark and Wasa of at least
10 per cent, while Friends will acquire a 51 per cent share in Topdanmark's
UK subsidiary, Top UK, in a transaction valued at around Pounds 20m. Morgan
Grenfell, the merchant bank, is conducting valuations of the assets to be
injected into Eureko, with the transfers taking place in August.
Top UK is a direct motor insurer, selling insurance via mass media
advertising and telephone. Topdanmark and AVCB support direct sales
techniques, which avoid using brokers.
The Top UK deal signals Friends' re-entry into the general insurance field
in the UK.
Lex, Page 24
