FT  26 AUG 92 / Hopes high for international chemical weapons treaty: An
improbable legacy from Saddam Hussein is the end of 24 years of talks
THE FINAL draft of an international treaty outlawing chemical weapons will
be presented to negotiators for approval today, 24 years after talks began
in the 39-member United Nations Disarmament Conference in Geneva. For this
belated achievement the world can perhaps thank President Saddam Hussein.
Iraq's threat to use chemical weapons against allied forces in the 1991 Gulf
war - having already done so against Iranian soldiers and Iraqi Kurds -
turned the spotlight on this fearsome form of warfare. More important, it
convinced the US that chemical weapons were of no military value, even for
reprisal against a chemical attack.
Shortly afterwards, the Bush administration dropped its controversial
insistence on retaining a small weapons stockpile and the right to retaliate
in kind until all nations suspected of possessing toxic arms had endorsed
the pact. This change of stance paved the way for completion of the treaty.
The draft 190-page accord goes far beyond the 1925 Geneva Protocol which
forbids use, but not possession, of toxic arms. The proposed treaty will
prohibit development, production, stockpiling, transfer and use of chemical
weapons, and require the destruction of existing stocks and production
facilities within 10 years of coming into force.
The treaty also bars the use of herbicides and other toxic chemicals 'as a
method of warfare', although it allows non-toxic chemicals such as tear gas,
which cause temporary disablement, to be used for riot control.
Compliance will be policed by an international secretariat based in The
Hague, under the direction of a 41-member executive council. The
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, with up to 1,000 staff
and an annual budget of Dollars 150m-Dollars 180m, will verify destruction
programmes, inspect all military facilities and civilian plants producing
chemicals that could be used for armaments, and carry out routine monitoring
and random checks on other civilian chemical installations.
Countries suspected of cheating will be subject to short-notice challenge
inspections, though obviously frivolous challenges will be thrown out if
three-quarters of the executive council agree.
These provisions attempt to strike a balance between effective verification
and protection of military and commercial secrets. Washington backed off
from its original demand for challenge inspections 'any place, any time'
because the defence department did not want inspectors snooping around
sensitive military installations pretending to look for chemical weapons.
While countries will not be able to bar inspectors from a site altogether, a
procedure known as 'managed access' will allow them to shroud equipment,
hide documents, shut down computers, even restrict individual inspectors to
different parts of the site.
Western diplomats claim this will adequately protect secrets unrelated to
chemical weapons while still enabling inspectors to detect the 'clear
signatures' of toxic arms and equipment.
'The treaty adequately protects legitimate national security interests while
maintaining the ability to detect militarily significant cheating,' says Mr
Stephen Ledogar, head of the US disarmament delegation in Geneva.
A country will have at least 12 hours' notice of the challenged site before
the inspection team arrives at the airport or frontier. It must transport
the team to the site within 36 hours but, if it contests the site
boundaries, a further 72 hours may elapse before the team can enter.
However, Mr Adolf von Wagner, chairman of the Disarmament Conference's Ad
Hoc Committee on Chemical Weapons, says it would be impossible to 'clean' a
site within five days, especially since everything going in or out must be
accounted for.
So far, only the US and Russia, of the half a dozen countries thought to
have militarily useable chemical weapons stocks, have declared possession.
Iraq's stocks of mustard gas and nerve agents are being destroyed by UN
experts. Diplomats in Geneva believe that up to 20 other nations may have
facilities capable of production or abandoned weapons on their territory.
Countries must not only pay for eliminating their chemical weapons and
facilities, but the verification costs as well. Other expenses of the
inspectorate will be met by members according to the UN contribution scale.
The US, which calculates that incinerating its 30,000-ton stockpile could
cost Dollars 6bn-Dollars 7bn, has also agreed to foot part of the bill for
destroying the 40,000 tons of Russian weapons. Even so, the problems of
getting a destruction programme under way mean Russia will almost certainly
have to invoke treaty provisions allowing an extra five years to complete
the task.
A number of developing countries, notably Pakistan, China, Iran and
Indonesia, continue to argue that the inspection regime is too stringent,
intrusive and open to abuse. But they are not expected to block the treaty,
either in today's meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee or in next week's plenary
session of the Disarmament Conference which must forward the text to the UN
General Assembly in New York.
Approval by the assembly, probably in December, will be followed by a formal
signing ceremony in Paris early in 1993 and the treaty will come into force
two years later, provided 65 nations have ratified it.
Western nations are optimistic that the treaty, the most ambitious
multilateral disarmament pact ever attempted, will eventually command
near-universal adherence. Political and moral pressure will be reinforced by
economic leverage. Countries which refuse to join will face curbs on their
chemicals trade.
More than 50 nations, including all members of the Conference on Security
and Co-operation in Europe have said they will sign the treaty in Paris.
Diplomats expect Middle East countries to join as part of broader security
deals emerging from current regional peace negotiations.
