FT  29 MAY 92 / Survey of Coventry (10): Valuable role in the city's economy
 -University of Warwick works closely with industry and commerce
THE UNIVERSITY of Warwick, situated to the south-west of central Coventry
has played an important role in helping the city's economy to grow and
diversify.
With 2,800 employees at the university and a further 1,100 in the
neighbouring Science Park, it was ranked in 1990 as the ninth-largest
employer in Coventry and third largest in the public sector.
The university came into existence in the mid-1960s as one of the new,
so-called 'plate-glass' universities (as opposed to ancient and red-brick
universities.) It has 10,000 students enrolled on undergraduate,
postgraduate, post-experience and distance-learning courses.
The 34 academic departments offer a wide range of three and four-year
undergraduate courses in the sciences, social sciences and humanities; and
there are 1,300 postgraduates. The 2,000 undergraduate places on offer each
year attract a total of 20,000 applicants.
Around 8 per cent of those who graduated last summer from Warwick were still
without a job by the end of 1991, according to a recent newspaper poll of
unemployment among graduates from British universities. This compares with
the national average of one in 10.
Much interest in Warwick has centred not only upon academic achievement but
on links with local industry and the role the university has played in
developing the economy of Coventry and Warwickshire. As might be expected in
an area with long associations with the automotive industry, the university
is strong in engineering.
For example, through Professor Kumar Bhattacharyy's, manufacturing group in
engineering, the university has worked closely with the Rover Group in
training and research, as well as with other companies.
Through the advanced technology centre, which is part of the manufacturing
group partnership, Warwick co-operates with both Rover and Rolls-Royce
Motors in strategic research into automotive technology and new materials.
The Warwick Business school, an integral part of the university, maintains
close contacts with the local business community. The school's centre for
small and medium-sized enterprises produces a twice-yearly business survey
which contains important information for the local business community. The
school has important links with the Coventry and Warwickshire Training and
Enterprise Council.
One of the region's commercial success stories is the University of Warwick
Science Park. This was started in 1982 as a joint venture between the
university, Coventry city council, Warwickshire county council and the then
West Midlands county council.
Its success was a factor in persuading the city council to locate its
100-acre Westwood Business Park, just across the road from the university.
Today, the science park houses 65 companies, many in high technology fields.
Dr John Wood, the Industrial Development Officer, says: 'The science park is
a success in that there is a definite technology transfer. Approximately
half the companies are involved in joint projects or consultancy. Not all
science parks have achieved these links with universities, some have become
just industrial estates.'
Coventry Polytechnic, which next month should receive permission to become
Coventry University, has also developed close links with the city's business
community.
The annual turnover the polytechnic is now around Pounds 46m, an increase of
around 50 per cent in the past ten years. The revenue comes not just through
government funding but also from overseas students and various private
enterprises.
There are 12,000 students attending the campus which occupies 18 acres in
the city centre, next to the cathedral. There are 1,800 staff making the
polytechnic, like the University of Warwick, a main employer in the city.
There are close ties with local companies. Both Peugeot Talbot and Lucas
provide support for posts within the polytechnic and fund specially-tailored
courses.
The polytechnic's wholly-owned trading company, Coventry Polytechnic
Enterprises, is now in its third year of operation.
Mr Charles Leonard, the head of commercial development who runs the company,
estimates that it now accounts for around seven per cent of the
polytechnic's revenue.
Activities range from training to negotiating professional liability
contracts and consultancy.
One of the most publicised of the company's activities are its dealings with
the former Soviet Union. More than 400 former Soviet nationals have been on
training courses at Coventry. There is currently a group of Ukrainians at
the Coventry sponsored by Allied Lyons and another group sponsored by De
Beers.
The Polytechnic has had to find private sponsorship for these trainees
because the sponsoring countries no longer have the funds to send managers
to Coventry.
The Polytechnic has recently received Pounds 20,000 from the British Foreign
Office 'know-how fund' to help set up mobile food kiosks in Moscow. The Vaz
car plant (which makes Lada cars) has asked the polytechnic's help in
setting its first commercial bank.
The company is working on around 500 projects or contracts and is seeking
more.
