FT  09 JUN 92 / International Company News: General Dynamics plans Dollars
975m share buy-back
GENERAL Dynamics, the US defence contractor which has been promising to
return its rapidly-mounting excess cash reserves to shareholders, yesterday
announced plans to spend up to Dollars 975m to buy back 30 per cent of its
stock.
The company said it would launch a so-called Dutch auction tender offer this
week for up to 13m shares. As part of the package, the Crown and Goodman
families, which own 22 per cent of General Dynamics' stock, intend to lower
their stake to around 15 per cent.
The share repurchase is the latest stage in a 'plan of contraction' by Mr
William Anders, the former air force pilot and astronaut who took over as
chairman of General Dynamics last year.
The company, which is being slimmed to four core defence businesses, is
selling off peripheral activities, including several commercial businesses
and its missiles division. It is sitting on Dollars 1.2bn of cash and
marketable securities.
Mr Anders said yesterday the company's cash resources 'far exceed those
needed to pursue opportunities within our core businesses and to keep them
strong and viable'. He believed the best way to invest a significant
proportion of the funds was in the repurchase of the company's stock.
The Dutch auction involves shareholders specifying a price not greater than
Dollars 75 a share and not less than Dollars 65. 3/8 (last Friday's close)
at which they would be willing to sell their shares.
The company would then decide the lowest price in that range which would
allow it to buy 13m shares, and then pay that price for all shares tendered
at or below the purchase price.
General Dynamics shares, which have risen from Dollars 25 1/4 at the start
of last year, rose sharply on the news to close at Dollars 71, up Dollars
5.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.
The company's management said it would not be in General Dynamics' best
interests for the Crown and Goodman stockholders to increase their stake in
the business.
The families' three representatives on the board shared this view, it said.
The Crown and Goodman families would have preferred to retain their current
stake, but for tax reasons would be tendering shares likely to cut their
holding to around 15 per cent.
