FT  13 OCT 92 / Korea's perennial opposition leader boosted by DLP split:
Kim Dae-jung looks set to gain as leading figures quit a ruling party still
dogged by division
THE presidential hopes of Mr Kim Dae-jung, South Korea's perennial
opposition leader, have suddenly improved as the ruling Democratic Liberal
Party (DLP) appears to be splitting apart.
The crisis in the DLP reached a critical point over the weekend with the
resignation of Mr Park Tae-joon, head of the party's majority faction.
The departure of Mr Park, who also resigned last week as chairman of the
state-affiliated Posco steel company, is likely to trigger the exodus of
other important DLP figures who could establish a new conservative political
party.
That would damage the chances of Mr Kim Young-sam, the DLP nominee and
current leader in the presidential election, expected in mid-December. State
television said yesterday that Mr Kim would announce that he was resigning
as a member of parliament today to devote himself to the presidential
campaign.
Analysts said that by quitting parliament he was hoping to heal the rifts in
his party.
Conservative support for Mr Kim has already been eroded by the candidacy of
Mr Chung Ju-yung, the founder of the South Korean conglomerate Hyundai who
formed the United People's Party (UPP) earlier this year.
By contrast, Mr Kim Dae-jung's support, which mainly consists of working-
and middle-class voters in Seoul and his home base in the rural
south-western Cholla region, remains firm. He is now running a close second
behind Mr Kim Young-sam.
The DLP has been an uneasy political alliance since its creation in 1990 as
a result of a merger of President Roh Tae-woo's Democratic Justice Party
with two opposition parties, including Mr Kim Young-sam's Reunification
Democratic Party.
Mr Kim agreed to join the government and give it a majority of parliamentary
seats in return for a promise that he would receive the DLP presidential
nomination this year. The constitution bans Mr Roh from standing for
president again.
Mr Kim, who stood as an opposition presidential candidate in the last
election in 1987, duly received the DLP nomination in May.
But his recent actions have alienated Mr Roh and his supporters, including
Mr Park, who constitute the majority faction in the DLP.
Critics have accused Mr Kim of becoming arrogant and pushy, placing his
supporters in the top DLP positions in spite of his minority status within
the party.
Mr Kim also angered Mr Roh last month by pressing him to appoint a new
cabinet as part of an effort to improve his chances before the election.
Mr Kim was concerned that allegations of government vote-rigging in the
parliamentary election last March might tarnish his image and he wanted a
neutral caretaker cabinet to supervise the forthcoming poll.
But Mr Kim's demand backfired. While agreeing to a cabinet reshuffle, Mr Roh
also resigned from the DLP in the name of electoral 'fairness'. Mr Roh's
move was interpreted as a withdrawal of his support for Mr Kim.
This intensified factional squabbling within the DLP, culminating in Mr
Park's departure over the weekend.
Mr Park may join a nascent political party being formed by Mr Lee Jong-chan,
a popular Seoul MP who unsuccessfully stood against Mr Kim in the DLP
presidential convention in May.
Mr Park has discouraged speculation that he would be the presidential
candidate for the new political group. Instead, the nomination may be
offered to Mr Kang Young-hoon, prime minister between 1988 and 1990 and now
head of the South Korean Red Cross.
But there are doubts whether the new party can be organised in time for the
election. This has prompted proposals that Mr Park and the other
dissatisfied DLP members might merge their forces with Mr Chung and the UPP,
which is a well-financed and established organisation with 31 seats in the
299-member National Assembly.
Co-operation between Mr Chung and Mr Park would bring together two of South
Korea's most prominent industrialists and establish a precedent for business
playing an independent role in Korean politics.
Korean companies have traditionally accepted a subservient position to the
government, financially supporting the ruling party in return for political
favours.
Mr Chung broke that tradition by challenging the government with the
formation of the UPP. The political revolt staged by Mr Park confirms that
the nation's businessmen are aggressively seeking a more equal partnership
with government.
Mr Park has reportedly met with Mr Chung at least three times recently to
discuss a political alliance. But the former Posco chairman wants Mr Chung,
who is now a distant third in the opinion polls, to step down in favour of
another candidate. Mr Chung so far appears determined to remain the UPP
candidate.
