FT  04 JAN 92 / Washington budget battle begins
THE battle over the future of the budget agreement that has curbed US
government spending since 1990 opened yesterday as the US Congress returned
to Washington for its first session of 1992.
President George Bush said he saw 'room for some manoeuvring' within the
limits imposed by the budget pact, although he wanted to preserve the
ceiling on overall spending.
In Congress, meanwhile, leading Democrats called for an end to the budget
agreement's spending curbs to allow radical measures to stimulate economic
growth.
These opening shots foreshadow a battle in earnest when Mr Bush announces
his plans for an economic growth package on January 28 and in the 1993
budget he is due to propose in February.
In a television interview due to be broadcast last night, he said cuts in
defence spending could be used to increase domestic spending or to reduce
the federal budget deficit.
The 1990 budget places separate caps on domestic, defence and foreign
discretionary spending, and forbids any transfer of funds from one category
to another. However, these separate caps are due to expire in the 1994
budget, allowing money to be shifted from defence to domestic spending.
Mr Bush, who is visiting Singapore as part of a 12-day Far East trip, said
he wanted to live within the caps, but there were ways to juggle spending
among the different categories, although this would require new legislation.
While the budget agreement already programmes a 6 per cent reduction in
defence spending to Dollars 295bn (Pounds 162bn) in the 1993 budget, the
administration is now considering cutting Dollars 50bn more from defence
spending over the next five years.
In Congress, meanwhile, Senator Paul Sarbanes, chairman of the joint
economic committee, and Senator Jim Sasser, chairman of the Senate budget
committee, called for a package including federal grants to local government
in order to pull the economy out of recession.
Mr Sasser said that unlike previous recessions, where the government had
provided a fiscal stimulus, this recession was being prolonged by fiscal
contraction at all levels of government which he described as 'de facto
Hooverism'.
'Getting this economy back on its feet is a condition precedent to getting
the deficit under control. We have got to have a short-term recovery before
we can have long-term fiscal health,' he said.
His counterpart in the House of Representatives, Congressman Leon Panetta,
is now almost alone in attempting to preserve the discipline of the budget
agreement.
Mr Panetta warned recently that although the federal budget deficit is
likely to fall from a peak of Dollars 362bn in the current fiscal year to
Dollars 179bn in 1996, it will grow again to Dollars 335bn by 2001 under the
influence of slow long-term economic growth, rising medical costs and the
lingering debt service cost of cleaning up failed Savings and Loans and
banks.
