FT  28 SEP 92 / Prowse failed to pay Pounds 200,000 to pension fund
KEITH PROWSE, the ticket, travel and hospitality company which collapsed in
September last year, failed to pay pension contributions worth more than
Pounds 200,000 in the five months before it passed into receivership.
Problems in identifying the missing money and a series of legal wrangles
over the pension fund have meanwhile prevented more than 300 Keith Prowse
employees from transferring their benefits elsewhere or gaining information
about their value more than 12 months later.
GRE, the insurance company which manages the pension monies through one of
its investment policies, has now received payments of Pounds 211,327 from
the government's redundancy fund to fill the gap caused by the lack of
employee and employer contributions from Keith Prowse last year.
The money was received after months of work in collating company records and
waiting for actuarial assessments of the size of the deficit in the pension
fund.
The pension fund was controlled by Keith Prowse, not managed by an
independent trustee.
The directors of the company at the time of the collapse were Mr Paul Burns,
Mr Devinder Anand and Mr Ranjit Anand.
Mr Malcolm Shierson, one of the receivers at Grant Thornton, the accountancy
firm, said he had already submitted the 'D-form' required by the Department
of Trade and Industry on the conduct of directors in the circumstances
surrounding an insolvency. He would not say what it contained.
He said it was quite common for companies to fail to pay pension fund
contributions in the months before a collapse, because the fund was 'always
an easy creditor not to pay'.
Meanwhile, Grant Thornton has recently begun the process of applying to the
court for the appointment of an independent trustee to take responsibility
for the pension fund.
Some Keith Prowse employees have complained about the delay in appointing a
trustee and with the lack of information of the state of the pension funds
they have been given.
Grant Thornton says that it had no power to act as pension fund trustee
itself and had delayed its court application on advice from Allen &amp; Overy,
its legal advisers, while the full details of position of the pension fund
were clarified.
Ms Ann Hearn, head of Grant Thornton pensions consultancy service, said the
1990 Social Security Act - which requires pension funds to appoint
independent trustees - covered all schemes constituted by trust deed, but
that the Prowse scheme was constituted instead by a board resolution and so
was not covered.
She said the firm was under no obligation to act on behalf of the pensioners
in appointing a trustee and could not under UK insolvency legislation act as
a trustee itself.
She said Grant Thornton was handling a number of similar cases of insolvent
companies which had no trust deed and no independent pension fund trustees,
which she believed highlighted the need for a change in the law to close the
loophole.
