FT  25 FEB 92 / UK Company News: The man from Del Monte, he say 'Float my
fruit' - Roland Rudd talks to Leon Allen about his planned Pounds 450m
flotation of the canned food company
DEL MONTE is about to be floated on the London Stock Exchange. The question
is, which Del Monte? Five different companies use the brand name.
The one in question is Del Monte Foods International, which is preparing for
a Pounds 450m flotation.
Mr Leon Allen, chairman, says brand recognition is so high in Europe that
whenever he goes through passport control customs officials cannot resist
the quip: 'So you're the man from Del Monte'.
As it happens, he is. The four other Del Monte companies are not. But the
retail investor, who will be asked to stump up for shares in Del Monte
Foods, could be forgiven for being a little confused.
So first the history.
In February 1989 RJR Nabisco, the US food and tobacco group which
exclusively owned the Del Monte name, was bought by the US buy-out
specialists, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts for Dollars 25bn (Pounds 14.2bn).
KKR broke up Del Monte into two parts: fresh fruit and produce.
It sold the fresh fruit to Polly Peck International in September 1989 for
Dollars 875m.
And in January 1990 it sold Del Monte's produce business to a private US
consortium led by Merrill Lynch for Dollars 1.54bn. The US consortium named
its Del Monte business the Del Monte Corporation.
What followed can only be described as the proliferation of the Del Monte
name. Since the Merrill Lynch-led consortium had mainly financed its
acquisition through debt it was keen to divest itself of much of its
newly-acquired business.
The Del Monte Corporation immediately sold the rights to its name in the Far
East to Kikkoman Corporation of Japan for Dollars 110m.
In March 1990 DMC sold the Hawaiian Punch fruit drinks brand to Proctor and
Gamble for Dollars 150m - but without giving the man from Del Monte another
corporate face. Proctor and Gamble was only interested in the Hawaiian Punch
and did not want the Del Monte brand name to market the fruit drinks.
DMC's European juice and tinned fruit business was next to go, as a
management buy-out backed by Charterhouse, the UK merchant bank, for Dollars
375m in May 1990.
It is this company which is about to be floated on the London Stock
Exchange, and which has exclusive rights to the man from Del Monte dressed
in his cream suit and panama hat.
Mr Allen's Del Monte Foods International has expanded throughout Europe and
developed a worldwide business which operates in 35 countries.
A joint venture between DMFI, DMC and Kikkoman's Del Monte Far East gave
life to one last Del Monte company called Del Monte's Philippines Inc
(DMPI).
But the only confusion Mr Allen has been concerned about is between his
company and Polly Peck International's Del Monte fresh fruit.
Last year DMFI took full page adverts in national newspapers under the
slogan: 'The man from Del Monte he say Oi.' The message was that the man
from Del Monte, producing 'delicious canned fruit', was fed up with being
confused with Polly Peck's fresh fruit business.
He could get angry again if the Polly Peck administrators realise their
ambition of floating the fresh fruit businesses in the US later this year.
Del Monte Corporation in the US was sufficiently irritated by what it saw as
Polly Peck International's attempts to make the confusion worse that last
year to sue PPI Del Monte Tropical Fruit Company for breach of contract,
unfair competition and infringement of Del Monte's trademark rights.
Mr Allen has never threatened such drastic action.
But he has to contend with the possibility that a mistake by any of the
companies using the Del Monte name could harm his brand in Europe - though
he believes the threat of such contagion is small, given that the various
Del Monte companies operate in different geographical markets. 'I do not
believe there is much of a danger that we will be affected by what Del Monte
does in the US' he says.
But he nonetheless regards the Del Monte brand as his company's most
valuable asset. He led the buy-out for the reason that 'properties like the
Del Monte brand' do not become available very often.
He cites the results of the company's market research: when a sample of
consumers in the UK, Belgium. the Netherlands and Switzerland were asked to
list any food brand names they could think of, three quarters mentioned Del
Monte, a very high recognition rate. More than half of those polled in
DMFI's other main European countries recognised its brand name.
The brand strength is sustained by unusually high expenditure on television
advertising and marketing. Marketing costs were Pounds 9m in 1989, the year
before the buy-out, and have risen to Pounds 24m this year.
As a result, DMFI is the number one or two leading canned fruit and beverage
brand in 12 European countries. About 90 per cent of its goods are market
leaders.
'We believe our track record speaks for itself. We have a story to tell that
investors are going to understand.'
The strategy appears to have paid dividends. While other big buy-outs of the
last few years have struggled to hit their financial targets, DMFI's profits
have risen rapidly. In the year to November 1991, its pre-tax profits rose
24 per cent to Pounds 36.5m.
The company is not making any forecast for the year ending November 1992.
But it is likely to exceed 1991's profits, which is why Mr Allen is hopeful
that while there might be more than one company with his brand name, retail
and institutional investors will recognise that there is only one man from
Del Monte.
