FT  13 AUG 92 / Bush interview underlines rift over abortion
THE US Republican party's divisions over abortion were underlined on Tuesday
night when President George Bush expressed much less hard-line opposition to
it than does his party's platform committee.
In a television interview, Mr Bush was asked a similar question to that put
to Vice-President Dan Quayle last month: What advice would he give his
grand-daughter, should she become pregnant and want an abortion?
Like Mr Quayle, who was subsequently 'corrected' by his wife, Mr Bush
responded that, although he was offended by the very idea of abortion and
would try to talk his grand-daughter out of it, the decision ultimately was
hers and he would stand by her.
Mr Bill Clinton, the Democratic presidential candidate and a believer in
freedom of reproductive choice, said he understood Mr Bush's position 'as a
grand-father'. Other Democrats criticised it, charging that Mr Bush and Mr
Quayle seemed to want rights for their own families that would be denied to
others by a ban on abortion.
The president's comments, although repeatedly qualified by his campaign
aides after the interview was broadcast, is in sharp contrast with both the
sentiments and actions expressed by the party committee, preparing the
platform for the Republican convention next week in Houston, and with many
of Mr Bush's public pronouncements on the issue.
The committee overwhelmingly voted that the platform should again contain,
as it has since 1980, a demand for a constitutional amendment banning
abortion. It did so after an emotional debate in which many delegates
recounted personal experiences with the consequences of abortion.
Many demanded there should be no exemptions to an outright ban, even in
cases where pregnancy was the result of rape or incest.
Republican pro-choice advocates, increasingly vocal but outnumbered on the
committee by the pro-life movement, conceded there was little chance of
forcing a floor debate at the convention. This can now only be achieved if a
majority of the delegates from six states sign a motion to this effect.
However, a Washington Post poll of Republican delegates found 55 per cent
opposing a constitutional ban and only 28 per cent in favour.
Elsewhere, the debate over 'family values' continued to rage. In California,
the American Bar Association convention abandoned its previous neutrality
and passed a motion pledging to fight any laws restricting the
constitutional right to an abortion.
Mr Quayle attacked the ABA, charging that the country's trial lawyers were
'in the pocket' of Mr Clinton. The convention earlier had given an award to
Professor Anita Hill, whose charges of sexual harassment against Judge
Clarence Thomas, now in the Supreme Court, gripped the nation last year. Mr
Quayle asserted that most Americans believed Judge Thomas, not Professor
Hill.
In Washington, the Senate passed a family leave bill, providing up to 12
weeks of unpaid leave, but not for companies with fewer than 50 workers.
This controversial measure is likely to attract a presidential veto.
Congressman Ben Nighthorse Campbell won, on Tuesday, the Senate Democratic
primary in Colorado. If he beats the Republican Mr Terry Considine in
November, in what is predicted to be a close race, he will be the first
full-blooded American Indian in the Senate.
