FT  23 APR 92 / Chances of US rescue for Ravenscraig appear slim: Martin
Dickson assesses the significance of a visit by steelmaker Nucor to the
Scottish plant
AFLICKER of hope for saving the doomed Ravenscraig steelworks sparked in
Scotland this week at the news that a team from Nucor, arguably the most
successful US steel company of the past two decades, has been casting an eye
over the complex.
Nucor, which has pioneered the use of a cost-effective new steel-making
technology called thin-stab casting, is one of the lowest cost manufacturers
of steel in the world. It is the leader of the US 'mini-mills' - producers
which have undercut the large, integrated steel manufacturers in many
markets through the use of scrap metal and electric-arc furnace technology.
But while its trip to Scotland demonstrates the company's interest in
international expansion, the chances of a deal to save Ravenscraig seem
slim.
The team has been saying little, as have British Steel and Scottish
Enterprise, the government agency entrusted with marketing the Ravenscraig
site. But Mr Ken Iverson, chairman of Nucor, said the aim was to see whether
Ravenscraig might provide a suitable site for a new thin-slab plant,
producing sheet steel for both the British and Continental markets.
He added that if Nucor did decide such a project were feasible, it would
want to find some other partner to take a majority stake. Nucor would have a
minority role, although it would be substantially involved in both training
and technology transfer.
Industry analysts say the company has been looking at ways of expanding
outside the US. But Mr Christopher Plummer of Wefa, a Philadelphia-based
forecasting group, says: 'Asia-Pacific is probably top of their list, and
even there the strategy appears to involve minority stakes in joint
ventures, with Nucor pro-viding technical assistance.' Thin-slab casting
involves forming molten steel into slabs just two inches thick, using a new
type of tunnel mould. The slabs are then immediately compressed into even
thinner finished steel.
The process is much quicker and less capital-intensive than traditional
steel-making. However steel now made with the new technique is more suitable
for the lower-grade end of the sheet market, and not for more demanding
areas such as car-body panels. Mr Plummer estimates that Nucor's costs of
steelmaking using the technique are up to Dollars 100m (Pounds 56.4m) lower
than those of the integrated US manufacturers.
The technique is starting to be introduced to Europe. An Italian mini-mill
group opened the Europe's first thin-slab mill last year, and Dutch and
German companies may follow suit. But construction of a facility at
Ravenscraig would face obstacles. They include:
Opposition from British Steel, which is unlikely to relish competition from
a low-cost rival in its own backyard. Nucor would also find British Steel
and other efficient European manufacturers tougher competition than it has
faced so far in the US, adds Mr Plummer. 'In the UK, Nucor would have a very
marginal cost advantage over British Steel,' he says. Problems in finding
suitable investors for a new facility. Since Nucor would have a minority
role in any new company, a well-financed joint-venture partner, presumably
with substantial experience of the steel industry, would have to step into
the breach.
The capital costs of a new plant. Thin-slab technology may be cheaper than
traditional integrated facilities, but the sums involved are still large for
a cash-strapped industry such as steel. Energy and raw materials costs. For
the thin-slab process to work in the most cost-effective way, it needs to be
fed with relatively inexpensive supplies of molten metal. That in turn
depends on the local electricity costs and the price and availability
locally of scrap metal.
If scrap were not readily available for Ravenscraig, Nucor might be able to
get raw material using a new method which eliminates the need for costly
blast furnaces, although this would push up the capital costs and would be
dependent on the price of gas.
All this adds up to an extremely complex set of financial and political
hurdles. Unless the Nucor team decides immediately that the project is not
feasible, it will take some time, and much intricate negotiation, for
Ravenscraig to discover whether there might yet be life after death.
SENIOR executives of Nucor yesterday completed their two-day visit to
British Steel's complex at Ravenscraig, near Motherwell, where they are
exploring the possibility of establishing a steel-production operation when
British Steel closes the plant in September, James Buxton writes.
Yesterday, after meeting union leaders at Ravenscraig, the Nucor team
travelled to Hunterston on the Firth of Clyde to inspect British Steel's
ore-handling terminal. The Nucor team is expected to remain in Britain until
Sunday.
The visit is at the invitation of Scottish Enterprise, the government
development body, following an initiative by Mr Jeremy Bray, Labour MP for
Motherwell South. The visit has been played down by Nucor to avoid unduly
raising hopes of a reprieve for at least some of the 1,200 jobs due to be
lost by the plant's closure.
