FT  11 DEC 92 / Survey of Ecuador (8): Potential earnings enormous - The
government's plans aim to turn tourism into the country's biggest industry
With the intent of forging tourism into the number one economic activity of
the country, the nearly four-month-old government of president Sixto Duran
Ballen is etching out, for the first time in Ecuador's history, a long-term
development plan for the industry.
An indication of his commitment is that the president has formed a ministry
of tourism and information which is to revise applicable laws, promote
tourism abroad and co-ordinate the industry's development.
Tourism ranks fourth after petroleum, bananas, and shrimp in the generation
of foreign currency. In 1991 the tourist industry itself generated nearly
Dollars 200m in direct revenues, but its impact on the rest of the economy
is estimated to be three times as big. In the same year approximately
380,000 visitors came to the country, of which 40 per cent came from
Colombia, 18 per cent from the US, 17 per cent from Europe and 11 per cent
from Peru.
According to CETUR, the government's tourist agency and now technical arm of
the ministry, Ecuador's tourism industry in 1991 had a lodging capacity of
58,000 travellers and employed approximately 35,000 workers. Of the 1,400
hotels, hostels and pensions to choose from in the country only roughly a
dozen can be considered first class.
The biggest tourist attraction in Ecuador has been and continues to be the
Galapagos Archipelago. More than 40,000 visitors came to see exotic
penguins, the famous giant tortoises or tree-sized sunflowers last year.
Boat cruise operators are putting pressure on the government to increase the
permissible number of visitors.
Yet the Charles Darwin Foundation, charged with conducting research and
aiding in environmental protection, warns that the islands' delicate
ecosystem is already being overtaxed by the number of visitors.
However, the potential for tourism to grow in mainland Ecuador is enormous
say industry analysts and travel entrepreneurs. 'Ecuador has more', has been
the slogan with which the private sector has sought to promote areas other
than the Galapagos.
Ecuador's immense geographical and cultural diversity indeed make it a
traveller's paradise. Beaches, snow-capped volcanoes, Indian markets, quaint
colonial towns and Amazon rainforest can all be reached in little more than
an hour's journey from Quito.
A favourable exchange rate makes Ecuador an inexpensive country for most
foreigners. In addition, the country's political stability gives it an
advantage over its neighbours Peru and Colombia, where the governments are
still battling against leftist insurgents.
'The potential has always been there,' says Mr Eduardo Proano president of
Metropolitan Touring, Ecuador's largest tour operator. 'But in the past the
government's efforts to promote tourism abroad have been minimal. Tourism
has been largely a private-sector activity.'
According to Mr Patrick Barrera of the private sector trade association
Feprotur, the key to developing Ecuador's tourist potential is to further
engage in eco-tourism - the branch of the industry that offers the country's
natural beauty and diversity, while simultaneously protecting it.
Ecuador has already been practicing organised eco-tourism not only in the
Galapagos but also in the Amazon region. Metropolitan Touring has been
operating a luxury boat cruise on the Napo and Aguarico rivers for 18 years
and now offers a range of holiday packages to the area.
As well as allowing visitors to view the unspoiled flora and fauna of the
Amazon jungle in Cuyabeno national reserve in north-eastern Ecuador, nature
guides on board educate tourists on the importance of conserving the
wildlife they have come to see.
Eco-tourism not only provides local communities with an alternative to
farming and hunting, but the fee that foreigners have to pay to enter the
national parks helps finance the park management, which is still inadequate.
How tourism affects the behaviour of indigenous groups in these remote areas
remains to be seen. Yet in Cuyabeno the Cofan tribe, which illustrates the
Amazon's medicinal plants and sells handicrafts to tourists, seems to be
benefiting from the influx of visitors.
One of the areas that the government and Metropolitan Touring are developing
for eco-tourism is the national park Machalilla, on Ecuador's central coast.
Machalilla not only includes a tropical dry forest, a cloud forest and the
island La Plata with bird life like that of the Galapagos islands - the bird
count actually exceeds that of Galapagos - but it also harbours
archeological sights of one of the oldest civilisations in the Americas.
With the help of a three-year development plan designed by Feprotur, the
government seeks to provide the necessary infrastructure to allow organised
tours to operate in the park.
According to the plan the park will be spared grand-scale hotel complexes
which might endanger the delicate balance of the ecosystem. Rather the
facilities - including visitors centres and hiking paths - are to blend in
with the environment as much as possible. Negotiations to finance the
project are under way with private and institutional investors, including
foreign ones.
Not only is eco-tourism a reasonable strategy because of the type of natural
resources Ecuador offers, it is also reasonable because of its low cost and
relatively short implementation time. The plan to develop Machalilla Park,
for example, is estimated to cost Dollars 150,000. With these types of
projects Mr Carlos Solorzano, the sub-secretary of tourism, expects positive
results in the short to medium range.
With the reform of the foreign investment law under way, Mr Solorzano hopes
the tourist industry will attract enough capital to develop other potential
tourists sites, especially in the hotel sector. The government is also
exploring the possibility of converting the country's foreign debt into what
would amount to 'debt-for-tourism swaps'. Such financial mechanisms have
already been employed in Mexico and Venezuela.
One of the main activities of the newly created ministry is to promote
Ecuador as a tourist destination abroad. According to Mr Solorzano the
government intends to collaborate closely with Feprotur, which already
operates a promotional office in Miami.
Yet the success of eco-tourism in the long run will depend on the ability of
the government to manage the diverging demands that exist on Ecuador's
natural resources. Miners, loggers and settlers are invading parks and other
protected areas at an alarming rate, thus endangering the very asset of
eco-tourism - the country's ecological diversity and natural beauty.
