FT  14 NOV 92 / US closer to special prosecutor for Iraqgate
THE BUSH administration could move a step closer on Monday towards
appointing a special prosecutor to investigate allegations of criminal
wrongdoing by senior US government officials in the spreading Iraqgate
affair.
Mr Frederick Lacey, the retired New Jersey judge who has been investigating
the issue for the US Department of Justice, has told the Bush administration
that he found 'sufficiently specific and credible' allegations to extend his
inquiry.
Mr Lacey, who was appointed on October 16, made this known to Mr William
Barr, the US attorney general, on October 26, a week before the presidential
election. But he only disclosed yesterday his desire to extend the inquiry.
Mr Barr, who last summer rejected a demand from the US House of
Representatives' judiciary committee to appoint a special prosecutor, has
been facing uproar in Congress since it emerged last month that officials at
the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and Department of Justice deliberately
concealed intelligence reports from federal prosecutors in Atlanta.
The prosecutors were investigating the illegal loans of more than Dollars
5bn (Pounds 3.3bn) to Iraq from the Atlanta branch of Italy's Banca
Nazionale del Lavoro, which helped Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein's weapons
projects.
Mr Barr will report to the judiciary committee on Monday and announce that
he has given Mr Lacey until December 8 to make a final recommendation on
whether a special prosecutor should be appointed. . Officials said the
deadline would come just a week before the statute that authorises such
special prosecutors is due to expire, a law that dates back to the Watergate
era. .
The US Justice Department has cleared FBI director William Sessions of
allegations that he may have broken the law by trying to evade local taxes
and making personal long-distance telephone calls from his office, and
decided against the appointment of an independent special counsel, the FBI
said yesterday.
West's guilty role, Weekend FT Page I
