FT  20 OCT 92 / Survey of World Car Industry (16): Quiet man with the
world's hardest job / Profile of Jack Smith of GM
JACK SMITH arguably has the hardest job in the world automobile industry.
As president and chief operating officer of General Motors Mr Smith faces
the formidable task of returning the company's core North American
automotive operations to the black, and quickly.
Mr Smith was catapulted into this position last April at the age of 54 when
GM's board staged a coup, which was prompted by its unhappiness over the
relatively slow pace of change under Mr Robert Stempel, the group's
chairman, and Mr Lloyd Reuss, the then president. Mr Stempel's wings were
clipped and Mr Smith, the then head of international operations, took over
from Mr Reuss.
Mr Smith, who was passed over for the presidency two years ago when Mr Reuss
became chairman, now has the task of slimming down GM's bloated bureaucracy,
closing inefficient or redundant plants, rationalising its model range and
cutting its cost of parts by making its suppliers more efficient.
But Mr Smith is no stranger to corporate turnarounds. He made his mark in
Europe in the mid-1980s when he turned around GM's operations there from
heavy losses into one of the corporation's most profitable businesses - and
the way he went about that provides a case study in the rapid change now
engulfing GM in North America.
A quiet, unassuming man who still speaks with the accent of his native
Massachusetts, Mr Smith has a reputation for decisiveness and a willingness
to delegate - an important factor in an industry which is learning the
importance of 'empowering employees' to take on more responsibilities.
His initial expertise in GM was in finance but by proving himself as a
successful operating manager, he bridged the traditional gulf in the motor
industry between 'bean counters' and 'product men'.
His European success was due in part to fortuitous circumstances, including
strong economic growth and Japanese import restraints, yet he also made
several bold, crucial changes to the way GM operated on the continent.
First, GM did not increase its manufacturing capacity at a time of rising
demand but instead worked its existing plants much harder.
Mr Smith persuaded European unions to work three shifts, around the clock,
rather than the traditional two eight hour sessions.
In an interview with the Financial Times last December Mr Smith recalled:
'One of the lessons we learnt in Europe is that there is a lot of room to
increase capacity in an existing plant through innovative shift
arrangements, through concepts such as running through breaks.'
GM has just begun three-shifting at one North American plant and will
certainly want to extend the practice when the US market recovers. Another
extremely important change was his successful drive to reduce GM Europe's
materials costs. The company diversified its supplier base away from its
heavy dependence on Germany, to reflect the balance of its sales across the
continent.
It also began offering suppliers long term contracts and 'advance
contracts', the latter being issued well ahead of a car going into
production, to tie suppliers more closely into the manufacturing process.
And it began a process of advising suppliers on ways to improve their
efficiency so GM could reap the benefits in reduced costs.
All these initiatives were under the control of Mr J Ignacio Lopez de
Arriortua, GM's head of purchasing in Europe, and one of Mr Smith's first
moves on taking over the presidency was to appoint Mr Lopez as head of
purchasing worldwide, with a particular mandate to shake up North America.
Mr Smith also relocated GM Europe's head office to neutral Switzerland. This
was important, he said, because it allowed 'all the plants to work together.
They don't think one is being given special consideration.'
Following April's coup he was quick to set up the head office of his newly
created North American Operations in Warren, a suburb of Detroit some 10
miles from the GM bureaucracy at corporate headquarters.
Another important factor in the European turnaround was a strong run of
products which went down well in the market. That will be harder to fix
quickly in the US, given the long lead times needed to bring new models into
production, but GM does have some winners in its current line-up, notably
the small Saturn car and Cadillac's Seville and Eldorado models.
But perhaps the greatest challenge Mr Smith faces is bringing a deeply
suspicious United Auto Workers union along with the cuts in manpower and
plants necessary for GM to become an efficient producer.
He managed it in Europe, but will need all his quiet persistence to bring it
off at home.
