FT  03 JUN 92 / Danes say no to Maastricht Treaty: Denmark heads for
sidelines of Community
DENMARK'S narrow rejection of the treaty will have serious consequences for
its membership of the European Community.
By turning their backs on the planned evolution of the EC Danes have
isolated their country from the mainstream of European development. As a
result Denmark will have no influence on the future of the Community but
will have to abide by decisions taken by the other members.
The voters have dealt an unexpected body blow to their political leaders.
Only a few weeks ago the Folketing (parliament) voted 130-25 to ratify the
treaty.
'There are 130 members of the Folketing who must now sit down and think how
it is that they have distanced themselves so far from their voters,' said Mr
Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, foreign minister.
But it was not just the politicians who supported Maastricht. The main
industrial organisations, trade unions and the powerful agricultural lobby
all threw their weight behind the 'Yes to Maastricht' campaign, and there
was near-universal support for the treaty in the press.
Only two parties, the left-wing Socialist People's party and the populist
right-wing Progress party, were against the treaty, but they were supported
by an exotic coalition of environmentalists, feminists, left-wing academics
and ultra-nationalists. Despite a lack of resources, these groups touched a
nerve in the population.
Although Denmark joined the EC 20 years ago after a referendum which
approved membership by two to one, and in 1986 backed the Single European
Act by a comfortable majority, these votes were mainly out of economic
self-interest. When asked to vote for European union, a common foreign and
defence policy, and the rest of the Maastricht treaty, Danes drew back from
such a potentially far-reaching commitment.
Fears about national independence have been the overwhelming factor
influencing the No vote, opinion surveys showed. While many of the elderly,
with memories of the Second World War, feared German domination, many
younger voters, especially women, foresaw with distaste the development of a
European army in which their children might one day have to fight.
These emotional arguments turned out to be stronger than the appeal to
Danish material self-interest, despite a vigorous but belated campaign by
the Danish labour movement to persuade its supporters that a No vote would
mean more unemployment, falling investment and higher interest rates.
The country now faces a period of economic uncertainty, which could threaten
its economic stability at a time when the economy is one of the strongest in
Europe. In the worst case, Danish officials in Brussels have suggested,
Denmark could be excluded from the Common Agricultural Policy, which has
brought big economic benefits to Denmark, a big exporter of agricultural
products to non-member countries.
The consequences are likely to be serious for the rest of the Nordic region.
In Sweden, public opinion is now evenly divided over the country's
membership application and the narrow result in Denmark will encourage the
anti-EC forces. In Finland, opinion appears to be more solid for the
country's EC membership application, but this could also begin to change
now, while in Norway, a majority is already hostile to any membership
application.
