FT  27 OCT 92 / Legal pressure on pit closures raised
TRADE unions moved yesterday to build on public opposition to the pit
closures by preparing further legal action against British Coal and planning
protest demonstrations throughout the country.
The Trades Union Congress had its request for a meeting with Mr John Major
turned down, but the prime minister instead offered a meeting with Mr
Michael Heseltine to discuss pit closures and the wider employment
situation.
Lawyers representing the National Union of Mineworkers and the Nacods pit
supervisors' union said they would apply for an injunction against British
Coal unless senior management gave an undertaking by noon today confirming
that it would resume both production and development at all of the 10 pits
under immediate threat.
In a letter signed by the NUM's solicitors, Stephens Innocent, the union
states that the ceasing of production at the pits 'seriously prejudices and
indicates prejudgment in any consultative process'.
Lawyers argue that by ceasing production at seven of the 10 pits already and
allegedly putting pressure on miners to take redundancy, British Coal is
breaking an earlier undertaking given to the High Court.
The Union of Democratic Mineworkers has also threatened British Coal with an
injunction unless it gives a similar undertaking by noon today. The union
challenged the economics and legality of ceasing coal production in a
separate action begun at the end of last week.
Yesterday's legal moves came as TUC leaders in an emergency subcommittee
considered ways of capitalising on Sunday's mass rally in London against the
pit closures, which drew an estimated 200,000 protesters.
While the emphasis still seems to be on the economic case, some union
officials argued that the momentum of the campaign should not be lost. The
TUC is expected to organise a series of regional rallies in the coming weeks
to reinforce its role as a broadly based lobbying organisation.
British Coal said last night that hundreds of miners had agreed to take
voluntary redundancy but denied they had done so under pressure. It also
restated that nothing was being done to damage the fabric of the mines
irrevocably.
