FT  11 APR 92 / World Stock Markets: Firmer crude prices boost European oils
 -Until recently, investors worldwide were bailing out of the sector
Fears of UN sanctions against Libya and renewed friction between Iran and
Iraq have lifted crude prices above Dollars 19 a barrel this week, giving a
much needed boost to European oil shares.
Until only recently, depressed oil prices and a February meeting of the
Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (Opec) that failed to agree
substantial production cuts to support the market, prompted investors to
bail out of oil shares worldwide.
The malaise has been particularly marked in the UK, but shareholder
disaffection with underperforming oil companies has spread to Europe where
most oil stocks suffered a drop in share prices.
Goldman Sachs has reviewed 28 worldwide oil companies to find that only
three have outperformed their respective local stock markets so far this
year. Repsol, the Spanish oil company, has outperformed the Madrid market by
10 per cent in the first three months of the year, Norsk Hydro made a
relative outperformance of 14 per cent in Oslo, and Burmah Castrol, the
UK-based lubricants and chemicals group, has beaten the FTSE All-Share index
by 15 per cent.
Mr Christopher Buckley, oil analyst at Goldman, believes that Repsol
continues to offer strong upside potential. 'The company has a dominant
position in the Spanish market which is a growth market for petrol. The
company also has an attractive stake in the country's natural gas market.'
While the Spanish petroleum market is being opened to more competition, Mr
Buckley does not believe this will adversely affect Repsol's margins since
it owns such a major part of the country's infrastructure.
In addition, Elf Aquitaine, the French oil and chemicals group, and British
Petroleum, the UK-based oil major, have invested a lot of money to gain a
footing in the Spanish market and are unlikely to initiate a price war.
The two French oil companies, Elf and Total, are at the top of many analysts
'buy' lists since both have been breaking free from domestic bureaucracy and
aggressively expanding overseas in the past two years. Both have ambitions
to rank among the top five international majors by the end of the decade.
Elf recently became the first western oil company to conclude purely
production-sharing contracts with Russia and Kazakhstan where it will be
able to drill for oil without a local partner. . The venture could add as
much as 20 per cent to its oil reserves by 1995.
An indication of Elf's popularity came in mid-March when the French
government sold a 2.3 per cent stake in the company to domestic and overseas
investors. The offering was three times over-subscribed in spite of the
company's share price weakening slightly in advance of the sale.
Total's shares have picked up in recent weeks after showing a flat
performance against the Paris market earlier this year. A stock split in
February and hopes of improved earnings for last year have contributed to
Total's stronger share price. This week the company lived up to market
expectations by announcing a 22 per cent increase in its 1991 dividend to
FFr7, justified by the 43 per cent rise in attributable profit to FFr5.81bn
(Dollars 1.1bn).
Total, which has more exposure to refining than Elf, is also looking to
increase its reserves rapidly over the next couple of years. It has a 20 per
cent involvement in the major Cusiana field in Colombia which has been
estimated to contain over 1bn barrels of oil.
As Elf and Total enter the big league as major international players, other
companies such as Austria's OMV and Belgium's Petrofina are focusing their
strategies closer to home.
OMV has international ambitions and two years ago bought a portfolio of
assets in the North Sea, but its international exploration business remains
a lot smaller than its local refining and marketing operations. The company
is using its strong central European base to move into the newly-opening
Eastern European petrol market in Hungary and Czechoslovakia.
These ventures are unlikely to yield much return in the short term and the
company's chemicals business remains depressed by the downturn in the
industry. But both could provide good long-term growth.
Petrofina has focused on its local markets and achieved a high degree of
integration between its oil refining and chemicals business. It has also
built up a very strong marketing network. 'But it has the feel of being a
very soundly run company without much short-term sparkle,' says Mr Buckley.
Indeed, many of Europe's oil companies could lack a short-term spark until
there is evidence of a sustained recovery in the oil price and improvement
in refining margins. For that, investors will have to look more to the next
Opec meeting on April 24 than to the companies themselves.
