FT  30 JUN 92 / For want of a symbol an aircraft was lost: Germany's
threatened withdrawal from the EFA project presents difficult options for
its partners
The future of the European Fighter Aircraft (EFA) project is hanging on a
German parliamentary party vote today to allocate an additional Pounds 34m
to the Pounds 20bn programme.
A decision to reject the extra funding could rapidly lead to German
withdrawal from the four-nation project. The political, strategic and
industrial implications would be huge.
At stake are thousands of jobs in Britain, Germany, Italy and Spain. In the
UK alone, British Aerospace estimates that EFA could create up to 100,000
jobs, directly and through indirect employment. Military aircraft industries
in each of the four countries would be threatened with repercussions on
commercial aerospace. Industrial collaboration on a European scale would be
undermined as would Nato's longer-term air defence requirements.
In theory, a no vote would not automatically end German participation in the
programme, in which the German parliament has already committed DM5.85bn
(Pounds 2bn) to overall development costs.
In practice, a decision not to authorise an extra DM100m in the 1993 defence
budget for tooling investments to prepare for EFA production next year would
be interpreted as a sign of Germany's intention to abandon the project.
'The DM100m is a derisory amount of money but it would show Germany's
continued faith in the programme and remove the short-term uncertainties
surrounding EFA,' a British official said yesterday. However, he
acknowledged that the chances of a yes vote were slim.
Mr Volker Ruhe, the German defence minister, has vigorously campaigned
against EFA, proposing last week that the programme should be scrapped and
replaced with the development of a cheaper, lighter combat aircraft.
EFA's supporters in Germany have been fighting a fierce rearguard action to
keep the country in the project. But they remain outnumbered by its
opponents.
The issue, however, is by no means cut and dried. Even a no vote today will
leave several different options open for Germany and its three EFA partners.
The most unlikely but clearly best solution for Britain, Italy and Spain, as
well as for the German aerospace industry, would be a firm German commitment
to stay in the project. The alternatives include:
German withdrawal from the production phase of the fighter starting next
year, regarded as the worst option for the UK and the other EFA countries.
Although a pull-out would jeopardise the project, the UK believes the
programme could still be rescued. British Aerospace claims costs could be
held down to Pounds 21m-Pounds 23m per aircraft - the same level currently
envisaged - and at least 450 aircraft would be bought by the three remaining
countries. The programme's production break-even point is about 400 aircraft
and the partners expect additional export demand.
However, many in the industry, as well as senior Ministry of Defence
officials, fear that a German pull-out would have damaging psychological
repercussions in the other partner countries, raise serious questions about
European collaboration and increase the risk of a Spanish withdrawal.
Without Spanish participation, the viability of EFA as a two-nation
Anglo-Italian project would be in even graver doubt. It would also take at
least 18 months to reorganise the programme and partnership in the event of
a German withdrawal. Germany postpones a decision to participate in the EFA
production phase. This is regarded as the most likely outcome of today's
vote. The other partners favour the idea of maintaining some German
industrial participation in EFA to enable it to re-enter the programme at a
later date. This may give the government and Deutsche Aerospace more time to
swing the political mood in favour of the fighter.
The partners have also proposed changes in the EFA work-sharing arrangements
to cut costs, including the reduction of assembly lines and test sites to
make the programme more politically acceptable in Germany. However, some of
the industrial partners, especially subcontractors, fear that half-hearted
German participation would be the worst of all worlds. It would maintain
uncertainty over the project at a time when expensive commitments were
required on new production facilities.
The replacement of EFA with a cheaper, lighter aircraft. Mr Ruhe's proposal
to this effect has been dismissed by the three other countries as well as
Deutsche Aerospace as a non-starter. A smaller, lighter aircraft would have
lower operational capability, and carry less fuel and fewer weapons. It
would entail new airframe and engine designs. The UK estimates the
development of a new fighter would lead to a delay of at least eight years
in the programme and would ultimately cost about 20 per cent more than EFA.
Mr Ruhe's proposal to extend the collaboration to France or Sweden, or both,
also appears unrealistic. The smaller French Rafale fighter is being
designed essentially for French naval and ground-attack applications with an
air defence capability as a secondary role. The Swedish Gripen JAS-39 is a
single-engine fighter which would rule it out in Germany where the air force
is insisting on a twin-engine combat aircraft. Its speed is also a
shortcoming.
The off-the-shelf acquisition by Germany and conceivably by other EFA
partners of US or Russian alternatives. Potential purchases include the
McDonnell Douglas F-15, its planned successor, the Lockheed-Boeing-General
Dynamics F-22, or the Russian Mig-29, of which the German air force
inherited 24 after reunification. All serious alternatives to EFA have been
tested by the partners. Their studies, however, have shown that existing
aircraft on the market or derivatives of these aircraft cannot provide the
performance required for a modern fighter long after 2000 as cheaply as EFA.
Few would argue that the debate in Germany has been sensible and informed.
There has been little careful analysis in the German media, or in
parliament, of the price and capabilities of alternative combat aircraft.
There has been no serious questioning of the likely budget savings to be
made. The desire to abandon EFA is more a desire to destroy a symbol.
The belated realisation in the German defence lobby that the debate over EFA
was as good as lost has galvanised frantic activity in recent weeks. This
may yet succeed in buying a delay. But it cannot change the political
reality that Mr Ruhe so clearly perceives: EFA in the German popular mind is
part of an era of extravagant Cold war defence spending that has now past.
If he succeeds today in pushing a decision to axe German participation in
EFA through the parliamentary parties in the German government, he will be
responsible for what will arguably be the most popular decision taken by the
coalition since its re-election in 1990. But for the EFA programme, it may
not have been the fairest of trials.
