FT  07 MAR 92 / Kohl faces double challenge on Emu
THE German government yesterday faced a twin onslaught on its efforts to win
clear parliamentary approval for European economic and monetary union (Emu):
from the opposition Social Democrats (SPD) and the Bundesbank.
Responding to a groundswell of public concern about the prospect of 'losing
the D-Mark' in a future single European currency, the SPD revealed plans to
demand a full parliamentary debate and decision on Emu, before a single
currency is introduced - either in 1997 or 1999.
Mrs Heidemarie Wieczoreck-Zeul, the SPD spokesman on Europe, said the debate
should also consider whether the European Parliament had really been
'substantially strengthened' in its powers.
The move by the SPD, whose support for the EC treaties is essential to
obtain a two-thirds majority for the related changes in the constitution,
would be tantamount to giving the German Bundestag virtually the same
'opt-out' right as that obtained by Britain during the negotiations at
Maastricht.
It goes much further than the move already mooted in both houses of
parliament, the Bundestag and Bundesrat, that they should be given another
chance to 'take stock' of the treaties before the final phase of Emu -
without any power to stop the process.
Mrs Wieczoreck-Zeul said there must a declaration by the Bundestag, attached
to the ratification of the EC treaties, that there would be no 'automatic'
move from phase two to phase three of Emu.
The SPD tactics are likely to be finalised by a meeting of the party
leadership on Monday, but they do stop short of the outright rejection of
the EC treaties advocated by Mr Oskar Lafontaine, the deputy leader and
premier of the Saarland.
His hostile attitude was roundly criticised yesterday by many party members,
who remain overwhelmingly committed to the goal of greater European
integration.
Instead, the Bundestag would demand the right to reconsider whether the
convergence criteria for currency stability had been met by all
participating countries.
Meanwhile Mr Otmar Issing, a leading board member of the central bank,
yesterday said the Emu treaty might not provide adequate safeguards for
future monetary and price stability.
Mr Issing, head of the Bundesbank's economics division, said it was
'questionable' whether the rules on budget discipline would be strict enough
to ensure monetary stability.
'This aspect, and the question about the relationship between monetary union
and political union, should be dealt with more thoroughly at a later date,'
he said, implying, like the SPD, some need for re-negotiation.
Any such move would be fiercely opposed by the German government, whose
staunch defence of the treaty was spelt out on Thursday by Mr Horst Kohler,
state secretary in the Finance Ministry and Chancellor Helmut Kohl's leading
adviser on international economics.
Mr Issing also warned that it seemed 'almost impossible' for Italy, Greece,
Ireland and Belgium to comply with the rules on state debt and public sector
deficits, necessary to join Emu, 'in the foreseeable future'. That might
mean strong political pressure to relax the rules, thus endangering the
stability of the system.
