FT  10 APR 92 / FT Law Report: Court appoints substitute arbitrator
GRAZIELLA FERRAZ
Queen's Bench Division (Commercial Court): Mr Justice Hirst: March 27 1992
THE DEATH of an arbitrator appointed under an agreement providing for
reference to two arbitrators, does not entitle the party who appointed him
to appoint a new one in his place as would be the case on a reference to
three arbitrators, and the appropriate procedure is to apply to the court to
appoint a substitute.
Mr Justice Hirst so held when dismissing a claim by Rocco Giuseppe &amp; Figli
SpA, charterers of Graziella Ferraz, for a declaration that their
appointment of a replacement arbitrator in a claim against the defendant
shipowners, Tupinave, was valid under section 7(a) of the Arbitration Act
1950. The court made an order appointing a replacement arbitrator under
section 10(1)(b) of the Act.
Section 7 of the Arbitration Act 1950 provides: 'Where an arbitration
agreement provides that the reference shall be to two arbitrators, one to be
appointed by each party then . . . (a) if either of the appointed
arbitrators dies . . . the party who appointed him may appoint a new
arbitrator in his place . . .'
Section (10)(1)(b): 'If an appointed arbitrator . . . dies . . . the High
Court . . . may . . . appoint an arbitrator . . .'
HIS LORDSHIP said that by a charterparty on the New York Produce Exchange
form dated April 29 1083, Tupinave chartered Graziella Ferraz to Rocco
Giuseppe.
The arbitration clause provided that any dispute should be referred 'to
three persons at London one to be appointed by each of the parties hereto'.
Disputes having arisen between the parties, Mr John Potter was appointed
arbitrator on behalf of the charterers, and Mr Michael Mabbs on behalf of
the shipowners.
Those two arbitrators then appointed Captain Baskerville as third
arbitrator.
An oral hearing was held in June 1985, after which the arbitrators issued an
interim final award dated July 12 1985. They awarded that the shipowners
should pay the charterers 82m Italian lire in damages plus interest. They
stipulated that they made no order in respect of costs 'leaving it that the
parties can always, if they so wish, make application at a later date for
such an order'.
A number of attempts had been made by the charterers to agree costs with the
shipowners, but they had proved fruitless. Consequently, the charterers
wished to revert to the arbitrators to obtain a final award dealing with
costs.
Unfortunately, however, since the interim final award was issued Mr Potter
had died.
It was therefore necessary for another arbitrator for charterers to be
appointed in his place, to enable them to pursue their application for costs
before a properly constituted tribunal.
By letter dated November 16 1990, the charterers' solicitors invited Mr John
Besman, a well-known maritime arbitrator, to accept appointment in Mr
Potter's place. He accepted on November 19.
By the present originating summons the charterers sought a declaration that
Mr Besman's appointment was a valid appointment pursuant to section 7(a) of
the Arbitration Act 1950.
Section 7(a) provided that, where the arbitration agreement was for
reference 'to two arbitrators' and one died, the party who appointed him
might appoint another.
Appreciating possible pitfalls under section 7, the charterers also went
through the prescribed procedure under section 10 of the Act, which
empowered the court to appoint a substitute arbitrator.
Under section 10, if an appointed arbitrator died, any party might serve the
other with written notice to appoint, and if appointment was not made within
seven days of service the High Court might appoint an arbitrator.
The requisite notice under section 10 had been duly served on the shipowners
in Brazil.
Consequently, the originating summons sought in the alternative an order
pursuant to section 10(1)(b) that Mr Besman be appointed in Mr Potter's
place.
Leave to serve the originating summons out of the jurisdiction in Brazil was
granted on January 30 1992 and the summons was duly served. No
acknowledgement of service had been received and the shipowners did not
appear at the hearing.
As the arbitration clause provided for appointment of three arbitrators, the
difficulty in applying section 7(a) which was explicitly limited to cases
where the reference was to two arbitrators, was obvious.
In Re Smith and Services and Nelson &amp; Sons (1890) 25 QBD 545, where there
was a submission to three arbitrators, the Court of Appeal upheld a
concession that section 6 of the Arbitration Act 1889 (which was re-enacted
as section 7 of the 1950 Act) was inapplicable.
That was followed by Mr Justice Megaw in Marinos and Frangos v Dulien Steel
Products (1961) 2 Lloyd's Rep 192 in relation to a similar agreement.
He went on to hold that the provisions of section 9(1) of the 1950 Act as
they then stood, stipulating that an agreement for reference to three
arbitrators should have effect as if it provided for appointment of an
umpire, not a third arbitrator, brought the agreement back into section 7,
so that the agreement was to be treated as providing that the reference
should be to two arbitrators.
That avenue was no longer available to the charterers, because section 9 had
since been amended by the 1979 Act which repealed section 9(1) in relation
to any arbitration, such as the present, to which the 1979 Act applied.
The court must therefore regretfully conclude, in line with the view
expressed in Mustill &amp; Boyd, Commercial Arbitration, ed 2 page 187, that the
charterers were not entitled to invoke section 7 in the present case.
Accordingly, the declaration sought must be refused.
The charterers having gone through all the necessary steps under section 10,
and Mr Besman being a thoroughly suitable replacement for the late Mr
Potter, the court made the order sought under section 10(1)(b) that Mr
Besman be appointed to act as arbitrator in Mr Potter's place.
There was a lacuna in arbitration procedure worthy of rectification now that
further statutory amendments were under consideration. The drawbacks were
exemplified by the present case seeing that, in addition to the costs
incurred in relation to the originating summons itself, the charterers had
to undertake two long and expensive service processes in Brazil in order to
invoke section 10, rather than the very simple and inexpensive procedure
under section 7 which would have been available to them in a reference to
two arbitrators.
For the charterers: Christopher Butcher (Middleton Potts).
The shipowners did not appear.
