FT  09 JAN 92 / Mafia turnover put at Dollars 17bn a year as organised crime
spreads
ORGANISED crime in Italy is becoming an increasingly sophisticated business
with an annual turnover of L20,000bn (Dollars 17bn), according to a report
published by the private social and economic research institute, Censis.
The report does not distinguish between turnover and profits from criminal
activities. Nevertheless, the 283 page document is the most considered
attempt so far to analyse the growing economic impact of organised crime
which now generates the equivalent of almost 2 per cent of GDP, according to
Censis.
The report coincides with mounting public concern about organised crime
spreading throughout Italy and the apparent impunity of some 500 criminal
'families' dominated by the Sicilian Mafia, the Calabrian 'Ndrangheta and
the Naples Camorra.
Last Saturday a police inspector and his wife were gunned down in the
southern town of Lamezia Terme near Catanzaro, reportedly by hired assassins
of the Calabrian mafia. The assassination provoked 25,000 to demonstrate in
the town on Tuesday.
On Sunday night a bomb went off on the railway near Lecce, south of
Brindisi, narrowly missing the crowded Lecce-Milan express in what is seen
as muscle-flexing by local organised crime.
The Censis report, which excludes petty crime, estimates that L16,000bn is
generated from illicit activities, while a further L4,000bn comes from
operating in legitimate fields of business using criminal methods -
essentially in the field of obtaining public contracts.
The L3,700bn obtained by rigging public contracts accounts for almost 20 per
cent of total earnings and is exceeded in importance only by the manufacture
and sale of illicit drugs (heroin, cocaine and marijuana) valued at
L4,000bn.
Theft accounts for a significant L3,700bn of which L820bn is reckoned to
come from stolen works of art and archaeological items, L965bn from stolen
lorry-loads of goods and L800bn from stolen cars. A further L2,200bn is
earned from armed robberies, the most lucrative being the hijacking of
loaded trucks worth L340bn. In November, police broke a Calabrian gang
responsible for robbing 1,600 trucks in five years.
Illegal lotteries and gambling, according to Censis, provide an annual
turnover of L1,400bn, while contraband generates L790bn. The latter is
mainly illegal cigarette sales. Since the middle of last month the
government has stepped up its campaign against cigarette contraband,
controlled by the Naples mafia, and banned for a month sales of most Philip
Morris brands because of excessive contraband seizures.
Commenting on the report, Mr Giovanni Conso, former president of the
constitutional court, said: 'This enemy (organised crime) is worse than
terrorism because that was something outside the state structure; this is
inside the state and benefits from a complicity which goes beyond the mere
taking of bribes.'
The report through its title, 'Outside and Inside: criminality,
institutions, society', highlights this complicity. In particular the system
of public contracts is open to abuse with last year 65 per cent being
awarded on the basis of closed bids.
In Sicily it is estimated that 75 per cent of all contracts end up in mafia
hands, while nationwide the percentage is believed to be around 7 per cent.
