FT  26 MAY 92 / Survey of Tohoku Region of Japan (4): Residents rise to the
eagle - Development of tourism is meeting resistance on ecological grounds
ALMOST EXACTLY two years ago, the residents of Tazawako, a town in the
mountains of Akita prefecture, were called to a meeting by the town mayor.
A plan was presented by the prefectural authorities and by JR East railway.
JR East was to purchase land from the town's people and build a resort with
hotels and lodges, ski slopes, an 18-hole golf course and a horse-riding
course. The project would help invigorate the local economy, they were told.
Mr Takeo Chiba, a resident of the town who runs a small catering business,
attended the meeting and, with his neighbours, asked a lot of questions: how
would the development affect the town's drinking water supply, or irrigation
water for its rice farmers? What would happen to the run-off of fertilisers
and poisonous weed-killers applied to the golf course? What would happen to
the animals, especially the nesting grounds for the golden eagle, an
endangered species?
'JR came to explain, but they couldn't answer our questions,' says Mr Chiba.
Today the project, part of a grand scheme to develop the area, is on ice,
pending completion of a three-year study of the habitat of the golden eagle.
Mr Chiba has formed an organisation, which 81 of the town's 120 families
have joined, and he is confident they can defeat the project.
The experience of Tazawako is in many ways a microcosm of the difficulties
surrounding the implementation of Japan's resort development promotion law,
which was enacted in 1987. Under the terms of the law, each prefecture has
selected one geographic area for development, with multiple resorts projects
totaling at least Y100bn (Pounds 419m) in value. Then the government helps
to foot the bill with subsidised financing.
The aims of the law are laudable enough: to promote local economic
development, and to provide much-needed leisure facilities for Japan's
overworked people. Yet, according to a recent survey by the Yomiuri Shimbun,
projects in over half of Japan's prefectures are in trouble because of
serious local opposition, sometimes on ecological grounds, or economic
difficulties, or both.
According to Mr Zeizo Kokubo, a consultant at the Japan Travel Bureau, the
large amount of money involved encouraged many prefectures to propose
unrealistic, grandiose projects, without conducting needed preliminary
studies.
JTB, for example, was called in after a plan had been proposed in Yamagata
Prefecture, and was asked to produce a study favourable for a project in the
areas of the ski resort at Zao mountain. Part of the plan, however, has been
halted by Yamagata City, because cutting more trees in the mountains would
threaten the city's water supply.
Mr Kokubo says the transport infrastructure is also insufficient to support
the project, and the financing ability of the companies involved too weak.
Indeed, he suspects that some local companies join the projects to speculate
in land, and have no real intent to develop and manage a resort.
Mr Kokubo blames, in part, the arbitrary manner in which resort areas are
selected - one per prefecture, although plans proposed by some local
governments do have a great deal of merit. He says, for example, that
projects proposed by Miyagi prefecture, in the Kurikoma-Funagata area, which
involve the usual combination of golf course and ski area, are more
realistic in part because Miyagi has a more highly developed transport
infrastructure.
Indeed, for the less developed, more remote areas of Tohoku, including
Akita, Aomori and Iwate, ease of transport from the Tokyo area can be what
makes or breaks a big project. One of Japan's largest and most elaborate ski
resorts, Appi, in Iwate prefecture, has been a great commercial success
because it lies a short distance from the last stop on the fast Shinkansen
'Bullet' train at Morioka. Appi was able to attract spring weekend skiers as
late as early May, long after resorts in central Japan had closed down.
Mr Kiyoei Kobayashi, deputy director general of planning at Aomori
prefecture, is for this reason longing for the completion of the Shinkansen
to Aomori. Although construction has started, the line may not be finished
until the turn of the century. Mr Kobayashi says that, after the line to
Morioka in Iwate was finished in 1983, resort and hotel investment in Iwate
blossomed and tourist arrivals doubled. During the same period, tourist
arrivals in Aomori rose by only 50 per cent.
Apart from the more grandiose golf-ski-hot springs trios under planning,
many more modest projects are under development that may be more appropriate
to local area needs, providing facilities for lower-cost, longer stay
holidays.
Mr Masao Hashimoto, head of Akita prefecture's resort promotion bureau,
boasts that next year Akita will open one of Japan's highest quality car
camp facilities. Given the enormous increase in sales of recreational
vehicles in Japan, the project looks almost guaranteed to be a success.
Likewise, Iwate, Akita and Aomori are all building villages of cottages in
scenic areas, with the aim of attracting families.
What Tohoku has in abundance still is relatively undeveloped mountains and
lakes of great natural beauty that, if exploited sensibly, could be a boon
the local economy. People such as Mr Chiba, of Tazawako, are not opposed to
development per se, but are against developments that will change the
character of their homes, and possibly threaten the environmental balance.
He says: 'The fact that the golden eagles live here means that this area is
environmentally very healthy. We want to preserve this.'
