FT  27 MAR 92 / Jersey rejects demand for top judge to resign
A DELEGATION from Jersey will visit London next Thursday to try to reverse a
ruling demanding the resignation of one of the island's senior judges.
Representatives of the States, the island's parliament, hope a compromise
can be found, but they warned yesterday that they might be forced to
petition the Queen directly over the issue.
Mr Vernon Tomes, Jersey's deputy bailiff, was asked to resign after a
meeting at the Home Office in London last week.
That followed complaints from island advocates that over the past few years
he had taken too long to deliver reserved judgments,
The island is a Crown dependency and a privy councillor, usually the home
secretary, has special responsibility for it.
The island's lieutenant governor, its attorney-general and the judiciary are
Crown appointments while other appointments are made locally. Mr Pierre
Horsfall, president of the island administration's finance committee, said:
'I am very hopeful that when they hear what we have to say we will be able
to persuade them to change their minds. Should this fail, it is possible we
could petition the Queen.'
Other politicians have voiced irritation at what they see as an example of
outside interference in the independence of Jersey.
Mr Tomes claims that delays in issuing judgments have been caused by an
overload of work. Mr Horsfall said that once the demand for Mr Tomes'
resignation had been removed, 'the question of the workload could be
resolved internally by the island's elected government'.
The local judicial committee recommended three months as a suitable length
of time to produce a judgment.
Mr Tomes, who acts as deputy speaker of the Jersey parliament, has sometimes
taken much longer than that.
In one judgment, Mr Tomes took more than two years.
That was in the Rahman case, a complex case in which the validity of a
Jersey-based trust was challenged by the family of Mr Rahman, the trust's
settlor (a person who makes settlements, especially of property).
Mr Tomes found the trust not to be a true trust, and the island amended its
trust law.
Hopes that next Thursday's meeting in London will lead to an internal island
resolution of the issue are echoed by Mr Reg Jeune, president of the
administration's policies and resources committee.
'We have had many centuries of working well together and our relations with
London have always been good', he said.
Mr Jeune said there was no constitutional crisis because by seeking the
deputy bailiff's resignation the Crown has not challenged the island's
independence. The Crown makes the appointment and can withdraw it.
However, he and other members of the States hope they can offer the privy
councillors an acceptable resolution of the problem that does not involve Mr
Tomes' resignation.
