FT  06 MAR 92 / King Kong antics
British politicians like their parliaments supine. One party supplies a
prime minister, he or she chooses a cabinet and off they go. They
nationalise, privatise, introduce a poll tax, take it back, reshape
education, health and the social services, and reshape them again, muddle,
cancel, restore, cut, spend, bribe and never forget to work away at the
fulfilment of the Treasury's purpose, which is to run the economy into the
ground at regular intervals. This is called 'strong government'. King Kong
is strong; the great ape should be draped around Big Ben.
The game may change on April 10. The House of Commons could come to life.
For that to happen, no party must have an overall majority. Most of this
year's polls suggest that that would be the outcome of an April 9 election.
Custom calls this a 'hung parliament' but, in truth, it would be a live
parliament. It is hung if you can only conceive of the imposition of the
will of one party. It is live if you regard coalition government as the
norm. It is hung if you are Anglo-Saxon; live if you are continental.
Yet I place no great hopes on this impending return of the living dead. Most
British politicians cannot think other than in terms of one-party rule. At a
symposium at the London School of Economics on Wednesday, Mr Vernon Bogdanor
reminded us that the four hung parliaments of this century - 1924, 1929-31,
1974, and 1976-79 - produced minority Labour administrations dependent on
Liberal support. Their performances ranged from the ineffective to the
disastrous. Labour used the Liberals as a convenience.
The long-term objective of the Liberal Democrats, putative partners for
1992, is the destruction of the Labour party so that they may replace it. Mr
Paddy Ashdown's troops will therefore be lucky if they are invited to
support Labour.
At Wednesday's symposium, which was organised by the tactical voting
campaign, Common Voice, Professor Ivor Crewe sketched six possible outcomes
to the next election. Half make the Tories the largest party, the other half
give the edge to Labour. In Outcome I the Tories have 315 seats, just 11
short of the 326 they need. They can try a deal with either the Liberal
Democrats (20 seats assumed in this model), or the Ulster Unionists (13
seats), or they can rule without any of them, on the assumption that the six
smaller parties will not have a common interest in uniting to overthrow the
Conservatives. In reality, a Tory deal with the Liberal Democrats, following
the loss of the Tory majority, would be too cynical even for politicians
desperate to cling to power, while the Unionists are unpredictable. So the
Tories might govern alone until they saw a chance to win a second election.
By Outcome III, the Conservatives are down to 303 seats. To thump their
chests atop I place no great hopes in the impending return of the living
dead
Big Ben they need the support of at least two other parties (Liberal
Democrats plus Ulster Unionists, or plus Scottish Nationalists, or plus
Welsh Nationalists). Forget it. Fractions of percentage points separate the
contestants in all of these scenarios. Calculations IV-VI result in a
similar variety of choices for a Labour party with the largest number of
seats. In every one save I and, just possibly, II (Tories 309), Mr Neil
Kinnock becomes prime minister.
Some proponents of constitutional reform place hope in that. Labour is
dangling the promise of a Scottish assembly, regional assemblies, and a
senate to replace the House of Lords. All would be elected on some form of
proportional representation. Labour campaigners for PR believe that the
party will be converted to electoral reform for the Commons at the party
conference in October. If so, the Liberal Democrats would by then differ
from Labour only in that they are not tied to the unions and, in
consequence, are more robust in their appreciation of market principles. A
Labour-Alliance coalition in 1983 or 1987 would have betrayed the principles
of both parties; Labour was at the time unilateralist, socialist, and
anti-Europe. It is now none of those things. Since Mr Kinnock's party has
moved nine-tenths Alliance-wards, it could claim that a coalition between
its MPs representing, say, 40 per cent of the vote and the Liberal
Democrats' representation of, say, 20 per cent would reflect current
majority opinion in Britain. Call it 50 per cent plus, since many of today's
potential Liberal Democrat voters would abstain or vote Conservative rather
than let Labour in.
Mr Ashdown's terms are well-known: coalition, a four-year pact, PR, and the
building of the fourth Trident submarine. Labour would not easily be tied
into such a deal if its sole purpose was to repeat the experience of 1974,
when Mr Harold Wilson used the Liberals to keep him going after the February
election until he could get an overall majority in October. You have to be a
childish wide-eyed optimist to believe that Mr Kinnock would want anything
else.
Yet there are some who believe that he and his colleagues can learn from
history. Past Lib-Lab pacts have ended in failure for Labour. The necessary
conditions for a successful future understanding are that Labour abandon its
dreams of becoming the natural majority party of government, while the
Liberal Democrats grasp the point that they cannot hope to destroy Labour.
If personal ambitions are a bar to this kind of accommodation, history
suggests that it may yet come about.
I first postulated such a 'grand alliance' in this space on July 2 1987.
Most of its building-blocks, which then seemed out of reach, are now in
place. The principal remaining requisite is a conversion of the likely
consenting parties to permanent multi-party government. It is more likely to
be met in a live parliament with Labour and the Liberal Democrats in
opposition than with Labour in power. For in government, Labour might not
need to change. Out once more, it would have to.
