FT  03 OCT 92 / Markets: The best policy? Never surrender - Serious Money
IN THE field of personal finance, 'never surrender' is not a bad motto,
although it might often be impractical. It is most relevant, though, if you
are holding on to a long-term with-profits life policy. The companies
offering them have set them up on the assumption that they will last a fixed
long term.
If you surrender early, you have broken the original contract and put their
calculations awry. Life companies use this as a justification for offering
you worse value than you would receive if you waited until maturity. So, the
rule until now has always been - don't surrender.
Sadly, as the Weekend FT has reported extensively, many savers have been
forced to surrender their policies over the past few years. In 1991 -
according to a now-notorious survey by the Securities and Investments Board,
produced at the end of last year - 37 per cent of unit-linked life policies
and 23 per cent of with-profits policies were terminated within a year of
being started.
This was amplified last week by another survey, for Money Management. This
showed that across a range of the 11 companies which were prepared to admit
their figures, 16 per cent of 25-year with-profits policies started in 1990
had been surrendered already.
These figures do, however, tell as much about the state of the housing
market and the economy as they do about the unsuitability of life policies.
Rising unemployment, falling house prices and rising home repossessions have
forced many young families to surrender their policies in an attempt to get
some cash. A survey, by the Watford Group of large life insurers, found
divorce was another big factor.
In a last resort like this, it might be necessary to release the cash from
an endowment. But that does not mean that you should surrender a policy.
Surrender values are bad. Earlier this year, Money Marketing examined
surrender values on offer for 25-year policies after 24 years. While some
offices were offering as much as 90 per cent of the final maturity value,
several offered much worse rates. Commercial Union, the present top payer
when policies reach maturity, paid out only 61 per cent after 24 years.
The value you receive in these circumstances is worked out as a totally
separate calculation from the accrual of bonuses. Thus, surrender is not a
way to 'lock in' to present high bonuses as some people seem, unfortunately,
to have assumed. But penal surrender values do make it possible for
marketmakers to buy a policy and sell it to someone else to make a profit.
Therefore, even if you are desperate for cash, you should not surrender an
endowment until you have been given a quote for it from a marketmaker. How
much you can gain this way varies, depending on the life office and the
length of the policy.
One marketmaker, Policy Portfolio, cites an Equity &amp; Law policy started in
September 1980 with premiums of Pounds 18.79; this would have a surrender
value of Pounds 3,346 now but Policy Portfolio would pay Pounds 3,900 for
it. A Scottish Amicable 20-year policy taken out in November 1980 with
Pounds 31 premiums would have a surrender value of Pounds 6,913, and a
market price of Pounds 8,000.
Marketmakers agree that you can gain an average of between 10 and 20 per
cent by selling your policy rather than accepting limply what the life
office offers you. A few laudable life offices pay a surrender value which
the market cannot better - but they are in the minority.
Bonus rates on maturity are now under severe pressure and final pay-outs
from these policies are likely to come down. Does this mean that those who
are not cash-starved should still get rid of their endowment, as an
investment decision? Definitely not: that is shown by the fact that demand
exists to buy policies at a higher price than you can sell them for.
As Sammy Alexander, of Policy Portfolio, puts it: 'If it is worthwhile for
the endowment holder to sell, that means it is not worthwhile for the
investor to purchase the policy. We exist only because there is demand from
purchasers.'
David Beale, of Beale Dobie, echoes this point: 'We buy these policies
because we think they are good investments at the price at which we are
buying.' In effect, his advice to someone who was selling, and did not need
to, would be: 'Don't'
The strength of demand for unmatured endowments is undeniable. Earlier this
year, Kleinwort Benson even launched an entire investment trust investing
only in such policies. Unlike virtually any other launch of shares this
year, it was oversubscribed. Plainly, many people in the market still think
this is a good investment, even though bonus rates at present are
unrealistic, and are likely to come down.
Regular readers of the Weekend FT will know that I am not a fan of
with-profits endowment policies; there seem to be better investments on
offer for those taking out a mortgage. But if you have already started
paying the premiums, and can afford to carry on, then do. And never
surrender]
