FT  11 JUN 92 / Cuba opens doors wide to foreign investment: Damian Fraser
takes a business trip to Havana
THE Cuban government yesterday stepped up its latest and most visible
attempt to attract foreign capital, to shore up the island's battered
economy.
About 125 potential foreign investors arrived in Havana to be awarded
celebrity status by the government, and a rare meeting with President Fidel
Castro. They included officials from subsidiaries of Eastman Kodak, ICI,
Philip Morris, American Express and Procter &amp; Gamble, and a large number of
US lawyers, some of whom were said to be representing camera-shy
Cuban-Americans.
Eighty of the participants were from the US, although US law forbids them to
invest in Cuba. One delegate suggested the Cubans were unwittingly making
arrangements for life after President Castro. 'We can't invest now, but we
need to be ready in case Fidel goes,' one US visitor added.
The visitors were to meet the foreign trade minister, the national bank
president and senior officials from their respective sectors.
The investors had been briefed on Tuesday by other government officials at
the Mexican resort of Cancun, as part of the conference on investment in
Cuba organised by Euromoney magazine.
The clear message was that almost all foreign investment was welcome, and
that rules to limit foreign ownership to 49 per cent of an enterprise could
be partially lifted. 'It is,' said Mr Oscar Alfonso Montalvan, of the state
committee for economic co-operation, 'a socialist opening for a capitalist
world.'
Cuba claims to have received about Dollars 400m-Dollars 500m (Pounds
217m-Pounds 271m) in foreign investment last year, mainly in big hotels
built by, among others, the Spanish company Grupo Sol.
Mr Ernesto Melendez Bach, of the economic co-operation committee, said that
due to this, Cuba would attract 1m tourists in 1995, up from 500,000 this
year and 250,000 in 1988. He said that the typical foreign tourism developer
in Cuba recovered his investment in 3 1/2 years.
Mr Melendez and other officials said Cuba was open to investment in oil
exploration, nickel, capital goods, textiles and agriculture, and could
refine oil for foreigners.
The government says it has given individual state enterprises authority to
make most of the decisions in their sector, in an attempt to ease
bureaucracy in foreign investment.
Mr Orlando Hernandez Gui-llen, commercial director at the foreign trade
ministry, claimed that, for example, approval to set up a textile factory in
Cuba would take a mere 25-30 days.
Mr Raul Amado Blanco, Bank of Cuba vice-president, said Cuba would consider
debt-equity swaps to attract foreign capital, although he emphasised that
fresh money would have to be part of any such arrangement. Cuba is in
default on some Dollars 6.5bn of its foreign debt. Mr Blanco said there were
'possibilities for fruitful dialogue' with banks on the debt, but there
remained an impasse between Cuba and its official creditors.
Foreign investment is now seen as the last hope for Cuba, whose gross
domestic product dropped by 25-30 per cent last year after the collapse of
trade with the former Soviet Union.
The potential foreign investors seemed unsure what to make of Cuba's
overtures. One fund manager enthused: 'Cuba is following the China model. We
could easily have closed-end investment trusts with joint ventures with
Cuban partners that would trade in non-American stockmarkets.'
A time-share tourism developer from Miami was not so sure: 'Right now, all
we have heard is that they want our money. But what about legal certainty?
Can they buy you out when they want?'
