FT  15 JUL 92 / Business and the Environment: Getting into hot water - The
Philippines' investment in geothermal energy is not without its drawbacks
Geothermal energy sounds like a heaven-sent answer to two of south east
Asia's most pressing problems - electricity shortages and air pollution from
the burning of fossil fuels - but the experience of the Philippines
demonstrates how even this apparently elegant solution is fraught with
environmental obstacles.
Just as the region's shrimp exporters either deplete the sea's natural
stocks or destroy coastal mangrove swamps to make way for shrimp farms, so
the Philippines must choose between a range of environmentally
unsatisfactory options to alleviate its desperate lack of electric power.
Coal-fired power stations in the Philippines have been criticised by nearby
residents for polluting the atmosphere and the fields, and a proposed
nuclear plant was suspended partly because of fears that it would be prone
to earthquake damage.
A decision this year to approve the building of a geothermal plant inside a
national park regarded as a holy place by local tribes has shown that
geothermal energy also has environmental drawbacks.
Exploitation of the earth's subterranean heat holds obvious advantages for
the Philippines, which is poor enough to need to reduce its oil imports and
rich enough in volcanic activity to make investment in geothermally-produced
electricity worthwhile.
The Philippines, with about 20 per cent of its electricity already coming
from this source, is the second largest producer of geothermal power after
the US. It intends to add 1,600 MW by 2000 to its existing capacity of
889MW. Indonesia also has substantial geothermal potential.
With power cuts up to 12 hours long on the main island of Luzon and on
Mindanao in the south, there is no doubting the need for further generating
capacity in the Philippines. The previous administration of Corazon Aquino
abandoned a 620MW nuclear power station built by Westinghouse of the US
under the late dictator Ferdinand Marcos before it was commissioned amid a
controversy over safety and alleged corruption, but neglected to order new
plants to make up for the electricity shortfall.
It was against this background that the Department of Environment and
Natural Resources (DENR), after years of delay, reluctantly issued an
environmental clearance certificate in January for a 120MW geothermal
project inside the Mt Apo national park on Mindanao. The decision angered
environmentalists, who argue that it endangers the wildlife in the park,
including the rare Philippine eagle, and negates the whole purpose of
establishing such national reserves.
Geothermal energy, exploited by drilling wells similar to oil wells and
drawing out hot subterranean water to run steam turbines, enjoys several
environmental and other advantages over alternative sources of electricity.
With no combustion required, the plants are more reliable and should release
less carbon dioxide into the atmosphere than oil or coal-fired power
stations. Nor are they affected by the drought which has sharply reduced the
output of the Philippines' hydroelectric dams.
They must, however, be built in places with proven geothermal resources  -
places which may be distant from electricity consumers or, like Mt Apo,
environmentally controversial.
Nor are these the only problems. Like oil fields, geothermal fields
eventually run out of commercially exploitable energy. Drilling is
expensive, turbines are noisy and development of a geothermal field can
release unpleasant-smelling hydrogen sulphide and substantial quantities of
carbon dioxide.
Nazario Vasquez, vice president for energy of the Philippine National Oil
Company (PNOC), acknowledges that the first geothermal projects in the
country in the 1970s failed to recognise the problems of water pollution
caused by dumping the used underground brine on the surface, complete with
substances such as lithium, chlorides and boron which affected local rice
crops. Two of the four operational fields are run by PNOC and the other two
by Philippine Geothermal Inc (PGI), a subsidiary of Unocal of the US.
At PNOC's Mt Apo project all the fluid will be reinjected into the ground in
line with a 'zero-discharge policy', Vasquez says. 'While before we could
just walk into an area and develop it, the (Aquino) government opted to
seriously consider environmental clearances.' About a third of the 25 to 30
wells will be for reinjection and therefore to help the environment, he
says, rejecting suggestions that the reinjection is necessary in any case to
maintain the pressure of the fluid reservoir.
Of the 54,000-hectare national park, 701ha has been set aside for the PNOC
and only about 100ha will be used, he says, although environmentalists have
expressed concern that the road built by PNOC and the future development
will open the park up to further degradations by farmers and loggers.
'At the first (exploratory) PNOC well alone, the extent of forest
devastation is appalling,' wrote Yasmin Arquiza, a journalist and
environmental activist, before the PNOC was given the final go-ahead for the
project this year. 'Trees have been cut down indiscriminately to give way to
a sprawling field dotted with corn and cabbage patches.'
The tribes, meanwhile, have been bought off. They will receive one centavo
per kilowatt hour, equivalent to 7m pesos a year, to be paid into a
foundation for the local community and the environment managed jointly by
the developers, the DENR, the tribes and non-governmental organisations.
Mt Apo is not the only geothermal site where environmental considerations
are coming into play. The PNOC is planning to expand geothermal electricity
output from the island of Leyte by at least 440MW, and has calculated that
the carbon dioxide expected to be released into the atmosphere from
underground can be half absorbed by the trees on the 100,000ha of land it
manages there, and half reinjected. To help with environmental costs the
company is seeking Dollars 30m (Pounds 15.7m) in grants and Dollars 40m in
loans from the Global Environment Fund managed by the World Bank.
Geothermal energy projects may, in the words of a paper produced by PGI,
'tend to be more environmentally benign than the conventional alternatives',
but even geothermal power, it seems, cannot produce electricity without some
cost to the environment.
