FT  29 FEB 92 / UK Company News: Absent guest questions GWR
THE BIG showdown at Great Western Res-ources ended in a big let down.
Despite a string of anonymous faxes to newspapers warning of trouble at the
company's annual meeting, the main character, Mr Daniel Pena, the flamboyant
but ousted former chairman, failed to attend. Instead, he sent his proxy, a
soft spoken lawyer from Richards Butler dressed in a blue suit.
Directors shifted uneasily in their seats as she listed Mr Pena's grievances
and a raft of oblique allegations. Some current directors, she suggested,
had bought shares at a 'fortunate time.' But shareholders seemed happier to
head for some coffee after asking a couple of softball questions.
'At least no one threw anything at us', said Mr Bruce Patterson, a
non-executive director.
Mr Pena is only one of the problems confronting Great Western Resources, the
US-based but London-listed energy company. By its own admission it faces a
'life or death' court action in the US.
Its main customer, a South Carolina utility, has accused it of involvement
in fraud and price fixing and withheld payments. The company denies the
charges strongly. An individual accused by the utility of involvement in the
scheme died of gunshot wounds on February 2.
Its shares collapsed from 240p 18 months ago to 6p in early February. A
heady rally since then, during which several directors bought shares, has
been mirrored by a heavy fall. The share chart now looks like one of the
company's own oil derricks.
Deflecting Mr Pena's allegations was Mr Howard Wolf, who replaced him as
chairman with the tacit backing of the Kuwait Investment Office, the bemused
owner of 32 per cent of the company.
Mr Wolf, a Texan lawyer, answered questions engagingly but refused to be
photographed.
Meanwhile, Mr Pena is threatening his own broadside of writs, claiming
dismissal payments and punitive damages.
Mr Green, a shareholder from Scotland, asked what the company's prospects
looked like. After stumbling for an answer, Mr Wolf admitted that Mr Green's
view was as valid as his own.
