FT  02 MAR 92 / Monday Interview: Striving to reach Sanctuary - Jack Straw,
the Labour party's education spokesman
Were Mr Jack Straw to take a month off to write his autobiography, it might
appear under the title: Shadow Boxing: from president of the National Union
of Students to chief opposition spokesman on education and science.
Not an obvious best-seller, but it graphically highlights the personal
stakes involved in the coming election. Mr Straw, 45, an MP for 13 years and
in politics all his adult life save for a brief spell at the bar, has yet to
sit on the government benches, let alone hold office. He is not alone. Most
of the shadow cabinet have never exercised power, and Mr Straw, Mr Blair and
Mr Gould - not to mention Mr Kinnock  - have little stomach for another five
years slogging away in opposition.
The son of a Nonconformist conscientious objector, Mr Straw is still
remembered by some as a student union firebrand.
The acid tongue has not deserted him. Even colleagues were taken aback at
his television denunciation of Mrs Margaret Thatcher as 'evil' on the eve of
her resignation. Recent accusations that Kenneth Clarke, the education
secretary, was telling 'lies of Goebbels proportions' about Labour education
plans were par for the course.
Yet for the most part, Mr Straw is a dedicated student of Moderation and
Respectability. He talks of 'the break-up of the traditional categories
(among Labour MPs), reflected by the collapse of the Campaign Group', the
fact that 'the Tribune Group is now the establishment of the party', and
places himself in the party's 'solid centre'. Social solidity has come too.
With his wife Alice - a senior civil servant - and family, he decamps as
often as possible to a cottage in Minster Lovell, on the edge of
Oxfordshire's Cotswolds, and is a stalwart of the parish church. The motto
of his old school, Brentwood, says it all: 'Virtue, Learning and Manners'.
The Church Times was relieved to hear recently that church schools, at
least, are safe in Labour's post-election hands. 'They help to provide the
moral and ethical framework without which education is sterile,' Mr Straw
told it.
But much more than religious education will stay in place if Mr Straw takes
charge of Sanctuary Buildings, the education department's palatial new
offices in Great Smith Street. Of the 25,000 state schools in England and
Wales, only the 15 city technology colleges, 138 grant-maintained schools
and 159 grammar schools need fear for their futures. The national
curriculum, pupil testing, league tables, teachers' pay review body and
local management of schools are all here to stay. Polytechnics will not be
returned to local government, and they will still be able to call themselves
universities. As for private schools, their 30,000 state-funded assisted
places will go, but otherwise they will be left in peace - with even their
charitable status intact, provided they show 'community involvement'.
Mr Straw eschews dogma, dubbing his attitude to teaching methods 'fairly
catholic'. 'I am fairly and squarely with the teaching method that works,'
he says. 'Part of the Tories' problem is they think all the time about what
happened in their own prep schools.' He insists that 'you won't get
improvement if you simply treat teachers as technicians. We need to turn
teaching into an accountable profession'. Accountable to whom? 'To parents,
to the governing body, to the public.'
As for his determination to ban all forms of selection in the state sector,
he says: 'The comprehensive ideal is that you should comprehensively cater
for children of every ability range.' And that means 'ensuring that state
schools do cater comprehensively for very bright children'. So not only will
fast-streaming and master classes be encouraged, but part of the money saved
from assisted places will go on 'centres for gifted children'.
Setting and meeting national standards is Mr Straw's continual refrain:
'Ministers should be setting the standard and making sure it is achieved.'
An Educational Standards Commission, to run a national inspectorate and set
national targets, is a central plank of his programme. He contrasts it with
Mr Clarke's bill - assailed from all sides - to allow schools to pick and
pay their own private inspectors.
How will Labour tackle Britain's poor staying-on rates among 16-year olds?
'We are going to set national targets, and translate these targets locally
and for each school and college within the locality. Through these
imperatives of targets and funding you change the culture.'
It all sounds rather centralist. Local councils, he says, are important 'for
planning the system locally and managing it in a hands-off way'. But he
wants 'a single standard of inspection for all local authorities', and a
single national service to embrace all inspectors.
A new 'Advanced Certificate in Education and Training' (ACET) also features
prominently in Labour's manifesto. Its aim is to span the divide between
post-16 academic and vocational studies, by offering modular courses on both
sides. 'The hard part is to allow students to mix and match,' says Mr Straw,
but he insists 'there will still be a recognisable five-subject A-level
within it (the ACET)'. The current plan is to modularise A-levels by year,
while moving to a broader five-subject curriculum on the lines of the
Higginson report. So three A-levels will become 10 modules, each of them
requiring a written exam.
But Mr Straw is not concerned only with exams. 'The academic/vocational
divide is perpetuated right through government at the moment,' he says, and
he wants a single curriculum council to span the chasm between the education
and employment departments. The current state of vocational qualifications -
'the obsession with competences'  - concerns him. 'You are ending up with
people who are too narrowly trained,' he says. He wants vocational
qualifications broadened and given more rigour.
How much will Labour spend on improving school standards? Mr Straw is coy.
Apart from shifting money from the city technology college programme to
nursery schools, the only immediate spending commitments are to put an end
to primary classes of more than 40 and to abolish outside toilets - neither
of them widespread. Beyond that, all spending is 'as resources allow, in the
famous phrase'.
It is the same for higher education. Loans are to go, and the student grant
made up to its 1990 level in real terms. 'But there is not any way out of
the parental contribution towards student maintenance', and though he
recognises that much of the higher education infrastructure - particularly
the polytechnics - is dilapidated, improvements will only come - as
resources allow.
However, Mr Straw is happy with the emerging three-tier structure of
teaching, research and mixed universities, and will not change it. 'I was
against the rigid classification of institutions,' he says, but 'the
inevitable consequence' of ending the division between polytechnics and
universities will be 'much greater differentiation in higher education', and
the massive projected increase in student numbers is 'bound to come' largely
in the non-research universities.
Mr Straw bridles at any idea that Labour is simply endorsing government
policies. But he is not slow to daub the Tories with Labour policies that
may prove unpopular. In a policy statement announcing Labour's plans to
abolish the remaining grammar schools last week, he was at pains to point
out not merely that the Tories themselves had closed 106 grammar schools
since 1979 'without a peep from John Major or Kenneth Clarke', but that Mrs
Thatcher had shut 363 in her three years as Ted Heath's education secretary
in the early 1970s - while Shirley Williams, her Labour successor, had
managed to disband a paltry 205 in a similar period.
It is the same with the independent schools. Mr Straw believes his policies
will raise standards in the state sector so high that only 'snobs and
eccentrics' will thereafter want to go private. Yet he often cites the views
of the Headmasters' Conference and the Girls' School Association in support
of Labour's policies on curriculum reform.
If the election comes up trumps, how long does Mr Straw see himself in
Education? 'Quite a long time. I feel reasonably well trained for it, and I
would like to be around to take the consequences of what I do.' Now that
would be a significant change from the current regime.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                          PERSONAL FILE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1946 Born Buckhurst Hill, Essex. Educated Brentwood School, Essex, and
Leeds University.
1969-71 President, National Union of Students.
1973-74 Deputy Leader, Inner London Education Authority.
1974-77 Special Adviser to Labour government social services and
environment secretaries.
1979 Labour MP, Blackburn.
1987 Elected to Shadow Cabinet; Opposition Education Spokesman.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
