FT  15 DEC 92 / International Company News: Indonesia issues threat to
liquidate Bank Summa
THE Indonesian government said yesterday it would liquidate troubled Bank
Summa within two days unless the Soeryadjaya family, its owners, injected
new capital. Brokers saw the move as forcing the family to sell their
majority holding in Astra International, Indonesia's dominant automotive
company, to raise finance.
The suspension of Bank Summa in mid-November, with debts of more than
Rp1,000bn (Dollars 487m), has brought into question the health of
Indonesia's banking sector, caused customers to withdraw deposits from three
other banks and led to heavy selling pressure on the Jakarta stock market.
'If there is no fresh money being injected, the government will act to
liquidate Bank Summa in the next one or two days,' Mr Murdiono, state
secretary, said yesterday.
Diplomats say the statement is likely to have been instigated by President
Suharto.
Mr Murdiono added the government would not allow the Soeryadjayas to borrow
further from domestic banks and would oppose the Soeryadjayas' raising
offshore finance.
The Soeryadjayas have failed to meet an action plan, agreed in June, to
inject new money into Bank Summa, despite raising more than Rp700bn in loans
from domestic banks, secured against their Astra shareholding. A Rp500bn
loan from a three-bank consortium, headed by state-owned Exim Bank, matures
on Friday.
In the last week, the Soeryadjayas have held negotiations with two competing
consortia to sell more than 100m Astra shares, over 40 per cent of the
company. The consortia are headed by Mr Prajogo Pangestu, a timber
businessman with political connections, and Mr Hashim Djojohadikusumo, son
of Mr Sumitro Djojohadikusumo, appointed Astra chairman in September.
Bankers to Astra have expressed reservations over some of the potential new
shareholders. They say the company's cost of borrowing is certain to
increase. Astra has foreign loans of over Dollars 900m, of which, brokers
say, more than half are scheduled for renewal within the next 12 months.
