FT  17 NOV 92 / Technology: A tighter lid on the pillbox - Drug companies
are toughening their approach to research and development
THE drugs industry is adopting an increasingly ruthless attitude to research
and development spending, which grew fourfold over the past decade to reach
an estimated Dollars 25bn (Pounds 16.50bn) worldwide this year. Companies
are working to reduce the interval between drug discovery and marketing -
averaging about 10 years - and at the same time to control the soaring costs
of R&amp;D.
A striking example of the hard decisions being made was this autumn's
announcement by SmithKline Beecham, the Anglo-US group, of 150 redundancies
among its UK R&amp;D staff. Equally shocking to people inside and outside the
company was its withdrawal from long-term research into gastro-intestinal
drugs - the field that led to its best-selling product, the ulcer medicine
Tagamet.
But George Poste, SB's new chairman of pharmaceutical R&amp;D, said that in
today's climate 'resources must be focused on drug discovery with the
highest potential for return'. It was not worth continuing to search for new
gastro-intestinal drugs, because there were better targets in other fields.
Poste also stated SB's intention to hold R&amp;D budgets to about 15 per cent of
pharmaceutical sales. That is similar to the R&amp;D commitment of most
international drug companies based in Europe and the US.
Roche of Switzerland stands out for its large R&amp;D spending, equivalent to 26
per cent of prescription drug sales. As the table shows, Roche more or less
matches the two giants of the industry, Glaxo of the UK and Merck of the US,
in its total spending on R&amp;D - about Dollars 1bn in 1991. But research
expenses are exceptionally high in Switzerland, so Roche does not employ
such a large R&amp;D workforce. At the other extreme, companies based in the UK,
where scientific salaries are notoriously low, can afford to employ more
people for each Dollars 1m spent on R&amp;D.
To force the pace of development, companies are setting an increasingly
tight timetable for each stage of R&amp;D, accompanied by tough criteria which
every project must satisfy if it is to move on to the next stage.
For example, ICI Pharmaceuticals in the UK now consistently achieves its
target of administering candidate drugs to human volunteers within 14 months
of their first synthesis, says Tom McKillop, technical director. This stage
used to take an average of 30 months.
At the same time ICI has become more determined to abandon drugs that do not
live up to their initial promise. The new approach is quite different to the
company's traditional attitude which 'assumed that every drug was going to
succeed,' McKillop says.
Strong management is required to kill a promising research project in the
face of lobbying from scientists who have devoted years of work to it - and
who still believe it would lead to a blockbuster drug if only the company
would let them continue a little longer.
As Max Gurtner, head of corporate communications at Roche puts it, 'managing
the development pipeline is really tough because you're dealing with people
who feel they live or die with their project.'
A comprehensive survey of R&amp;D management in the international pharmaceutical
industry, published this year by the UK-based Centre for Medicines Research,
shows that about half the companies have a target maximum time to take a new
drug from discovery to first market. This averages eight to nine years for
US and European companies and 12 years for Japanese companies.
Detailed analysis of 114 research projects by PA Consulting of the UK
suggests that the two largest pharmaceutical companies succeed in getting
their drugs to market faster than their competitors. Glaxo and Merck
averaged 7.2 years and 7.8 years respectively; the average time to market
for eight other international companies was 10.2 years.
Their speed is partly the result of clear-sighted management. 'You have to
pick the winners, set your priorities and prevent anything else distracting
you or cluttering up the system,' said Richard Sykes, Glaxo research
director.
But size may be an advantage in itself, because the giants have more drugs
in development at any one time and therefore more flexibility to concentrate
on the most promising candidates. An example is the way Glaxo switched
chemical research resources this year into developing a promising Aids drug,
3TC; 'nothing is being allowed to stand in its way,' said Grahaem Brown, who
is in charge of the development programme.
The giants can also afford to take more risks than smaller companies through
'parallel development' - moving on to the next phase of a project before
completing the current one.
Pharmaceutical companies in Japan tend to proceed more cautiously,
preferring to carry out R&amp;D step by step rather than in parallel, as Stuart
Walker, director of the Centre for Medicines Research, points out. As a
result Japanese drugs take even longer to reach the market than western
ones, but fewer of them are dropped during the development process.
Japanese drug companies do not yet spend as much on R&amp;D as their European
and US counterparts, with R&amp;D budgets typically amounting to only 10 to 12
per cent of sales. 'They are going to have to increase that spend to come
into line with the rest of the world if they want to become major global
players,' Walker says.
Once drug companies have put the right management in place, researchers can
call on an enormous range of new technologies to help them. Computers are
now used in every aspect of pharmaceutical R&amp;D, from graphics systems for
designing new molecules to information systems for keeping track of the
immense volumes of patient data amassed during clinical trials.
An example from the start of the drug discovery process is Glaxo's
Core-2000, a collection of 2,000 compounds chosen by computer and chemical
analysis to give a representative sample of the 10m molecules known to
science. The idea was to come up with the most diverse possible selection of
molecular structures.
Glaxo researchers who want to develop a medicine against a particular target
can start by screening the Core-2000 chemicals to discover which has the
biological activity they want. This should give a 'lead compound' which can
be improved, with the help of molecular graphics computers, to produce one
or more candidate drugs.
There may be even more opportunity to use information technology later in
the R&amp;D process, to accelerate the clinical trials which usually take up
more than half of the total time taken to get a drug to market. Merck's
Clin*Net project shows how a company can benefit from a computer network
linking its headquarters to clinical centres around the world.
Clin*Net - installed over the last four years - allows managers to follow
the progress of thousands of patients far more effectively than the unwieldy
mixture of mail, telephone calls and faxes used previously.
For example, the network enabled Merck to analyse early clinical results
from Proscar, its new prostate drug, as they came in and to make a quick
judgment that it was worth waiting for 12-month data before submitting a
licensing application, because these would provide more persuasive evidence
of the medicine's efficacy than the six-month data.
The progress of science, particularly in genetics and molecular biology, has
given the pharmaceutical industry more possible avenues of research than
ever before. In one sense this is a golden age of drug development.
But pharmaceutical manufacturers already devote a higher proportion of their
revenues to R&amp;D than other high-technology industries such as electronics
and aerospace. They face a likely squeeze on profits over the next few years
as governments tighten price controls. So rising R&amp;D spending - for long a
source of pride for drug companies - could soon become an embarrassment.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
             WORLD'S TOP PHARMACEUTICAL RESEARCH COMPANIES
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       R&amp;D           R&amp;D       R&amp;D as %
                                  manpower   expenditure       of sales
                                      1990          1991           1991
                                              (pounds m)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Glaxo                                5,700           540             14
Merck                                5,300           510             12
SmithKline Beecham                   4,800           370             15
Hoechst                              4,500           430             16
Ciba-Geigy                           4,300           380             17
Bristol Myers Squibb                 4,000           490             15
Roche                                4,000           530             26
Eli Lilly                            3,600           360             16
Sanofi/Winthrop                      3,600           280             20
Wellcome                             3,600           230             19
Boehringer Ingelheim                 3,500           250             20
Rhone Poulenc Rorer                  3,400           250             13
ICI                                  3,300           220             14
Sandoz                               3,300           380             16
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Industry estimates
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
