FT  08 SEP 92 / Moscow presses Japan over Kuriles: Yeltsin seeks
'imagination' over disputed islands
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin's personal spokesman yesterday urged Japan to show
'imagination' in order to solve the territorial dispute over the Kurile
islands which will be at the centre of talks with the Russian leader in
Tokyo next week.
'Japan is doing an imitation of flexibility. If they showed real flexibility
we could find an effective compromise solution,' Mr Vyacheslav Kostikov said
in an interview yesterday.
He said that President Yeltsin, whose position would remain open until he
heard Japanese leaders on the first day of the talks, could produce a
breakthrough on the issue if Tokyo made it possible for him to do so.
'I think he will go on looking for a solution even while is he is on the
plane (to Tokyo). . .His position is like molten lava which can change
shape. Japan needs to find a suitable channel for this lava but for the time
being this has not happened.'
A solution to the dispute over territory seized by the Soviet Union in the
closing days of the second world war and which was never sealed by a peace
treaty, would take into account both Russian feelings and the country's
economic problems.
Japan says it is willing to be flexible on timing and details of how Russia
returns the disputed southern-most four of the Kurile islands - but that
large-scale economic assistance will be conditional on getting them back.
Mr Yeltsin has said he wants to solve the issue on the basis of legality and
justice but faces fierce domestic opposition to an explicit handover of
territory for money.
'We are willing to give something in return for such help but we don't see
this help as the be all and end all,' Mr Kostikov said.
While Japanese help was desirable for 'resolving tactical problems' to speed
Russia's march towards capitalism, Moscow would be less prone to make
compromises in future.
'The Japanese do not understand this. They talk to us like a chronically
sick child. But we are not chronically sick. We are just ill with communism.
When Russia gets better it will surprise the world with its dynamism.'
