FT  14 MAR 92 / Despatches: Kurds struggle to rebuild - Harriet Martin
examines some conflicting moralities in the efforts made to revive an Iraqi
village destroyed by Saddam Hussein
SET against the snow, the line of red, yellow and orange trucks looks more
like a stranded circus than a convoy of heavy industrial machinery. For over
a month, these diggers, generators and graders have been sitting in Choman,
an Iraqi village on the border with Iran, waiting to be sold to Iran.
The Iranians want to buy them, the Kurdish people need the money, but the
Kurds living in Choman will not let them go.
The equipment comes from Iraq's Dollars 3bn Bekhma hydro-electric dam
project. Over the past year, the half-finished site has been triumphantly
dismantled by the Kurdish people. Fifty miles north of Arbil in northern
Iraq, it was central to Saddam Hussein's strategy to control the Kurds.
In fact, the valley below the dam was never flooded. Now, the equipment has
been looted and the luxury lake - side resort gutted: the project is
defunct. Raising funds by selling off equipment brought in to destroy them
is a coup de grace for the Kurds, but it is one that is proving increasingly
controversial.
Recently, these sales have been a vital source of income and food. But
efforts by Kurdish leaders to prevent the loss of construction equipment
across the border have now brought threats from Iran of a food blockade.
None the less Choman, which was one of the 4,000 Kurdish villages destroyed
by Saddam, is being rebuilt. It is without electricity, and it wants one of
the generators on the convoy to remain behind.
The original Bekhma plan was to build a hydro-electric dam across the Great
Zab river. When Saddam came to power in 1979, he transformed this project
into a much more ambitious scheme.
His intention was to disperse one of the most politically organised and
articulate sections of Kurdish society, the Barzani people. Massoud Barzani,
leader of one of the two main parties in Kurdistan, the KDP, is at the
forefront of Kurdish nationalism.
The expanded Bekhma scheme was to have flooded the heavily-cultivated Barzan
valley, destroying the livelihood of the Barzani people. In preparation for
this, in the mid - 1980s, the Iraqi army destroyed many villages and the
Barzani people fled into exile in Iran.
The scheme also had the advantage of dividing Iraqi Kurdistan geographically
in two - with an immense artificial lake - making military control of the
region easier.
On the slopes of the Barzan valley, the Iraqis were building a luxury
lake-side resort with boating marina, shopping complex, hotel, gym,
hospital, mosque and hundreds of holiday chalets. Here, rich Arab Iraqis
were to come and spend their leisure time. It was only half-complete when
Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, at which point the 4,000 Turkish and
Yugoslav workers fled and work on the dam ceased.
Bitterness at this violation of the beautiful valley contributed to the
site's destruction. The bungalows now shelter hundreds of Barzani families
which, after months or even years of exile, have returned to rebuild the
homes Saddam destroyed.
When Kawa's village was razed seven years ago, he and his family - wife,
three children, his mother, two sisters and a brother - walked more than 100
miles across the border into Iran, where they lived in a refugee camp.
They returned in November. Their temporary home at Bekhma, which once had
running water, electricity, air - conditioning and television, is cold,
heated by just one small paraffin burner. However rudimentary it is, this
accommodation now offersa solution to one of Iraqi Kurdistan's most pressing
problems: the homelessness of displaced people.
The equipment, on the other hand, is creating problems. Local Kurdish people
and the Front (an alliance of eight reformist groups led by the PUK and the
KDP, the two dominant political parties) are having to face some difficult
moral issues over its sale.
The convoy sits in Choman, waiting for decisions to be made. 'It's been like
this for weeks now,' says a French doctor who is working in the area. 'Local
people have threatened to set light to the convoy if attempts are made to
move it.'
Efforts are being made to defuse the situation. Local Kurdish engineers are
trying to bring in a smaller generator; even the intended Iranian buyer has
been to Choman to try to sort out the dispute. Some Kurds feel that the
Iraqi equipment which was brought in to destroy their towns and villages
should now be used to rebuild them. 'I don't understand why we are selling
it,' said one aid worker, 'when it is exactly what we need for the
reconstruction programme.'
In contrast to the well - publicised short-term UN programme intended to
take people through the cold winter, Kurdish development organisations have
been rebuilding houses, hospitals and schools. In Arbil, there are workshops
turning out 150 school desks a day. Everywhere, you see people on the roofs
of houses using heavy rollers to flatten the recently-laid mud roofs.
Underlying all this activity, though, is an uncertain future. In a few
months, the Kurdish people could once more be exposed to the brutality of
Saddam. The six-month extension of the Memorandum of Understanding with
Baghdad has committed the allies to providing air cover until the end of
June. The UN, on the other hand, is intent on pulling out at the end of
April. Then the weather will be getting warmer, and thousands of Kurds are
expected to return from exile in Iran. It is reluctant to be drawn into this
new phase of reconstruction, which would require a level of commitment to
the Kurds that would go far beyond helping them survive a single winter.
Once the Kurdish people are left without allied protection, it is important
that the Iraqi government equipment should be seen to have been 'looted'
rather than semi - appropriated by the Front, which could then be held
responsible for its disappearance. Whether it is or not, no one seems to
know.
However, ridding Kurdistan of equipment brought in to destroy it is central
to the sales. Furthermore, the remaining equipment increases the ease with
which Saddam could one day resume his onslaught on the Kurdish people.
In Choman, a few men, some with guns flung over their shoulders, are hanging
around the vehicles. Nothing seems to be happening.
Leaning against one of the trucks, a young man with eyes like jewels smiles
at me. I ask him what the problem is with the convoy. Passionately, he
explains: 'There are no arguments between Kurds, it is Saddam who has turned
us against one another. We are not really divided. One day you will come
back and this place will be beautiful. The hills will be made of gold; the
trees will have golden leaves.'
