FT  27 JUL 92 / Abta warns on travel safeguards
GOVERNMENT proposals for regulating package travel will not prevent further
incidents like the collapse last Friday of Land Travel, Mr John Dunscombe,
chief executive of the Association of British Travel Agents (Abta), said
yesterday. The failure of the Bath-based coach company resulted in 50,000
people losing money on holiday bookings.
Mr Dunscombe said that several aspects of the government's proposals were
welcome, but they would not prevent customers from losing money in future
travel company collapses.
His comments came as 2,500 Land Travel customers continued to make their way
back from the Continent, and the Foreign Office said their repatriation had
gone relatively smoothly. A driver had refused to bring 42 Land Travel
customers back from Czechoslovakia, but the travellers had returned on
another coach.
The government has proposed a central reserve fund to compensate
package-holiday customers travelling by land or sea. Companies selling
charter flight packages are already required to obtain a licence from the
Civil Aviation Authority and to arrange a bond to compensate customers in
case of collapse.
Many providers of land and sea packages already have bonds arranged through
Abta or other trade bodies. Mr Dunscombe welcomed the creation of a fund for
surface travel as Abta would not then have to rely on its own emergency
financial arrangements if a bond proved inadequate. Abta is disappointed,
however, that the government does not plan to insist that all companies
taking holidaymakers abroad subscribe to the reserve fund.
Package-tour providers outside the central fund will still have to obtain
insurance or open a designated account to ensure the return of pre-payments
and the repatriation of holidaymakers.
But this will be monitored by local trading-standards officers and Mr
Dunscombe questioned whether they would have the time or experience to
evaluate the effectiveness of these arrangements.
Mr Nigel Griffiths, Labour's consumer affairs spokesman, said he would seek
a meeting with Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, today to
ask why the Department of Trade and Industry took no action against Land
Travel when the company's difficulties had been known in the travel trade
for eight weeks.
Mr Griffiths added that the government's new proposals on package travel,
announced last week, would allow unscrupulous operators to escape the
regulatory net.
