FT  18 NOV 92 / Survey of Turkish Finance, Investment and Industry (2):
Government appetite proves inhibiting - A dynamic economy striving to shed
the inheritance of a large state sector
FEW SUBJECTS arouse such contrasting views as the state of health of the
Turkish economy. Some of the indicators - the inflation rate, the public
sector borrowing requirement (PSBR), the steady erosion of the Turkish lira
 -remain consistently gloomy. Yet official reserves, often seen as a measure
of an economy's well-being, are at near-record levels.
The balance of payments looks robust, with capital inflow comfortably
matching the deficit on the current account. Another positive indication is
the increasing facility with which Turkish institutions seem able to tap the
international capital markets.
Turkey today is a dynamic economy striving to throw off the inheritance of a
large state sector, in a free-exchange regime increasingly sensitive to
policy errors. The foreign debt, at around Dollars 51bn, is manageable. The
private sector has proved resilient in a difficult business environment.
Exports are now a major part of the Turkish balance of payments - where a
few years ago all that Turkey exported was its Gastarbeiter, or guest
workers. Equally encouraging, the recent growth in imports included a 34 per
cent increase in shipments of capital goods, suggesting that Turkey may be
nearing the end of the recent investment slump.
The problem, as ever, is the government's huge appetite for funds, which
crowds out the equity markets and has pushed interest rates to a point where
they provide an active disincentive to investment. Already at around 70 per
cent for deposits, bankers say rates are likely to rise further.
Mrs Tansu Ciller, the Istanbul professor entrusted by the prime minister, Mr
Suleyman Demirel, to handle the economy, has at times struggled to present a
coherent strategy, to address the need for fiscal and monetary discipline
while creating jobs for a growing labour force.
When she unveiled her programme in January, many economists expressed their
doubts. The programme envisaged 5-6 per cent growth, while inflation was
projected to fall to 42 per cent. The growth target still seems within
range. Inflation, however, shows little sign of slowing down.
The figures, of course, mask one important factor - the distorting effect of
the Gulf crisis, a point Mr Demirel's government has sometimes chosen to
overlook when comparing his performance with the previous 12 months under
the Motherland party administration.
For example, this year's growth rate is somewhat less impressive if you
consider that, in 1991, the economy was at a virtual standstill. The tourism
industry is a case in point. Badly hit by the crisis, the industry has
bounced back. For the first half of 1992, revenues rose 60 per cent to
Dollars 1.4bn, the largest single item on the current account. On the other
hand, Turkey is unable to look to the grant assistance which it enjoyed in
1991. These amounts were vital in helping to close the budget deficit, and
produced a small surplus on the current account.
The latest balance of payments figures nonetheless reassert the fundamental
strengths of the economy. In the six months to June, the current account
recorded a small Dollars 760m deficit. On the capital account, portfolio
investment was up, together with direct foreign investment, although this
remains a surprisingly small item on Turkey's balance of payments. In
addition, there was a marked increase in foreign borrowings, with the
Treasury for the first time tapping international bond markets in Japan and
the US, after receiving a BBB rating from Standard &amp; Poor's, the US rating
agency. The one cause for concern, however, was a large increase in the
errors and omissions, suggesting that residents are still choosing to hold
their foreign exchange savings in hand.
The year started with the government announcing a wave of price increases
for state enterprises, which the previous administration had held back in a
bid to win voters in the run-up to the October election. The 11 per cent
jump in inflation which resulted was then blamed firmly on the old regime.
Inflation dropped steadily from January onwards, falling to 0.5 per cent in
June, the lowest monthly inflation rate since mid-1990. Indeed, almost any
rate would have seemed better than the January figure. However, it was only
a matter of time before the chickens came home to roost.
Economists were already pointing to seasonal factors, like the agricultural
surpluses resulting, in part, from the inability of exporters to ship
produce because of the Yugoslav crisis. Economists believe there has been an
underlying upward trend in inflation, given the money supply growth over the
same period as the Treasury resorted increasingly to the central bank to
finance its spendings.
In September, there was thus little real surprise when inflation jumped by
7.4 per cent, compared with 3.3 per cent in August. In October, the rate was
even higher, at 7.6 per cent or 69.2 per cent on an annualised basis.
Unless the government now comes to terms with the problems of the budget and
the PSBR, it is hard to see how Mrs Ciller can hope to bring down inflation.
In turn, without a reduction in the PSBR, upward pressure on interest rates
will continue, holding back badly needed private sector investment.
Some measures have been taken. Changes were introduced to the taxes relating
to government securities, to make it more attractive to hold longer-term
paper, to extend the government's debt maturities.
The strategy on capital market reform of the capital markets too has been
shaped by the need to create longer-term funds for business, hitherto
reliant on costly bank borrowing. Mrs Ciller has introduced new products,
like securitisation of consumer credits and other bank assets. Regulatory
change has tightened up disclosure rules. In addition, the government is now
encouraging equity investment on the part of mutual funds, in a bid to
increase market liquidity.
However, on tax and privatisation, two areas vital to the short-term budget
picture, the government has vacillated. Officials rule out any major changes
in the tax regime, although government receipts were enhanced by the law on
tax amnesty for tax offenders passed in March.
On privatisation, the government is counting on raising TL5,500bn (Pounds
438m) in 1992 from the sale of minority participation in what are, by and
large, privately managed companies. The revenue effect is all too welcome,
but, like the tax amnesty, this is little more than a one-off exercise,
unless measures are taken to divest the state of the main loss-making state
enterprises.
More controversial was Mrs Ciller attempt to talk down interest rates in the
first half of the year. By resorting to cheap central bank funds, she
fuelled monetary growth as a way to exert downward pressure on rates. But in
so doing, she come close to open conflict with a central bank governor,
strenuously defending the lira's position.
Up to June, the central bank was forced to intervene heavily to sterilise
this money creation by selling dollars to the market. Inflation strategy has
since changed, but damage control has become the major preoccupation,
leaving the fundamental causes of inflation untouched.
Without major reform, there is little room for manoeuvre on the expenditure
side. Debt servicing still accounts for 20 per cent of total spending. To
the government's credit, infrastructure investment spending has already been
sharply cut back, much to the chagrin of the powerful contractors lobby, who
rely on the government for project work. But economists expect the central
government budget deficit to be closer to TL55,000bn, compared with the
TL32,000bn forecast under the programme.
When the deficits on the public sector enterprises and the special
non-budgetary funds are added, it is hard to see how the government can
contain PSBR to the target of 8.8 per cent of GNP. Officials privately say
the government will be lucky to see anything less than 10 per cent.
Few but the most pessimistic will see a crisis looming. There is nonetheless
some disappointment that the government has not pressed ahead with its
promise of structural reform.
