FT  19 NOV 92 / Community's social action plans succumb to sabotage and
recession: How some high hopes have been brought down to earth
THE 'social dimension' of the European Community relaunched by Mr Jacques
Delors in 1989 is proving a disappointment to many of its supporters,
especially Europe's trade unions.
Slower growth in Europe and successful sabotage by Britain has ensured that
only a small number of the key measures contained in the 1989 social action
programme have been adopted.
If the Maastricht treaty is passed, its 'social chapter', which excludes
Britain, should make it easier to push through more social and employment
legislation by majority vote.
But even that looks unlikely as some of the leading strategists inside the
European Commission's Directorate-General 5 - the social affairs directorate
 -privately speculate about a less ambitious approach to legislation.
Social affairs officials appear to have taken some of the British criticisms
about over-centralised, over-prescriptive, legislation to heart. They are
thus concentrating their attention on the idea - included in the social
chapter - that the European Trades Union Congress (ETUC) and Unice, the
European employers' body, should agree the details of European social and
employment law between themselves.
This idea, with the Commission itself merely laying down general objectives,
is likely to appeal to whoever takes over from Ms Vasso Papandreou, the
current social affairs commissioner from Greece.
The idea does not, however, appeal to the ETUC. At a recent conference in
Greece, Mr Jean Lapeyre, its deputy general secretary, said: 'The trouble is
European employers are only willing to negotiate with us if there is a
threat of legislation.'
There is, nevertheless, some evidence that the idea is sticking. The
Commission recently withdrew a health and safety directive on transport
because it was not flexible enough. Even more shocking to Europe's unions
were recent comments made by Mr Hermanus van Zonneveld, a senior Commission
official, who appeared to suggest at a conference in the UK that the EC was
losing interest in legislating on European works councils - consultation
committees in European multinationals.
The Commission insists that it has not dropped its commitment to legislation
and was merely encouraging unions to use the potential leverage in the
social chapter.
But IG Metall, the main German union, is said to be ready to 'drive tanks
into Brussels' to make sure that the commitment to works councils is
maintained. And Mr Marcello Malentacchi, general secretary of the
International Metalworkers' Federation, has written to the Commission saying
that works councils are the most important part of the social dimension.
The reason why unions are so obsessed by works council, which are merely
consultative bodies, is that they see them as the first step towards the
long-held goal of cross-border collective bargaining. It was the Maastricht
treaty's ability to deliver on works councils, plus the fact that the social
partners, unions and employers, were given formal recognition in a major
international treaty, that persuaded union leaders around Europe to give
their qualified backing to Maastricht.
On the face of it that support is rather surprising. The anti-inflation,
anti-devaluation, principles built into economic convergence mean that wages
and employment will have to take the strain of adjustment in Europe's less
successful economies. Even the pre-Maastricht moves towards convergence are
causing a wave of strikes in Spain and Italy led by the very unions that are
supporting the even more stringent convergence conditions of the treaty
itself.
If the social dimension sweetener is now being taken away as well, it is no
wonder that Europe's unions are feeling a bit exposed on their Europhile
flank.
But arguably the unions are interpreting the social dimension too narrowly.
Since 1989 about 60 per cent of the social action programme has been passed.
Admittedly much of the legislation, for example on maternity pay or working
time, has been watered down, but there is still much of value from a union
point of view.
There has been a consistent trickle of health and safety legislation, with
another batch due for implementation at the beginning of next year. The
written proof of employment directive, passed last year, could also
significantly improve the rights of the most vulnerable workers.
Even the working time directive, which is unlikely to be passed this year
under the British presidency but will probably be passed early next year,
has some useful protection for workers forced to work dangerously long
hours, and might encourage more job creation and less overtime when the
upturn comes.
Further, in Britain, the government's current drive to contract out central
government services has been thrown into confusion by one of the oldest
pieces of EC employment legislation known as the acquired rights directive.
Like so much else in the EC, enthusiasm for the social dimension waxes and
wanes. After the spurt of the late 1980s the outlook for the social
dimension is currently bleak, but it would be foolish to write its obituary.
