FT  11 JUN 92 / Slovaks rule out talks with Havel
THE prospects for successful talks on the future of the Czechoslovak
federation faltered again yesterday as the Slovak nationalists ruled out a
meeting with the Czechoslovak president, Mr Vaclav Havel.
Mr Vladimir Meciar, the newly-elected leader in the Slovak republic and his
Czech counterpart, Mr Vaclav Klaus, were to meet President Havel today in
Prague to continue their attempts to agree on a reduced federal state which
would bind the Czech and Slovak republics together. They will instead meet
without the president.
Mr Havel's presidential re-election could become the biggest stumbling bloc
in negotiating a federal structure. Mr Meciar has pledged to bloc the
re-election of Mr Havel in the federal parliament after the latter called on
voters not to support candidates with 'dictatorial tendencies'. But the
Czech side has refused to back down on its support for the president, with
Mr Klaus saying it was 'the basis for any further negotiations'.
A first meeting between Mr Meciar and Mr Klaus on Monday night only revealed
the extend to which both men disagree over the future of the country, with
Mr Klaus unambiguously rejecting the Slovak demands for some sort of
economic and defence union.
Mr Klaus, however, called for the quick formation of a government before
July 5 when the presidential election is due in the federal parliament. But
Mr Meciar told reporters this scenario was highly unlikely.
According to Mr Meciar, any federal structure would be temporary until a
referendum on independence is held in Slovakia, possibly by the end of the
year. He also said that a referendum should be initiated by the Slovak
parliament and not the federal parliament as the law currently stipulates.
The new Slovak parliament is likely to take a series of measures violating
federal law. Mr Meciar, together with Mr Peter Weiss, leader of the renamed
communist party in Slovakia which came out second in last weekend's
elections, said they would immediately abolish in the republic the federal
law which forbids former high-ranking communist officials and secret police
agents from holding public office for five years.
Mr Meciar is believed by his opponents to have removed, in his short spell
as Slovak interior minister after the revolution, any incriminating evidence
on his relations to the hated secret police.
The break-up of Czechoslovakia would probably lead to a significant
renegotiation of at least the trade elements of the country's association
agreement with the European Community, according to a senior Czechoslovak
official, writes Ian Rodger in Basle.
'One party to the agreement would no longer exist so we would have to
negotiate separate agreements or else find some modus vivendi,' Mr Zdenek
Drabek, of the federal economics ministry, said. Mr Drabek was attending a
conference on problems in eastern Europe, sponsored by the Institute for
East-West Studies.
