FT  01 SEP 92 / Survey of Saxony (3): VW takes economic lead - Andrew Fisher
looks at the region's largest corporate investment
VOLKSWAGEN is the most obvious symbol of Saxony's economic regeneration,
hesitant though that may yet be. At Mosel, near the town of Zwickau, VW
already employs 2,300 people and will have twice that number in two years'
time.
Visitors to the Mosel site, where a big plant is being constructed, are
guided along the country roads by the VW emblem which the local authorities
have allowed to be painted on to their signs. VW did not have trouble
persuading them. It is investing nearly DM5bn in east Germany, most of that
in Saxony, at the Mosel car plant and the Chemnitz engine facility.
The presence in Saxony of the largest corporate investment in east Germany
is proof enough, if proof were needed, that this is the region with the best
chance of economic success. 'Every investment has a symbolic character,'
says Mr Gerd Heuss, general manager at VW Sachsen. 'But this is also an
investment with new standards of technology and equipment.'
From the mid-1990s VW will produce up to 250,000 cars a year from the new
plant being erected beside the building where the choking little Trabants -
the butt of numerous jokes - were made.
VW is already assembling cars in the existing building - completely
revamped; the products and manufacturing methods are light years away from
those of the Trabi days. In July, in Mosel, VW started production of its
latest Golf model. It aims to turn out a daily average of 380 cars next
year, having reached 250 a day in 1992 with the old model. The new plant
will be capable of 1,200 a day from 1994.
VW is already trying out some new techniques which will be used in the new
facility. Whole 'front-end' assemblies of bumpers, lights, grilles and
radiators are delivered by a local supplier and inserted straight on to the
car. The same is true of instrument panels, wheel and tyre units, seats and
other units.
Components makers such as Siemens, VDO, Alibert of France and Britain's GKN
have already set up local operations. VW works with nine components system
suppliers and plans to raise this to 15. Mr Heuss says VW hopes to save up
to 15 per cent of component costs - parts and materials account for some 60
per cent of total manufacturing costs - by having assembly systems delivered
as they are needed.
The benefits for the area are already considerable, though Saxony as a whole
is afflicted with the same economic upheaval as the rest of east Germany.
Zwickau, an historic town which once drew its prosperity from the silver
mining in the nearby hills, is undergoing a revival as the result of VW's
nearby presence.
Apart from jobs at VW, at least 20,000 more will be generated at supplier
companies by its investment in east Germany, also including a cylinder head
plant in Eisenach, Thuringia. Most of these supplier jobs will be in Saxony.
VW now buys DM1bn worth of east German-made parts a year.
One part of the new Mosel plant is already operating. With the help of 123
orange robots, body panels are made for the Golfs being assembled next door.
All that remains of the old days is the sight of a few Trabis in the VW car
park.
