FT  10 FEB 92 / Space-based defences back in favour
NOW THAT the Cold War is over, nuclear weapons have lost favour with the
western defence establishment, while space-based anti-missile defences -
previously backed only by hard-core Reaganites - are suddenly popular across
the political spectrum on both sides of the Atlantic, after their resounding
endorsement by President Boris Yeltsin last month.
That was one of the more surprising developments to emerge over the weekend
at the Munich Security Conference (formerly Wehrkunde), an annual gathering
of Nato's political and military top brass. The reasoning was explained by
Mr Les Aspin, chairman of the US House of Representatives defence committee.
'Previously,' he said, 'we didn't want to make the world safe for
conventional warfare because in conventional terms the Soviets were the
biggest kid on the block. Now we do, because we're the biggest kid on the
block.'
As a result, certain policies previously regarded as right or left-wing were
now much more widely supported, Mr Aspin said.
From the right came defensive systems - both space and ground-based - as
well as the idea of pre-emptive action against states that might be building
a nuclear weapon with aggressive intent.
An example is the action taken by Israel against Iraq's nuclear reactor in
1981.
From the left came such ideas as a comprehensive test ban treaty,
co-operative efforts to halt proliferation, the doctrine of 'no first use'
of nuclear weapons and a ban on the production or sale of fissile materials.
Several speakers called for a return to the Baruch Plan of 1946, when the US
proposed to put all nuclear energy under international control. At the time,
it was vetoed by Stalin.
The first to advocate this was Mr Alfred Dregger, a right-wing German
Christian Democrat, who said unless the US went back to the Baruch Plan
there would soon be 20 countries with both nuclear and chemical weapons and
'a very far-reaching carrier capability'.
Even more surprisingly, Mr Dregger received qualified support from Mr Pierre
Lellouche, a French defence expert and adviser to Mr Jacques Chirac, the
Gaullist leader.
Northern industrialised countries, Mr Lellouche said, were already living in
a 'post-nuclear' world, while North-South relations were returning to a
pre-nuclear age.
He believed that to deal with the threat of nuclear proliferation the North
did not need a nuclear response.
'What you need is a defensive system and a non-nuclear pre-emptive
capacity.'
Professor Edward Teller - often described as the father of the hydrogen
bomb, but also instrumental in President Reagan's strategic defence
initiative - after giving an account of the original Baruch Plan made an
impassioned plea for an updated version which should include an abandonment
of secrecy.
