FT  06 AUG 92 / US shrinks from role in Bosnia: James Baker may be angry at
the Serbs, but Washington sees the conflict as Europe's problem
DESPITE an increase in the violence in war-torn Bosnia-Hercegovina, the US
appears determined not to get embroiled in a conflict which it sees as a
European problem, in a 'backwater' for the administration.
If European governments were prepared to commit ground troops or air support
to back up relief efforts, Washington would assist. But congressmen,
senators and state department officials said this would only be with air
power and only with UN authorisation.
'The area is now a political backwater for us,' a staff member of the House
committee on foreign affairs said. 'It was important under Tito (the former
Yugoslav president), but what interests do we have in the region now that
the cold war is over?' he added.
He said that with the end of the cold war there was growing isolationism in
the US. 'The feeling among public opinion in the US is that we have poverty,
unemployment and budget problems on our own doorstep,' he said. 'And isn't
it time to turn our attention to these matters. Besides, people still do not
know where Yugoslavia is, or what the war over there is about. In a
presidential election year, everybody is going to be cautious.'
Despite the impact of the media on US public opinion, both Republicans and
Democrats said security in the Balkans and the Yugoslav crisis was the
responsibility of Europe, even though repeated internal disagreements within
the European Community has often prevented it from adopting a coherent
strategy towards the region.
'After the republics of Slovenia and Croatia declared independence (in June
1991), we thought Yugoslavia was a European problem,' said Republican Mr
Richard Lugar, a member of the Senate foreign affairs committee.
'Of course we consulted with our (European) allies. But now it seems to us
that Europe has had problems in deciding what to do. My own view is that the
problem of violence has to be addressed. Until we have a commitment from the
EC countries that they will supply ground forces of some kind, we are not
prepared to use air force. In any case, we would only use air force through
the authorisation of the United Nations.'
But as Britain prepares to host an EC-UN conference on the former Yugoslavia
later this month, US officials are increasingly critical of the EC's
year-long role in the conflict.
Administration officials said Mr James Baker, the US secretary of state,
became exasperated with Serbian aggression against Sarajevo, the Bosnian
capital, and the attempts by the EC-sponsored peace conference to implement
any lasting ceasefire. 'TV coverage, especially of the mortar attack on the
bread line in Sarajevo, made him furious with Belgrade,' an official said.
This impatience with the EC peace process was expressed at the EC Lisbon
summit in June, where the US called for tougher measures against Serbia, and
even referred to the use of military force.
'We spoke about some form of military intervention. But the Pentagon was
against it, and many of us were divided about its goals. It would have meant
going to war against Serbia. In any case, there was an agreement thrashed
out at the Munich G7 summit in July, an administration official said.
He said Mr Douglas Hurd, the UK foreign secretary, asked Mr Baker to 'give
(Lord) Carrington and the EC peace efforts one more chance'. 'Britain was
about to take over the EC presidency. It did not want France to expand the
peace conference. . . Baker said: 'OK. We'll give Carrington another
chance'.'
The failure of the London talks on Bosnia last month has now forced the EC
to broaden the conference into the ambit of the UN.
Mr Tom Lantos, a Democrat, who is also a member of the foreign affairs
committee, said: 'Europe's response to the war in the former Yugoslavia has
been a complete shambles. Its response is shameful.'
Yet few US officials are prepared to spell out how they would stop the war
in Bosnia, and prevent it from spreading to neighbouring republics.
'Tragically, the world community response has been too little and late,' Mr
Robert Dole, the Republican Senate leader said. 'Why didn't we respond to
this aggression 12 months ago?'
Last June he asked the senate to authorise the use of Nato forces to
re-establish peace in Bosnia, to close the airspace over Bosnia, to protect
humanitarian air convoys, and to plan for airstrikes 'if feasible against
Serbian positions in Bosnia, and in Serbia'. Support for these proposals has
been muted.
