FT  01 AUG 92 / Return of the whale killers: Bronwen Maddox visits Norway's
remote Lofoten Islands to meet the men eager for the hunt
DR TORE HAUG'S voice crackles over the radio link from Spitzbergen, half-way
between Norway and the North Pole: 'Our boats have caught 59 whales so far,
but we are behind schedule because of the terrible weather and fog.'
Haug is the 40-year-old scientist in charge of the six Norwegian whaleboats
now at the centre of a fierce international dispute.
His 12-man team on board the Asbjorn Selsbarne (Child of the Seal) has
killed 14 minke whales in the past three weeks, hunting around the clock
under the midnight sun. The whaleboats are now heading back to Norway - and
back into the dispute.
At the annual meeting of the International Whaling Commission in June,
Norway announced that it would resume commercial whaling next spring after a
break of five years.
Norway's move threatens to undermine the fragile moratorium which most IWC
members have observed since 1985 and Japan is expected to follow. Less than
48 hours after its announcement, Norway dispatched Haug's team to catch 110
minke whales for 'scientific research'. This is permitted under IWC rules,
but considered by some to be a mere pretext for starting whaling
immediately.
The resumption brought international condemnation particularly as Mrs Gro
Harlem Brundtland, Norway's prime minister, has received dozens of
environmental awards, earning her the tag of 'the Green Queen'. It might
prove an obstacle to entry into the EC, the European parliament has said.
Is the Norwegian stance foolish and obstinate? Are campaigns to 'save the
whale' trying to protect the species or to protect every single whale - and
are they more than a lobby of sentimental animal lovers?
In the tiny whaling villages of the Lofoten archipelago, 150 miles inside
the Arctic Circle and four hours from the mainland, the answer is emphatic.
'We have to earn our living from the sea - we don't like being called
barbarians', says Arne Lauritz Bendiksen who has hunted whales for 39 of his
54 years, first with his father and then with his three sons.
He lives in Reine, the village at the south of the islands which could claim
to be Norway's whaling capital, with six of the country's 55 registered
whaleboats.
It is beautiful and harsh: 150 wooden houses strung along a crescent of flat
land between jagged black mountains, pervaded by the smell of fish and
sewerage. The road peters out after a few kilometres at the village of Aa.
Hugging the shore is the Maelstrom, the ferocious tidal current which
horrified Jules Vernes in Twenty Thousand Leagues under the Sea.
Until 1987 almost a third of the men from Reine's 30 families were whalers.
That year the Norwegian government bowed to international pressure to halt
commercial whaling - two years later than most countries - until research
could determine their numbers.
Roald Olsen, out in his 65-foot boat, the Malnesfjord, is searching for the
minke which he hopes to kill next season. 'Keep looking for the curve of his
back in the water', he says from the bridge. The tripod on the bow is empty
now, but by spring it will be fitted with four-feet-long metal shafts, with
orange grenades screwed to the tip.
The grey-and-white minke whales are hard to spot: only 20 feet long, they
rarely spout and their tiny dorsal fin hardly cuts the water.
Suddenly a shout from the crow's nest: a young whale has been tempted close
to shore by the low tide. The boat lurches round in pursuit, but the whale,
100 yards away, dives. 'Sometimes he is cleverer than me,' says Olsen
ruefully. 'I am just waiting for next spring.'
The 1987 ban hit the community hard. 'It was a great loss in my life' says
Bendiksen. 'We used to call it whale sickness - the fever that would grip
all the men here in April before the season started.'
'But the worse damage was to my wallet,' he says, grimacing. 'The permits
were like money in the bank.'
Before the 1987 ban, the whalers sold the slabs of bright red meat to
traders on nearby Skrova island for Norwegian and Japanese supermarkets. 'It
is like the best beef you ever had,' say the occupants of the Gammelbua,
Reine's main bar. On Skrova an average minke would fetch around 30,000
kroner (Pounds 2,700); although that price seems sacrilege to many whale
lovers, it was bounty to the Reine fishermen.
In 1987 Bendiksen says he made around 200,000 kroner. Whaling contributed 60
per cent; catching haddock, cod and caplin in the 24-hour darkness of the
winter, less than half. Fishing all year round has proved a poor substitute
for whaling, he says, although the government has paid half the cost of new
cod nets to help compensate.
But however much the end of the ban is appreciated by the Lofoten whalers,
they number only a few hundred. The Norwegian government is the first to say
that the motive behind its decision was not money.
Whaling is not actually economically important to us,' says Helga Hernes of
the Foreign Affairs Ministry. In 1987, the last year of Norwegian commercial
whaling, its catch of 387 whales made the country only 13m kroner, around
Pounds 1.2m, mainly from selling whale meat to Japan. Instead, it is a
question of the right to preserve a cultural heritage, the ministry says,
arguing that 'Norway has always made its living from marine resources.'
Norway's resumption of whaling pre-empted a judgment by the IWC of whether
the minke whale had recovered enough from intensive hunting in the 1950s and
1960s to be caught without endangering its numbers. Norway claims that its
action is environmentally sound as there are now enough minke whales off its
coasts to 'harvest' in line with the Rio environmental summit's principle of
the 'sustainable use of the environment'.
Its scientific arguments that the minke is not endangered are good ones  -
although less complete than it claims - but it has undermined its case by
impatient and insensitive diplomacy. This summer the IWC scientific
committee formally accepted an estimate, based on Norwegian data, that there
are some 86,700 minke whales in the northeast Atlantic. That is a 'best
guess': the model gives a 95 per cent chance that the total lies between
61,000 and 120,000.
Acceptance of that figure marks a triumph for the Norwegian delegation to
the IWC. It had argued steadily that research in 1987 which suggested that
only 20,000 whales were left was wildly inaccurate.
The debate has raged because it is difficult and expensive to work out how
many whales there are. For two years Norway sent out boats from its marine
institutes to count whales systematically, crossing and recrossing the sea
in a grid, at a cost of 30m kroner. They spotted several thousand whales;
the institutes had to conduct more studies on how long whales stay
underwater and other crucial assumptions in order to project the total
population from that small sample.
The IWC's acceptance of the data put some weight behind Norway's case that
regular 'harvesting' would not jeopardise the northeast Atlantic minke
whale. But Norway promptly weakened its case by refusing to wait for the IWC
to agree a quota or inspection procedures.
Norway says it will itself run the IWC model of how fast minke whales breed
and set itself a safe catch limit.
The 'finger in the wind' guess from one IWC executive is that the eventual
figure is likely to be between 600 and 1500 next spring, which tallies with
the Lofoten fishermen's expectations.
So far the Norwegian government has refused to comment, thus preventing any
serious scientific discussion of whether its chosen 'harvest' will be safe
for the whales. It seems premature for it to claim 'we have science on our
side'.
Norway explains its impatience by saying that the IWC has been hijacked from
its task of setting safe quotas by countries which are opposed to any whale
killing at all. It has some cause for frustration, given the members' past
difficulty in reaching agreement. Indeed, the two arguments have often
become entangled. But it has done itself no favours in the way it dismisses
its opponents views as 'sentimental and emotional arguments based on animal
rights', in the words of the foreign ministry.
The proprietor of the Gammelbua bar demands 'what about Spanish
bullfighting? And what about your Prince Philip and his fox-hunting? Why
pick on whales - they are not special,' he says.
'Our problem is that in the past two decades the whale has become an urban
totem,' says Georg Blichfeldt, secretary of the High North Alliance, a
pro-whaling lobby based in Reine. 'It is cultural imperialism to impose
these foreign values on us.'
Those arguments have a long pedigree and a catholic set of advocates. The
Marquis de Sade, one of the most succinct, declared 'morals are geography
misapplied'. It is fashionable, widely marketed under the label of cultural
relativism, to argue that one culture's standards are not preferable to
another's. But it is hard for the Norwegian government to claim the moral
high ground. It may complain of other countries' totems but it has itself
made a totem out of its whaling traditions, now practised by a tiny fraction
of its people.
Its abrupt rejection of its opponents arguments also does not do justice to
the strength of feeling that whales arouse around the world. Hundreds of
thousands of pounds are regularly spent rescuing beached whales, and in the
past week a British diver has pledged to raise Pounds 250,000 to release a
Beluga whale, nicknamed Brightness, into the Black Sea. Both Jonah and Moby
Dick, neither urban nor contemporary, point to the history behind that
fascination.
Politics is more likely than moral pressure to bring a resolution to the
battle. International sympathy for whales may mean little to Lofoten
islanders, but it cannot be ignored by the Norwegian government,
particularly if it intends to apply to join the EC.
So far the Norwegian stand has been expressed in terms of high principle.
But it would be disingenuous for the government to argue that survival of
the fishing communities is its only motive; the survival of Mrs Brundtland's
precarious minority-government Labour Party, is also at stake. Her party has
seen its support collapse in the coastal towns partly because of its plan to
take Norway into the EC, which coastal towns see as a threat to their cod
quotas. In 1972 a national referendum extracted a vehement Nei to EC entry -
particularly from the north - and no government has tried since.
Oslo ministers are adamant that the whaling decision is not a bribe to
persuade the north to back a new referendum, but one local mayor, Mr
Sigbjoern Eriksen of Nordland, welcomes it for the help it will give the
fishing communities.
'Whaling will be one of several matters for negotiation if we decide to
apply to the EC in November' the foreign ministry says smoothly, but the row
is unlikely to have dissolved by then. The government has earned itself a
difficult autumn, spoiling a promising though incomplete scientific case
with inept diplomacy and isolationist rhetoric.
Meanwhile, the Lofoten whalers look anxiously on. Greenpeace, the lobby
group which has made its name by harassing whaleboats, last week tracked
down one of Haug's research boats and has since deterred it from killing
more whales. Leif Bendiksen, the 84-year old head of the clan, says 'We're
all uncertain. It's not sure this will go through. We're just a small
nation.'
From the porthole of the Malnesfjord Roald Olsen looks out at the sea. 'I
feel bitter, after hunting for so many years. To be up by Spitzbergen, in
your own boat, there is nothing like it. It is my greatest desire to hunt
for whales again.'
Additional Research by Karen Fossli
