FT  18 JUN 92 / Survey of European Building &amp; Construction (9): The
still-missing links - The prospects of completing Europe's train network
EUROPE'S high-speed rail network represents a potential goldmine for
construction and engineering companies. The project is colossal: at the last
count, it was estimated to involve spending of more than Pounds 100bn to the
year 2010.
But the project's scale raises questions about how realistic it is. While
parts of the network are already in place or under construction,
geographical, technological and financial considerations stand in the way of
its completion.
The outline plan for the high-speed network was devised by an EC working
group in 1990. Taking as its basis the high-speed rail projects already
planned independently by member states, it was completed by pencilling in
the missing cross-frontier links needed to join these disparate systems into
a coherent whole.
On the face of it, construction of the network has got off to a strong
start. The train a grande vitesse, or TGV, is well-established in France:
the TGV Sud-Est between Paris and Lyons was completed in 1983.
In Germany, the first two lines of the InterCity Express high-speed network
opened last year, between Hanover and Wurzburg and between Mannheim and
Stuttgart; in Spain, the first line of the planned Alta Velocidad Espanola
high- speed system opened between Madrid and Seville in April.
Other lines are under construction. France is building the TGV Nord from
Paris to Calais, a TGV interconnection by-passing Paris, and the TGV
Rhone-Alpes from Lyon to Valence. Germany is extending its high-speed lines
northwards to Hamburg and southwards to Munich. Italy is extending the
Rome-Florence Direttissima northwards to Milan and southwards to Naples.
Yet, almost by definition, the high-speed rail lines that have already been
built or commissioned are the most attractive - either because they fulfil
the greatest need or because they are the cheapest or easiest to construct.
A number of factors could impede progress on subsequent projects.
One obvious obstacle is geography. Mountains and seas, for example, are
extremely expensive to tunnel under: witness the Pounds 8bn-plus bill for
the Channel tunnel. And high-speed lines are highly unpopular when they pass
through densely-populated conurbations or areas of natural beauty, as France
is beginning to discover with its TGV extensions.
A second factor is finance. Even relatively straightforward high- speed
lines are not cheap to build. The greater the geographical difficulties, the
more the cost goes up. The planned high-speed link between London and the
Channel tunnel, for example, just 69 miles long, is expected to cost more
than Pounds 4bn because of the need to make it environmentally acceptable to
the people of Kent.
A third factor is the so-called frontier effect. Traffic flows tend to be
higher within countries than between them, so while there may be a financial
case for a high-speed line between two cities in the same country, the case
for extending the same line over the border often does not stack up.
That said, there are commitments to building at least some of the lines
needed to complete the European network.
France has adopted a TGV master plan paving the way for 16 projects
involving 4,700km of new lines. These include a new TGV line from Paris to
Calais via Amiens; an extension of the TGV Atlantique to Bordeaux and
Toulouse; extensions of the TGV Sud-Est to the Spanish border and to Nice;
and a new line, the TGV Est, from Paris to Strasbourg.
Germany faces pressure to build a high-speed line from Hanover to Berlin
following east-west unification, though there are no firm plans yet.
Britain has promised to build a line from London to the Channel tunnel,
though there are still no indications as to who is to pay for it or when it
will be built.
Belgium is to build a high-speed line linking Brussels with France's TGV
Nord at Lille, and continuing beyond Brussels to Liege.
Italy is planning a high-speed line between Turin and Venice and a line from
Milan to Genoa. It is also studying the feasibility of a line from Turin to
Lyon in France, plugging into the TGV.
Spain may build a high- speed Madrid-Barcelona line, though no firm plans
exist.
Europe, then, is looking at a considerable expansion of its high-speed rail
network: but it may not take place on quite the scale envisaged by the EC.
Without an agreement to set up a substantial EC transport infrastructure
fund, most of the so-called missing links in the network seem destined to
remain exactly that: missing. And while large, thinly-populated countries
(eg France) may find the benefits of high-speed lines outweigh the costs,
smaller and more densely populated ones (eg Britain) may prefer to upgrade
existing lines.
