FT  30 MAY 92 / The Long View: Going for the jugular
WHENEVER I meet Fringe Freddie, I know I am going to start worrying. It's
catching. Either he is getting ready for the biggest boom ever known, or the
biggest crash. A quiet life never comes into it. Right now, he is in one of
his apocalyptic phases.
I occasionally run into Freddie at slightly offbeat investment seminars.
These are, I must emphasise, perfectly respectable occasions - nothing at
all like those international gatherings in places like Monte Carlo or
Acapulco where every weird investment prophet and nutty newsletter editor in
the world is gathered. They rant at geriatric American investors who can be
persuaded to pay Dollars 5,000 to enjoy two days of skilful manipulation of
their only remaining emotions of greed and fear - in between naps, of
course. Freddie is in his element in those places. But he can once in a
while come in from the fringe.
The previous time I bumped into Freddie, he was heavily into global weather
patterns. El Nino was developing again in the South Pacific. I gathered it
was some kind of surface warming effect which kills all the fish off South
America and then spreads drought and famine across large areas of the globe.
Freddie's eyes lit up at the thought. He was going heavily long of
agricultural commodities on the Chicago markets. Potatoes would be like gold
dust.
This week, I dropped into a seemingly harmless seminar on long-term cycles
and was buttonholed by Freddie again at coffee time. El Nino? He seemed to
have lost interest in Pacific sea temperatures. Evidently, those futures
contracts had drifted out of the money. Now he was into NT, which he
patiently explained was Nostradamus Theory. Did I know that a new team of
Nostradamus analysts had finally cracked the mystery of the old mystic's
code? Future disasters were being set out on an accurate timetable so that
those investors in the know could take maximum advantage.
I said I was a bit hazy about Nostradamus, although I was aware that the
International Harry Shultz Letter had confessed to an error in its last
issue. Apparently, the catastrophic Californian earthquake it had forecast
on an interpretation of Nostradamus for May 8 1992 was wrong; it should have
said May 8 1993. San Diego would still slide into the sea, but a year late.
You had better not go to Disneyland about that time, either.
Possibly Freddie twigged that I was not taking him entirely seriously, but
he pressed on. Did I not realise that the US economy was twice as
debt-ridden as it had ever been? Was I not aware that the Japanese financial
system was already technically insolvent, and that there were exact
parallels between the Wall Street slide and subsequent American slump from
1929 onwards and the Toyko market slide beginning in 1990? Had I not noticed
that Germany . . .
Look, I said, I knew some of the numbers didn't look too good, but the
global economy was still growing and over the years I had read more than my
fair ration of books by gloom and doom merchants. As far back as 1984, the
Kondratieff Wave theorists had been forecasting an imminent slump. In fact,
the world stayed in a long boom. Then there was Ravi Batra, who made a
fortune out of The Great Depression of 1990. However, there was no
depression in 1990, just a recession in 1991, while Wall Street in 1992 is
hitting all-time highs. Britain's own Lord Rees-Mogg, taking time out from
cleaning up television, had got in on the act with a co-authored financial
spinechiller called Blood in the Streets and, when that proved premature,
managed to get out a sequel called The Great Reckoning earlier this year. It
had all been good for royalty receipts but not for credibility.
Freddie was distinctly unimpressed. Hadn't I seen what was happening to
property values worldwide? Or the 60 per cent collapse of what had been the
world's biggest stock market in Tokyo? Or the dreadful economic slump in
eastern Europe? What was happening in western stock markets was just the
last gasp of the old order.
What I had missed, he said, becoming more excitable by the minute, was the
importance of the combination of the 54-year Kondratieff Wave with the
seven- to 11-year Juglar cycle, not to mention the intermediary Kuznets
cycle. After all, the Kondratieff could last as long as 60 years: what did
1932 plus 60 add up to? Put all the cycles together and you could have a
triple whammy for the early 1990s.
This was all getting beyond me, although I murmured that I remembered that
Batra had discussed something called the Jugular Cycle in his book. Either
his spelling was wrong or he was talking about blood in the streets, too. I
wished Freddie had stuck to his Peruvian fish famine.
I should never have got back to the weather. Global warming, apparently, was
the latest theme to arise from NT Why, Nostradamus himself had warned that a
great tide would arise in a second Great Flood and the hot wind would blow
as from hell itself. The date? Well, the interpreters hadn't quite decided
yet, but it wouldn't be very long.
We should be selling all energy stocks on the grounds that governments would
soon be doubling gasoline taxes and banning emissions. Commodity markets
would be transformed as food crops were devastated. By now the gleam was
really back in his eyes. The long-term punter should be buying land at least
10 metres above existing sea level, waiting for values to soar as millions
were driven out of beachside settlements by the advancing waters. Except in
California, of course, which was all going to slide into a geological fault
. . .
I made an excuse and left. The Freddie Cycle was clearly testing its low
point. But, in my experience, it never stays down for long.
