FT  11 MAY 92 / Arts: Joint efforts save the day - Sponsorship
No one can accuse the Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts
(ABSA) of not giving a lead as arts organisations struggle to find sponsors
in a cold climate. ABSA, which was formed to promote the benefits of
sponsorship, has quickly found a new backer for its most prestigious event,
the annual awards ceremony for imaginative arts sponsorships.
For well over a decade The Daily Telegraph provided the Pounds 28,000 plus
funding. It has called it a day, but Arthur Andersen has stepped into the
breach. ABSA's other big social occasion, the Goodman-Garrett dinner, where
individuals receive prizes, is to be sponsored, for the first time, by Reed
International. Each of the two recipients will get Pounds 10,000, but are
honour bound to hand the money over to an arts organisation of their choice.
                       *      *      *
Despite the efforts of ABSA many major corporate sponsors are cutting back
on their commitments this year. This is because they give a fixed percentage
of their profits to good causes and their profits have been reduced. But
ABSA's Colin Tweedy is adamant that total sponsorship will rise in 1992,
thanks to the involvement of new sponsors among small and medium sized
companies.
Support for his theory comes from Blackheath Concert Halls in south east
London, which sees no falling away in its corporate funding. But changing
times demand changing approaches and it hit on a happy solution to the
sponsorship of its ambitious four day Schubertiade last week. It was
underwritten by three professional firms: Drivers Jonas, the chartered
surveyors; Grant Thornton, the accountants; and Turner Kenneth Brown, the
solicitors.
This not only reduced the cost - to Pounds 7,500 from each firm - but could
actually benefit clients (as well as sponsors). In the social gatherings
around the song cycles a corporate guest of, say, Drivers Jonas, who is in
the market for a new solicitor or a new accountant, could be introduced to
plenty of them. And so it went on. Joint sponsorship often fails because the
companies sharing the bill have nothing in common. Here there was mutual
self-interest, and the chance to meet potential new clients, as well as keep
happy existing ones.
                       *      *      *
Joint sponsorship deals are also attracting large companies. The cost of
backing a new opera production at Covent Garden can be Pounds 150,000. Not
surprisingly there are few takers. Even when the opera houses accept a much
lower sum for a sponsorship deal - BMW is reputed to have secured ENO's
revival of Street Scene for around Pounds 30,000 - it can still seem an
unacceptably large investment.
Shell, with an arts sponsorship budget of around Pounds 450,000, is
investigating alternatives. It is talking with Opera North about a touring
production next year in which Shell will act as the main sponsor, putting up
perhaps Pounds 50,000, while smaller companies take on the local sponsorship
for Pounds 10,000 or so when Opera North performs in their cities.
Such a deal could draw in new sponsors who would be guided by Shell into
what is possible from the connection. Any interested companies on the Opera
North touring circuit should contact Shell.
                       *      *      *
More groups of sponsors could be spotted at the Birmingham Symphony Hall
last month for the first UK visit by the orchestra of La Scala, Milan. For
once they were non-paying guests. The evening had a sponsor - British Gas -
but the other clutches of businessmen were the major backers of 'Sounds Like
Birmingham', the biggest music festival ever held in the UK. It was one of
three gala evenings that they received as a sweetener for putting up over
Pounds 20,000 each for the year long binge.
'Sounds Like Birmingham' quickly hit its sponsorship target of Pounds
150,000, suggesting that it is only the run-of-the-mill arts events that are
finding it hard to find sponsors. The specials secure backing. Most of the
names were locally familiar - Cadbury, BT, Ansells, Cooper Lybrand, the
Grand Hotel - but included Arcadian, builders of a new shopping mall in the
city.
A disappointment was the failure to attract smaller local businessmen,
especially Asian, to the project, but the big companies showed imagination.
Cadbury is supporting ten groups of musicians, ranging from jazz through
bhangra to early music - which perform each week in venues like
supermarkets; BT is backing a world music festival; while Birmingham
International Airport has commissioned a 'sound sculpture' for its departure
hall.
                       *      *      *
More sponsored sculpture - this time in Paris, in the Bagatelle, a
dream-like English garden tucked away in the Bois de Boulogne. On June 11
the Queen will open a major Henry Moore exhibition of 27 large bronzes.
Given the cost and complexity of transporting such works, some weighing up
to seven tons, this could be the last time such a major exhibition travels
overseas.
Half the Pounds 300,000 plus bill is being picked up by the Henry Moore
Foundation and the British Council, but Pounds 170,000 comes from a nicely
Anglo-French bunch of sponsors, led by the Compagnie Generale des Eaux, but
including Shell France, British Steel and British Airways. One intriguing
backer, with Pounds 40,000, is GEC Alsthom. GEC is notoriously stingy on
sponsorship in the UK but has been convinced by its French subsidiary, which
it half owns, that this commitment to European co-operation will go down
well in France.
                       *      *      *
Despite half hearted efforts by the Government through minimal tax benefits,
and a strong personal lead given by Lord Palumbo, chairman of the Arts
Council, private patronage of the arts in the UK remains at an abysmally low
level. But the Hattori family of Japan has come up with Pounds 300,000 to
underwrite the Folkestone Menuhin International Violin Competition. The
money will be spread over the next three biennial competitions, starting in
March 1993.
A stipulation in the funding is that the competition should remain based in
Folkestone. The Hattori's have a vested interest in the Folkestone
competition maintaining its reputation. A 1989 winner was Joji Hattori.
