FT  20 JUN 92 / Lloyd's summer of discontent: The insurance market is taking
steps to meet a shortage of capital and a crisis of confidence
At the annual general meeting of Lloyd's of London last June Mr David
Coleridge, the insurance market's 60-year-old chairman, gave a virtuoso
performance. Standing with his back to the yellow and silver escalators at
the centre of the market's glass and steel headquarters, Mr Coleridge held
court with a hostile audience of Names for four hours, explaining the
reasons for the market's first loss in 20 years.
'Tears were streaming down his face as I gave the vote of thanks,' says Mr
Robert Hiscox, who was then chairman of Lloyd's Underwriting Agents
Association.
At this year's AGM next Wednesday Mr Coleridge's task will be even more
difficult. Up to 3,000 Names - the individuals whose personal wealth
underpins the market's capital base - will be severely affected by losses of
some Pounds 2bn accumulated by their syndicates in 1989 which, in line with
the three-year accounting system used by Lloyd's, are reported this year.
The losses are the biggest the market has incurred and their burden will
fall most heavily on members of spiral reinsurance syndicates which
specialised in reinsuring each others' and company exposures to high-level
catastrophe risks. About half the market's total Pounds 2bn loss will be
borne by 15 of the 401 syndicates trading in 1989. They have been swamped by
claims arising from hurricane Hugo which devastated the Caribbean in
September 1989, and a series of other disasters. Several thousand Names on
syndicates managed by the Gooda Walker agency, which is now in liquidation,
face losses of about Pounds 500m.
Lloyd's decision this week to reject a plan to bail out the hardest-hit
Names will fuel anger among them. Some allege that working Names - market
insiders who work with agents and brokers - accepted the least risky
business for themselves and thus avoided the worst losses. Further
complaints include claims that underwriters charged rates that were too low
for the size of risks being covered, and that agents funnelled some Names
into too many spiral syndicates. A blizzard of litigation is being promised
by Names' leaders to add to the legal actions being taken by several
thousand Names against their agents and against Lloyd's itself.
Yet despite the sense of crisis that has severely dented confidence in the
market, in some respects there is more optimism than when Mr Coleridge gave
his performance last year. Several developments over the past 12 months give
for hope that once the storm is past, the market may be on the road to a new
phase of prosperity.
Virtually all sectors of the market are benefiting from rising rates, which
is increasing the flow of cash into syndicate funds, helping to alleviate
liquidity problems caused by the big catastrophe claims of 1989 and 1990 and
bringing the slim prospect of profit for 1991 business. 'Underwriters are
beginning to walk around with a spring in their step,' says an agent.
For example, rates for marine and aviation insurance have climbed steadily
upwards and insurers have attached tough new conditions to policies. The
'hardening' of the market has been reinforced by a reduction in syndicates
from 354 in 1991 to 278 this year, and stronger management by the agencies,
which manage syndicates and handle the affairs of Names. This makes a repeat
of some of the worst mistakes of the 1980s less likely.
Although the market is mired in litigation, Lloyd's has won some decisive
battles. In April Lloyd's defeated a move by 800 Names to seek injunctions
preventing the market from drawing down on their deposits to pay losses.
Several cases have been won in the United States, where Lloyd's has
successfully argued that disputes between Names and their agents must be
heard in English rather than in American courts.
Lloyd's has quashed fears, rife earlier this year, that it may even be
unable to meet claims because of cash flow or solvency problems. This month
the size of the Central Fund - which pays claims when Names are unable to
meet their obligations - was increased by Pounds 500m to Pounds 1bn. The
money was raised by a one-off levy on Names participating in the 1990, 1991
and 1992 years.
Measures to strengthen the regulation and leadership of the market could
also be in the pipeline. Early next month the conclusions of a committee
headed by Sir Jeremy Morse, chairman of Lloyds Bank, which has been
examining these issues, will be published and almost certainly acted upon by
the market.
The committee is tipped to endorse proposals which would lead Lloyd's to
introduce a greater element of external monitoring of its system of
self-regulation. It could also push for the setting up of a market board to
provide more effective business leadership.
A second committee, chaired by Sir David Walker, head of the Securities and
Investment Board, which has been examining allegations of 'insider trading',
will also report next month. Mr Coleridge, who earlier this year promised to
'string up' anyone found to have committed such offences, will hope that the
report puts an end to damaging reports which have tarnished the market's
image.
Despite progress on all these fronts the market faces the problem of a
potentially acute shortage of capital in the medium term. The exodus of
Names and the steady reduction in the size of its capital base looks set to
continue.
Since 1988 some 10,000 Names have ceased underwriting at Lloyd's. Mr Colin
Murray, a Lloyd's Council member, said this week that he expects the number
of Names to shrink by a further 10 per cent this year, taking numbers from
their present level of 22,300 to below 20,000.
Last year the market's total capacity fell from Pounds 11.4bn to Pounds
10.1bn and is set to drop to at least Pounds 9bn next year. Some pessimists
put the figure as low as Pounds 7bn.
A few critics believe this decline indicates that the capital base of the
market is beginning to disintegrate. Mr John Rew, co-author of Chatset, a
company which monitors the results of syndicates, says that without external
help the market is set to 'melt down'.
He predicts that the weight of catastrophe losses and continuing claims from
US asbestosis and pollution cases will gradually eat away at the assets of
Lloyd's Names and undermine future profitability, with the market's capacity
shrinking to as little as Pounds 4bn by 1995.
Mr Rew predicts that a further levy on Names will be needed to replenish the
Central Fund to cover losses arising from 1990 and 1991 business, which
could amount to more than Pounds 1.75bn, he says. This will have the effect
of 'cascading' the losses of the worst-hit Names across the entire market.
Other observers who take a far more sanguine view are still concerned about
capital shortages.
Mr David Rowland, chairman of Sedgwick, the international broker, who last
year headed a review of Lloyd's business practices, says capital shortages
could restrict the market's growth and reduce its ability to compete in the
international reinsurance and specialist commercial insurance markets.
Although Lloyd's current capacity of Pounds 10.1bn is well in excess of its
premium income - which reached an estimated Pounds 7bn last year - a
shortage is already apparent as rates start to rise. In other words, some
big companies are unable to buy enough insurance to meet their needs.
Two solutions have so far been devised to solve the problem of expanding the
capital base. First, a scheme to cap the losses of new Names who join next
year has been introduced. This radically modifies the principle of unlimited
liability, whereby Names commit their entire personal wealth to backing the
market. New members should be attracted to the market if their risks are
thus reduced.
Second, in the medium term, the hunt is on for corporate capital. The
suggestion that Lloyd's should tap this source of funds for the first time
was one of the most radical conclusions of the Rowland task force's report.
So far the signs are reasonably good. Lloyd's has received legal opinions
indicating that no substantial changes to the Lloyd's Act which provides for
self-regulatory status will be required. Over the next six months another
Lloyd's committee will negotiate the regulatory and tax implications of such
as move in all the markets in which Lloyd's trades. Corporate capital could
be introduced by 1994.
Meanwhile, in a supplementary move to gain indirect access to corporate
capital Lloyd's has announced measures to make it easier for syndicates to
form consortiums with insurance and reinsurance companies. They also intend
to make more use of reinsurance to offset risks.
Several agencies are getting into shape to attract corporate investors.
For instance, Castle Holdings, one of the fastest-growing agencies, last
month announced a reorganisation of its syndicates, centralising
administration of its nine syndicates and more precisely focusing the
actitivies of each.
Mr Alec Sharp, a leading underwriter with Castle, says: 'Corporate capital
is a different kind of philosophy to Names' capital.' In general, agents and
underwriters will need to operate in a more open and disciplined way.
In line with others at Lloyd's, Mr Sharp believes that the most obvious
source of capital will be the insurance and reinsurance companies which have
traditionally worked alongside syndicates. He says participation in
syndicates, possibly backed by a share stake and a position on the board of
the managing agency, would offer several advantages for insurers, such as
access to the specialist - and often expensive - skills of the most
successful Lloyd's underwriters.
Ultimately though the willingness of corporate investors - and new Names -
to commit capital to the world's oldest insurance market will depend on the
confidence it inspires in those who do business there. As Mr Coleridge rises
to speak next Wednesday he will be acutely conscious of that fact. Although
some of the signs may be good, the fate of many existing Names and the
repercussions of their legal battles could keep the market on the defensive
for some time. Mr Hiscox is confident about the market's prospects, but says
of Mr Coleridge and his task on Wednesday: 'There aren't many men who would
like to be in his shoes.'
