FT  24 SEP 92 / Sugar may buy rest of Amstrad's shares
MR Alan Sugar, founder and chief executive of Amstrad, the consumer
electronics and computer company, is considering buying the shares in the
company which he does not currently own, the company said yesterday.
The announcement followed speculation in the City that Amstrad would be
taken private again after the company's shares, which had been languishing,
rose strongly for no apparent reason.
Amstrad said Mr Sugar, who is the single largest shareholder with 35.4 per
cent of the shares, was looking into the possibility of buying the remaining
issued ordinary shares which he does not own at 30p a share, subject to the
availability of financing.
The news, which did not come as a complete surprise, was received fairly
positively in the City and Amstrad's shares rose 3p to 28p.
There had been speculation for months that Mr Sugar might want to take
Amstrad private again. The consensus among analysts was that at its current
price, Amstrad was so cheap it must have looked a good opportunity to Mr
Sugar.
The company has seen its share price fall from a peak of 233p in 1988 to 20p
last week. The share price stands at about half the asset value, estimated
at about 45p per share.
Analysts say going private would make it easier for the company to carry out
the drastic restructuring that may be needed to turn the company around.
Although the offer of 30p a share is unlikely to look attractive to many
shareholders, they may not have much choice, says Mr Patrick Wellington,
industry analyst at County NatWest.
If a buy-out is attempted and fails, they would have a disappointed
potential buyer as a chairman, he added.
Amstrad, which will announce final results for the year to June 30 a week
from Friday, is expected to report a loss of between Pounds 65m and Pounds
75m.
Analysts expect the dividend to be cut from 1.3p last year to 0.53p, if not
passed altogether, and there is little hope of a return to profits in the
near term. Under those circumstances, '30p may not be so bad after all,' Mr
Wellington said.
Lex, Page 22; Background, Page 25; Market, Page 44
