FT  14 JAN 92 / Australian appointed to stir up statistics office
A SHAKE-UP in the way Britain monitors its economy is likely following the
appointment of Mr Bill McLennan, a top Australian statistician, as new head
of the Central Statistical Office.
The appointment, to be announced by Downing Street today, marks one of the
most ambitious efforts in recent years to inject new ideas into a UK
government department.
The CSO, the main agency dealing with economic statistics and answerable to
the Treasury, has been criticised by some economists and politicians for
failing to use the latest ideas and technology to track economic change.
Mr McLennan, 49, has the reputation of being an innovator, and is well known
in the international statistical community.
As deputy head of the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS), he introduced
schemes to raise money for Canberra by marketing economic statistics to
specific industrial sectors.
The Australian has also been given credit for introducing new surveys at the
ABS and for using computers to collect and analyse data in a more timely
fashion.
Several UK economists and statistical experts were sounded out, but the
government's interview panel was struck by the Australian's forcefulness and
reputation.
Mr Ivan Fellegi the Canadian government's chief statistician, said Mr
McLennan was 'capable, imaginative and energetic' and that a 'period of
rejuvenation and excitement' was likely for the CSO.
Mr McLennan has worked all his career at the ABS, joining in 1960 as a
teenage 'statistical cadet'. He takes up the UK post on March 2 from Sir
Jack Hibbert, who is retiring.
In his new position he will have close links with Treasury officials and
will report ultimately to Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor.
The Treasury has in recent years been heavily involved in efforts to improve
the quality of the CSO's output, which some argue has been affected by staff
cuts suffered by government statisticians in the early 1980s.
However, the CSO collects and analyses its statistics independently from the
Treasury, to guard against claims of political bias.
