FT  09 SEP 92 / Foreign Affairs: The dangers of disorder - European
stability depends on integrating the east into a federal union built around
the EC
It will not, we are told, be the end of the world if the French vote No to
European union. That is presumably true. But it is also true that the idea
of European union was not dreamt up for the fun of it. The Maastricht treaty
is an attempt to respond to the new situation in Europe created by the end
of the cold war - a situation full of hope, but also of unfamiliar danger.
The treaty is far from perfect, but no alternative has yet been offered. And
if Europe fails to respond at all, the results could be grim indeed.
In the former Yugoslavia the end of the cold war has already allowed the
outbreak of hot war, with thousands killed and some 2m people driven from
their homes. As Mr Jacques Attali, president of the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, warned on Monday, this 'may only be the
beginning' of ethnic wars throughout eastern Europe, unless western Europe
lives up to its responsibilities.
For centuries the main fear of European statesmen has been the deliberate
use of force by one state against another - especially by one powerful state
to establish domination over the rest. Now suddenly that threat has almost
disappeared. In its place has come the danger of a complete breakdown of
order on western Europe's periphery - an almost continuous zone of
instability stretching from the Arctic circle through eastern Europe, the
Balkans, the Middle East and along the Mediterranean's southern shore.
Why does anarchy on its borders threaten the comfortable existence of
western Europe? Perhaps the most direct threat is that of nuclear or
chemical fall-out, if unconventional weapons are used in the former Soviet
Union, or if the collapse of social discipline and political control leads
to a second Chernobyl.
More indirectly, the disintegration of the Red Army and of the Soviet
defence industries has greatly increased the danger of weapons
proliferation. It is putting more dangerous arms into the hands of dictators
or terrorist groups in the Middle East, and perhaps soon in the Balkans.
Next, in both eastern Europe and the Maghreb lack of security is pushing
more and more people to migrate westward or northward. Western Europe could
perhaps absorb them economically, making up for the decline in its own birth
rate, but not without straining its social and political structures to the
breaking point.
Finally, there is the risk that western powers may get sucked into other
people's quarrels, as former national frontiers dissolve and coalitions
spring up based on ethnic solidarity or on the old adage that 'my enemy's
enemy is my friend'. Already Greece and Turkey, both Nato members, have
formed axes with opposite sides in the Yugoslav conflict, with Greece
backing the Serbs and Turkey supporting the Albanians and Bosnian Moslems.
That is not an argument for west Europeans to turn their backs on Balkan
problems. It does mean they need to be very careful about the form of their
intervention. The worst mistake would be for different west European states
to identify with opposite sides in a local conflict - as nearly happened
with Germany backing the Croats and France the Serbs in the second half of
1991. That is precisely why the leaders of the European Community, at
Maastricht, felt it necessary to create a 'European Union' (EU), with a
common foreign and security policy (CFSP).
A new European security system will take years to assume a clear shape.
Europe faces a wide variety of security problems, and will have to deal with
them through a variety of institutions. At best there will be, in the words
of Nato's Rome Declaration last November, 'a framework of interlocking
institutions', in which Nato, the Conference on Security and Co-operation in
Europe (CSCE), the EC, the Western European Union (WEU) and the Council of
Europe will complement each other.
But Nato will continue to be seen, both by its members and from outside, as
a 'hard security' organisation, concerned mainly with defence against the
old type of threat. In the absence of a renewed east-west conflict it is
therefore unlikely to acquire a broader political role - unless it can
overcome its inhibitions about admitting new members, and thus extend its
security zone into eastern Europe, where it is most needed. If it does do
that, it could come to provide the hard security dimension which the CSCE
would otherwise lack.
The CSCE will be the main forum for discussing security concerns common to
Europe as a whole, with the participation of both the US and Russia. It has
come to represent the aspiration of the continent to achieve that 'just and
lasting peaceful order' (the official objective of Nato from 1967 onwards)
with the understanding - which since 1989 has become a consensus - that such
an order must be based on shared norms of democracy and human rights. For
the CSCE to help achieve this aim, it would need to improve and strengthen
its machinery not only for verifying arms control agreements but also for
the peaceful settlement of disputes, the protection of national minority
rights, the humane treatment of migrants and asylum-seekers, and possibly
also the provision of peacekeeping forces.
The establishment of such a stable and peaceful order in Europe presupposes
that Russia and the states associated with it must find their rightful place
in the wider world community. But those central and east European countries
which have no organic or permanent connection with Russia will inevitably
look westward for investment, markets, and political support. Germany, as
the country nearest them and the strongest economy in Europe, will be best
placed to provide all three. If only for historical reasons, it is much
preferable that these countries be associated with Germany in the context of
an integrated European union, rather than becoming mere satellites of a
dominant nation-state.
Such an integrated union can only be built around the EC. If the process of
west European integration continues, the EU, based on the present EC, should
emerge as the main political entity standing between the US and Russia. It
is likely to have a multi-tier or at least a multi-speed structure, with
initially only a hard core of members belonging to its monetary and defence
institutions - the latter being derived from the WEU.
A prime function of such a union, while consolidating the unity between its
original members, would be to facilitate the gradual integration of eastern
and central European countries into the west European market. This means, as
Mr Attali said, that the west European market must be opened now. A
secondary but important function would be to seek a more harmonious
relationship between its members and their southern neighbours, notably the
Maghreb countries.
In order to carry out both those functions effectively the EU would need,
among other things, a common immigration policy, based on the requirements
of its internal labour market and backed by appropriate housing and social
policies. A common immigration policy is unworkable unless it includes a
common policy on asylum for political refugees. The EU would, in any case,
need to co-ordinate the policing of its external frontiers.
Will a union capable of undertaking such a central role in European security
come about? It is far from certain. Even if the Maastricht treaty is
ratified, few people believe that it provides a definitive constitution for
a Community which now faces successive waves of enlargement. The union it
creates is a hybrid affair - part federal superstate, part intergovernmental
organisation. The problem of the 'democratic deficit' remains unsolved,
since many decisions are left in the hands of ministers or heads of
government who are accountable individually to their national parliaments
and electorates, but collectively to no body representing the European
electorate.
A common foreign policy is proclaimed, but the procedure set forth -
unanimity for deciding on 'joint action' and qualified majority voting for
follow-up decisions - seems designed to produce the maximum number of
conflicts of interpretation. More seriously, implementation of the policy is
left to the rotating presidency, 'assisted if need be by the previous and
next member state to hold the presidency'.
The European Commission - which already represents the EC in trade
negotiations, administers its foreign aid programmes, and maintains
'embassies' in a number of foreign capitals - is supposed to be 'fully
associated' in the tasks arising from the CFSP. But it is unlikely to be
given either the mandate or the staff to play the part of a foreign
ministry. A coherent foreign policy is not likely to emerge from this
mish-mash of disparate procedures and rival bureaucracies.
A credible European union, able to make the contribution to European
security outlined above, would need a more coherent structure. It is hard to
see how that structure can be other than federal in form, but this should
not mean that the union would inevitably encroach on the powers of its
member states in every domain. On the contrary, a federal constitution would
be one in which the powers of the union would be defined and circumscribed,
and those of the states protected by judicial power. The constitution would
be amendable only by a predetermined procedure requiring a very broad
consensus.
This is essential, because without it, the central power is liable to expand
until the peoples of Europe revolt against it, with the danger that they
would pull down the entire edifice in the process.
If no European union capable of responding to these challenges comes into
existence, nation-states would have to cope with them separately and will
almost inevitably come into conflict with each other. Among those
nation-states Germany would be the strongest, and the only way for other
states to avoid falling under Germany hegemony would be to band together, in
time-honoured fashion, as an anti-Germany alliance. But if Britain and
France formed such as alliance, it is hard to imagine that Germany would
long allow them the monopoly of nuclear weapons. Thus Europe would
experience, at best, a new balance of terror or, at worst, a downward slide
towards a new world war.
Edward Mortimer's Adelphi Paper, European Security after the Cold War, will
be published on Friday September 18, by Brassey's for the International
Institute of Strategic Studies. Pounds 9.50.
