FT  02 JUN 92 / Survey of The Earth Summit (9): Difference of perspective -
Third World countries are increasingly reluctant to take advice from
industrialised nations
FOR DEVELOPING country governments, the industrialised world's new-found
concern for the environment has presented both a threat, and an opportunity.
The threat, as they see it, is that international pressure will be applied
to force them to forego growth by placing restrictions on their ability to
use their own natural resources. Having enjoyed the benefits of economic
growth at great environmental cost, industrialised country governments are
now seen as wanting the third world to forego development in order to
contain further environmental damage.
For some governments, the first world's attempts to interfere with the
environment policies in the third world smack of old-style imperialism.
Moreover, advice is not well-taken from countries whose own environmental
records are poor and whose use of the world's scarce resources is so much
more intensive than the developing countries'.
Dr Lim Keng Yaik, the Malaysian Minister of Primary Industries, says: 'We
feel offended that the whole discussion on the environment in the last few
years has been a finger-pointing exercise centred on countries who are
commercially exploiting their forests.'
The opportunity is that, for the first time in years, the developing world
has discovered it has leverage over the industrialised economies. If rich
countries want the developing countries to take environmental action, the
benefits of which will be widely dispersed, then there will have to be
compensation.
The bill for environmental action will probably be high: according to the UN
secretariat for the Rio conference the extra annual cost in aid from the
rich countries would be Dollars 125bn.
Many developing countries take the position that this should be entirely
additional to current aid budgets. The World Bank has made more modest
costings of an annual Dollars 75bn from the year 2000.
The extra call on the resources of industrialised countries has scared some
governments, particularly the US administration. It has taken the view that
the actual threat to the environment is less critical than has been
depicted. It has seen the aid demands as uncomfortably reminiscent of the
1970s discussion of a new international economic order, a debate it had
considered buried.
Rich-country governments much which developing countries can do for the
environment by opening up their economies to the discipline of market
forces, and by removing incentives for excessive exploitation of natural
resources.
This advice, though, is already being heeded by many third world
governments: they are lowering trade barriers and sharply reducing the role
of state intervention in their economies. Mr Jose Goldemberg, Brazil's
interim environment minister, says the removal by his government of tax
incentives has halved the rate of deforestation in the Amazon to 10,000 sq
km a year.
Moreover, it is precisely because the market fails to account for all the
costs of economic activity that environmental problems have become so acute.
The battle lines between north and south reflect in part their different
perspectives on environmental priorities. In most developed countries of the
north, the main concerns are issues such as carbon dioxide emissions, ozone
depletion, photochemical smog, acid rain, toxic waste and the loss of rare
species.
From a poor country viewpoint, the pressing environmental issues tend to be
smaller in scale and of which the international ramifications are smaller:
water supply and sanitation, soil erosion and desertification, and local air
pollution.
Global warming does indeed imply dangers for people in low-lying poor
countries, such as Bangladesh and Egypt, and threatens the water supplies of
others across the world, but many more people are seen as more immediately
at risk from local environmental problems. The World Bank has estimated
that, for example, 200m people rely for sustenance on shrinking tropical
forests, 1.2bn lack adequate safe water and 1.8bn proper sanitation, and
1.3bn people are exposed to unsafe conditions caused by soot and smoke.
From this perspective, poverty is the threat to the environment and the
solution to poverty is growth. Thus, at least on the face of it, third world
governments put themselves at odds with the many, mostly first world,
environmental pressure groups that see growth as the greatest environmental
threat.
In its 1992 World Development Report, the World Bank describes the idea of a
trade-off between environmental protection and growth as a false dichotomy.
'Without adequate environmental protection, development will be undermined;
without development, environmental protection will fail,' it says.
Developing countries are suspicious of the Global Environmental Facility
(GEF), the fund administered by the World Bank through which developed
countries want to channel their environment-linked aid.
Sensitive to their national sovereignty, they fear that the conditions which
will be imposed on the aid will further increase the rich countries' grip
over them.
As well as finance, they want access - unimpeded by restrictions on
intellectual property - to clean technology; they see themselves as entitled
to some financial flows from holding back on the development of their
forests; and they want to capture some of the economic benefits that may
arise out of the preservation of biodiversity.
For their part, most industrialised countries have thus accepted that the
threat to the global environment is two-fold: spreading poverty in the south
and poorly-regulated industrialisation in the north, although the extent to
which this consensus will be converted into action is still unclear.
In recent months, the debate appears to have become less heated and the
positions less entrenched. The summit will inevitably fall short of what
many environmentalists consider minimum objectives. But a framework should
be be established for the future discussion of a variety of environmental
issues on a global and on a national scale.
More finance will be made available to halt environmental degradation and
the GEF (now with about Dollars 1.3bn in commitments) expanded, and made
more receptive to the concerns of developing countries.
President Fernando Collor of Brazil, the host of the Rio summit, points to
the decision by President Bush to attend the conference, and breakthroughs
made in preparatory meetings over the last few months.
As a result, he says he views the prospects for the conference much more
optimistically than he did a month or two ago.
