FT  29 OCT 92 / EC wary on Danish opt-out demands for treaty
PROPOSALS by Denmark to reverse its rejection of the Maastricht treaty on
European union were greeted with caution yesterday amid signs that there may
be a lengthy wrangle among Community members on accommodation of Danish
demands.
Diplomats and officials in Brussels were encouraged that the Danish
compromise, which calls for supplements to the treaty, meets a central
request of the 11 EC member states: no renegotiation of Maastricht.
But it remains unclear whether the principal Danish demands for opt-outs on
a single European currency and a putative European defence force - agreed on
Tuesday night by seven of Denmark's eight main political parties - can be
met without amending the treaty.
Another fear is that Denmark's demands to opt out on defence could upset
negotiations on enlargement with Finland, Austria and Sweden. President
Mauno Koivisto of Finland noted pointedly yesterday in Brussels that
Helsinki would accept 'its obligations' conferred by EC membership under the
Maastricht treaty.
Brussels diplomats said the true test would come when Mr Uffe
Ellemann-Jensen, Denmark's foreign minister, visited EC capitals over the
next fortnight. Although the substance of Danish demands is well-known, it
would 'all come down to the wording', said one EC ambassador who stressed
that reaching agreement among all 11 states this year would not be easy.
In Denmark there were strong hopes that the compromise, if acceptable to the
rest of the Community, would enable the government to take the issue to the
electorate in a second referendum next year - and win.
The rejection by Danish voters of the treaty in June triggered the EC crisis
over economic and political union.
Dansk Markedsanalyse, an opinion polling institute, said yesterday that
research undertaken on Monday, ahead of the latest cross-party proposals,
found that 29 per cent of those who voted No in June had changed their
minds.
By adding these to the June Yes vote, the institute claims that 64 per cent
would vote in favour if a vote were held now.
The requests for special arrangements will receive the official approval of
the Folketing's European market affairs committee tomorrow before being
despatched to the other EC member governments.
One option gaining favour is for the 12 unanimously to adopt a new EC
directive which would be legally binding but which would fall short of a
treaty-amending protocol.
Such a directive could be accompanied by a political declaration on
subsidiarity - decision-making at the lowest appropriate Community level -
and transparency. Both could be appended to Maastricht and approved,
possibly, at December's EC summit in Edinburgh.
Maastricht loyalists, Page 9
Warning on single market, Page 2
