FT  07 SEP 92 / The ERM and Maastricht: EC joins in loan for Baltic states
THE European Community intends to provide a Dollars 300m (Pounds 150.7m)
medium-term loan to help the three Baltic republics reduce their balance of
payments deficit.
The EC loan will make up half of a Dollars 600m package of loans to Latvia,
Lithuania and Estonia from the Group of 24 industrialised nations.
So far some Dollars 260m of loans have been committed by other G24 nations,
with members of the European Free Trade Association shouldering a large part
of the burden. Most of the remaining Dollars 40m should come from the US.
EC finance ministers agreed provisionally to go ahead with their half of the
loan package during their weekend meeting in Bath. The Community should give
its formal approval to the Baltic loan at a formal meeting this autumn.
A year ago, in advance of the first EC mission to the Baltic states,
Brussels officials estimated that the three republics would require between
Dollars 2bn and Dollars 3bn annually in the form of emergency and technical
assistance, project loans and balance of payments aid.
Since then the economic situation has deteriorated still further. An IMF
study published in April forecast a 30 per cent drop in Latvian GDP this
year and a 15 to 30 per cent decline in Lithuanian output.
The Dollars 600m G24 loan is supposed to apply to this year, and Mr Henning
Christophersen, the EC finance commissioner, said after the Bath meeting
that he expected a quick decision on the EC half of the loan within the next
few weeks.
Discussion of the EC economy and the need to calm foreign exchange markets
swept most other items off the Bath agenda, but ministers did have time over
lunch to hear from Mr Jacques Attali, president of the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development.
Mr Attali urged ministers to improve the flow of trade between the Community
and eastern Europe.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor of the exchequer, who chaired the meeting,
later reiterated the EC's intention to move to 'a more liberal trading
position with eastern Europe'. He invited Mr Attali to address finance
ministers later during the British presidency of the EC.
