FT  22 JUN 92 / A velvet divorce, but a rough road to single life: The Czech
and Slovak republics will face difficult challenges after separation
The federal parliament which convenes today in Prague will almost certainly
be the last. Only the unlikely prospect of a popular revolt against the
decisions of its recently elected political leaders can now save the
Czechoslovak federal state.
A new interim federal government, to be made up of Czechs and Slovaks in
equal measure, will oversee the separation of the state, which was formed in
1918. Its function will be limited mainly to overseeing an orderly
transition of federal powers to the Czech and Slovak national parliaments by
September 30.
The dissolution of the post-communist state of Czechoslovakia, which was
regarded as perhaps the most promising candidate for full European Community
membership, will have repercussions well beyond its borders. It is further
evidence that the fragmentation of Eastern Europe, most tragically
experienced by Yugoslavia, is continuing.
The decision by the two republics to divorce, taken in the early hours of
Saturday morning, comes only two weeks after general elections which
revealed the strength of Slovak resentment against the government in Prague.
Rejecting arguments that Slovakia's future will be best assured by firm
linkage to the Czech economic locomotive, 60 per cent of the electorate
voted for parties which were either nationalist, or socialist, or both.
That vote provided the mandate with which Mr Vladimir Meciar went into the
talks. The former boxer is the leader of the nationalist Movement for a
Democratic Slovakia which played on the resentments of Slovaks and emerged
as the largest party in the republic. But although Mr Meciar went into the
post-electoral talks on Czechoslovakia's future as spokesman for the
aggrieved party the terms of the proposed divorce bear the strong imprint of
the Czech leader, Mr Vaclav Klaus.
Before the elections, Mr Klaus the former federal finance minister whose
Civic Democratic party (ODS) has become the dominant party in the Czech
republic, openly rejected any 'soft options' such as a looser confederal
structure. At the first round of talks in Brno, between Prague, the Czech
capital, and Bratislava, the Slovak capital, he rejected Mr Meciar's
proposed 'defence and foreign affairs community.' Having received a mandate
in the Czech lands for tight monetary policy, rapid privatisation and a
market economy, Mr Klaus turned a deaf ear to Slovak demands for its own
central bank and requests for federal funds.
Mr Klaus argued that both sides should either agree on a smaller but more
effective federal government dedicated to market-orientated economic reforms
or on a quick divorce. In the event Mr Meciar, had to agree to the latter.
After more than a thousand years of domination by Hungary, followed by a
six-year interlude as a puppet state of the Axis powers during the second
world war and Stalinist industrialisation after the war, Slovakia is
therefore faced with the challenge of independence.
It is a daunting prospect. It raises questions about the republic's
political and economic future and its role in the new Europe. Moreover, not
all of Slovakia's 5m citizens are ethnic Slovaks. There is a restive 600,000
strong Hungarian minority and smaller groups of ethnic Poles and Germans.
One of the principal demands made by Slovak nationalists is for Slovakia to
enter the European Community as a sovereign state in its own right. But that
depends more on Brussels than Bratislava. The likelihood is that the western
Czech lands of Bohemia and Moravia, freed of the need to subsidise the
economically weaker Slovakia, will now move faster on economic and other
reforms. Such policies should allow them to fulfil the preconditions for
membership of the EC while Slovakia, with its inefficient heavy industries,
risks sliding backwards economically.
Politically, too, there are fears over Slovakia's future. Mr Meciar's tight
control over the media and jibes against the Hungarian minority during the
election campaign are warning signs which have been noted by the Christian
Democrat and other opposition parties during recent weeks.
The international implications of the division of Czechoslovakia into two
sovereign, internationally recognised states will affect all international
treaties and agreements concluded by the Czechoslovak state - including the
recently signed association agreement with the EC and membership of the
International Monetary Fund and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The details of divorce will also require agreement on the division of
responsibility for Czechoslovakia's Dollars 9.1bn net foreign debt, as well
as the domestic debt and agreement on distributing assets.
Some issues are likely to be more fraught than others. At present, for
example, over 80 per cent of Czechoslovakia's 12m tonne annual oil
consumption is imported through the Druzhba pipeline which runs across
Slovak territory from Russia. It terminates in the Slovnaft refinery, just
outside Bratislava.
An independent Slovakia will seek higher transit and refining fees from the
Czech lands. To lessen its dependence both on Soviet sources and Slovakia,
however, the Czech republic has already made plans to build a new 3.4m tonne
capacity pipeline to bring oil from Trieste.
One of Bratislava's main economic complaints against Prague is that recent
economic reform measures - in particular freeing of prices - have hit doubly
hard in Slovakia. Officials in the Slovak industry ministry say that because
the republic is a supplier of components and semi-finished steel to Czech
factories, and because the products from Slovak factories are in many cases
still price-controlled, Czech factories receive artifically cheap Slovak
products which they then sell for valuable hard currency.
The collapse in trade between the former Comecon states which followed the
shift to dollar pricing provides a warning about what could happen if the
political and economic links between the two republics are severed. An
independent Slovakia would be hard pressed to sell its products to the west,
except at extremely low prices made possible by a devalued currency.
Potential markets to the east have no money.
But this is a dangerous part of the world in which to be small and poor. The
border between Hungary and Czechoslovakia was defined after the first world
war by the Treaty of Trianon under which Hungary, as part of the defeated
Austro-Hungarian empire, was much diminished. More than 5m Hungarians now
live outside Hungary's borders. If they are made to feel second class
citizens in an independent Slovakia the Hungarian minority may press
Budapest to demand some form of protectorate or even a renegotiation of the
borders which would bring them back into Hungary.
That could open a Pandora's box of similar claims from Poland and the
Ukraine which would further destabilise a region already apprehensive about
the future.
