FT  17 JUN 92 / Sense of crisis still dogs Perez: Pressure on Venezuela's
government is mounting
MORE THAN five months after the coup attempt that came close to ousting
President Carlos Andres Perez, a sense of crisis still pervades Venezuela.
The February 4 rebellion by junior army officers released pent-up
anti-government sentiment and produced waves of angry protests against the
Perez administration. The officers said their action was intended to
eliminate an inefficient and corrupt political system, punish those who had
stolen from the state, repeal the government's three-year-old economic
reform programme and guarantee national sovereignty.
In recent weeks the country has been shaken by dozens of violent
anti-government protests staged by students in Caracas and other key cities.
The students, along with many of the president's political opponents, are
calling for the resignation of Mr Perez and an end to his economic reform
programme.
Mr Perez has been resisting the calls, repeatedly stating he will remain in
office until his term ends in February 1994.
Pressure on the government increased last week when the main opposition
group, the Christian Democrat party (Copei), withdrew two members from the
cabinet and a political independent resigned from the Ministry of Economic
Development. In filling the vacancies, Mr Perez increased the number of
serving military officers in his 26-member cabinet to two.
This was seen as a gesture to the armed forces, where discontent is still
high. Many middle and junior level officers in the army sympathised with the
grievances voiced during the attempted coup and there is concern these
officers will try again.
General Fernando Ochoa Antich, former minister of defence who is now foreign
affairs minister, has warned that Venezuelans are demanding 'important
changes' and that were the changes not achieved peacefully they would come
through violence. Gen Ochoa, a widely respected army officer, played a key
role in quelling the February military rebellion. Although a critic of the
current state of Venezuelan democracy, he is a staunch defender of the
democratic system.
The crisis has slowed economic growth. After posting the fastest growth rate
in Latin America in 1991 - of 9.2 per cent - economists now believe growth
this year will fall well short of the 5-6 per cent forecast at the start of
the year.
Inflation has proved stubborn - it is likely to be about 30 per cent this
year - and is running well ahead of wage increases.
Weak international prices for petroleum exports - which provide the
government with most of its tax revenue - have also forced the state to
scramble to deal with a widening fiscal deficit for 1992. This may have a
bearing on its three-year loan agreement with the International Monetary
Fund, which expires next March.
The government's main response to the crisis came in early March, when it
announced a halt to price increases for petrol, electricity and a small
group of medicines and basic consumption items. This remains the only aspect
of the unpopular economic reforms that the president has been prepared
publicly to alter.
He also promised in March wide-ranging judicial, financial and
constitutional reforms, increased social welfare benefits and renewed
efforts to punish past corruption.
The results so far have been meagre. The president managed to force early
retirements from some members of the Supreme Court, and to replace them with
politically independent judges. However, the impact of the new court on
Venezuela's generally corrupt legal system will take time to be felt.
The administration has produced reform bills for the financial sector, begun
overhauling the national health system, and increased the number of
scholarships.
Mr Perez has been trying to hammer together a 'national accord' with the
Copei leader Mr Eduardo Fernandez and other political figures and
businessmen. This would specify several high-priority economic and social
problems that the government would attack in its remaining 19 months in
office.
To date, however, the plan has not taken shape.
'Even after the February warning, the government continues to talk a lot and
to do very little", said Mr Freddy Rojas, president of Fedecamaras,
Venezuela's largest business association.
