FT  03 SEP 92 / Survey of Distribution Services (1): Efficiency and quality
rule - Distribution services are becoming more sophisticated as the demand
intensifies for increased reliability and maximum cost savings. Phillip
Hastings looks at an industry facing the challenge of new safety legislation
and greater use of information technology
THE RECESSION and increased competitive pressures are combining with much
greater use of sophisticated information technology systems to make
industry's distribution operations more efficient and cost-effective.
In Europe the trend is being re-inforced by the rapid approach of the
European Community Single Market. A number of companies have already moved
to set up pan-European distribution networks - admittedly not always with
the success that had been hoped for - and others are considering similar
moves. At the same time, the international and domestic UK distribution
sectors are both focusing on quality, with more and more service operators
seeking to achieve recognised standards such as BS 5750 or ISO 9002.
The continuing drive for greater efficiency is highlighted in a survey by
the UK Institute of Logistics &amp; Distribution Management of more than 480
companies across a broad spectrum of UK industry and commerce. This showed
that distribution costs as a percentage of companies' overall turnover fell
from just under 5.2 per cent in 1990/91 to 4.7 per cent in 1991/92. That
compares with 8.5 per cent in the mid-1980s and 17 per cent at the start of
that decade.
However, there is still a considerable difference between the impact on
small companies and on large organisations of distribution costs. In the
industrial manufacturing sector, small companies with an annual UK turnover
of less than Pounds 50m report that on average, distribution costs amount to
nearly 16 per cent of turnover.
For medium-size companies with a turnover of Pounds 50m to Pounds 300m the
figure is a little more than 5 per cent and for large companies, just under
4 per cent.
'These results are consistent with previous surveys and indicate significant
economies of scale for many larger operators,' adds the ILDM.
However, the continuing overall improvement in distribution service
efficiency has not been enough to quell discontent among some distribution
service users.
There is particular dissatisfaction over the efficiency of distribution
operations run by third party contractors, particularly in the retail
sector. Other reports have found that companies with in-house distribution
services are also experiencing problems in achieving desired efficiency
levels.
Companies using third party contractors cite lack of understanding of their
business by service providers, poor standards of management and excessive
teething problems in the early stages of a contract as their main
difficulties.
Organisations running in-house distribution activities mention inefficiency
in the use of vehicles and facilities as weak links. Running their own
distribution operations uses financial and human resources which could be
better employed in other areas.
Partly in an attempt to resolve these problems, there has been a move
towards achieving recognised quality standards.
While distribution companies admit that gaining BS 5750 or similar
accreditation does not ensure customer needs will be fully met, they argue
that a standard is likely in future to be seen as a starting point, a basic
criterion which will have to be met.
Distribution service providers which do not meet that criterion, consultants
suggest, will find it increasingly difficult to receive invitations to
tender for new business.
Environmental issues such as traffic congestion and pollution are also
becoming significant factors in distribution service activities. London's
'Red Routes' scheme, for example, bans parking on certain roads to try to
ensure a free flow of vehicles.
Other restrictions on the movement of traffic are also complicating
distribution activities.
The UK's Freight Transport Association highlights recent proposals to put a
total ban on lorries in the Slade Green area of Bexley, Kent, at night and
at weekends.
The ban would prevent lorries collecting or delivering goods, with no
movements to or from premises, between 9pm and 6am, Monday to Friday, and
from 1pm Saturday to 6am Monday.
The FTA claims that companies situated on some busy industrial estates in
the area could face complete closure or relocation if the ban is introduced.
Other environmental issues affecting the distribution industry include a
continuing controversy over maximum truck weights in the UK. Meanwhile,
efforts to improve the fuel efficiency of commercial vehicles and to cut
emissions continue.
There is also an increasing emphasis on safety and this is particularly
evident in the specialised field of temperature-controlled distribution.
Continued tightening of legislation on food safety has forced operators to
invest in more staff training and new equipment.
Overshadowing domestic UK issues, though, is the coming of the EC Single
Market and its likely impact on distribution activities. At present, few
distribution service providers offer full pan-European coverage, and the
past two or three years have seen more and more companies forced to rethink
their expansion plans or even pull out. The most significant instance of
this was the withdrawal of giant US parcels company Federal Express from
European regional and domestic delivery because of continuing heavy losses.
A number of UK distribution companies have also run into problems with their
expansion on the Continent and even the more successful ones such as Exel
Logistics, Transport Development Group and McGregor Cory have tended to move
fairly cautiously.
There are definite signs, however, of renewed interest in the development of
European services. In June, for instance, the UK-based Hays group announced
it had bought French distribution company Groupe FRIL for Pounds 37.5m.
According to Mr Ronnie Frost, Hays' chairman and chief executive, the group
has for several years been searching for a significant company to expand its
presence in Europe.
More recently, Mayne Nickless group UK domestic parcels carrier Parceline
announced it was moving into Continental Europe using a networking operation
and an international forwarding company.
'We are not about to put at risk the improving profitability of Parceline by
taking on heavy costs from day one. We are getting into Europe with minimum
investment and risk, with variable costs rather than fixed costs,' Mr Colin
Millbanks, Parceline chief executive says.
Another stimulus for UK distribution industry interest in Continental
European business is the construction of the Channel Tunnel and its
associated freight links. Together with European Commission efforts to speed
up the development of railfreight and combined road/rail transport services,
the Tunnel is pushing rail transport much more firmly into the general
distribution industry spotlight.
Still to be answered, though, is the question of whether railfreight and
combined rail/road transport will be viable for a wide range of goods in
addition to the former's traditional bulk traffics. Crucial factors will
include the development of efficient transhipment operations and good
consignment control capabilities.
In fact, good information technology systems, increasingly including EDI
(Electronic Data Interchange), are already playing a critical role in
general distribution service development.
And research carried out by consultants Touche Ross for the ILDM shows that
improvement of such systems is now the number one target for future
development among distribution industry executives.
