FT  17 JUL 92 / Parliament and Politics: Prescott hopeful of extended fight
MR John Prescott, shadow transport secretary, tried to inject a dose of
excitement into Labour's leadership contest yesterday by claiming he could
force a second ballot for the deputy leadership.
Speaking after Nupe, the public-sector union, said it would back him in
Saturday's contest, Mr Prescott said his calculations showed that Mrs
Margaret Beckett, the clear favourite for deputy leader, may not win a
majority in the first ballot.
However, he acknowledged that Mrs Beckett was easily the most likely to win
a second ballot. Nupe has also announced that it will back Mr John Smith,
shadow chancellor, for Labour leader.
The latest events in the leadership contest came as nominations closed for
the party's shadow cabinet elections next week - set to be a far less
predictable poll. A record 54 nominations have been received for the 18
places.
Mr Prescott has won the support of unions representing about 11 1/2 per cent
of the electoral college. Mrs Beckett has about 25 per cent and Mr Bryan
Gould, shadow environment secretary and the final challenger for the deputy
leadership, has just 3 per cent.
Mr Prescott's calculations show him and Mrs Beckett each winning a further
12 per cent from Labour MPs but he belives some MPs are switching
allegiances. He also disputes claims that Mrs Beckett has an overwhelming
lead among the constituency section of the electoral college.
Mr Prescott believes he has drawn more votes from northern constituency
parties and Mr Gould more from southern areas - a distinction he claimed may
have biased estimates of his support. It is unclear how many of Mr Gould's
supporters would switch to Mr Prescott in a second ballot.
Mrs Beckett's total share of the vote would be a few percentage points
either side of 50 per cent, Mr Prescott predicted. 'It is open. Nobody can
tell. It will be done on the floor on the day,' Mr Prescott said.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, yesterday announced a joint
environmental policy conference with the Green party, designed to show the
spirit, 'of the new politics' involving co-operation between opposition
parties.
