FT  18 JUN 92 / International Company News: Japanese drug-makers slow off
the mark - Pharmaceutical groups are under pressure to expand and innovate
A RUSH to invest overseas by Japanese pharmaceutical companies in the late
1980s appeared to signal their entrance on to the world stage. However, it
has since become clear that Japanese pharmaceutical groups are far from
becoming the Toyotas or Matsushitas of the global drugs market.
Despite strong efforts by some Japanese groups, the country's pharmaceutical
industry has been unable to develop the world-beating innovatory products
needed to break into overseas markets.
Yamanouchi Pharmaceutical, with annual sales of Y226bn (Dollars 1.8bn) and
one of the drugs companies to expand most aggressively internationally,
hopes to be a truly global company within the next 10 years.
Fujisawa Pharmaceutical, Japan's third-largest with sales of Y227bn, says:
'It's essential for Japanese companies to globalise since domestic market
conditions are going to be increasingly difficult.'
However, western managers have doubts. Mr Thomas Hofstatter, executive
managing director of Hoechst Japan, says most Japanese drugs companies are
going to take time to grow into leading global operations unless a real
breakthrough product is discovered.
In the 1980s, most Japanese drugs companies started their overseas expansion
with simple licensing agreements and established clinical trial offices. The
more ambitious, however, set up joint ventures or acquired distributors in
the US and Europe.
Fujisawa acquired Lyphomed, a small drugs company in the US, and Yamanouchi
built a manufacturing plant in Ireland, a research centre in Oxford and,
last year, acquired the pharmaceutical division of Gist-Brocades, a Dutch
chemical company.
Japanese drugs-makers are now trying to build comprehensive independent
operations in research and development, production, and marketing. Fujisawa
is increasing production and marketing capacity in the US and Europe ahead
of the launch of FK-506, an immune system suppressor used to prevent
transplant patients rejecting their new organs.
However, compared with the multi-billion dollar mergers and acquisitions of
US and European companies, the Japanese operations and acquisitions have
been modest in size. Total overseas sales by Japanese pharmaceutical
companies remain around 5 per cent of their turnover, compared with 30 to 50
per cent of leading US companies and 70 to 90 per cent of leading European
companies.
The main barrier for the Japanese companies has been their lack of
marketable products, as most have lagged in the development of important new
drugs. This was due to their reliance on small-step innovations of existing
drugs, mainly lower-value antibiotics and vitamins.
Mr Muneyuki Sakai, pharmaceutical analyst at County NatWest in Tokyo, says
an overseas subsidiary needs at least four or five original mainline
products.
Exceptions to this pattern include Sankyo, with its anti-cholesterol product
Mevalotin. The drug has annual exports to its licensees of Y13.2bn.
Yamanouchi is known for its anti-ulcer agent Gastar, which had Y90bn
overseas sales last year.
Japanese drug companies have traditionally been complacent about R&amp;D because
of the government's pricing policy on drugs. The Health Ministry used to
award all new drugs premium prices, whether they were improvements or not,
and failed to give drug companies an incentive to develop innovative drugs.
Rather than take the risk of spending high sums on product development, many
of the larger companies chose to only make small improvements of existing
drugs, and distribute drugs supplied by foreign companies under licence for
the Japanese market only.
Development programmes have also been hurt by cumulative price cuts by the
Health Ministry, which started in 1981. It forced 10 to 15 per cent price
reductions every two years. This pressured cash-flow at the Japanese drug
companies, which are considerably smaller than their western counterparts.
However, attitudes towards R&amp;D are changing rapidly as innovation has become
the key to profits.
The ministry is pushing for innovative drugs through a change in its pricing
rules. From this fiscal year, the only drugs to be allowed premium prices
will be those which represent a new concept, are more effective than
existing drugs, and which make a noticeable contribution to treatment.
At the same time, foreign drug companies have started to end distribution
tie-ups as they establish their own networks in Japan, reducing commissions
at the former Japanese partners.
Ultimately, companies will need to establish a worldwide presence in order
to recoup mounting R&amp;D costs. Fujisawa needs to globalise because its market
share in Japan has hit a ceiling and profits have reached their upward
limit. Companies which do not succeed internationally will see a pressure on
profits.
In the long run, Japanese companies are expected to become more innovative.
However, for companies whose development policies are aimed at marginal
improvements, changing direction will not be easy. Mr John Wilson, analyst
at James Capel, says: 'Companies are under pressure, with sales of the
industry growing at 5 per cent and costs of R&amp;D increasing by 10 per cent.'
Since a typical drug takes 10 years and Y10bn to develop, only those
companies large enough to absorb the costs will be able to survive. Mr Sakai
at County NatWest believes that about 10 companies, led by Sankyo, Fujisawa,
and Yamanouchi, will be able to establish a position in the international
pharmaceutical market.
In the near future, companies predict a wave of mergers and acquisitions,
especially rescues of smaller companies lacking new products. Takeda, the
industry leader, says: 'There are a lot of negotiations going on behind the
scenes.'
Mergers and acquisitions by foreign companies, in line with Merck and Banyu
in 1983, and more recently Bohringer Ingelheim and Yamaguchi Seiyaku in
1990, are also expected to increase, as Japanese companies are now cheaper
following the slump in Japanese share prices.
