FT  01 JUN 92 / Gadaffi's guns elude police dragnets / Tracing an enigma
within a mystery from its start in a secluded Irish cove
CLOGGA STRAND does not appear on most tourist maps of Ireland.
It is about 50 miles south of Dublin, a secluded, mile-long bay with golden
sand, where oyster and mussel shells crunch underfoot at the high tide mark.
No road or track reaches the beach, and only shore anglers and other people
in the know are likely to turn up there. Set back from the seashore is a
cluster of isolated cottages with innocuous names such as Journey's End and
Shady Nook. At Clogga Strand, though, they have an intensely ironic meaning.
For it was here in 1985 and 1986 that the chief quartermasters of the
Provisional IRA carried out one of the biggest and most successful arms
smuggling operation in the IRA's history. Four shipments from Libya were
unloaded in the bay and provided the IRA with an estimated 150 tons of
weaponry.
To date, it is independently estimated that only between a quarter and a
third of the weapons landed in the first four shipments has been captured by
security forces, although the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) in Northern
Ireland and the Gardai police forces in the Republic claim that the figure
is closer to half.
It included automatic rifles, heavy machine guns, anti-aircraft missiles,
millions of rounds of ammunition and several tons of the powerful Semtex
explosive. The operation was disclosed after the capture of a small coastal
freighter, the Eksund, off France in 1987. A further 150 tons of weapons
were aboard, also destined for Clogga Strand.
Most of the rest is widely believed to be stored in bunkers scattered about
the Republic of Ireland. It is thought that there may be as many as 4,000
AK47 automatic rifles, several hundred machine guns and well over a million
rounds of ammunition.
Mr Ken Maginnis, Ulster Unionist MP for Fermanagh and South Tyrone and his
party's spokesman on security matters, said: 'I am firmly convinced that if
the Special Branch (in the Republic) was given the resources it could do a
better job. It is under-resourced and underfunded in every respect.'
Early last February, days after Mr Albert Reynolds succeeded Mr Charles
Haughey as Irish prime minister, the Gardai set in motion Operation Silo.
Acting on intelligence reports, they uncovered a series of IRA bunkers in
the southern counties of Kerry, Limerick and Kilkenny. The dragnet has since
extended to Cork, where this month the biggest haul since 1988 was made. It
uncovered 51 AK47 automatic rifles, a DShK heavy machine-gun - a type used
with success against British Army helicopters in the north - and 20,000
rounds of ammunition.
The succession of finds prompted one Dublin magazine to publish a cartoon
showing one farmer leaning on a fence and saying to another: 'That field is
corn, those two are barley and the far one is semi-automatic rifles.'
The IRA's caches in the Republic range from purpose-built concrete bunkers
capable of holding several tons of weapons usually concealed under a farm
building, to plastic barrels containing only a few rifles or pistols and a
few hundred rounds of ammunition and buried in a field next to a culvert or
ditch.
The biggest find, after the Eksund capture, was in January 1988, when 100
AK47s, five heavy machine guns and 50,000 rounds of ammunition were
discovered hidden in sand dunes in the northern county of Donegal. All the
arms finds since then in the Republic do not equal that one discovery.
Since 1987, the RUC, British army and Gardai together have captured about
500,000 rounds of ammunition and some 350 AK47s.
Detailed figures on Semtex are unavailable, but the RUC estimates that 1 1/2
tons has been used or recovered in the north.
Mr Maginnis said he had put down several parliamentary questions to find out
how many of the weapons are still in IRA hands, but without success. 'When
the government wants to hide failures,' he said, 'it says it cannot reveal
the information for security reasons.'
Up to a year ago he said that no more than a fifth of the Libyan-supplied
weapons had been discovered. The reported finds of the security forces since
then would increase that figure to no more than a quarter.
Mr Maginnis said: 'On the present rate of discoveries, even if 50 tons have
been found over the past seven years, that means there is sufficient left
for the IRA to carry on until the year 2010.'
In a similar vein, Mr Alan Shatter, the justice spokesman for the opposition
Fine Gael party in the republic, said: 'There is concern that we are only
scratching the surface.'
There is uncertainty over whether the IRA has widely dispersed its weaponry,
or whether there remain several large caches, under the control of just a
few key IRA quartermasters.
The Gardai declined to divulge figures on the number of Special Branch
detectives dedicated to anti-IRA duties, but confirmed that the job fell
largely to local detective units who also have to deal with common crime and
are backed up by Special Branch units only in some larger cities. Mr
Maginnis would seem to have cause for complaint.
It is the frustration with the limited success rate against the IRA's
logistic supply lines that has convinced unionist politicians in the north
that the best way of disrupting the IRA's military campaign is to use
selective internment against the suspected quartermasters.
Much may hinge on what Col Gadaffi, the Libyan leader, decides to do. To
ease mounting international pressure against him over the Pan Am Lockerbie
bombing, he recently offered to co-operate with the UK authorities on
disclosing his past links with the IRA. Will he be prepared to detail the
shipments that got through and name the IRA quartermasters with whom he
dealt?
The fact that so few of the Libyan-supplied arms have been used has prompted
the observation that either the IRA has far more weapons than people trained
to use them, or the weapons themselves are not particularly suited to the
IRA's present strategy.
A renewed political vacuum in Ulster should the current inter-party talks
end again in deadlock and the new Northern Ireland ministerial team bowing
to Unionist demands is the kind of scenario in which the weapons might be
brought out of their bunkers. Operation Silo has so far done little to
prevent that happening.
