FT  22 JAN 92 / More troops sent to West Bank and Gaza: Move follows strong
pressure from settlers
ISRAEL said yesterday it had sharply increased the strength of its armed
forces in the occupied territories, a move which followed strong pressure
from Jewish settlers for more aggressive army action against the Palestinian
uprising, or intifada.
The army's statement that it was stepping up troop numbers in the West Bank
and Gaza Strip by 20 per cent kept the focus of political debate in the wake
of Sunday's collapse of Mr Yitzhak Shamir's coalition government fixed
firmly on the occupied territories.
Mr Moshe Arens, the defence minister, denied the reinforcement was prompted
by the demands of the settlers, who have mounted angry demonstrations
against him and Mr Shamir over a series of shootings in which five Israelis,
including fours settlers, have died. He said the extra troops were needed to
help track down the killers.
But both Mr Arens and Mr Shamir have been quick to affirm their support for
the 100,000-strong settlers - an important constituency for their Likud
party - since the loss of the government's parliamentary majority heralded a
likely general election by mid-summer.
The issue is a tricky one for Mr Shamir because his dogged commitment to
expanding Jewish settlements may jeopardise his request for Dollars 10bn
(Pounds 5.5bn) in loan guarantees from the US, which strongly opposes the
settlements. Israel, needing to raise more than Dollars 20bn overseas to
help cope with mass Jewish immigration from the former Soviet Union, can
ill-afford to forego the assistance.
Mr Ronni Milo, the police minister and close associate of Mr Shamir,
suggested in a newspaper interview that Mr Shamir could reach a 'quiet
agreement' with Washington to freeze settlements, although it would be
difficult for him to announce this publicly.
This was interpreted as meaning Mr Shamir might tell the Bush administration
that no further commitments to new house building in the settlements would
be made. But, as settler leaders were happy to point out, the large numbers
of housing starts already under way or in the pipeline would mean such an
assurance would have little meaning.
Latest figures show housing starts in Jewish settlements - almost all
government funded - numbered 6,435 in the first nine months of last year,
compared with 1,820 in all of 1990. The government is committed to more than
5,000 this year.
Mr Shamir's apparent lack of concern about voter reaction to the economic
consequences of his settlement policies is partly explained by the disarray
in the main opposition Labour party.
At a meeting of Labour MPs yesterday attended by reporters, Mr Shimon Peres,
the party leader, and Mr Yitzhak Rabin, who will challenge his leadership
before the election, traded angry accusations and insults.
Mr Chaim Ramon, leader of the Labour parliamentary party, warned that if the
two did not stop squabbling 'it will cause irreversible damage to Labour's
position which will be very difficult to overcome'.
