FT  11 JUN 92 / Survey of US Finance and Investment (6): A shrinking share
of a larger pie / A look at the prospects for the country's futures industry
THE US futures industry, once a magical beanstock of growth and a honey-pot
for risk-craving traders, is facing a far less dazzlingly profitable
maturity.
Fast-paced growth is now the province of newer, overseas exchanges. And as
US futures markets have become larger and more liquid and competition has
increased for client business, the bid-ask spreads that make trader's
profits have slimmed and so have the fees for client transactions.
A consensus has grown that the days of fat windfalls, turning ex-taxi driver
traders into overnight millionaires, are over in the US. Simply winning
returns better than the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 is regarded as success these
days.
But, if it has lost a bit of its rude gleam, the US industry has benefited
at the same time. It has made progress in shedding its poor image as a crap
shoot and establishing futures as a legitimate part of virtually every large
investor's portfolio.
Moreover, it still has a number of innovative tricks up its sleeve. For
instance, Chicago, with the world's two largest exchanges, the Chicago Board
of Trade and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, has been home to the greatest
innovations in the industry - the creation of financial contracts based on
US government bonds (the most actively traded futures in the world), stock
indices and currencies - and remains the best laboratory for new concepts in
futures.
This year, for example, the CBOT is launching insurance futures and hopes to
start a new pollution permits contract next year.
Whatever the fate of those contracts, the US is likely to continue to be the
centre of futures innovation because 'you need big markets to initiate new
products,' says Mr Jack Wing, chief executive officer of Chicago Corp, a
large futures brokerage.
Nevertheless, the US futures industry is vexed that its worldwide market
share has continued to shrink as new foreign exchanges have mushroomed.
Although it thoroughly dominated futures trading around the globe a decade
ago, it claimed just 53.2 per cent of total volume last year.
The American industry as a whole has not enjoyed double digit annual growth
since 1987, when trading volume shot up 24.2 per cent. 'It's a mature
business here and we're not going to see growth like the 1980s,' says Mr
John Damgard, president of the US Futures Industry Association.
According to the FIA's figures, last year for the first time since 1968,
America's 11 exchanges suffered a decline in trading. Volume fell in 1991 by
4.93 per cent.
By comparison, futures trading volume at the Marche a Terme International de
France (Matif) grew last year by 32 per cent, at the London International
Financial Futures Exchange (Liffe) by 13 per cent and at the Osaka
Securities Exchange by 47 per cent.
A renewed upswing of 15 per cent in trading volume on American exchanges
from January to April this year promises to deliver at least single-digit
annual growth again. But the long-term trend of a smaller piece of a much
larger international futures pie, given the proliferation of futures
exchanges, is unlikely to be reversed.
While the exchanges themselves are most hurt by the diminished market share,
large US-based futures traders welcome the overseas markets. They are
willing to trade anywhere and the new markets offer them more diversity of
product and trading environments that are less restrictive than the US.
For the moment, most products on foreign exchanges are not competing head to
head with those on US exchanges. They tend to be indigenous, with a firmer
local than global market, though an internationalisation has already begun
to occur in Europe and could hasten as the Community's integration
progresses. Thus, for instance, Liffe has contracts on both the Italian and
German governments' bonds and trades the US government bond as well.
One remedy to boost volume for the US exchanges is the advent of
round-the-clock trading, which they will pioneer with the electronic system
known as Globex. Long-awaited, and with its start postponed successively for
three years, Globex is due to be launched on June 25. Developed jointly by
the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the CBOT and Reuters, the system could mean
that those contracts it lists will benefit in trading volume from giving
off-hour access to traders around the globe.
So far, select products from the two Chicago exchanges and Matif, Globex's
only international partner exchange, are to be listed. This year, the CME's
currency, Eurodollar and one-month Libor contracts and the CBOT's Treasury
bond and two-, five- and 10-year treasury notes contracts will be listed,
followed by Matif's 10-year Notional bond, seven-year Ecu interest rate,
three-month Pibor rate and CAC-40 stock index contracts.
Four New York exchanges have agreed in principle to join the system, though
final approval of their affiliation is still being worked out.
Beyond bringing a rise in volume, the Globex system is also widely
considered a possible harbinger of the industry's likely electronic future.
Though many exchanges, even some of the newest, believe firmly in open
outcry pit trading as the best, most efficient style, screen trading seems
to be exerting a strong undertow on this orthodoxy.
The shape of the markets over this decade will also continue to be deeply
affected by the entry of large institutional players. Since the early 1980s,
this trend has been gathering steam. Every large Wall Street investment bank
and stock brokerage now has a futures arm of some sort.
Just as mutual funds have come to play a major role in the stock markets,
managed futures funds, currently holding an estimated Dollars 21bn, are
increasingly important in futures markets. Futures have become very much a
professionals market, with retail business accounting for only an estimated
3 per cent of trading.
Many in the industry who have come out of the equities business have a
strong sense of deja vu. Mr Wing, for example, says: 'One is struck by the
similarities.' This in itself is testimony to how mainstream the futures
business has become. One veteran futures hand, pining for the salad days,
recently complained that big institutional traders 'have gotten a taste of
being part of the establishment and now they're a stuffy, co-opted
conservative bunch.'
