FT  21 AUG 92 / Eastern Europe banks on the west for advice: A discreet
battle to influence the direction of monetary institutions in the evolving
market economies
THE BANK of England and the Bundesbank are fighting a discreet battle - for
the hearts and minds of eastern Europe's fledgling central bankers.
At stake is the future shape of capitalism in the new democracies as they
evolve towards a market economy. At this stage, however, the issues tend to
be strictly practical - for example advising on accounting and payment
systems, or explaining just how you control money supply.
Compared with the Bank of England and the Banque de France, which have had
long experience of giving advice and support to central banks in developing
countries, the Bundesbank is a comparative newcomer to the advisory game.
Last year it set up a special department to provide 'technical assistance'
in this field, in an attempt to expand German influence in parts of the
world undergoing political and economic change.
Apart from eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, the Bundesbank has
been in contact with a number of countries from Latin America which have
reformed their central banks in recent years.
Stressing Germany's post-war success in fighting inflation, the Bundesbank
places special emphasis on the need for central banking independence.
Would-be central bankers from eastern Europe, says Mr Hans Tietmeyer,
vice-president of the Bundesbank, are particularly interested in 'how and
where the bank notes for a new currency are to be printed, what they are to
be called, how big they ought to be and what colour they ought to have'.
But, says Mr Tietmeyer, these preoccupations ought to be secondary compared
with questions such as how a central bank controls the circulation of money
or manages a country's foreign exchange reserves - or copes with the
'overhang' of money from a previous currency.
'It is not surprising that people come to us with these requests,' Mr
Tietmeyer says. 'Central banking is one area where we in Germany have a
reputation for special expertise.'
More than 250 east European bankers have come to Frankfurt to learn how the
Bundesbank functions, some of them staying for up to two months. Up to 40
German central bankers have had short secondments to the central banks of
the former communist states, for example, giving help in setting up
accounting systems at the new Russian central bank.
In June, the Bundesbank held a special conference in Prague for the staff of
Czechoslovakia's central bank - the first time it has offered a training
course for central bankers outside Germany.
The Bundesbank has also offered advice to the states of Estonia, Lithuania
and Latvia as they re-established their central banks during the past year,
after 50 years of Soviet rule. Estonia, for instance, gave its central bank
a statute of independence on Bundesbank lines - and specifically pegged its
new currency, the kroon, to the D-Mark when it was launched in June.
The Bank of England has also received numerous requests for help from the
east. Over the past 18 months, 200 central bankers from eastern Europe and
the republics of the former Soviet Union have been to London for special
courses and about 15 of the Bank's staff have spent time on secondment to
the east.
Bank officials admit the rivalry with the Bundesbank. This has been
particularly delicate in areas of the former eastern bloc conquered by
Germany during the second world War, which resulted at the time in
Reichsbank officials being brought in to take over local central banking.
The Bank of England's effort is focused on the London-based Centre for
Central Banking Studies. This was set up in September 1990 and offers a
series of courses lasting up to two weeks to central bankers from the east.
With 10 staff, it costs the Bank about Pounds 2m a year.
The heads of the central banks of Russia, the Ukraine and Kazakhstan are
among the people who have been on the courses in the past few months.
Subjects covered include creation of separate currencies, currency
convertibility, the development of financial markets, relations between
fiscal policy and monetary policy, and press relations.
Early in July, the Bank despatched Mr Tony Latter, a senior manager in the
Bank's international division, for a six-month secondment in Kiev. Mr Latter
is to act as special adviser to Mr Vadim Hetman, governor of the Ukrainian
central bank, and will help out in particular with the introduction of the
hryvnia, the new Ukrainian currency due to come into force next year.
The Bank's involvement in the east is underscored by the personal commitment
of Mr Eddie George, deputy governor of the Bank and a strong candidate to
take over as governor next year when Mr Robin Leigh-Pemberton retires.
One of the 12 or so people within the Bank with a good grasp of Russian  -
learned during a spell with the army in Berlin during the 1950s - has been
interested in the region for decades.
The commitment of the two central banks has its limits, however. Mr
Tietmeyer of the Bundesbank explains: 'We don't want to take over any
responsibility for the policies pursued by a bank,' he says. 'We don't want
them to say: 'Well we were advised by the Bundesbank, so it is their
policy.' The responsibility must remain with each country.'
