FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (15): Tensions rise as the economy weakens
 -The immigration issue / National self-confidence is wavering amid economic
uncertainty
THERE is a popular belief in Germany, fostered by social affairs experts,
that the rise of the extreme right does not offer any danger to democracy.
Backed up by continuous assurances, notably from Chancellor Helmut Kohl,
that Germany is 'foreigner-friendly,' it rings increasingly hollow as the
tally of killings, fire-bombings, and less overt signs of xenophobia
increases. The number of attacks by right-wing extremists rose more than
five-fold in 1991, and is continuing to go up this year.
Although the level of violence has eased since the August riots in Rostock
on the Baltic coast in the former GDR, the wave of antipathy rolls on.
Swelled by regular media reports which splash headlines on the number of
crimes committed by 'foreigners,' and politicians making capital out of the
alleged costs of housing, feeding and processing refugees, it has developed
a momentum which government has been unable to dissipate.
Most recent public attention has been focused on physical attacks on
Roumanians and other registered asylum-seekers in eastern Germany, but the
malaise has spread deeper and further.
The defacement of Jewish monuments and memorials is once again commonplace.
The so-called Jewish barracks in the former Sachsenhausen concentration camp
was burned down in late September.
Earlier this month, right-wing extremists attacked a Greek school in
Wuppertal. Expatriate staff of foreign companies have been tutored on how to
dress and behave to avoid abuse or worse.
Meanwhile, thousands of hapless asylum-seekers continue to press into
Germany through gateways opened up by the country's liberal asylum laws.
Under the traditional interpretation of the so-called basic law, or
constitution, anyone arriving in Germany asking for political asylum must be
admitted and his or her case investigated.
This has long been interpreted as a carte blanche for economic refugees from
all over the world to make a bid for a better life in Germany. The long-term
steady flow has turned to a flood following unification, the collapse of the
Soviet Union, the opening of Germany's eastern borders with Poland and
Czechoslovakia, and war in the former Yugoslavia.
Recent monthly registrations of asylum-seekers have exceeded one a minute.
By August the total for the year so far already matched the 256,000 who
arrived in 1991. Forecasts of 400,000 at most during 1992 were revised
upwards towards 500,000.
On today's acceptance rates, fewer than 5 per cent of the total will be
allowed to remain as genuine asylum cases. But all will be processed through
the lengthy and meticulous procedures set out by the interior ministry and
the constitutional court.
All will be distributed around the country - each Land or region allocated
assorted groups according to a strict quota system - and all will be housed,
fed and clothed at an estimated monthly cost of DM1,400 each.
Debt-laden local authorities, struggling with a national housing shortage,
and police and social services increasingly claim they can no longer cope.
Beyond the street battles, the signal failure of policy-makers and
administrators to deal with the problem has led to widespread popular
cynicism and loss of support for leaders of all the mainstream parties.
Indications of possible future trends have included the winning of seats in
the Schleswig-Holstein parliament by the racist German People's Union, and
the installation of a powerful voting bloc in the Baden-Wurttemberg
legislature for the far-right Republican party, led by Mr Franz Schonhuber,
a former Waffen-SS officer.
While vox pop soundings suggest that the vast majority of Germans despise
and are shamed by the regular outbursts of violence, other, more detailed
investigations show up considerable antipathy to foreigners. A recent study
by the Cologne Institute of Empirical Psychology, which involved more than
2,000 people between the ages of 16 and 24, showed that a third admitted to
being antagonistic towards non-Germans or at least harbouring xenophobic
thoughts.
A finding that is possibly even more significant is that only 25 per cent of
the sample believed there should be no discrimination of any kind against
foreigners.
A broader sampling in early September by the respected Infas institute
reported 25 per cent supporting repatriation of foreigners, and a good 50
per cent agreeing that 'Germany belongs to the Germans.'
The sheer volume of foreign faces, often concentrated in run-down,
heavily-populated areas, and the proliferation of habits alien to the
disciplined Germans, is producing unmanageable tensions at a time when the
economy is weakening rapidly.
National self-confidence is wavering under the influences of economic
uncertainty, the realisation that the dream of unification is a potential
nightmare, and the impact of international condemnation of the violence on
Germans' self-esteem.
The reactions of national political leaders, far from countering the
uncertainty, have in fact reflected it in magnified form. Wide cross-party
consensus is essential for any change to the basic law, but until recently
government and opposition policies have been in turmoil.
The three-party ruling coalition earlier this month healed its three-way
split and agreed a compromise reform plan.
Returning to Bonn after the summer, the SPD leadership raised hopes of
progress when it apparently gave up its long-standing ideological resistance
to any reduction of refugees' rights.
Mr Bjorn Engholm, party chief, declared himself ready to negotiate with
government on constitutional amendments. But within weeks the regional
membership was pressing party leaders to change tack once again, and
promising chancellor-candidate Mr Engholm an uncomfortable time at the next
party assembly in November. But his discomfort will be minor compared with
the tribulations of the beleaguered refugees.
As long as international and domestic economic conditions deteriorate and
the flow of newcomers continues without clear initiatives from Bonn, so the
potential among native Germans for resentment and violence seems likely to
grow.
The so-called 'asylum problem' has developed into Germany's most pressing
domestic political and social challenge. It has fostered the re-emergence of
the far right as a potent political power throughout the country and damaged
the east's hopes of winning vital foreign investment.
It has also put the German people at odds with themselves - and the watching
world.
