FT  01 FEB 92 / Yeltsin calls for global nuclear defence system
RUSSIAN president Boris Yeltsin made his debut on the international stage
yesterday with a call at a special United Nations Security Council summit
for a global defence system against nuclear missiles.
Urging the US and the west generally to join a democratic Russia in the
quest for greater collective security, Mr Yeltsin invited other nuclear
powers to take part in common research to develop a space-based anti-missile
shield. He said Russian scientists had been working on developing such a
system.
Mr Yeltsin suggested that 3,000 nuclear scientists and specialists could use
their skills in this programme. The west has expressed fears that aspirant
nuclear powers, such as Libya, Iraq and Iran, could lure these scientists
into developing their own programmes.
He also proposed that the UN set up a permanent rapid response force under
Security Council control to deal with international crises.
President George Bush avoided a direct response to the Russian proposal for
a nuclear defence system, which is conditional on what Mr Yeltsin called 'a
reorientation' of the US Strategic Defence Initiative, the programme to
build a space-based anti-missile shield. Instead, Mr Bush welcomed earlier
proposals by Mr Yeltsin to make deep cuts in nuclear weapons.
Mr Ronald Reagan, when US president, offered to share SDI technology with
the former Soviet Union to try to overcome Mr Mikhail Gorbachev's opposition
to proposed deployment by the US of an anti-missile system. The Bush
administration has been more cautious.
The White House later announced that all Mr Yeltsin's defence proposals
would be examined today during the five hours of talks to be held by the two
leaders at the presidential retreat at Camp David. It will be their first
bilateral meeting since the abortive August 'putsch' in Moscow.
The Russians are also expected to offer to dismantle nuclear warheads as the
next step of arms reduction, in return for US money and expertise.
The summit meeting of Security Council member leaders, the first of its
kind, was called by Mr John Major to chart a new course for the UN in the
post-cold war era.
Opening the first session, Mr Major said the new partners had to take
advantage of the end of superpower rivalry to reinforce collective security.
'The world now has the best chance for peace, security and development since
the founding of the United Nations.'
Mr Major called on his fellow permanent members of the Security Council  -
Russia, which has taken over the former Soviet seat, France, China, and the
US - to strengthen the UN capacity for 'preventive diplomacy, peacemaking
and peacekeeping'.
President Francois Mitterrand of France offered to make available a
1,000-strong peacekeeping force at short notice.
The special summit was also designed to bolster the prestige of the new
secretary-general, Mr Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
The temporary and permanent members of the Security Council asked Mr
Boutros-Ghali to report by July 1 on ways to strengthen collective security
and peace keeping. The declaration also suggested the UN examine the
possible role of 'identifying potential crises and areas of instability'.
Mr Bush condemned the 'outlaw regime' of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq
and said there could be no normalisation of relations as long he remained in
power. He called for sanctions to remain in place.
The US yesterday signalled that it might press for further UN resolutions to
persuade Libya to hand over two men suspected of being involved in the
Lockerbie bombing and the sabotage of a French civil airliner.
Libya's offer to hand over the two men to the UN was dismissed by Mr James
Baker, US secretary of state, as unsatisfactory.
Page 3
Major heralds wider role for UN
UN declaration Japanese call to Security Council
Page 6
Superpowers move the winning post
