FT  13 NOV 92 / Government hopes recovery package may end turmoil
A COLLECTIVE cheer from Tory MPs for Mr Norman Lamont's economic recovery
package last night raised the government's hopes that it may at last have a
chance to draw a line under the political turmoil of the past two months.
As the Conservative backbenches focused on lower interest rates and the
financial help for the housing market, industry and construction, the
instant judgment was that Mr Lamont had strengthened his precarious hold on
the chancellorship.
Mr John Major sought to capitalise on the favourable reaction by telling
restless MPs on the right of his party that he was determined to focus the
government's efforts on boosting economic growth.
At a dinner held by the 92 group of MPs, which in recent weeks has led
backbench criticism of his strategy, the prime minister said that achieving
recovery was now 'number one priority'.
Opposition parties, however, dismissed the Autumn Statement as a timid
response to the recession and warned that the promised squeeze on public
spending was likely to drive the economy further into slump. There was
private acknowledgment among ministers that the success of the package - and
the government's political fortunes - now depended critically on the
reaction of business and consumers over the next few weeks and months. The
government, one cabinet minister said, had bought itself a breathing space.
The consensus was that Mr Lamont's future also would hinge on whether the
measures proved bold enough to stabilise the housing market and boost
confidence among consumers. One colleague commented laconically that last
night the chancellor was 'as safe as houses'.
The government's decision to load most of the pain of the spending squeeze
on to public sector pay won warm applause from Tory MPs - as did the
chancellor's promise that ministers would receive no increase at all.
Provision for private sector finance for transport and other infrastructure
projects and increased capital allowances for business also went down well
among the government's supporters.
There was relief that the Treasury had been thwarted in its attempts to
freeze or tax some social security benefits.
Ministers said that fear of further backbench revolts had persuaded the
cabinet against taking any measures requiring legislation.
Among Whitehall departments, the main loser from the squeeze was judged to
be the Ministry of Defence. But the health, transport and environment
departments were among others forced to accept cash reductions in their
previously agreed budgets.
There was also concern over an acknowledged clampdown on next year's
financing for local authorities. Tory MPs fear that the average household
bill in the south of the country when the council tax is introduced next
April could soar to over Pounds 600.
Ministers acknowledged that the government might yet face a rebellion when
MPs vote on the revenue support grant settlement early in the new year.
