FT  03 MAR 92 / Parliament and Politics: Rip Van Roy's radicalism is
re-awakened - Campaign Profile
MR Roy Hattersley's weaknesses are so widely caricatured, so publicly
displayed and so universally and joyously celebrated that his strengths tend
to be underestimated - even, perhaps, by himself.
Labour's deputy leader is endlessly pilloried for his self-confessed crime
of intellectual snobbery and his fondness for good living.
He might be more aptly reprimanded for being unconvincingly
self-deprecating, overweaningly loyal and for failing to throw his
indisputable weight around.
Urbane and provincial, imperious and blokish, fop and slob, Mr Hattersley is
known both for quoting stunningly obscure philosophers and supporting
Sheffield Wednesday.
These Jekyll and Hyde qualities are reflected in his two conflicting
reputations. While in Westminster, he is often depicted as almost too
semi-detached. Yet, he has also spent much of the last two months
energetically stomping the regions to sell a soundly old-fashioned vision of
socialism.
At little-reported Labour gatherings from Blackpool to York, he has reminded
his audiences that the party was in danger of forgetting its basic goal: the
redistribution of opportunity, privilege and wealth through a decisive
tipping of the political scales in favour of the powerless.
Back in London, Citizen Roy is more than aware that such robust sentiments
are out of place. Yet he doggedly refuses to substitute his eloquent quill
pen for the ubiquitous fax.
After all, when it was de rigeur to be left, he was unfashionably right. Now
that it is politically correct to be a pragmatic yuppy, he is irritated at
that old-style Labourism is seen as an embarrassing throwback to a past it
is now electorally advisable to forget.
'It is as if Roy has nodded off for a decade or so, then woken up to find
himself a leftwinger,' one youthful admirer observed recently.
Roy Sydney George (note the appropriate combination of no-nonsense Yorkshire
and pampered Hanoverian) Hattersley was born in Sheffield in 1932.
A grammar school boy whose mother once served as lord mayor his class
credentials do not run to claims of clogless deprivation. Rather, he seems
to have been a product of that sturdy municipalism lovingly recorded by JB
Priestley and Keith Waterhouse. At times, he was, in his own words, 'a
terrible prig'.
From Sheffield's council chamber, the young Hattersley ascended effortlessly
to Westminster, entering parliament as the first Wilson government took
office in 1964.
But though his sharpness was quickly spotted by the late Tony Crosland, he
failed to reach the Cabinet until Jim (now Lord) Callaghan appointed him
prices and consumer-protection secretary in 1976.
His critics at the time claimed that he failed to stand up for his
pro-European principles by resigning from Labour's front bench. They also
charged that he was opportunistic in backing the front-running Callaghan
leadership bid rather than for his old friends and allies, Roy (now Lord)
Jenkins and Crosland himself.
Such attacks fail, however, to take account of Hattersleian realism - the
same judgement that persuaded him not to take to the lifeboats when the
Social Democrat tide was running full flood.
A tribal man, Mr Hattersley's Labour loyalties are as fierce as his love of
Yorkshire and Coronation Street - sentiments as schmaltzy as a Hovis
advertisement, perhaps, but no less genuine for that.
In the long years of opposition, attitudes have subtly changed. His
hopelessly romantic bid for the leadership has been fully redeemed by his
loyalty to Mr Kinnock since. His less than shining period as shadow
chancellor - engaged in unappetising sumo wrestling with Mr Nigel Lawson -
was widely deemed a flop.
But in his current job as shadow home secretary, Mr Hattersley is regarded
to be enjoying a new lease of life. 'Roy is having a renaissance,' said one
colleague. 'He has discovered that the party likes him.'
Though by no means intimate either with the party leader or his shadow
cabinet colleagues, he is praised for a readiness both to consult and
devolve.
At times accused of spending more time on his books and journalism than his
political duties, Labour's growing band of constitutional reformers have
been impatient with his caution on a Charter of Rights and electoral reform.
Under pressure, however, he has appeared to be shifting, if at glacial
speed. Labour now argues that it will support a broad statement of rights,
to be backed up by individual legislative acts.
And while Mr Hattersley still opposes proportional representation for the
Commons, his even-handedness in allowing Professor Raymond Plant to conduct
his inquiry into electoral reform without interference has been noted.
So how would a Hattersley Home Office behave? The answer, if Labour's policy
menu is to be believed, is rather dramatically. With the party at best
expecting a narrow majority, its priority commitments to legislate for a
Scottish parliament in its first session and introduce a freedom of
information bill will put an often merely reactive dep+artment at centre
stage.
Close friends also claim that Mr Hattersley is deadly serious in his promise
to reform the House of Lords. Potentially, he could emerge as the last and
greatest reforming home secretary of the century - there can be no doubt he
is greedy for the job.
To his most unforgiving critics - the champions of Labour's new breed of
Browns and Blairs - it is his haughty aloofness and intellectual arrogance
are fatal flaws.
Yet there is a sense of humour, an all-roundedness to the man which is a
refreshing contrast to the grisly orthodoxies of the modern
technocrat-politician. His recent relentless hounding of the editors of the
Daily Express and the Daily Mail have added to the general jollity of
Westminster life.
On Star Chamber, the jokey C4 television programme that has 'personalities'
interviewed by a computer, Mr Hattersley was asked what animal best
described him. He replied: 'A Labrador dog. Because it's complacent,
affectionate and sometimes it actually sort of stands up on its feet and
resents people interfering with it.'
Unlike a well-known department store chain, Mr Hattersley is ever knowingly
undersold.
