FT  12 SEP 92 / Russia and Ukraine set for big grain purchases
RUSSIA and Ukraine, the largest of the former Soviet states, will make big
grain purchases on the world market this year - though these are expected to
be down on last year following a better harvest than originally forecast.
Russian President Boris Yeltsin yesterday said that the grain harvest would
be 110m tonnes, requiring imports of 7m-15m tonnes - a large drop on last
year's level of 25m tonnes. The figure followed a briefing from Mr Leonid
Chechinsky, the Grain Board chairman, to the effect that the harvest would
be a good one and that the yield per hectare would be some 2.1 tonnes,
higher than for the past five years.
However, a western agricultural expert in Moscow warned that the break-up of
the Soviet Union and the increasing difficulties faced by transport services
put the storage and distribution of the grain at risk.
Russia has made desperate efforts to secure hard currency to continue
repaying agricultural credits advanced by Canada - second only to the US in
exports of grain, with an average of 5m tonnes a year. Canada, which
extended CDollars 1.5bn (Pounds 625m) in credits to the former USSR, cut off
shipments in August after non-payment of arrears, but has since resumed
exports and says it will continue to offer credits this year.
Mr Vitold Fokin, prime minister of Ukraine, said yesterday that Ukraine
would again need to import 11m tonnes of grain, even though the 40m tonne
harvest expected is above average. State purchases of grain from farms are
still running below required levels, in spite of increases in the prices
paid to an average of Rbs12,000 a tonne - with hard wheat commanding up to
Rbs24,000 a tonne in some areas, notably the Urals.
Mr Alexander Romashko, a senior official in the Agriculture Ministry, said
yesterday purchases were now proving more difficult as farms hoarded their
grain in expectation of still higher prices.
Mr Arkady Volsky, the head of Russia's powerful state enterprise lobby,
yesterday presented President Boris Yeltsin with his most explicit ultimatum
yet to slow the pace of radical reforms or face the full might of factory
directors, writes Leyla Boulton from Moscow.
Mr Volsky, also a leader of the Civic Union opposition group which includes
the country's vice-president, said that unless he got a 'positive response'
to a 13-point list of demands by November, he would convene a conference of
industrial managers.
The demands included reducing the tax burden on enterprises to stem a fall
in production and price and wage controls.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is taking a 35 per cent
stake in a new bank to provide long-term project finance in Russia, writes
Peter Norman.
The EBRD board this week approved participation in the Moscow-based Russian
Project Finance Bank, which will provide corporate and project finance. The
bank will have an initial capital of Dollars 6m, which will rise to Dollars
100m (Pounds 50.7m) after two years. It will be headed by Mr Sergei
Konyachev, former managing director of the Moscow Narodny bank in London.
