FT  23 DEC 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Diamond gloom lifts as Angolan
smuggling eases
THE THREAT of civil war in Angola and growing consumer confidence in the US
is lifting some of the gloom from the diamond market.
The flood of smuggled rough (uncut) diamonds from Angola, which was severely
destabilising the market, has slowed to a trickle. Also official production
by Angola's state-owned Endiama group has come to a halt following renewed
tension and fighting between government forces and the Unita movement.
At one time an estimated 50,000 private enterprise diggers were picking up
diamonds from dried-up river beds in Angola. The stones were smuggled out
mainly to Antwerp where De Beers, which controls 80 per cent of world-wide
rough diamond sales, attempted to keep the market stable by buying them for
its stockpile.
At the height of the rush De Beers' buyer in Antwerp mopped up nearly
Dollars 40m-worth in one week and the group estimates about Dollars 500m of
stones were smuggled out of Angola this year, representing a sudden 10 per
cent addition to world supply.
However, most of the unofficial diggers disappeared when political tension
in Angola was renewed after elections in September and the Unita forces
withdrew to their stronghold in the southern provinces, including the Lunda
Norte diamond district.
After fighting broke out last month, sub-contractors who mine on Endiama's
behalf withdrew all their personnel. Last year Angola's official diamond
production was in the region of 1m carats, worth about Dollars 100m.
Coming at a time when demand was weakening in the biggest diamond markets -
the US and Japan - because of recession, the Angolan smuggling has been
putting a severe strain on De Beers' financial resources and its ability to
stop a precipitous fall in rough diamond prices.
De Beers has told the producers whose stones it markets that it can take
only 75 per cent of the agreed quota and has also severely restricted the
diamonds releases to the market via merchants at its monthly 'sights'.
Some traders suggest that, consequently, rough diamond prices are getting
firmer and there are even some shortages of particular types of polished
stones. 'Rough (diamond) buyers say the market is now in balance rather than
a buyer's market as it was a few weeks ago,' said Mr Mark Cockle, editor of
the Diamond International magazine.
