FT  22 MAY 92 / UK Company News: Italians get a taste for the Lancashire
pizza
A GREATER Manchester manufacturer has developed a new variation on the
'coals to Newcastle' theme by selling pizzas to Italy in increasing
quantities. The company, which also makes 35 per cent of the pizzas sold by
UK superstores as their own brands, was bought out yesterday by its
management for Pounds 15.5m.
Canadian Pizza Crust (UK) makes frozen pizza casings at Weaste in the former
Salford enterprise zone. Toppings are added in a second plant at Nelson,
Lancashire. Annual sales have nearly doubled to Pounds 11m during the
recession and are expected to rise to Pounds 16m this year.
The company attributes success to pressing its pizza cases into shape
through rollers, proofing them, and then rolling them again - an advance on
merely cutting them out of big sheets of pastry. Mr Harry Kent, who founded
the business in 1986 with Mr Gino Molinaro, a Canadian, says this ensures a
fluffy texture develops during baking.
Before building the Salford factory, Mr Kent was Mr Molinaro's UK importer.
Mr Molinaro has since sold his Canadian operations to Heinz.
He and Mr Kent have now sold the UK operation to the buy-out team, but Mr
Kent has reinvested half of his own proceeds back into the business, which
he will continue to run. Mr Alan Featherstone, his commercial director, has
joined in the buy-out, together with Mr Wilf Austin, the finance director.
The Manchester office of Murray Johnstone, the Scottish finance house, has
taken Pounds 7m of equity, 3i has Pounds 2.5m and ECI Ventures Pounds 1m.
Murray Johnstone also negotiated Pounds 2.5m of senior debt with 3i and is
putting Mr Peter Woodall on the pizza company's board.
Mr Kent is particularly pleased at breaking into Italy. His pizza cases are
now sold in supermarkets in Rome, Venice, Turin, and Naples, with expansion
into Milan later this year.
The company now plans to build a factory in southern France to supply
growing markets in Switzerland, Spain and Greece. The pizzas are also
selling well in the Netherlands and Norway.
Employment has grown from 30 in 1986 to 250 jobs. Murray Johnstone said
research predicts a growing UK market because of demand for convenience
foods that are quick to prepare and have a healthy image. A growing segment
is the in-store delicatessen custom-made pizza, for which the company
supplies cases.
