FT  11 JUL 92 / Letter: Exchange rate mechanism remains valid alternative to
single European currency
Sir, Mr Charles Bean and seven other professors try to defend the Maastricht
road to European Monetary Union (Personal View, July 3) by claiming that the
only long-term alternative is a more flexible regime of floating rather than
a continuation of the current exchange rate mechanism (ERM). They expect the
ERM to become unsustainable on the grounds that it may come under
speculative attacks in the absence of capital controls.
However, such attacks are likely only with respect to currencies of
countries whose perceived fiscal position becomes unsustainable (eg Italy)
or who are hit by a large country-specific real shock. In these rare events,
attacks can be prevented by proper realignment. Thus, it seems that the ERM
remains a valid alternative to a single European currency, provided
realignment is not tabooed and the Bundesbank's lead of monetary policy is
accepted.
Bean et al also assert that the European central bank (ECB) will be as
independent as the Bundesbank. They fail to see that the national governors,
serving in the ECB-council, can be made dependent on their home governments
by providing them with only a five-year term and a reappointment on
conditions to be determined by national legislation. The German central
bankers, by contrast, enjoy an eight-year term and can rely on an automatic
reappointment within the normal limits of age. Similarly, they can rely on a
general reluctance of German governments to manipulate the dollar/D-Mark
exchange rate.
Given the interventionist attitude in some EC countries, it is less likely
that the Commission will be similarly unwilling to intervene. After all,
exchange rate policy can be used to force the ECB on to more expansionary
growth.
Finally, Bean et al convey the impression that the 60 German economists who
criticised the overly hasty Maastricht move to monetary union used the
German unification experience as an illustration of the dangers of European
union. In fact, the German economists did not mention this experience at
all.
Manfred J M Neumann,
professor of economics,
University of Bonn,
Lennestr 37,
5300 Bonn 1,
Germany
