FT  10 APR 92 / China questions Midland Bank deal: Financial soundness of
Hongkong takeover in spotlight
CHINA yesterday questioned the financial soundness of Hongkong and Shanghai
Bank's proposed takeover of Midland Bank and reminded the bank of its
responsibilities to Hong Kong.
The New China News Agency (NCNA) quoted an unnamed official of the Bank of
China who said Midland was the worst performing of Britain's four clearing
banks, with huge bad debts and losses.
'(Hongkong Bank) is the biggest bank in Hong Kong, a major note-issuing
bank, the clearing bank and the government's main banker. Its executives sit
on many top advisory bodies. It is just natural that every move of (the
bank) arouses concerns among local and overseas investors,' the NCNA quoted
the Bank of China official as saying.
Hongkong Bank has always said it hoped the Chinese authorities would approve
of the deal. Hongkong Bank's fortunes in the coming decade will depend to a
great extent on Chinese attitudes, as Hong Kong will revert to Chinese
control in 1997.
China has to date adopted a low profile on Hongkong Bank's bid for Midland.
It has said the deal represented a sound commercial strategy for the bank's
long-term development, although it was a means of switching assets out of
Hong Kong.
Hongkong Bank has taken pains to keep China informed of its plans. Before
its March 17 announcement of the bid for Midland, the bank told Beijing's
Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office of its intentions, a strategy it has
adhered to since it acquired a 14.9 per cent interest in Midland in December
1987.
It was not immediately clear if the comments of the BOC's spokesman
represented a change in Beijing's policy towards the bank's takeover. But if
it did, it was unlikely to dissuade Hongkong Bank from the takeover.
The Hongkong Bank would not officially comment on yesterday's reports.
However, one bank official noted that it was well aware of its
responsibilities to Hong Kong which it took seriously.
Mr Gordon Wu, managing director of Hopewell Holdings, the big Hong Kong
construction company, yesterday said it was 'stupid' to claim the bank was
deserting Hong Kong.
'They, more than any other bank, have been the biggest supporter of Hong
Kong business in southern China,' he said.
Lex, Page 20
