FT  24 SEP 92 / People: Hankinson plugs RHM's gap
David Hankinson, Rank Hovis McDougall's new finance director, has probably
seen the insides of more British com-panies than the average finance chief.
When he takes up his new job on October 5, he will have been finance
director of six very different companies over the past 13 years.
The arrival of Hankinson, 53, who quit as Lucas's finance director in March
following a boardroom reshuffle, will plug an important gap in RHM's slim
top management team.
Bob Rogerson, who had been RHM's finance director for 15 years, retired a
year ago and Paul Coker, the deputy managing director, took on his
responsibilities. Following Tim Howden's move to head Albert Fisher's
European operations at the end of March, Coker had to take on his
responsibilities as managing director as well as head the finance side. The
increase in Coker's burden has come at a particularly difficult time for RHM
 -its shares have fallen by two thirds over the past couple of years - and
there has been concern in some quarters of the City that the company was not
doing enough to foster its relations with big investors.
Hankinson, like Coker and Rogerson before him, is a chartered accountant.
After reading law at Cambridge, he spent 11 years with Arthur Andersen
before moving into commerce. In 1972 he joined Midland Bank Finance
Corporation and a couple of years later moved first to Thomas Cook as group
controller and then George Wimpey. In 1979, he was appointed group finance
director of The Guthrie Corporation, and after that he went on to be finance
director of Wilkinson Sword (1982-83), Chloride (1983-86), Rover (1986-89)
and Lucas Industries (1989-92).
*****
Lord Hanson's son, Robert, has been appointed to the board of the
Anglo-American conglomerate at the age of 32. After seven years with N M
Rothschild, Hanson junior moved across to his father's company, as assistant
to the two vice-chairmen, in 1990. Also promoted on to the board is Graham
Dransfield (left), 41, Hanson's senior solicitor for the past four years.
Dransfield replaces Alan Hagdrup, 60, who relinquishes his executive
director responsibilities. Hagdrup, on the board since 1974, will continue
to work on legal matters full-time for the next year, with plans to stay on
part-time for an indefinite period thereafter.
