FT  31 JUL 92 / Survey of Power Generation Equipment (10): Water into juice
 -A reversal in the fortunes of hydroelectricity
THE history of hydroelectric power schemes is littered with shattered
dreams.
However, Gorm Gundersen, executive vice-president of ABB Norway, believes
river power is due for a revival. Only 20 per cent of the world's potential
for hydroelectric schemes has been tapped so far, he says.
Gundersen is a member of the management team responsible for the worldwide
hydroelectric business of ABB, the giant Swiss-Swedish power consortium.
Over the past 15 years new hydroelectric schemes have been in decline, he
says. Big dams and reservoirs were unpopular with environmentalists and the
vast capital costs made fossil fuel and even nuclear power generation more
attractive.
But fears of global warming and problems over nuclear waste disposal have
shifted attitudes towards hydroelectricity, says Gundersen. 'It is clean,
efficient and a renewable source.'
ABB expects to see the market pick up again in the developing countries such
as the US, Canada, Norway, Switzerland, and Italy where so far only 50 per
cent of the potential for hydroelectric schemes has been developed. 'But the
most important market for us will be the Third World,' says Gundersen.
'There, just a fraction of the potential, as little as 5 per cent , has been
tapped.'
In spite of the high capitalcosts, hydroelectricity is very attractive, he
says. There are no fuel costs and a large share of the 80 per cent of a
project's cost that goes on civil engineering work can be undertaken
locally. Also, he says, there is the added benefit in some cases of
combining hydroelectric schemes with irrigation schemes. As a result, says
Gundersen, ABB is beginning to see a significant growth in the market of
about 10 per cent a year.
Hydroelectricity accounts for about 20 per cent of total world energy output
 -620 GW (Gigawatts) out of 3,000 GW. Gundersen expects the level to reach
25 per cent in the next decade.
ABB estimates the total world market for hydroelectric schemes to be about
Dollars 3bn a year. This represents rather less than the 10 GW of new
capacity installed annually during the late 1970s. The two biggest markets
are China and south east Asia, particularly Taiwan, Malaysia, Korea and
Vietnam. But Pakistan, India, and South America are all potentially
exciting. And in Africa, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Mozambique, Namibia and
Angola all have considerable potential for hydroelectricity, Mr Gundersen
says.
Although the number of new hydroelectric schemes has declined, total order
values have risen because of the growth in the retrofit market. A
refurbished power station can generate up to 30 per cent more power from the
same turbines at 10-20 per cent of the cost of a new station. Better
electrical insulator materials mean that old generators installed in the
1950s can have their windings replaced by new ones that squeeze more copper
wire into the same space.
Refurbishing and upgrading stations now accounts for 25 per cent of ABB's
hydroelectric business, says Gundersen. It is particularly popular in the
US, although Germany, the UK, Sweden, Norway, Italy and Switzerland are
upgrading existing stations. ABB also has some refurbishing projects
underway in the Third World where many power stations have not been properly
maintained says Gundersen.
ABB believes the future of hydroelectricity lies in reducing installation
and running costs rather than developing more efficient generators. It is
developing automated control systems to run power stations virtually
unmanned as well as condition-monitoring sensors to warn of early signs of
faults in generator insulation and bearings.
Over the last 10 years, some 83 GW of new hydroelectric capacity has been
installed, of which ABB claims 23 per cent. Its nearest rival has been
GEC-Alsthom with 16 per cent, followed by General Electric of Canada and the
East Europeans each with 9 per cent and Siemens with 8 per cent.
All the Japanese power companies together accounted for about 17 per cent.
But during 1989-91, GEC-Alsthom's share shot up and ABB's fell as
GEC-Alsthom won a huge order in Taiwan. This year, ABB reversed the figures
again by winning Dollars 350m worth of business from Iran's 2,000 MW scheme
at Karum.
Mr Alan Stothard, managing director of the GEC-Alsthom turbine subsidiary,
Rugby-based Neyrpic, sees hydroelectricity as the power source of the
future. 'If you had asked me two years ago, I would have said there would be
a boom by now.' But he was reckoning without the worldwide recession. And
despite his long-term optimism, Stothard is not expecting any big upturn in
new schemes for the next few years.
'Hydroelectric work is very flat at the moment. Construction work may take
off in the next five years, but it will be a further three years before the
equipment suppliers get in. Business is going to be very flat over the next
eight years,' he says.
Neyrpic will be relying on refit and rehabilitation work which has accounted
for up to 50 per cent of its business in recent years. 'A station installed
10 years ago with a rating of 100 MW now probably only has a rating of 75 MW
because of degradation. We can upgrade it to 130 MW, giving a leap in power
from 75 MW to 130 MW for as little as 10 per cent of the cost of a new
station.'
Ewbank Preece, the Bri ghton based engineering consultancy, says that the
world's leading funding authorities such as the World Bank and the European
Investment Bank now require an environmental impact report for any proposed
new hydroelectric power scheme. This makes raising funds even more
difficult.
As a result, it says, the trend over the next 10 years will be towards
smaller, environmentally friendly new schemes and towards refurbishment of
existing ones. Technology will reduce the size of generating equipment
needed and lead to an increase in turbine speeds which will in turn lead to
lower machinery costs.
John Dunn is deputy editor of The Engineer
