FT  08 JAN 92 / Hasty measures fail to lift Mexican smog: How political
costs are still outweighing environmental incentives
FLY into Mexico City in the next few months and you will notice a thick
cloud of yellow smog over the city. Talk to the city's residents and you
will hear endless complaints of sore eyes, breathing difficulties, and
ill-health.
In 1991 the levels of ozone (a secondary pollutant formed when nitrogen
oxide and hydrocarbons mix in sunlight) reached record highs, and exceeded
approved international standards for 290 days of the year. The next few
months - the peak smog season - are likely to be worse. In the past two
years, winter levels of ozone have risen by 14 per cent and 8.4 per cent
respectively. Other pollutants, which receive less attention are as, if not
more, dangerous. The amount of particulate matter - including faecal dust -
floating in Mexico City's air, which cause breathing problems and higher
mortality rates, is over twice the legislated standard.
Mexico City has come to be known as the pollution capital of the world. Home
to 15m to 20m people, almost 3m cars, and 36,000 factories, Mexico City
emits 12,000 tonnes of pollutants a day. In winter months much of the
pollution is trapped by clouds of cold air that hang over the city.
The deteriorating air quality, has forced the government to take a series of
drastic measures. The Environmental Ministry, along with other government
departments, has prevented use of the city's 2.8m cars and trucks on one
working day each week; closed down the giant March 18 oil refinery; ordered
the replacement of 60,000 taxis and minibuses with models fitted with
catalytic converters; shut down scores of factories that fail to comply with
tough emissions standards; invested hundreds of millions of dollars in
improving public transport, the quality of gasoline, and planting trees; and
in November raised leaded gasoline prices by 55 per cent.
The total cost of Mexico City's anti-pollution programme is now put at
Dollars 4.6bn although much of that used for better public transport would
have been spent anyway.
While the measures taken have stopped the increase of some pollutants
(noticeably lead), the programme, say many environmentalists and economists,
has not beening particularly well thought out.
One problem is that with a number of different ministries responsible for
the city's environment - including the departments of health, environment,
transport, education, the Mexico City and State of Mexico governments - that
implementation of the measures has been delayed by bureaucratic in-fighting.
More important, the government has neither established the impact of
different pollutants on the health of Mexico's City's residents, nor
estimated the economic cost of reducing the levels of these pollutants.
The Mexican government has thus still yet to conclude a large
epidemiological study on the health of Mexico City residents, compared to
say the health of residents of another large city less polluted. There is no
centralised pool of data on hospital admissions that lets researchers look
at how illnesses correlate with pollution levels. Nor has any attempt been
made (publicly at least) to calculate the economic cost of different
pollutants.
One 'back-of-the-envelope' attempt to do this by the World Bank, puts total
air pollution costs in Mexico City at Dollars 1.1bn a year. By far the most
costly pollutant in terms of reducing life expectancy, increasing medical
costs, and lost work days were fine particulates of faecal and other dust
that permeate Mexico's air.
The suspended particulates are most common in north-east Mexico City, and
are caused by the heavy concentration of industry in this part of the city,
coupled with the ecological destruction of nearby lakes and trees. A simple
measure that would reduce this problem - charging industries in Mexico City
with much higher tax rates - has not been taken.
The government has only a handful of stations measuring particulate matter
against dozens measuring ozone - much too few in the opinion of Mr Luis
Manuel Guerra, director of the Autonomous Institute of Ecological Research.
The measures the government has already taken have often failed to achieve
their goals. The 'day without a car' programme, which was rushed into law,
failed to halt the increase in petrol consumption, in part because many
Mexicans bought second cars to circumvent the restriction. This year petrol
consumption has risen by about 7 per cent.
The government has shied away from using market-based schemes to reduce
pollution, which evidence from the US suggests would reduce the cost of
cutting a given amount of pollution.
Mr Fernando Menendez, Mexico City's head of environmental planning, says
that a pollution tax on companies would be too difficult. In any case, he
says, 'what I don't want is that someone pays me to pollute. That looks to
me as criminal'.
However, the government could tax the fuels (or their carbon content) used
by Mexico City-based industries. This could be a useful proxy for taxing
pollution.
Other market-based measures have been rejected in part because the political
costs seem to be too high.
The Mexican government may be afraid that tough measures would dampen
economic growth, and threaten the ruling party's political hold over the
city. But until the cost of driving a car, or operating a factory reflects
the environmental damage of the activity, Mexico's pollution problem will
only get worse.
