FT  01 FEB 92 / Travel: Walking tall through Berber territory - Morocco
combines startling physical beauty with cultured sangfroid. It is ideal for
the trekker, the loafer and the honeymooner. Trekker Michael J. Woods
sweated in the High Atlas
A PETRIFIED white stream gushed forever silently from under the overhang,
its course marked by pebbles, each one crystal-covered and gleaming,
slightly spiky like coconut ice and coated with a delicate shell of salt
from which it could be shaken free, writes Michael J. Woods.
As valuable as gold in times past, this saline river now lay forgotten and
ignored in a narrow valley high in the Atlas mountains of Morocco. I found
it quite by chance when I wandered away from our camp site and scrambled
over scree while trying to follow the trails of nimble goats.
Once away from the tents, the sense of isolation was complete. Only the
occasional bird call and the distant rush of water broke the silence. The
air was so clean that I could easily detect the scent of lamb grilling on
hot coals; it wafted to me on the breeze, and I hurried back for dinner.
The High Atlas is probably the closest area of real wilderness to Europe,
less than four hours' flight from London's Heathrow and a dusty five-hour
drive from Marrakesh, but the mountains are hardly untouched by man. They
are inhabited by the Berbers - barbarians, so-called to distinguish them
from Arabs, a good-looking people with dark, well-defined features who eke
out a living against severe odds among the Atlas peaks.
Water here is both friend and foe. When the snow melts at the end of winter,
it rushes down from the mountains tearing away and demolishing roads, paths
and dams carefully built the previous year, so that the whole village has to
set to and carry out repairs.
Dry stone walls jammed with logs support teetering cliff-side tracks while
similar walls, their cracks jammed with leaves and moss, channel water from
way upstream to ensure that the irrigation canals are at the right level
when they reach the terraced fields. Above the water line the hillsides are
arid; below, green and lush. Crops of barley and wheat wave in the breeze
and tall old walnut trees spread shady branches in whose coolness we
frequently took our long lunch stop.
The margins are grazed by cattle, mules and donkeys, tended in groups of two
and three by women and children who control their charges with cries, sticks
and the occasional well-aimed stone. Older lads take the sheep and goats at
dawn to the mountainsides, only returning at dusk when it is almost too dark
to see.
Around the villages, people are busy everywhere. Women and girls wash
clothes in the streams, beating the material with sticks and hanging it over
bushes to dry while men and mules till the soil with a primitive
single-furrow plough whose only metal component is the shoe, polished to a
fine shine by its passage through the earth.
At first our trek took us through villages beside a vehicular track served
by a daily lorry. Wells supplied their water, whereas higher up water was
taken from the streams. The flat roofs of the mud houses were adorned with
TV aerials, not fixed to the building in any way but simply jammed into a
bucket of stones.
The houses themselves are built from cast mud which is tamped down with such
vigour that it almost achieves the hardness of concrete. It certainly takes
on the starkness of that material, and the insides of the rooms are rough,
bare and rather forbidding as a result. Outside, though, the buildings match
precisely the background colour of the soil of the neighbourhood and appear
as one with the landscape.
In the sandstone valleys the houses were deep red in colour, whereas in the
more fertile limestone valleys they took on a grey hue. Our shoes did much
the same as we strode through dust, ground to talc by so many feet. Sherlock
Holmes would have had a field day.
The road was busy that evening, as it had been market day on the far side of
the mountain. First a police jeep came past, driven by a black
leather-jacketed flic, followed at irregular intervals by groups of men on
mules. Finally, just as darkness was falling, a brand new Landrover
Discovery bumped past to remind us that, in spite of the strangeness of our
surroundings, we had escaped from nothing.
Our daily routine varied little. We set off at about 8 am after tea or
coffee in bed, hot washing water brought to our tents, and breakfast. We
walked for about three hours to a shady spot and during that time the mules,
carrying all the equipment and food, overtook us so that, when we turned up,
cool drinks were waiting for us.
Lunch was served, often after we had swum in the river, and then we read and
dozed until about 3 pm when we left for another couple of hours' walking. By
the time we reached our evening camp-site the tents were already up,
including a shower tent, and dinner was being prepared.
The food was always very fresh, beautifully cooked and served with great
attention to cleanliness so that no-one suffered from an excited stomach
during the trek.
At one site a small, serious girl of about six brought a dozen eggs to the
cook. He took them from her and paid for them. Clutching the precious notes
in her fist, the girl walked purposefully through the camp and back to her
house. A couple of days later a well-grown lamb was obtained from a local
shepherd, carried bleating from its mother, despatched and later served for
dinner accompanied by surprisingly good Moroccan wine.
For me, the best days were away from the villages. In the wild hills the new
spring flowers were superb. Sheets of purple orchids, white asphodel and
yellow vetches graced damp meadows while the bare hillsides were cushioned
by domes of yellow and blue 'hedgehogs'; I presume they were a sort of
gorse, although no-one seemed to know, but their spines were wicked.
We walked almost to 10,000 ft, but there were mules always on hand if the
climbing became too much. Super fitness is certainly not necessary and I
managed the whole trek with a cracked rib, damaged before I arrived.
Without exception, all the people we met were friendly but, tempting as it
was, I found it hard to photograph them.
Instead, I felt in danger of appearing to take pictures of these people
purely for their curiousity value. But then the Berbers must have thought us
mad, for we possess wealth beyond their wildest dreams and yet choose to
leave our luxurious homes to walk along their tracks and sleep in tents.
And we do it, apparently, for fun.
Michael Woods went to Morocco with Abercrombie &amp; Kent: Sloane Square House,
Holbein Place, London SW1W 8NS. Tel: 071-730-9600. Treks in the High Atlas
are tailored to suit individual needs and last for a minimum of four days.
