FT  18 SEP 92 / The ERM and Maastricht: Irish punt drops to floor
THE IRISH government reaffirmed its commitment to the narrow band of the
exchange rate mechanism yesterday as the punt dropped to its floor level of
DM2.619, triggering intervention by the Irish central bank and the
Bundesbank.
Later it recovered to trade at DM2.6275. Mr Bertie Ahern, the finance
minister, said: 'We have to hold our confidence in the ERM and stay firm.
Our position is to remain in the narrow band. That's what keeps our economy
on course and our stability. There is no immediate concern but we will
continue to monitor the situation.' The government would 'do what is
necessary' to keep the punt within the ERM narrow band.
A central bank spokesman confirmed that it had been supporting the punt
yesterday and the Bundesbank said that it had bought IPounds 13.5m.
Ireland broke its long-standing currency link with sterling in 1979 when it
joined the ERM. The Irish economy, however, is still dependent on the UK
market for 32 per cent of its exports, and many Irish businesses have
subsidiaries in the UK.
Some industrial leaders were saying in private yesterday that a continuing
decline in sterling might force the Irish government to a devaluation.
At one point yesterday, the pound sterling fell by some 7 per cent to parity
with the Irish currency.
Mr Robbie Kelleher, head of research at Davy stockbrokers in Dublin, said:
'The fundamentals of the Irish economy are good.  If sterling devaluation is
a one-off change, and sterling re-enters the ERM, then we can handle parity.
 Sterling continuing outside the ERM is another matter.'
Mr Michael Noonan, the finance spokesman for the opposition Fine Gael party,
backed the government's stance, saying: 'The UK is now the sick man of
Europe.
It would be a great mistake, after 13 years of effort to get a strong
currency linked to the D-Mark, to abandon that and link ourselves to
sterling again.' He said that after a general realignment of exchange rates,
there would be an easing of interest rates and 'we will then emerge with a
strong currency and lower interest rates'.
The Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) in Dublin this week
revised up to 3.5 per cent its GNP growth forecast for the Irish economy for
1992, and predicted a surge in the balance-of-payments current-account
surplus by 36 per cent to IPounds 2.2bn, largely due to strong performances
in manufacturing industry.
Prof Kieran Kennedy, ESRI director, said: 'There is a 10 per cent
competitiveness cushion in the exchange rate.  The economy could endure
sterling falling to parity or even to 1.05 against the punt without
tremendous pain.'
