FT  03 FEB 92 / Rival models of privatisation
There are now so many libraries of books on privatisation that even reading
them is more than a full-time job. It is therefore extremely useful to have
within the covers of one pamphlet an analysis of British experience.
Privatisation Everywhere* has been written by John Moore, who was a minister
at the Department of Energy and then financial secretary of the Treasury
with a special responsibility for the subjects, before his spell in the
Cabinet as secretary of state, first for transport and then for health and
social security.
Many mainstream economists were initially sceptical of privatisation, not
because they were enthusiastic about nationalisation but because they
believed that competition was what mattered and that ownership was
unimportant. The economic analysis of property rights - not very developed
in the UK when privatisation started - suggests, on the contrary, that
ownership is crucial. Moore summarises the reasons as the inevitable
subordination of commercial to political objectives in state concerns; the
absence of the bankruptcy threat; and the weakening of the link between
customer gratification and financial success.
The sceptics have been persuaded to lie low partly by the popularity (after
the event) of privatisation in Britain and other western countries, but even
more by its prominence in the reform programmes of the ex-communist
countries, almost irrespective of the political hue of the reformers.
Governments in central and eastern Europe and their western advisers are
united in believing that it is not enough to free prices and remove other
controls unless managers have a direct personal stake in the profitability
of their enterprise. A further condition is, of course, a functioning
monetary system, which is not required to finance sky-rocketing government
deficits. But I will not enlarge on the latter problem.
John Moore writes from an unashamedly British background. He points out that
legitimate political worries about, for instance, foreign ownership or the
continuation of uneconomic but socially necessary services can be
safeguarded either in the privatisation legislation or through normal
government powers - the 'golden share' under which governments can prevent
an undesired sale - was a British invention. The author is perhaps
over-enthusiastic on the 'RPI minus X' formula for price regulation of the
still monopolistic public utilities. But he legitimately points out that
political opponents have shifted their demands from re-nationalisation to
arguments about how to tighten the regulatory regime.
He is rightly scathing about the hostility of senior City figures to mass
shareholding. The head of one big brokerage house explained: 'But John, we
don't want all those kind of people owning shares, do we?' In fact, the
original BT sale amounted to double the new issue capacity of the market as
estimated by the professionals. Not before time the government realised that
it was too much at the mercy of professional bankers and brokers and made
these experts compete for highly lucrative privatisation business by means
of so-called beauty contests.
Doubt sets in, however, when the author boasts about the increase in the
number of individuals holding shares from 7 per cent to 25 per cent of the
adult population. Assuming this degree of mass ownership was more expensive
for the government than outright sale to institutions at the best price,
then the losers have been the other 75 per cent. Unfortunately, Moore
dismisses the alternative of 'free' distribution to all citizens on the
ground that 'what we obtain too cheap, we esteem too lightly'.
Whatever the pros and cons of free distribution in the UK context, it looks
very different in the ex-communist countries where very few people can
afford to subscribe for conventional privatisation issues. There are three
basic options:
Sales to foreign investors, which at least bring in some hard currency and
release resources for domestic investment or consumption;
Mass distribution by some variant of vouchers, as in Czechoslovakia or
Poland today;
Handing over to existing management and workers, which in practice will
often mean the former communist appointees.
So great is the urgency that all three methods have to be used. Even the
third cannot be ruled out for small and medium-sized enterprises. The same
manager may behave differently if his personal fate depends on
commercially-earned profits rather than satisfying the local party chief in
a heavily rigged market.
Cultural change is also required. None of these three methods will yield
good results if a Russian manager believes that the key to successful
competition is breaking the windows of his competitors or overturning their
trucks. But a start has to be made somewhere. The lessons from Britain, in
which about one tenth of the economy was taken out of state control over 13
years, need to be modified before they are used in countries where far more
enterprises have to be transferred far more quickly in much more elemental
conditions.
*Centre for Policy Studies, 52 Rochester Row, London SW1P 1JU, price Pounds
6.95.
