FT  13 MAR 92 / Legacy of the curate's egg: Peter Norman on the economic
consequences of the past 13 years of Conservative rule
Mr John Major would hate the comparison. But the last sitting prime minister
to fight an election against such a troubled economic background was Mr
James Callaghan in 1979, and he lost.
There are differences, of course. Mr Callaghan failed because he could not
control the labour unrest unleashed by an inflationary boom. Mr Major will
be campaigning with the economy still mired in recession, unemployment
rising, a deteriorating current account deficit, growing government
borrowings and the worst recent growth record of the group of seven leading
industrial countries.
Economic growth over nearly 13 years of Conservative rule has averaged a
meagre 1.7 per cent a year. Unemployment, currently around 2.6m, is 2.4
times higher than in May 1979, when 1.09m were out of work. Unemployment
affects 9.2 per cent of the workforce against 4.1 per cent in May 1979.
Economists would say that such statistics do not compare like with like. May
1979 marked the peak of the economic cycle that began with the mid-1970s
recession, while at present Britain may be in the trough of the
Conservative's second recession. But the figures are a measure of the
problem that Mr Major must overcome.
On the other hand, Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, claimed in his Budget
speech this week that the economy had been transformed. Retail price
inflation, at 4.1 per cent in January, is down to German levels and producer
prices are rising more slowly than for a generation. New businesses continue
to be created. Japanese companies such as Nissan, Toyota and Honda invest in
the UK rather than other European Community countries. Labour relations
present a picture of unprecedented calm.
So which view is right? Did the UK experience an economic miracle during the
1980s or was it all an illusion? Has the present Conservative recession
negated the apparent progress of Mrs Margaret Thatcher's first two terms as
prime minister? Will whoever wins on April 9 preside over the sick man of
Europe? Or are Britain's current economic problems a hangover that will
pass?
An appraisal of the Conservatives' years of power suggests that the Tories'
economic legacy will be a curate's egg: good in parts only.
Starting with the abrupt abolition of exchange controls in October 1979, the
Conservatives exposed a protected nation and its institutions to the rigours
of competition and deregulation.
The economic history of the past 13 years can be summed up as an often
difficult adaptation to this changed environment. The new regime has claimed
victims among individuals, companies and policymakers. People have lost
their homes through repossessions that originated with imprudent borrowing.
A string of former high-flying companies which grew by acquisition and debt
have overextended themselves, and in some cases collapsed. A former
chancellor is among the losers. With hindsight, one of the main causes of Mr
Nigel Lawson's problems in his later years at the Treasury was his failure
to appreciate the effects of financial liberalisation on credit growth and
inflation.
Sir Geoffrey Howe, Mrs Thatcher's first chancellor, once said that the
abolition of exchange controls was the only decision of his political life
to have given him a sleepless night. It remains one of the most underrated
economic reforms of the postwar period. Ending controls did more than open
up hitherto-protected areas of the UK economy to international competition.
It provided an impetus for domestic deregulation, including the government's
privatisation programmes and its assault on trade union power.
The most enduring legacy of the 1980s has been in terms of labour relations
and productivity. The curbing of trade union power, culminating in the
defeat of the miners' strike in March 1985, has greatly increased the
ability of managements to manage.
As the illustration shows, only 800,000 working days were lost to industrial
disputes in the UK last year. This was the lowest yearly total since records
began 100 years ago, and lower even than in 1940, when the nation was
threatened in a world war.
Output per worker grew strongly in manufacturing as Britain emerged from the
recession of the early 1980s. It maintained a high rate of growth later in
the decade after a 'growth pause' in 1985. Whereas Britain had the lowest
growth in manufacturing output per head of the G7 economies in the 1970s, it
was at the top of the G7 productivity league in the 1980s. Recent research
from the National Institute of Economic and Social Research suggests that
the UK's productivity gap against Germany narrowed sharply between 1980 and
1987.
But this only tells part of the story. Productivity fell in the first half
of last year and it is unclear whether its recovery in recent months marks a
return to the strong growth of before. Moreover, productivity growth
elsewhere in the economy has been less impressive than in manufacturing.
More serious, and perhaps symptomatic of a deeper problem, the productivity
gains of the past few years were reflected in job cuts rather than in
significant expansion of the UK's manufacturing base. UK manufacturing
employment fell by 2.4m to 4.7m between 1979 and the end of 1991.
A similar picture of better performance on a narrow base emerges from the
UK's international trading record. The UK has increased its share of exports
among the main manufacturing nations from about 7.5 per cent in the
mid-1980s to roughly 8.6 per cent last year. Yet the insufficient size of
Britain's tradeable goods sector is highlighted by the persistence of a
Pounds 4.5bn current account deficit last year in conditions of depressed
domestic demand and Treasury projections that the current account deficit
will expand again to Pounds 6.5bn this year, as the economy recovers.
Despite strong investment growth for much of the past decade, the British
economy is therefore unable to meet in full the demands put upon it. Skills
shortages are a particular problem, according to Professor Charles Bean who
teaches economics at the London School of Economics. The government's
'biggest error was to underestimate the importance of training and skills
and to overestimate the ability of the economy to meet demand', he says.
Undoubtedly other policy mistakes have contributed to the difficult economic
background on which the government is fighting the election. The decision in
1986 to allow sterling to fall in value with the oil price meant that
Britain, unlike its competitors in the European community, did not lock into
a low-inflation regime in the late 1980s. Then followed the Treasury's
failure to realise the inflationary dangers of the late-1980s house price
boom, the expansionary monetary and fiscal policies associated with Mr
Lawson's experiment of shadowing the D-Mark and his tax-cutting 1988 Budget,
and the growing estrangement between Mr Lawson and Mrs Thatcher over Europe
that upset policymaking. Individually, these problems might have been
manageable. Together they helped pave the way for the longest recession
since the 1930s and acceptance of a new form of economic discipline in
Europe's exchange rate mechanism.
But whoever wins the election, the last 13 years of Conservative government
have resulted in profound changes in the economy and the way it is managed.
All leading parties acknowledge the power of market forces. Although tax
policy will be at the centre of the campaign, there is no question of Labour
returning to the top tax rates of 98 per cent on unearned income levied in
1979.
According to Mr David Kern, National Westminster Bank's chief economist:
'The biggest success of 10 years of Thatcherism is a modern Labour party.'
For Mr Major, that must be the most worrying economic legacy of three Tory
governments.
