FT  02 OCT 92 / Survey of Software at Work - Autumn 1992 (15): Key role in
the company - An integrated payroll, personnel and pensions package can
change a personnel unit's outlook and raise challenges for line managers /
Application Case Study; Mercantile and General Reinsurance
MERCANTILE and General Reinsurance has moved from separate payroll, pensions
and personnel systems to a single integrated package run by a small
personnel department. The move has enabled the department to evolve from a
largely administrative unit into an operation playing a key role in the
whole management of the company, its people and its costs.
Mercantile and General claims to be the biggest reinsurance company in the
UK and in the top six, worldwide. In the UK it has 750 staff at offices in
London and at Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, and pensions information
involving another 250. For much of the 1980s the company was using a
computer bureau for payroll and its own mainframe computer system for
personnel. Pensions were run manually by actuaries.
'On the payroll side, we had two staff filling in forms, which went to the
bureau to be keyed in,' says personnel and administration manager Mr Mike
Marshall, who is based in Cheltenham. 'We then got reports back for
checking, sent those back for correction and so on.
'This process meant we had to send the information three weeks before our
pay day. We just got half-a-dozen very basic reports. We felt we were losing
control and wanted to bring the system in-house.
'Meanwhile, we had a bespoke personnel system running on our own mainframe
computer. This produced rigid reports which could not be changed easily.
There were no links with the payroll system.'
Mr Marshall had a simple aim when he started looking for a new system: 'I
wanted something that would provide information on people from cradle to
grave.'
This aim led the company to seek a system which could handle the payroll,
personnel and pensions functions from a single database of staff information
rather than separate files, as in the past.
As a simple example of such integration of functions, recording personnel
data on a new recruit would mean he would be added automatically to the
pension scheme as soon as he became eligible; in addition, a person's
pension could be calculated at any time from payroll and personnel data.
Mr Marshall also wanted a system which could be controlled from the
personnel department - 'personnel never gets much in central computing
resource, because the core business systems quite rightly get priority.'
The company started by looking for mainframe computer packages but came
across a personal computer product called Delphi from Midland Software.
'The attraction of a PC system is that the central computing department
doesn't have to be involved at all,' says Mr Marshall. The initial emphasis
was on payroll, with some personnel jobs, such as salary planning, being
done from the payroll data. However, as experience increased and more
personnel tasks were added, screen response times fell away and the
department out-grew the personal computer system. So it switched to the
mainframe version of Delphi, running on Mercantile and General's IBM-type
computer from manufacturer Amdahl.
However, the department still wanted to keep total control over its system
and not become dependent on the computing department - 'with a mainframe
package we faced the prospect of having to call the operators to ask them to
run our programs every time we wanted to do something,' says Mr Julian
Soltau, a personnel officer recruited specifically to handle the computer
system and to do market research into salary trends, benefit packages and so
on.
'We therefore worked with the computer department to devise a front-end
system which enables us to pick an option, such as running the payroll, on a
workstation at our end and get it processed automatically on the mainframe.
All the reports and pay-slips are directed through the network back to our
office and printed there.
'This arrangement means that even though the system is running on the
central computer, the only time the operators are directly involved is when
we run the payroll and it displays a message on their console asking them to
load a tape to collect data for sending to the BACS automated payments
service.'
When Mercantile and General received the mainframe version of Delphi the
personnel section consisted of blank screens. This was in the early days of
the product: Midland Software now supplies screens already laid out, to get
customers started more quickly.
'Midland Software provides a powerful tool for creating screens,' says Mr
Soltau. 'We had payroll, personnel and pensions data in different places, so
we did some data analysis with the computing people. We had some
brainstorming sessions in our own department and we used our imaginations to
work out what we wanted.'
The Delphi report and screen generators have enabled Mr Soltau to produce
numerous and often complex enquiry facilities and management reports. He
describes the generators as 'very powerful but long-winded': for example for
some analysis work it is quicker to extract data from Delphi and load it
into a Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet. But he adds that Midland Software recognises
this and is work ing on it.
Mr Soltau describes himself as a personnel man with a great interest in
computing and some aptitude for it. This combination of characteristics has
done much to enable the personnel department to maintain its control over
its system and to develop new reports and enquiry screens: Mike Marshall
knows of some Delphi users who rely on their computing departments to
prepare reports and screens for managers. Mr Marshall says the wealth of
information which can be obtained from the system has brought a move from
passive to active personnel management.
At business management level, budgeting has become increasingly important,
he says, and the personnel system now makes a significant contribution. It
provides regular information on expenses by department for the management
costing system, showing, for example, just how much it has cost to promote a
particular person, in terms of company car, National Insurance and so on.
At a detailed level, here Mr Marshall's team can produce reports showing the
effect of providing cars of different engine sizes and the cost of replacing
cars every three years.
'I might be talking about company cars to a department manager and he might
not believe the number and the costs,' Mr Marshall says. 'I can show him how
the number has grown and the impact on his costs.'
Some divisions of the company practise job rotation to give potential high
flyers experience of different aspects of the business. Their job-moves and
training are recorded by the system.
Mike Marshall hopes to add appraisal information and this helps with
succession planning - 'if we are likely to need someone in London with two
years' underwriting experience, who can speak French, we can search the
database for candidates,' he says. 'If there is no match, we can find people
with some of the required characteristics and plan some training in the
missing ones.'
Another example of active personnel management lies in the production of
reports showing the proportion of women in different grades. Such
information can be used to alert managers to the possibility that they are
discriminating against women.
Mr Marshall has numerous examples of the reports and enquiry screens which
have been built on to the system.
'With an integrated system we can take any data item and link it with any
other,' he says. One issue now is whether the business managers can
themselves adapt to this active type of personnel management.
'Some managers have not yet fully grasped the implications of the
information we're giving them,' says Mike Marshall says. He is looking at
ways of getting these managers more closely involved in their own
information, eventually by allowing them to keep their own staff data up to
date and to make their own enquiries through the networked personal
computers which they already have in their departments for other purposes.
Again, the personnel department is being pro-active here. It is taking on
Midland Software's training administration screens, which will integrate
with the existing payroll and personnel data. Users can define training
modules and allocate staff to them within specified periods; the package
also handles bookings and throws up lists of the equipment needed by an
internal training department for a particular course.
'This will be our first big step in taking the personnel system out to the
managers for them to use themselves,' Mike Marshall says. 'They control
their own training budgets and will be able to arrange training for their
own staff, directly through the system.'
One further development which would be useful but which is not planned for
the immediate future is a connection to Mercantile and General's time and
attendance system. This system, from Hengstler, involves clocking-in units
linked to a personal computer. It helps the company to manage its flexible
working hours. This system is being updated to show long history information
which could help the company spot, for example, people who regularly take
sick leave on Fridays.
The personnel department is now supported in all these developments from the
top of the company, not least because it is providing top management with
information on the company's biggest expense: the staff and their related
costs.
'It takes a long time to get all the data and reports set up and then to be
successful,' Mike Marshall says. 'But we get management support. We are a
low-cost operation, because we have done it all ourselves on the computing
front.
'For example, in payroll we have absorbed all the legislative changes,
maintained the data and ensured everyone gets paid with just one person;
when we used the bureau we needed two people. Similarly, we have one person
running pensions and our company mortgage scheme and two personnel officers
and an assistant. In addition we have Julian Soltau and his assistant.'
He adds: 'The desire to be pro-active has always been there, but we have
never had the resources, for example, to go through hundreds of files to
find out how many people have cars with two-litre engines and work out the
impact on company costs.
'Using a system like this means we can provide any information pro-actively
with minimum resources.'
