FT  11 SEP 92 / Poland's old party hands bury ex-premier: Murdered man
mourned only by communist faithful
MOST OF the leaders of former communist Poland yesterday paid their last
respects to Mr Piotr Jaroszewicz, the former prime minister who was murdered
with his wife 10 days ago. However there were some conspicuous absentees,
with neither the Polish state, nor the government, nor the army in
attendance. As a communist, he was also buried without benefit of clergy.
Farewells were left to the old party cadres. Mr Edward Gierek, the former
communist chief, tanned and relaxed, signed autographs for his ageing
admirers. General Wojciech Jaruzelski, the general who briefly interned the
1970s leadership during martial law, hovered discreetly in the background as
did his prime minister Mr Mieczyslaw Rakowski.
But the man who best captured the fears stirred up by the murders was Mr
Jerzy Urban, the mouthpiece of the regime during martial law and now the
publisher of a highly-successful but scurrilous weekly. His tiny, rotund
figure and bald head was practically invisible behind a wall of mean-looking
bodyguards.
The still-unsolved murder shocked Poles, including those who cordially
detested the humourless, Moscow-loyal apparatchik who together with Mr
Gierek, picked up the pieces after police suppressed the 1970 Gdansk
shipyard revolt.
The bloody street fighting led to the downfall of party boss Wladyslaw
Gomulka, whose son was among yesterday's 5,000-strong crowd of mourners.
More important, it fatally undermined the prestige and long-term survival of
communism in Poland and beyond.
Once in power, Mr Gierek and Mr Jaroszewicz turned to western bankers and
government export-credit agencies to prop up their shaky regime. They sought
finance to import western factories and consumer goods. Western bankers,
flush with Arab oil money, were pleased enough to oblige.
Unfortunately, such transplants were not enough to heal the underlying
sickness of the communist economy and the Dollars 20bn borrowed in the
Gierek-Jaroscewicz years ballooned into Dollars 46bn through accumulated
unpaid interest. Significantly, bankers were not among yesterday's mourners
and sent no flowers.
