FT  02 NOV 92 / US regulators close big Texas bank: First City's main
subsidiaries insolvent - Dollars 500m rescue for depositors
FIRST City Bancorporation of Houston, one of the largest banks in Texas, has
been closed down by US regulatory authorities because two of its main
subsidiaries are insolvent.
At the same time the regulators have put up Dollars 500m (Pounds 306.7m) to
protect depositors. This bailout of First City, with assets of Dollars 8.8bn
and 900,000 customer accounts in its 20 banks, is one of the costliest ever,
and the second time regulators have had to come to the aid of the troubled
bank.
Closure of a leading Texas bank comes at a politically sensitive time for
President George Bush, who has strong ties to the state. Texas-based
billionaire Mr Ross Perot, the independent challenger in tomorrow's
presidential election, has criticised the administration for its stewardship
of the country's banking system.
In 1988, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) spent more than
Dollars 900m trying to shore up First City. The slump in the local property
market and mounting problem foreign loans meant the plan, masterminded by Mr
Robert Abboud, former chairman of the First Chicago Corporation, did not
stem losses.
After failing to find a partner to save the group, First City unveiled in
August a plan to raise capital by selling 13 subsidiaries. Regulators,
however, found the plan would not shore up the group's capital.
The final act came after the office of the comptroller of the currency, one
of the industry's main regulators, discovered last week that a
management-led recovery plan for First City Bank of Houston, the largest
subsidiary of the First City group, was inadequate. First City of Houston
had only Dollars 15m in capital, but needed to make substantial provisions
for its reserves to cover potential loan losses.
After deciding to close First City, the FDIC established 'bridge banks' to
assume deposits, and other assets and liabilities of the group. Full
protection will be given to the 16 subsidiaries that had adequate capital,
but customers with deposits of more than Dollars 100,000 at the four
insolvent banks in Houston, Dallas, Austin and San Antonio are expected to
face losses.
Regulators will now try to find buyers for some or all of the 20 banks in
the group. Industry observers say Chemical Banking Corporation, which
already owns a large Texas bank, may acquire part or all of First City.
The closing of First City means regulators have closed 104 banks with assets
of Dollars 36.6bn this year.
