FT  21 SEP 92 / Survey of Northern Ireland (2): Outward signs of activity
mask the real story - Statistics paint a gloomy picture
ANYONE wanting to place a finger on the economic pulse of Northern Ireland
these days, need do no more than stand on the Queen Elizabeth Bridge over
the Lagan river in Belfast.
From there an outward appearance of feverish activity meets the eye. The
unmistakable heavy-lift cranes of the Harland and Wolf shipyard manoeuvre
structures on to the hull of a bulk carrier - one of six orders the company
won last year; the flash of welding arcs identifies the Lagan weir - the
centrepiece of the Laganside development scheme; the ramps for the
cross-harbour road and rail link are taking shape; and in the harbour
itself, the sleek lines of the SeaCat ferry from Stranraer can be spotted
bringing in carloads of tourists that are feeding a renaissance in the
province's tourism industry.
According to a regional trends survey published in July by the Confederation
of British Industry, the economic outlook in the province is better than
anywhere else in the UK, with order books growing and businessmen showing
confidence by planning new investment. The recession, it would seem, has
only been happening over the water.
But a different picture emerges from the statistics. The Northern Ireland
Economic Council (NIEC), a governmental research and advisory body
representing business and trade union interests, notes in a report made in
April of this year that 'almost all the indicators . . . show that the
Northern Ireland economy has been in recession over the past year. Given
that recovery in Northern Ireland has usually lagged behind recovery in the
rest of the UK, where GDP and other indicators are still falling, any
respite from these problems may be some way off'.
'These indicators add up to what is probably the most gloomy assessment of
the Northern Ireland economy that the Council has produced since the last
recession in the early 1980s,' it says.
Unemployment rose in July to 107,100, up 6,700 on the same month last year,
and is now at 14.7 per cent of the workforce. Dr Graham Gudgin, the head of
the Northern Ireland Economic Research Centre (NIERC) says his group's
econometric model predicts unemployment rising to 16.4 per cent by 1994, to
fall later but to remain at 15 per cent until the end of the decade.
According to the NIEC, over half the unemployed have been out of work over
one year and are classified as long-term unemployed - almost double the UK
average of 27 per cent.
The recession held off until last year in Northern Ireland, largely because
of high public sector employment level and lower house prices resulting in
higher disposable incomes than the rest of the UK. But those watching the
longer term trends are concerned that when there is an upturn, the province
will continue to lag behind the rest of the UK.
The announcement earlier this month from Mr Michael Mates, minister of state
for finance and security in the province, that Northern Ireland will have to
face public spending cuts this year with the rest of the UK, has added
further gloom to the picture.
more radical approaches are needed. 'Until we get off the current growth
path, there is no prospect of any convergence with the mainland economy or
our Community partners,' he said. Northern Ireland's GNP per capita is
calculated to be around 75 per cent of the rest of the UK, but at the upper
end of the poorer regions in the community.
The NIEC calculates that if the EC were to continue its average annual
growth rate of 3 per cent of the past five years, Northern Ireland would
have to grow at an annual 5.4 per cent to achieve convergence over the next
15 years. But figures produced by Dr Gudgin's group show Northern Ireland's
economy has rarely outstripped growth in the overall UK economy, and then
only during recessions.
Inside and outside government, it is acknowledged that the province's high
birth rate - one of the highest in western Europe - is a big problem.
Job creation programmes, industrial promotion and vocational training are
all being actively pursued through various governmental agencies, some of
them using EC funding, but Dr Gudgin believes this is not enough.
'If we had the same birth rate as the rest of the UK we would have the same
unemployment rate. We have to create a highly skilled mobile workforce and
increase the quality of labour, to give people the skills to find jobs.'
He said a vocational training programme 'to bring everybody up to A-level
standard at vocational level' would create a different outlook for the
province. Although A-level results in Northern Ireland are consistently
higher than on the mainland, he says 'only a third of students go on to
A-levels. It is no good educating just half of the people'.
There is little hope of funds being made available for such an ambitious
programme though. Public expenditure is targeted at Pounds 7bn for 1992/93
and will rise by an average 2.4 per cent annually in real terms until 94/95.
As a proportion of total UK public spending, however, it is declining,
according to the NIEC.
A growing body of opinion believes that by giving the province autonomous
powers and allowing it to work with the Irish Republic to negotiate the
allocation of EC structural funds, a higher rate of growth could be
achieved. Both parts of the island suffer similar structural problems but
for 1989-93 structural funds allocated to Ireland were almost three times on
a per capita basis those which were allocated to Northern Ireland.
Such an approach would clearly have to clear the hurdle of a political
solution. But even those trying to sell Northern Ireland to the outside
world, are frank in their assessment of the future if unemployment is not
adequately tackled. Mr Billy Pinkerton, a DoE official administering the
government's 'Positively Belfast' campaign, said: 'If we don't give the
people of Belfast the dignity of employment or further education, someone is
going to stick guns in their hands.'
