FT  03 NOV 92 / Money Markets: France cuts rates
CASH RATES in the French franc money market eased sharply yesterday after
the Bank of France cut its intervention rate for the first time since
December 1991, writes James Blitz.
Elsewhere in Europe, cash and futures trading was a good deal quieter. In
Britain, money market dealers are waiting for tomorrow's vote in the House
of Commons on the paving bill for the Maastricht treaty.
The Bank of France's decision to cut its money market intervention rate to
9.35 per cent from 9.60 per cent was the clearest sign yet that France has
won the battle to save the franc.
It was accompanied by a cut in the five to 10-day rate from 10.5 per cent to
10.25 per cent, and a comment from Mr Michel Sapin, the French finance
minister, that France has recovered all the reserves spent during the recent
currency crisis.
The three-month offered rate for francs fell to 9 3/4 per cent from the 9
15/16 per cent of Friday night, although French franc futures were mostly
unchanged because much of the derivatives market was shut.
One London trader suggested that the cash rates could fall further, as
French three-month rates remain some 80 basis points above Germany's.
In the sterling markets, fears that the UK government could be defeated in
the Maastricht bill on Wednesday caused new nervousness. A rejection of the
treaty would probably trigger sharp falls at the front end of the futures
market.
However, the market was undecided yesterday on how to act. The pound's fall
on the foreign exchanges injected some bearishness into the futures. But
this was relieved by easier liquidity in the sterling cash market which
reduced the short-dated rates.
Most of the Pounds 850m shortage forecast by the Bank of England at the
start of trading was removed in the early round via a repurchase agreement.
One-month money declined to 8 3/16 per cent offered, from the 8 3/8 per cent
registered on Friday night. The three-month offered rate was  1/8 lower at 7
5/8 per cent.
In the German money market, conditions remained tight following the
end-of-month liquidity problems seen on Friday. Call money was quoted
slightly higher at between 8.95 and 9 per cent.
