FT  21 AUG 92 / Not always a class act: Exam pressures facing schools
The tribulations of Mrs Helen Williams, forced to resign as high mistress of
St Paul's Girls' School, London, have been reported largely in terms of
personalities and the power of school governors.
It is familiar saga: new head, following a charismatic and forceful
predecessor, falls foul of staff and governors and is out within three
years. Many independent schools can tell tales of heads despatched in
similar circumstances. Before long, state schools will join them, as their
governors gain ever greater powers to hire and fire.
Behind the events at St Paul's lie two more novel and significant issues.
First, are Britain's leading independent schools now no more than exam
factories servicing a narrow parental demand for 'results'? And second, in
their determination to give parents 'results', have the public schools
stopped experimenting and thus ceased to influence the national debate about
curriculum reform and the content of education?
Parents footing the bill for school fees certainly see themselves as paying
for high exam grades. A 1989 Mori survey of parents with children in the
independent sector found 'exam results of school' to be the second most
frequently mentioned factor in choice of school, the first being 'good
discipline'.
The typical Mori parent would have little to complain of at St Paul's.
Ranked 11th across the country in this March's FT-500 survey of last year's
independent school A-level results, nearly three-quarters of all its A-level
entries were graded A or B, with virtually all its sixth-form leavers
proceeding to higher education and more than a third going to Oxford or
Cambridge. If London's upper-middle class wants better value for its Pounds
5,000 a year, it would be hard pushed to find it.
Exam results nonetheless played an important part in the rumpus at St
Paul's. Mrs Williams wanted her pupils to take only five or six GCSEs, with
girls following broader and more original study programmes leading directly
into A-level work. Her scheme was resisted by parents, worried that their
offspring would no longer have a dozen GCSE grade As to wave before Oxbridge
admissions tutors before taking their A-levels.
The conflict was ironic since, as Ms Kate Flint, senior tutor of Oxford's
Mansfield College and a former pupil at the school, wrote to the press
earlier this week, in the 1970s girls at St Paul's were restricted to six
O-levels at 16, avoiding subjects to be pursued at A-level and 'instead
following a stimulating variety of internally organised courses'. Several
other schools with top-notch academic records used to follow a similar
policy, but have also largely abandoned it in response to evident or
anticipated parental disquiet.
Parents are misguided if they think that a string of GCSEs is necessary for
a pupil from the likes of St Paul's to impress Oxbridge. Ask most admissions
tutors and they will tell you that the capacity to garner a mass of GCSEs is
taken for granted. They are more concerned about reasoning ability and
academic breadth and curiosity. Says Dr Michael Hart, senior tutor of Exeter
College, Oxford: 'If a student has half a dozen As at GCSE, he or she has
demonstrated enough. Far more impressive than the number of GCSEs is the
breadth of subjects being studied at A-level.'
The lack of breadth in the post-16 A-level curriculum is a matter of acute
concern across the education spectrum. While most of their continental
counterparts keep going with maths, a science and a foreign language,
England's brightest sixth formers need not - and a large proportion do not -
study any of them. Even the Head Master's Conference has spoken in favour of
reforming the traditional three-subject A-level course - to which the
government remains resolutely wedded - into a broader, more balanced
curriculum.
But when it comes to leading the way, the independent sector is hardly to be
seen. The widely respected international baccalaureate (IB) already offers a
six-subject post-16 curriculum, obliging students to study English, maths, a
foreign language, a science and at least one other humanities subject. Yet
only a handful of independent schools take the IB, and those few (such as
Sevenoaks School in Kent) have a strong international bias to their pupil
intake.
Why don't more follow? Mr James Sabben-Clare, headmaster of Winchester
College, says he looked 'long and hard' at the IB, but was dissatisfied with
the detailed curriculum for maths and science. One prominent headmaster was
more blunt: 'Frankly, my parents wouldn't swallow it: they've never heard of
the IB, and don't think it's what gets their little Johnnies into Balliol.'
The independent sector led the way in the development of English education.
England's state grammar schools were carbon copies of the great public
schools in their curriculum and teaching. As late as the 1960s, innovative
projects owed much to independent-sector leadership.
If the likes of St Paul's are now terrified to experiment for fear of
parental backlash, only government quangos will be left to try out new ideas
for teaching our children. And the government, we know, has a patchy record
when it comes to reforming the education system.
