FT  07 MAY 92 / Technology: Androids on the march - After years on the
breadline, modern robots are finding gainful employment in Europe
In the US fashion industry they call it 'localised abrasion' - the pre-worn
look for denim jeans produced by applying potassium permanganate solution to
the knee, thigh and seat areas.
The faded effect has traditionally been achieved through manual spraying,
but consistency and quality control have been hard to achieve. Now GMFanuc
Robotics has perfected a robotic solution that is three times faster than
manual spraying, can reproduce a spray pattern to an accuracy of 0.03 inch,
and can be programmed easily to handle a wide range of garments.
The system is a relatively simple example of recent trends in the industrial
robotics industry, which is trying to reduce its dependence on comparatively
mature automotive markets and find new applications elsewhere.
It is a trend that is particularly important for robot suppliers in the
European market, where the overall penetration of robots into industry is
much lower than in Japan, and where a potentially huge market for
non-automotive applications remains untapped.
According to Massimo Mattucci, vice president for engineering and marketing
at Comau of Italy, around 50 per cent of industrial robots installed in
Europe are in use in the automotive industry and 20 per cent in electronics
 -the reverse of the situation in Japan.
'The automotive industry has more or less understood the potential of
robots,' says Stelio Demark, head of ABB Robotics, Europe's largest
producer, although he stresses, along with other robot industry executives,
the potential of robots in the paint-spraying and final assembly area of
European vehicle manufacturing.
The inherent flexibility of modern robots, and the advances made in control
systems and mechanics that have increased their speed and reliability, ought
to increase their suitability for small-batch manufacturing in Europe, where
model changes are frequent.
Demark sees new opportunities for robots emerging in the European food,
packaging, pharmaceutical and white goods industries.
But the pace at which European industry accepts robots will depend partly on
suppliers' ability to counter the mistrust caused by the hype of the 1970s
and early 1980s, when the robot industry appeared to be carried away by
euphoria over business prospects.
There are other obstacles, too, for suppliers to surmount. In Japan, one of
the driving forces behind the growth in the industrial robot population to
274,210 in 1990 - nearly 10 times the population in the former West Germany
 -has been labour shortages.
'Everything has to come back to economic considerations,' says Axel
Gerhardt, an executive board member of IWKA, the holding company for Kuka,
Germany's largest robot supplier. 'In Europe robots are used where it is
economical to do so. In Japan the question is often whether to produce with
a robot or not to produce there at all.'
Mistakes have also been made in the installation of robots, for which the
suppliers and customers have to share the blame. 'People have tended to put
in a robot, then have an operator standing by watching,' says Demark. 'This
is a half-way house that I wouldn't recommend.'
Increasingly, robot suppliers are realising that if they are to make inroads
into the small- and medium-sized businesses that still dominate European
industry - especially outside the automotive sector  - they have to
understand better the customer's needs and worries.
'You have to enter into an economic calculation with the customer and
demonstrate the ability to find a solution,' says Mattucci.
That could mean being paid only for a feasibility study that comes down
against the use of robots. But in the long run this approach makes more
sense for an industry that wants to broaden its customer base and maintain
its reputation.
Comau, which sells most of its robots as part of an integrated automation
package, is around 90 per cent dependent on the vehicle industry. Mattucci
wants to expand the remaining 10 per cent of the business to 30 per cent
over the next five years by exploiting the group's strengths in robotics for
body-welding, mechanical assembly and difficult handling operations.
The Italian company's most ambitious step away from the automotive sector is
its involvement in the Columbus Automation and robotics Testbed (Cat)
programme financed by the European Space Agency. The ground testbed for the
automation and robotics on board the projected Columbus Space Station will
incorporate a new Comau robot using advanced materials such as aeronautical
alloys and composites.
A more-down-to earth approach to broadening the customer base is in evidence
at GMFanuc, the US/Japanese concern which is the world's second biggest
supplier. The jean-spraying robot, developed in the US and now available in
the UK, offers a high return on investment with a payback of less than a
year, says Mike Wilson, the UK sales and marketing manager.
Robotics are also in their infancy in the European food industry, partly
because it has hitherto been difficult to turn a hose on to a robot to clean
it without ruining its electrical circuits. In January, GMFanuc launched its
'Washdown' robot to conform to the strict hygiene requirements of the food
industry and withstand all the chemical substances likely to be used in
washdown or wipedown procedures.
In the European electronics industry, robots are more frequent but
applications are still developing. Data Packaging, an Irish supplier of
plastic moulded components for the computer industry, recently installed an
ABB Robotics painting cell to handle metallic paints used to provide an
attractive finish, and assist in electrical shielding, on parts for the
Apple Macintosh.
Metallic paints are hard to handle because they block supply lines if not
kept flowing continuously. The ABB system programs the robot to fire the
spray gun if the system lays dormant for a given length of time.
Advances such as these are often based on techniques originally developed
for the automotive industry, which is not being neglected in suppliers'
haste to exploit other markets. A number of fairly recent technologies have
relevance to the use of robots in automotive and non-automotive fields.
Laser welding, says Wilson, is attracting interest in a number of
industries, including aerospace, because of its precision and speed. Unlike
conventional spot welding, the robot does not have to reach both sides of
the part to be welded.
Another emerging technology, especially when combined with robotics, is
water-jet cutting, which is likely to become increasingly important for
cutting plastics quickly and cleanly. It is already being used in the
automotive industry for cutting carpets, door panels and instrument panels.
In both areas robot suppliers are forming partnerships with companies which
have developed the technologies so that they can exploit the opportunities
quicker. Comau has a co-operation agreement with Trumpf, the German machine
tool builder best-known for its laser-cutting machines, while last year ABB
Robotics formed a joint venture with Ingersoll-Rand of the US to develop and
market a robotised water-jet cutting system in Europe.
The search for a broader European customer base coincides with a much more
price-conscious attitude over the past two to three years among customers,
due as much to general business conditions as to scepticism about the early
claims made by robot suppliers.
Suppliers are rationalising their product ranges to give customers what they
want and no more, but using developments in control systems to increase the
applications available from each model.
These conditions give advantages and disadvantages in more or less equal
measure to European suppliers and Japanese/US importers, which control one
third of the market. Demark and Mattucci strongly believe that the European
suppliers benefit from a approach based on solutions rather than products.
'The Japanese do not have the solutions for European needs,' says Mattucci
flatly. This is a view strongly disputed by the Japanese producers, but in a
price-sensitive market the the Japanese do have the advantage of size -
investment in control systems, in particular, can be spread over a bigger
sales base.
Ultimately, though, all the robot suppliers could benefit if they can
persuade more European companies of the benefits of robots. And that is
likely to be a gradual process where technology is only one factor in the
equation.
