FT  09 JUL 92 / The Munich Summit: Strong growth vital to meet post-Cold War
challenges
final Munich summit statement. Extract on world economy and trade.
'Strong world economic growth is the prerequisite for solving a variety of
challenges we face in the post-Cold War world. Increasingly, there are signs
of global economic recovery. But we will not take it for granted and will
act together to ensure the recovery gathers strength and growth picks up.
Too many people are out of work. The potential strength of people, factories
and resources is not being fully employed. We are particularly concerned
about the hardship unemployment creates.
Each of us faces somewhat different economic situations. But we all would
gain greatly from stronger, sustainable non-inflationary growth.
Higher growth will help other countries too. Growth generates trade. More
trade will give a boost to developing nations and to the new democracies
seeking to transform command economies into productive participants within
the global marketplace. Their economic success is in our common interest.
A successful Uruguay Round will be a significant contribution to the future
of the world economy. An early conclusion of the negotiations will reinforce
our economies, promote the process of reform in eastern Europe and give new
opportunities for the well-being of other nations, including in particular
the developing countries.
We regret the slow pace of the negotiations since we met in London last
year. But there has been progress in recent months. Therefore we are
convinced that a balanced agreement is within reach.
We welcome the reform of the European Community's common agricultural
policy, which has just been adopted and which should facilitate the
settlement of outstanding issues.
Progress has been made on the issue of internal support in a way which is
consistent with the reform of the common agricultural policy, on dealing
with the volume of subsidised exports and on avoiding future disputes. These
topics require further work. In addition, parties still have concerns in the
area of market access and trade in cereal substitutes that they seek to
address.
We reaffirm that the negotiations should lead to a globally balanced result.
An accord must create more open markets for goods and services and will
require comparable efforts from all negotiating partners.
On this basis we expect that an agreement can be reached before the end of
1992.
We are committed, through co-ordinated and individual actions, to build
confidence for investors, savers, and consumers: confidence that hard work
will lead to a better quality of life; confidence that investments will be
profitable; confidence that savings will be rewarded and that price
stability will not be put at risk.
We pledge to adopt policies aimed at creating jobs and growth. We will seek
to take the appropriate steps, recognising our individual circumstances, to
establish sound macroeconomic policies to spur stronger sustainable growth.
With this in mind we have agreed on the following guidelines:
to continue to pursue sound monetary and financial policies to support the
upturn without rekindling inflation;
to create the scope for lower interest rates through the reduction of
excessive public deficits and the promotion of savings;
to curb excessive public deficits, above all by limiting public spending.
Taxpayers' money should be used more economically and more effectively;
to integrate more closely our environmental and growth objectives, by
encouraging market incentives and technological innovation to promote
environmentally sound consumption and production.
As the risk of inflation recedes as a result of our policies, it will be
increasingly possible for interest rates to come down. This will help
promote new investment and therefore stronger growth and more jobs.
But good macroeconomic policies are not enough. All our economies are
burdened by structural rigidities that constrain our potential growth rates.
We need to encourage competition. We need to create a more hospitable
environment for private initiative. We need to cut back excess regulation,
which suppresses innovation, enterprise and creativity. We will strengthen
employment opportunities through better training, education and enhanced
mobility. We will strengthen the basis for long-term growth through
improvements in infrastructure and greater attention to research and
development. We are urging these kinds of reforms for new democracies in the
transition to market economies. We cannot demand less of ourselves.
The co-ordination of economic and financial policies is a central element in
our common strategy for sustained, non-inflationary growth. We request our
finance ministers to strengthen their co-operation on the basis of our
agreed guidelines and to intensify their work to reduce obstacles to growth
and therefore foster employment. We ask them to report to our meeting in
Japan in 1993.'
