FT  29 FEB 92 / Elephants and ivory: the battle that is being won
THE PLIGHT of the African elephant arouses high passions. Hunted down and
stripped of tusks and hide by poachers, their numbers in Africa slumped from
1.2m to 600,000 in a decade until, in 1989, CITES - the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species - banned the trade in ivory.
On Monday, when the CITES' 12-day triennial conference begins in Kyoto,
Japan, the wound will be re-opened. Zimbabwe, South Africa, Botswana,
Namibia and Malawi want the buying and selling of ivory and other elephant
products to resume in order to generate funds for protection and
preservation.
They claim that effective management of native elephant herds has meant that
populations are flourishing, and Zimbabwe even says culling may be needed to
reduce numbers. But conservationists fear that ending the ban will mean a
new wave of poaching, which could have drastic effects on nations to the
north. The debate will be stormy.
Here, IAIN DOUGLAS-HAMILTON, who has been battling for 25 years to protect
the world's largest land animal, explains the background to the meeting -
and the problems that continue to make a lasting solution so difficult.
IN SEPTEMBER 1991, two years after the CITES' ivory ban, a multi-national
team in nine light aircraft criss-crossed Kenya's Tsavo national park - a
wilderness of red earth, thorn bush and blue, faraway hills - looking for
elephants. Over five days, scanning every corner of the 43,000 sq km park,
6,800 live animals were spotted - up 9 per cent since the last count. Even
more important was the near-total absence of fresh carcasses.
Tsavo had been ravaged by poachers and ivory traders. But now, morale was
soaring. Corrupt park staff had gone and the new warden was a true
professional with properly-equipped forces which had confronted and defeated
the intruders. There were still plenty of armed men pouring into Kenya as
the civil war in Somalia raged to the north, but the trading ban meant that
ivory was devalued and not worth the risks any more.
It was a far different story only a few years earlier. After a brief golden
age for elephants in the 1950s and '60s, following the post-Second World War
establishment of national parks, a wave of poaching had spread from east
Africa, driven by the high ivory price and the demand for trinkets and name
stamps in far-off Japan, Europe and the United States. The poaching extended
far west through the equatorial forests and south to the Zambezi river.
Flying over Uganda in 1980, after the fall of dictator Idi Amin, we found a
holocaust. Elephants lay littered on the trails like crumpled leaves, the
wounded dragging their legs as they struggled to keep up with the terrified
herds. In the Murchison Falls national park, there were only 2,300 survivors
from 14,000 elephants in the 1960s.
There were gun battles in the parks as the authorities sought to deal with
the aggressive, heavily-armed poachers. Rangers were killed by Sudanese army
poachers in Kidepo until a determined campaign drove them out. Bodies of
dead poachers were left to be eaten by hyenas.
The problems of Uganda were mirrored time and again elsewhere. Collecting
information, with the help of scientific colleagues across Africa, we found
evidence of elephants speared, trapped, poisoned, burned or shot down with
automatic fire. At times, we came close to despair at the failure of one
initiative after another to stop the slaughter.
The only exceptions to the general trend were in southern Africa, south of
the Zambezi. But we feared the poaching inevitably would spread south, given
the high world demand for ivory.
Finally, in 1989, the sheer weight of evidence of abuse convinced African
governments and Western publics to back the ivory trade ban. And, in
general, there has been an improvement.
Contrary to predictions, it has proved policeable. In most countries, the
ivory price has dropped followed by a rapid decrease in poaching. This is
especially true in the parks and reserves of east Africa, once affected most
seriously. But at next week's CITES' conference in Kyoto, five southern
African nations want to re-open trading. It is a move opposed strongly by
most African countries to the north, which believe it would destroy their
elephants.
The traders sitting on stock-piles of ivory poached before the ban would
benefit the most, as any legal trade would send up the price. It would also
be impossible to prevent the mixing of legal and illegal stocks.
A possible compromise would be for the southern African countries to agree
not to trade in ivory and to confine trade to meat and skins; but there are
fears this would not be sufficiently binding. And yet, the southern African
countries, by giving up ivory sales over the past two years, have borne some
of the cost of keeping elephants alive elsewhere in Africa. Their altruistic
action has saved heavier costs in human and elephant lives, and money, that
would have been incurred by nations to the north.
But for northern countries - in particular, Kenya - keeping the ivory ban is
a matter of economic survival. There is no way it could cope with another
surge in poaching.
Despite Kenya and Zimbabwe being at either end of the spectrum, they have
common interests. Both believe the way forward will include an economic
programme to make wildlife self-sustaining.
Zimbabwe, with its 'camp-fire' programme, has pioneered projects to bring
money to local people from tourism, hunting and cropping exercises. Kenya
has made great strides in doubling its wildlife-based tourist revenues,
although this is being damaged at present by bandit attacks on visitors to
game reserves.
At the heart of the problem is a difference in philosophy between the
protectionist and utilisation lobbies. The arguments have been bitter at
times and represent a real clash of ideas.
The tragedy has been that conservationists on either side of the ivory
divide have fought each other rather than the illegal traders who were the
real enemy.
On the other hand, the matter of culling has now clouded the argument.
Although it is a repellent business, no one has yet come up with a solution
for over-population of elephants - something that is becoming an issue as
numbers grow. And whether you like it or not, culling is a sovereign right
of each country with elephants.
But a recent meeting of African elephant range states at the United Nations
Environment Programme revealed a distinctly encouraging mood. There is a
growing sense of collaboration between African states and a growing
willingness on the part of major donors, such as the US, the European
Community and its individual member-states, to fund elephant programmes
within their aid packages.
A united African initiative to resolve the thorny question of the ivory
trade would be better than any Western-led solution, however
well-intentioned. An African compromise which keeps the ivory trade shut
indefinitely would be worth the price of some nations selling skins from
properly-controlled culling operations. Ultimately, the fate of elephants
lies in the hands of the African peoples themselves.
Iain Douglas-Hamilton is adviser to the European Commission on its elephant
survey and conservation programme. He has also worked for the World Wildlife
Fund and for the New York Zoological Society. Together with his wife, Oira,
he has written the book Battle for the Elephants (Doubleday, Pounds 17.99).
