FT  04 APR 92 / Sport: Taxman grabs Britain's Olympic gold - Sponsorship /
UK sports administrators have a tough adversary in the Treasury
THREE MONTHS from now the British team sets off for the Barcelona Olympic
games. Unexpected medals will be won, predicted triumphs denied. Uncertainty
is the seasoning of all sport. Yet even at this early stage it is possible
to identify one clear winner - the UK Treasury.
Of the the Pounds 7m raised by the British Olympic Association to pay for
participation at Barcelona, slightly more than 20 per cent will disappear in
corporation tax. 'I've made provision for a tax liability in excess of
Pounds 1.5m', says Robert Watson, a London barrister and treasurer of the
BOA.
In a 31-nation survey conducted by Watson and his colleagues, they could
find no other country that taxed funds raised to support Olympic teams.
Ironically, during the course of the BOA research, the government announced
its Pounds 55m support for Manchester's bid to stage the 2000 Olympics. The
government giveth, and the government taketh away.
'If the BOA didn't do this fund-raising every four years, who would be
paying for our athletes to go to the Olympics', asked Watson rhetorically.
The government would, of course, via a Sports Council grant - as it used to,
prior to the partially boycotted Moscow games of 1980.
'We've relieved HMG of that responsibility and basically all we've received
for it is a smack in the face,' Watson continues. 'I'm delighted with what
they're doing for Manchester, but it does seem the final turn of the screw
that sportsmen are helping pay for it.'
Since the bitter scenes of 1980 over whether British athletes should compete
in Moscow, the Olympic movement in Britain has preferred quiet negotiation
with government over confrontation. For the past two years, Watson and his
colleagues have been seeking to persuade the Treasury to exempt BOA funds
from tax. A high-powered lobbying firm has been employed, to no avail.
Now the gloves are off, and the Olympic movement has decided to go public
with its grievance. 'Our income is from two sources,' explained Watson. 'The
most visible is the public appeal and for Barcelona that should raise around
Pounds 2m. We don't pay tax on that.
'But the largest part of our income, around Pounds 5m this time, comes from
commercial sponsorship.' Companies making substantial donations to the
appeal are entitled to use the British Olympic symbol in their marketing and
advertising campaigns, as well as calling themselves 'Official Sponsors of
the British Olympic Team.'
The Inland Revenue, alone among its international brethren, defines this as
'trading' - and taxes it accordingly. Watson knows from informal briefings
and conversations with ministers that the government regards exemption for
the Olympic movement as the thin end of a terrifyingly large wedge.
At present, revenue from sport - derived primarily from VAT, betting taxes,
income tax and corporation tax - is estimated to be worth Pounds 3bn per
year to the exchequer.
The officials worry that once the exemption door is opened a chink, everyone
from Manchester United to Wimbledon will claim the moral right not to pay,
citing the Olympians as their precedent.
'We're pushing on the grounds that the Olympics is unique and does not
invite comparisons,' counters Watson. 'The BOA has no ability to generate
income in the way domestic sporting events do.'
The association's expenditure splits into two strands. The first is simply
transporting a team and its equipment to the Olympics, then clothing,
housing and feeding them while they are there. For Seoul in 1988, this
involved transporting 561 people, 55 bicycles, 19 horses, 16 yachts, ten
rowing craft and 15 canoes halfway round the world.
Second, but also vital if British entries are to go beyond mere
participation, the BOA funds qualifying tournaments, acclimatisation
training camps and injury treatment. Colin Moynihan, former Conservative
sports minister, recognised that the nation expected some prospect of
success - Britain is not yet plucky Monaco, thrilled just to be there.
'Some help is necessary to enable prospective international competitors to
meet their rivals on equivalent terms. Success is sport reflects well on
both our standing in the world and on trade and on morale,' Moyniham told
parliament when he was sports minister.
In terms of expenditure on sport, the government has shallow pockets but big
expectations. In the year 1990-91 the amount spent per head of population
was 97p (the comparable figure for the arts in 1989-90 was Pounds 2.76). By
contrast, Italy spent Pounds 5 per head, while even Denmark's outlay topped
Pounds 3 per head.
Cynics maintain that the Pounds 55m promised to help Manchester's Olympic
bid has far more to do with vote-winning in politically marginal north-west
England than it has with support for sport.
'We painted John Major into an electoral corner,' confessed Bob Scott,
ebullient impresario of the Manchester bid. Local councillors make the point
that the city cannot lose, wherever the games go in 2000.
'The chancellor could make this exemption in minutes, it doesn't need an Act
of Parliament,' frets Watson. If it doesn't happen, he sees it as inevitable
that the BOA becomes an active trading organisation. 'We don't want to go
into it, but if we have to, we will.'
