FT  31 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Bright future awaits wines of
quality in a changing world - Robert Graham samples the FAO's world wine
consumption forecast
THE COST of stocking a decent cellar is likely to rise by the turn of the
century, according to the United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organisation.
For the less discerning, the cost of a bottle of plonk is forecast to remain
stable at best.
Quality wines should meet rising demand, while production of common table
wine will exceed market requirements, the FAO suggests in papers prepared
for a meeting of its intergovernmental group on wine and vine products to be
held in conjunction with the International Vine and Wine Office in Sienna,
Italy at the end of the month.
The papers show that despite a continued trend to hold down output, overall
production by the year 2000 will exceed potential demand.
Taking 1985-87 as the benchmark year, world wine production is expected to
increase by 37m hectolitres to 338m hectolitres by the end of this decade.
World annual wine production will grow on average by 0.8 percent compared
with annual increases of 2.1 percent in the sixties and 1.5 per cent in the
late 1870s and early 1980s. Global demand is estimated to attain 334m
hectrolitres by 2,000, with direct consumption of wine accounting for 80 per
cent of this quantity.
The FAO recognises the problems of forecasting production figures, given the
enormous potential variable of weather conditions.
Uncertainty also surrounds the fate of production in eastern Europe,
especially in the republics of the former Soviet Union. It is unclear how
demand patterns will evolve and to what extent anti-alcohol campaigns will
erode an already declining trend in consumption among the main wine-drinking
countries. Even with these variables, the FAO concludes it will be necessary
to pursue policies to reduce and stabilise production levels.
With 60 per cent of global wine produced by the EC, world output is
sensitive to major changes in the Community. For instance in 1990-91 EC wine
production increased 7 per cent to 184m hectolitres as a result of large
vintages in France, Portugal and Spain.
That helped explain last year's 4 per cent rise in world production to 294m
hectolitres. For the current year, the FAO projects a 20 per cent world
production fall, mainly because of expected declines in France (34 per
cent), Germany, Portugal and Spain.
The main trend identified by the FAO is a switch among developed countries,
which account for 90 per cent of wine production, away from cheap table
wines to higher quality. That allows producers to take advantage of an
expansion of the quality end of the market while also earning added value.
The quality market is also considered price elastic.
France, with its significant concentration in quality wines, accounts for
more than half the world's Dollars 8.5bn wine trade. However, in volume
terms, France is responsible for only 28 per cent of exports. Italy exports
30 per cent in volume terms but its earnings only represent 20 per cent of
world wine sales. To correct this imbalance, the Italian authorities are
trying to encourage producers to increase the percentage of quality
products.
The effect of converting more Italian vineyards to higher quality is
expected to produce a 0.4 percent annual average decline in production, but
offset by higher sales returns. With the process at a mature stage in
France, French annual production is expected to stabilise at about 70m
hectolitres increasing annually by 0.3 per cent to the end of the decade. In
the case of Spain, another major producer, an annual growth of 0.7 per cent
is predicted, reaching production levels of 38m hectolitres.
German production prospects remain unpredictable, according to the FAO; but
the inclusion of former east Germany may produce an enlarged domestic market
stimulating greater output. Production in the former Soviet Union may grow
at an annual average of 3.2 per cent.
Elsewhere in eastern Europe production may rise by 6.8m hectolitres by the
year 2000. Eastern Europe's production rose by 34 per cent in 1990-91 with
good vintages in Hungary and Romania.
The North American market is expected to rise annually by 1.2 per cent from
late 1980s levels of 17m hectolitres and with marginally greater rises from
Australia and New Zealand.
The FAO believes the next decade will see developing countries occupy a
slightly increased share of world production, largely because Latin America
producers will raise output to accommodate their own expanding domestic
markets. Latin America currently provides almost 9 per cent of world
production. Argentina could increase its production by 4.3m hectolitre,
growing at 1.5 per cent a year; while Chile, which has switched many vines
to table grape production and concentrated on quality wines, could increase
output by 1.7 per cent. The small Brazilian output may grow by 2.4 per cent
annually.
Algeria is expected to continue its marked downward trend in production,
which was inherited from French colonial rule and used for 'coupage' with
French wines. That will be offset by Morocco raising production by an annual
2.4 percent and Tunisia with a more modest 0.8 per cent.
The FAO concludes: 'Social attitudes towards alcohol consumption, health
concerns and changing life-styles have influenced the per capita consumption
in major wine consuming countries, especially in the large wine consuming
countries of western Europe such as France and Italy.'
Average world per capita consumption among adults is expected to almost
halve by the end of the century against the levels of the mid 1970s.
Paradoxically, absolute non-consumption of wine is most common in high
consumption countries (like Italy and Spain), while there are few
non-consumers in countries where overall consumption is occasional and
relatively low (Denmark and Switzerland).
Demand continues to be dominated by national habits. One third of the
American population never drinks wine; a proportion which has remained
stable for 10 years, while 90 per cent of all wine drunk in the US is
consumed by only 15 per cent of the population concentrated mainly in six
states.
