FT  28 SEP 92 / The Lex Column: UK utilities
Shares in water and regional electricity companies outpaced the market by 50
per cent and 25 per cent respectively in the year to the end of August. They
have lost half this relative advantage since sterling was suspended from the
ERM. Some under-performance was on the cards anyway. Established utilities
usually trade on a yield premium to the market to compensate for their
relatively limited growth prospects. Water and electricity companies have
been benefitting from the loose regulatory framework under which they were
privatised. Thus there were expectations of respectable dividend growth up
to their first regulatory review in 1995, but the market was already just
starting to look beyond. Now the economy is liberated from German-style
interest rates, the promise from the water companies of real annual dividend
growth of 3-5 per cent up to 1995 looks, arguably, less enticing. Logic
suggests the yield premium should rise.
Both utility sectors, however, are now trading at a 40 per cent yield
premium to the market, levels last seen immediately before the general
election when renationalisation looked a distinct possibility. Since their
revenues are still linked to the inflation rate, it is not obvious why water
and electricity stocks have suffered absolute price falls while index-linked
gilts have surged ahead. Too close a comparison is dangerous, since, in
practice, fund managers rarely consider the two markets together.
That said, a 5 per cent fall in electricity shares and 6 per cent fall in
water stocks seem hard to justify - unless investors are simply going on
experience of how utilities perform in a rising market. Recent history is
hardly auspicious. In the bull market running up to 1987, both British
Telecom and British Gas traded to yield premiums to the market of 60 per
cent. This may have had more to do with the regulatory cycle than the market
cycle, but water and electricity are also facing the prospect of a tighter
regulatory environment. If they are also outpaced in terms of earnings
growth by the market, managements may be tempted to take bolder steps
towards building unregulated businesses. The more aggressively expansionist
of the water companies, such as Severn Trent, already trade at a yield
premium to the sector.
