FT  17 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Kenya's election
KENYA'S first multi-party elections for 26 years are in jeopardy. A
manipulated nomination procedure, violence, intimidation and abuse of the
machinery of state have seriously compromised the process, as the
Commonwealth observer group and other independent monitors have warned this
week. Far from marking the start of a new democratic era for Kenya, the
December 29 poll could become the catalyst for instability.
A year ago President Daniel arap Moi capitulated to internal and external
pressure - notably a freeze on aid flows - and lifted the ban on opposition
parties. But hopes have not been sustained. The loose coalition that pressed
for multi-party democracy broke into three main parties in which ethnicity
predominates.
Most worrying, however, has been the performance of President Moi and the
ruling Kanu party. They have exercised autocratic power for so long that the
distinction between state and party has been lost. Opposition parties have
been prevented from nominating candidates in as many as 45 parliamentary
seats. In no less than 17 seats Kanu candidates have been returned
unopposed, giving Mr Moi a head start in the contest for 188 seats. The
electoral commission has effectively disclaimed its responsibilities, saying
that aggrieved candidates must seek redress in the courts.
Meanwhile district commissioners behave like party functionaries rather than
civil servants, and harass opposition parties; state radio and television
display a pro-government bias; and there are growing suspicions that the
Kanu campaign is drawing on state resources. Only last Saturday a parade
marking the 29th anniversary of independence was turned by Mr Moi into a
Kanu political rally, prompting five western ambassadors to walk out.
Thus even before polling takes place, the credibility of the election
process has been undermined. A heavy responsibility now rests with the
Commonwealth observers, whose assessment of the conduct of a member state
will carry special weight with the international community.
As a first step, the number of observers should be increased. The team
cannot prevent election fraud; but 40 people cannot adequately monitor
10,000 polling stations. At the same time, the group should make clear to Mr
Moi that abuses of state power must cease if Kenya's elections are to be
judged free and fair. Only if they are will aid frozen a year ago resume. A
Kanu win under any other circumstances will be a Pyrrhic victory.
