FT  22 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Privatising British Rail
NOBODY EVER said railway privatisation was going to be easy, but did the
government have to make it quite so hard? Five months after publishing a
flimsy white paper that raised as many questions as it answered, the
Department of Transport has still to provide the details necessary to
convince a sceptical world that privatisation will actually work. The result
has been a vacuum which opponents have been only too eager to fill.
The latest to join the chorus of disapproval is Sir Bob Reid, the chairman
of British Rail, who has urged the government to adopt a more evolutionary
approach to rail reform. Breaking up BR would make it harder to improve rail
services in the UK, he said, and lead to the closure of branch lines. There
would be problems in maintaining safety standards, and orders would dry up
for UK rolling stock manufacturers. So-called network benefits such as
through ticketing and the national timetable would disappear.
Before writing privatisation off, however, it is as well to consider the
alternative. For under state ownership, desperately-needed investment is
certain to continue to be denied by constraints on public spending, as Sir
Bob himself acknowledged. At the same time management is stultified by
government controls and the lack of a profit motive. More of the same is the
no-hope solution.
Railway renaissance
If Britain is to see a railway renaissance - and growing demands for more
and better transport suggest that it needs one - privatisation offers the
best hope of providing it. The only question is what form it should take.
Since a sell-off is ruled out by the fact that most of the passenger railway
loses money, the government has had to find another way of introducing
private sector skills and capital into the industry.
In reality, privatisation is too strong a word for what is proposed. Only
the freight operations are to be sold outright. On the passenger side, the
private sector is being asked to bid for franchises to operate British
Rail's trains, with the contracts going to the companies requiring the
lowest subsidies. The infrastructure will remain in state ownership, with
train operators being charged for the use of the tracks. It should not be
impossible to preserve network benefits within such a setup.
Flexible approach
This approach is almost infinitely flexible, exactly the sort of
evolutionary approach which Sir Bob commends. On the passenger side, the
government may franchise one train service, half a dozen, or the lot over
the next 10 years, depending on what rate of progress seems sensible. It may
vary the terms of the franchises from one line to another in recognition of
their different attributes. Open access, for example, may be appropriate on
main trunk routes, but impractical on congested commuter lines. It may make
sense to let operators of little-used branch lines rent the tracks as well
as the trains rather than cripple them with track charges. And some services
may need to be franchised for decades at a time if that is what it takes to
persuade the private sector to invest in them.
This is not to say that privatisation will be painless. The transparency
that will result from the introduction of track charges could bring home
some uncomfortable truths about the real costs of the more heavily
loss-making freight and passenger services. But if the result is to prompt a
debate about what price society is prepared to pay to see people and goods
transported by rail rather than road, it should be welcomed.
As for the rest of the objections, most stem more from fear of change than
from any genuine weaknesses in the government's proposals. Separating track
infrastructure from the provision of services is the way of the future in
Europe: Sweden has already successfully implemented it, Germany is doing so
as part of its own rail privatisation plans, and the concept lies at the
heart of EC rail transport policy. Significantly, few if any of the
objectors to Britain's plans have been able to suggest an alternative.
The government bungled the launch of its railway plans, but the proposed
structure itself is sound. All that is needed is a clear demonstration of
the government's will to make it work. It will then be up to BR's senior
management to deliver or step aside.
