FT  03 DEC 92 / Survey of European Finance and Investment - Belgium (2):
Maystadt faces the greatest challenge of his career - Andrew Hill profiles
the finance minister
DURING AN almost uninterrupted 13-year period in government, Mr Philippe
Maystadt has headed each of Belgium's three money ministries - budget,
economic affairs and, since 1988, the top job of finance.
In 1990, aged only 42 and just two years into his term in office, he was
named Finance Minister of the Year by Euromoney magazine. The award  - which
he character- istically described at the time as an accolade for the
ministry team, not for him alone - was based on the series of financial
reforms which he had helped put in place.
He is justifiably proud of those achievements. In part- icular, he claims to
have changed 'the rules of the game' for takeovers, to prevent a repeat of
the clan- destine stake-building through which Mr Carlo De Benedetti nearly
gained control of Societe Generale de Belgique, Belgium's largest holding
company, five years ago.
Now that the smoke has cleared away from Belgium's 'big bang', it is obvious
that, in some cases, the noise was greater than the actual changes wrought.
Recession has held back some of Belgium's financial markets. In particular,
the Brussels stock exchange does not yet compete with larger European
markets in the way in which Mr Maystadt might have hoped, and the embryonic
futures and options exchange has not yet taken off.
On the other hand, Mr Maystadt's policy of linking Belgium's currency firmly
to the Deutsche Mark has certainly paid off, both in terms of general
investor confidence, and in the government bond market, where, helped by
parallel reforms of the market itself, Mr Maystadt has had no difficulty in
overfunding the government deficit in successive years.
Now, however, he faces the greatest challenges of his career, at home and
abroad. Within Belgium, as a member of Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene's shaky
centre-left coalition, he must convince fellow citizens that a stringent
economic policy is essential to their future well-being. At the same time,
he must seek ways of reviving the run-down industrial areas of Belgium -
including Charleroi, where he was brought up - and making them attractive to
outside investors.
As a francophone Social Christian, Mr Maystadt speaks with the same
political voice as Mr Dehaene, a Flemish Christian Democrat. If the
government fails, or goes soft under domestic political pressure, then the
risk is that the budget deficit will 'snowball' out of control, and Belgium
will miss the first train to European monetary union (Emu).
In fact, Belgium's European and domestic economic ambitions are identical.
Mr Maystadt believes it is 'essential' that his country is in the same Emu
group as the Netherlands, France and Germany. In addition, the Emu target
figure of a budget deficit of 3 per cent of gross domestic product
'corresponds exactly to what is needed in Belgium to get rid of the snowball
effect'. In that sense, says Mr Maystadt, the Maastricht treaty is only 'one
more good reason' for reducing the country's budget deficit.
Parliamentary approval of the parallel constitutional reform programme -
which devolves more powers to Belgium's regions and lang- uage communities -
will strengthen Mr Maystadt's hand. The government has already had to revise
its orig- inal 1993 budget plans - critic- ised as too soft by economic
analysts - to take account of slipping growth forecasts.
According to Mr Maystadt, who fronts his country's economic policy in the
EC, those adjustments have been welcomed by Belgium's Community partners.
Critic- ised in the past for a lack of political courage, he is sure that
the country can make it into the promised land of monetary union.
'We really have no choice: we have to go on with the convergence programme
even if the Maastricht treaty is not ratified, because that is the only way
to cut the snowball effect definitively. We are determined to go on,' he
says.
