FT  17 DEC 92 / British Gas wins Argentine deal
A CONSORTIUM led by British Gas yesterday bought the largest gas
distribution company in Argentina in a privatisation auction in Buenos Aires
yesterday with a bid of just over Dollars 300m (Pounds 197m).
The bid for Distribuidora de Gas Metropolitana, which supplies 1.7m
consumers in Buenos Aires, values the company at just over Dollars 700m.
British Gas, which holds a leading 41 per cent stake in the consortium, will
take over management of the company by the month-end, installing Mr Rob
Varrion, a former regional operations director in Britain, as general
manager.
Mr Peter Lehmann, director of British Gas's global gas division, said the
price 'was very reasonable for us and very fair for the government'.
The consortium, which includes the Argentine conglomerate Perez Companc,
will own 70 per cent of Metropolitana and is taking over its debts. A
majority of the rest will be sold to the public next year, with the
remainder held by employees.
The other gas distribution company in Buenos Aires, Gas de Buenos Aires
Norte, supplying 850,000 consumers, was sold yesterday to Gas Natural, a
subsidiary of Spain's Repsol, for Dollars 155m.
The third-round auctions for the two companies complete the privatisation of
the state monopoly, Gas del Estado, split into eight distribution and two
transportation companies for sale. The sale valued the industry's assets at
more than Dollars 4bn, nearly double the minimum price.
Mr Charles Alexander, a director of NM Rothschild, adviser on the project,
said the privatisation had secured a 'very broad spread of investors in the
Argentine gas industry', with operators from Britain, Belgium, Spain, Italy,
Chile, the US and Canada all emerging as winners.
The acquisition will double the size of British Gas's global gas division
from where it hopes to make 20 per cent of its profits by the end of the
decade.
Further investment in Metropolitana - which covers 21 per cent of the
country's population and which supplied 4.8bn cubic metres of gas in 1991 -
would be financed out of its turnover, British Gas has said. It is committed
to invest Dollars 103.7m over the next five years in the company.
Insurer's issue cleared, Page 25
