FT  02 SEP 92 / Management: Back at work but life is still one long holiday
 -Diane Summers examines the problem of flagging productivity
Holidays are supposed to refresh employees and allow them to return to work
full of enthusiasm. Productivity, it might be thought, would increase after
a break.
The opposite is true, according to Helen Pitcher, a director of personnel
consultants Cedar International.
August has come to an end, and with it the traditional holiday season - but
British industry, far from operating on full throttle, is still idling, she
says.
Pitcher first noticed employees' poor productivity after holidays by
examining the computer records of her own company. Cedar has 10 consultants
and 11 other staff who are engaged in research and administration.
Everyone at Cedar fills in an electronic timesheet, allocating the hours
they have worked in a day between 'chargeable' and 'admin' time.
'We do an analysis of the accounts each month and we found a substantial
drop in productivity over the summer.
'We thought that was because people were away but then we discovered the dip
continued well beyond the holidays,' says Pitcher.
Timesheets showed that chargeable hours were lower and admin hours were
higher after an employee returned from holiday. Admin is the 'dump code' for
hours spent chatting by the coffee machine, she explains.
A close look at the figures also revealed lower productivity before an
employee went on holiday, and showed that work done before an individual
went away was often of a lower standard.
Comparing notes with other companies, Pitcher found the syndrome was common.
'Line managers complained that first there was the time lost before a
holiday when employees were running around getting their currency and
tickets.
'Then there was the rush to get work finished and the increase in mistakes;
next was the return, the showing of photographs, and so on; finally there
was the slow process of getting back into the swing of things.'
Managers are often afraid of appearing to be kill-joys, says Pitcher.
'They're not very good about saying 'I'm glad you had a good holiday, can
you now concentrate on the job please?'' she says.
Pitcher calculates that five days should be added to each week of holiday to
arrive at the true cost of time off.
Figures from Incomes Data Services, the pay and conditions research group,
show the most common basic holiday entitlement is 25 days in the UK - the
figure is not very different elsewhere in Europe - and added to that are
eight days for bank holidays in the UK, making at least 33 days off.
Using Pitcher's formula, employees lose a total of 66 productive days
because of holidays.
Cary Cooper, professor of organisational psychology at Manchester
University's Institute of Science and Technology, is not surprised by
Pitcher's findings.
'There's a sort of 'holiday infection' that contaminates everyone around the
person who has been away,' he says.
As a stress guru, Cooper is emphatic that the solution is not to cut
holidays. 'We need them, there's no question about that,' he says.
Instead of the two- or three-week holiday, taken at the peak of the season,
he suggests shorter, more frequent breaks.
Not only is this better for the individual, he argues, but the employer also
benefits. With shorter holidays there is not the big build-up associated
with longer breaks.
There is less chat, less disruption of colleagues' work and a shorter time
to get over disappointment if the holiday has not measured up to
expectations.
The shorter, more frequent break can also be taken when an individual
actually needs it. The tell-tale signs are: constant irritation, difficulty
in concentrating, hostility, losing a sense of humour, and not listening to
people.
