FT  19 AUG 92 / Bush faces tough transition to domestic warrior
MR Ronald Reagan, the Republican party's elder statesman, devoted most of
his address on Monday night to familiar themes  - such as his faith in the
greatness of the American people and his single-handed defeat of communism.
But the final few paragraphs were more revealing.
Speaking of the 'great task we have to do together in our own home' Mr
Reagan called for a host of social reforms. Let us 'pledge ourselves to a
new beginning' for those 'who languish in neighbourhoods riddled with crime
and bereft of hope'. Let us 'revolutionise education' so that everyone 'will
have the mental tools to build a better life'. Let us 'strengthen our health
care system so that Americans of all ages can be secure in their futures
without the fear of financial ruin'.
He was faithfully broadcasting what is intended as the central message of
this convention: having won the cold war and brought hope to millions
overseas, President George Bush and the Republican party are now about to
'target America' and address social problems. The question for voters is
whether Mr Bush has the will or the ideas to make a difference at home.
The sight of Mr Reagan, 81, finally climbing aboard the domestic reform
bandwagon was not entirely reassuring. It raises an awkward question: why
have three Republican administrations achieved so little in domestic policy
in 12 years? Claiming preoccupation with foreign affairs for all this time
is not credible.
The usual excuse is that the Democratic Congress stymied reform. But it is
likely that the party will have an even bigger majority in Congress after
November.
If Mr Bush is to appear competitive on domestic policy, he needs to set out
a crystal-clear agenda for reform in tomorrow's acceptance speech and then
win a decisive election victory. Faced with such a presidential mandate for
change, Congress would feel obliged to co-operate.
It is not as though the Bush administration has had no ideas for domestic
reforms. Pressure of events has forced policy pronouncements. Mounting
concern about the low quality of education led to last year's 'America 2000'
educational initiative, which advocates a new national testing system as
well as greater parental choice of schools.
Democratic Senator Harris Wofford's surprise win in a Pennsylvania Senate
race led to an 11th hour Bush plan for reforming health care. The full
details are still not available but it centres on tax credits (up to Dollars
3,750 a year per family) to help poor people buy private health insurance as
well as generous tax relief on health policies for the middle classes.
Many other ideas, including reform of the legal and welfare systems, form
part of the conservative policy platform debated by delegates in yesterday's
sessions.
In trying to make the transition from cold war to domestic warrior, however,
Mr Bush faces severe handicaps. One is the sense that he only proposes
reforms when they seem politically unavoidable. How, for example, does he
justify waiting three years to unveil a health care reform when the
principal problems  - 35m people without insurance and an uncontrolled
escalation of costs  - have been known for a decade?
Another handicap is the piecemeal nature of the proposed reforms  - the lack
of any over-arching theme. Had Mr Bush listened to conservative advisers he
might have made a splash with an innovative, libertarian approach to social
policy, emphasising the importance of individual 'empowerment'.
But he failed to do so, and Governor Bill Clinton has already moved to
occupy part of that fertile ground by using the code word empowerment in his
own acceptance speech.
In Houston, Republicans seek to emphasise the 'experience gap' separating
the candidates. Mr Bush is to be trusted, said Mr Reagan, because he has
'been at the table with Gorbachev and Yeltsin'.
Yet if domestic rather than foreign policy is now the principal battle
ground, the advantage may lie with Mr Clinton; having served 11 years as a
state governor he is as fluent on education and health care as Mr Bush is on
the UN or arms control.
