FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (5): The
unflappable man in the hot seat - The chairman discusses his troubles with
Richard Lapper
'SO MUCH venom without facts. So much outpouring. The market is very numb,'
says Mr David Coleridge, chairman of Lloyd's.
'They have never been treated like this before. They are very miserable,' he
adds summing up the demoralisation at the Lloyd's insurance market.
Certainly both Lloyd's and Mr Coleridge have had a rough ride since he took
over as chairman of Lloyd's at the end of 1990. Last year, his first in
office, was bad enough as the market posted its first losses for more than
20 years when it reported its 1988 results in June.
This year will be far worse. As Lloyd's prepares to report record losses for
1989 the market has been subject to ferocious criticism from loss making
Names. During February a highly effective publicity campaign by Names'
organisations has left the market enveloped in a cloud of bad publicity.
Increasingly Mr Coleridge himself has come under attack. Unimpressed by his
displays of sympathy with their fate, angry Names who have been quick to
point out the contrast between their own difficulties and Mr Coleridge's own
immense personal wealth - earned in 30 years underwriting at the market.
His image - his old Etonian background and style - have sometimes undermined
his ability to present Lloyd's case in the media. And he has been an obvious
target for those Labour MPs who have joined in a campaign of Lloyd's bashing
in the House of Commons instigated by Conservatives who have lost money at
the market.
Even some of Mr Coleridge's strongest erstwhile supporters, the successful
businessmen who head up Lloyd's bigger agencies and brokers, have directed
their frustration about Lloyd's problems in Mr Coleridge's direction.
But for a man at the centre of a crisis Mr Coleridge maintains a remarkably
unflappable air. Last month, market gossip predicting his imminent
resignation had apparently not percolated up to Mr Coleridge's spacious
office at the top of the Lloyd's building.
Simply posing the question of resignation was 'silly', said Mr Coleridge.
'I've been asked to be chairman of Lloyd's for another year and I've done
two months,' he says insisting that he intends to complete his term of
office. There had been no letters calling for his resignation and the
Lloyd's Council had not indicated that it wanted 'a change of captain'.
If the Council was to say 'look chairman we know you're doing your level
best but quite honestly your level best isn't good enough so do the decent
thing or we've got to throw you out', he would 'of course think hard about
it,' he said.
In the meantime, he was aiming to re-establish morale and confidence at the
market: 'If everyone goes on running down this business here, people will
begin to say they don't want a Lloyd's policy. The whole thing will be in a
state of total disarray and that will be an absolute disaster.'
An initial goal was to 'kick to death' the allegations raised by MPs that
market insiders were benefiting to the detriment of outside Names. Mr
Coleridge had appointed Sir David Walker, the chairman of the Securities and
Investment Board, to head up an investigation into the charges. Sir David
would look carefully into the mechanics of the 'spiral', the way Lloyd's
syndicates and London market companies insure each other against catastrophe
losses, which - it is alleged - has systematically favoured working Names.
Sir David's independence and integrity was such that if he were to find that
the allegations were unfounded this would be accepted. 'I needed a man who
is so white that snow white looks dirty,' said Mr Coleridge. 'If Sir David
puts his mark on a document there is no need to go further.'
If on the other hand the investigation were to discover that 'it is true in
a section - however small - of our society that somebody had been doing
something that they shouldn't', Lloyd's own regulatory machine would be
brought into action. 'We will either demolish the accusations or get hold of
the wrongdoers and string 'em up.'
But for the moment at least Mr Coleridge has little to offer Names facing
large losses and insists that these must be met even if, by paying, Names
are driven to the mercies of the hardship committee. In particular, Lloyd's
would resist legal moves by Names to prevent draw downs on their deposits.
This threatened the 'lifeblood of our operation'.
Names were perfectly free to sue but must pay claims first. 'We can have
'can't payers' but we can't have non-payers who are wilfully trying to
prevent us meeting our obligations.' The action by more than 790 Names,
represented by solicitor, Mr Michael Freeman, would be resisted
"vigorously'.
'We'll fight the case for ever and a day. If on some technicality they get a
result that is damaging - then we'd have to apply to the House of Lords at
once.' The best answer for Names was to trade out of their difficulties - by
paying past losses with future profits - if at all possible.
He described 1989 as a 'horrific catastrophe year on a low rate basis' and
said the damage had been done. Claims from US asbestosis and pollution were
a problem but 'Lloyd's was better reserved than practically any other
insurance operator'. A few point profit would be shown for 1991 and with
rates now hardening better times were on the horizon for 1992, 1993 and
1994.
In the longer term the implementation of the recommendations of the market
task force which reported in January would improve the market's efficiency
and profitability. Working groups were meeting to study ways in which the
recommendations should be implemented. Sir Jeremy Morse was heading up one
on reforms to the way Lloyd's is governed.
There had been consternation in the market at Mr Coleridge's initial
rejection of the separation of the regulatory and business development
functions of the Council as 'codswallop and absolute hot air'. He now
acknowledged that the rejection had been a mistake, even though he belived
the reasons behind it - potential delays to the implementation of other task
force recommendations - were valid.
When the 'governance question comes up it can't be settled quickly. I tried
to settle it and it wasn't acceptable. But still that is now water under the
bridge. I don't mind changing my mind. I don't find it embarrassing - I
don't find I've lost face.'
