FT  25 SEP 92 / Business Travel Management (15): Guild remains confident on
growth - Silver jubilee of a British organisation which is the driving force
behind European body
THE Guild of Business Travel Agents celebrates its silver jubilee this year
against a background of some of the toughest trading conditions that its 41
members have ever experienced. Yet the guild remains confident that the
future for business travel remains strong - helped by such factors as the
deregulation of European frontiers from next year - even amid the present
economic uncertainty.
'There is no doubt that companies will continue to need to spend money on
business travel in the 1990s as the pace of international business picks
up,' says Mr David Whittaker, joint managing director of The Travel Company
and current chairman of the guild.
So confident are guild members of the growth of business travel, especially
on a pan-European basis, that it has been the driving force behind the
formation of the Guild of European Business Travel Agents, an umbrella body
for the fledgling business travel agency associations that the British guild
has helped nurture across seven other European countries.
The European guild's objective is 'to speak and act in unity for the benefit
of the business traveller and the member agents who serve him or her'. Its
200 or so members have a combined turnover of some Dollars 10bn - giving
them substantial clout in the increasingly global world of suppliers such as
airlines, hotel chains and car rental companies.
Members of the UK guild alone generated an annual turnover of Pounds 3.4bn -
almost Pounds 10m a day - from over 1,900 outlets in Britain. They were also
collectively responsible for handling over three-quarters of all air traffic
generated by agents in the UK.
The scale of the guild members' operations in the 1990s would seem almost a
dream in 1967 to the half-dozen travel agents specialising in business
travel who banded together to form the guild, believed to be the first such
travel trade association of its type in the world. At that time, for
example, British Airways did not exist - it was still in the days of BOAC
and BEA - and Concorde had yet to fly. The two airlines between them handled
some 9m passengers - compared with the 25m carried by BA now.
What prompted the formation of the guild 25 years ago was the feeling that
the Association of British Travel Agents was more concerned with the
interests of leisure travellers rather than of those travelling on business.
The specific concerns of business travellers were sometimes lost amid Abta's
concern for the blossoming package holiday trade.
The guild's early days were concerned with fighting the uphill battle of
getting a better deal for business travellers - especially in the days when
business class cabins were unheard of. Moreover, hefty price discounting by
the airlines in the mid-1970s prompted the guild to launch its own
'bucket-shop' type of discounted fares operation for members, which has
developed into a more structured system now called Guildfare.
The growing demands of the guild's members in the 1980s saw it turn itself
into a limited company in 1987, controlled by a 12-strong board of
directors. Mr David Reynolds is now the guild's full-time chief executive,
enabling the elected chairman to concentrate on the lobbying duties which
form the backbone of the guild's operations.
'There are many important issues that concern business travel agents and
their customers and we spend a great deal of time and effort trying to sort
out the problems before they arise,' explains Mr Whittaker.
One recent concern, for example, has been the plans by the European
Commission for member states to impose VAT on air fares at a rate of not
less than 5 per cent. 'We've been fighting this one all the way and we hope
that they are now beginning to see sense,' says Mr Whittaker. 'It's
incredible that there should be moves to put up air fares by imposing VAT at
the same time as the whole issue of the level of European air fares is under
review.'
The EC, as well as the UK government, is also being lobbied by the guild
over the proposed directive on package holiday travel. As presently worded,
the directive, which comes into force next year, would bring business travel
within the directive's remit as well as package holidays.
The guild is also concerned over the delays about the planned expansion of
Heathrow airport which it believes will enable other European airports to
win business away from the UK. It would also like to see greater efforts
made by the BAA, which owns Heathrow and other major UK airports, to enable
business travellers to have the fastest possible transit through airports.
'Since the business traveller already has to cut a swathe through the
tourist throngs at Heathrow, we want to see a clear plan for reducing
terminal congestion while we await the new terminal five,' says Mr
Whittaker. 'But the noises from the BAA are not encouraging so far - in fact
they seem to be giving even more space to shopping areas.'
The guild is also putting pressure on the government to speed up immigration
queues at Heathrow which, it believes, are offputting for regular business
travellers.
Apart from its lobbying role, the guild has been active in two other key
areas of interest to good business travel management.
Firstly, it has spent considerable effort to improve the quality of training
among business travel staff. It believes that organising the best deals for
corporate travel requires a higher level of expertise than is usual in high
street holiday travel agents. Hence, the guild has worked with Abta's
national training board and the City and Guilds examination board to
establish a four-stage level of training for agency staff which will enable
them to claim the professional qualification, Certificate of Business
Travel.
The second area where the guild has played an active role is in the
development of the computer-driven technology which is rapidly changing the
way agents do business.
'Without this new technology, business agents would not be able to keep pace
with the growing demand from companies for a global travel service,' points
out Mr Whittaker.
