FT  12 JUN 92 / Letter: Banks too 'trigger happy' about investigating
smaller companies in difficulties
Sir, There appears to be an increasing tendency for banks to call for
investigative accountants' reports on smaller business customers with
trading difficulties. While, in some cases, this might be seen as prudent
banking practice, it gives cause for a number of concerns.
The first is that banks appear to be doing this as a matter of everyday
routine, rather than regarding it as an exceptional step. This is surprising
since, in many cases, the bank has been in a close relationship with the
business for a number of years and will already be very familiar with its
financial position. In such cases, an accountant's report will add very
little.
Next, these reports are generally undertaken by the insolvency
practitioners, who have a clear conflict of interest. If their report
suggests receivership as the only logical step to be taken by the banks, it
is standard practice for that same firm to be appointed as receiver.
Third, preparation of the report diverts the company's management just at
the time when it is most needed in the day-to-day running of the business.
Finally, the cost of these reports is borne by the customer, who is given no
chance to negotiate. In a number of recent instances which I have seen, the
charges levied seem to be out of all proportion to the workload involved.
This practice is becoming a source of increasing bitterness in the already
strained relationship between small businesses and their banks. To ease
this, a more constructive attitude needs to be taken by the banks and
accountancy firms themselves.
Banks should become less 'trigger happy' in calling for these reports. If
they feel they do not know enough about the businesses to which they are
lending money, they could perhaps spend a little more of their own time
getting to know their customers.
When reports are necessary, investigative accountants should be barred from
acting as receivers to the businesses they investigate. Finally, banks
should involve their customers in the negotiation of the fees for these
reports. After all, it is their money which is being spent.
Michael Proudlock,
Granville Development Capital,
Mint House,
77 Mansell Street,
London E1 8AF
