FT  05 JUN 92 / G7 nations reject demand to finance new environment fund
THE LEADING industrial countries closed ranks at the Earth Summit in Rio de
Janeiro yesterday in the face of developing countries' demands for more aid
to clean up the environment.
Environment ministers from the Group of Seven countries affirmed that any
extra money they provided would have to be channelled through the World
Bank's existing global environment facility, and not through a new
multi-billion dollar Green Fund, which developing countries favour.
Mr David Maclean, the UK environment minister, said the G7 had made 'a
strong commitment' to the global environment facility, though there was no
discussion of how much money donor nations would give or whether they would
even make the commitment in Rio.
The tough G7 stance followed a meeting late on Wednesday called by Mr Klaus
Toepfer, the environment minister of Germany, which is chairing the G7.
In contrast the Group of 77 developing countries are demanding both the
creation of a Green Fund outside the control of the World Bank, and changes
to the way the global environment facility is managed.
Ministers from the G77 held their first formal meeting at the Earth Summit
last night to agree a common position, which was expected to include a tough
stance on seeking commitments from the industrialised world on technology
transfer and finance.
Mr Anwar Saifullah Khan, environment minister of Pakistan, which is chairing
the G77, said before last night's meeting: 'I would consider the conference
a failure if it did not result in these commitments because it would
indicate that the developed world is not serious.'
Mr Khan stressed that aside from financial commitments, the need to reduce
trade protectionism was also likely to be a main theme in the G77
discussions.
Finance is fast becoming the main conference issue. A conference committee
on finance has been created, chaired by Mr Rubens Ricupero, Brazil's
ambassador to the US, and discussions were initiated yesterday afternoon on
the institutional framework and the quantities of money required to
implement summit decisions.
The G7 countries also agreed yesterday to concentrate their joint efforts in
Rio on an agreement to protect forests. This seemed to be a concession to
the US, which has made it clear that it has strong reservations about many
other issues on the summit agenda and sees little point in pursuing the
debate.
Page 6
Change in US forestry may curb logging
France will sign summit's bio-diversity accord
Ambitious action plan to clean up planet
