FT  06 AUG 92 / Women succeed as incumbents slide: Congressional primaries
WOMEN did well and incumbents poorly in the latest round of state primary
elections for Congress on Tuesday, confirming trends apparent all year.
Victories by two Democrats, Gloria O'Dell and Geri Rothman-Serot in Kansas
and Missouri respectively, bring to nine the number of women, eight of them
Democrats, who will be contesting Senate races in November. This is already
close to a record, with many states still to hold primaries.
At present the Senate has only two women members, Barbara Mikulski, the
Democrat from Maryland, who is heavily favoured to win re-election, and
Nancy Kassebaum, the Republican from Kansas whose seat is not up this year.
Two House members - the Republicans Mr Guy vander Jagt in Michigan, a
13-term veteran, and Mr Dick Nichols in Kansas - lost on Tuesday, bringing
to 15 the number of sitting representatives beaten in primaries. The number
of seats that incumbents will not be defending rises to well over 60 when
retirements are included. Total changeover in the House could well exceed
100.
Ms O'Dell and Ms Rothman-Serot will do well even to threaten the Republican
incumbents in November. Both Senators Robert Dole in Kansas and Christopher
Bond in Missouri easily won their primaries and start heavy favourites.
But other women Senate candidates are faring much better. The latest polls
in Illinois give Carol Mosely Braun a 30-plus point lead over a lacklustre
Republican nominee, while in California Barbara Boxer and Dianne Feinstein,
both Democrats, are ahead by 15-20 points. Lynn Yeakel is also given a real
chance in Pennsylvania.
Mr Bill Clinton, the Democratic presidential nominee, has had no hesitation
in hitching himself to the women's bandwagon, which is motoring along on two
major causes; freedom of reproductive choice and opposition to the sort of
sexual harassment evident in the hearings last year for Judge Clarence
Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court.
Mr Clinton left Arkansas yesterday with Senator Al Gore, his running mate,
on another bus tour. In three of the six midwestern states on the itinerary,
Illinois, Missouri and Iowa, his party is fielding women candidates for the
Senate.
His broader hope is to repeat the success of the maiden road cruise after
the New York convention last month, thus keeping President George Bush on
the defensive. But his message of change now thoroughly embraces gender. In
some states, popular women candidates like Ms Braun may help his
presidential ambition, in others his current big lead over Mr Bush
constitute a coat-tail that women may find helpful.
Mr Bush also took to the road yesterday, but to more conventional campaign
events in New York and Nevada in front of Catholic and military veterans'
associations. In New York Mr Bush repeated his opposition to abortion.
His appeal to women voters is mostly based on his call for the restoration
of traditional family values, exemplified by his wife, Barbara, who will
address the Republican's Houston convention in two weeks on precisely this
subject.
