FT  31 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Persuading parties to give up seats to women
 -Radical changes would be needed to avoid male bias in proposed assemblies
WHEN TORY MP Mrs Teresa Gorman recently put forward a plan to stop the
'mother of parliaments' being composed overwhelmingly of fathers, she was
met with derision.
Her private member's bill, introduced in January, would have created new,
bigger constituencies, each with one male MP and one female MP. But Mrs
Gorman's fellow Conservative, Mr Patrick Cormack, said he had never heard 'a
more silly proposition' in more than 20 years in the House. Colleagues
around him indicated their agreement.
Those plans for sex equality at Westminster were still-born, although Labour
has pledged that its proposed Scottish parliament and Greater London
Authority would have equal numbers of men and women.
The changes could be radical. New voting systems would have to ensure sex
equality and proportional representation for all parties.
As chairman of a Labour working party on electoral reform, Professor Raymond
Plant, from Southampton university, has been wrestling with the
complexities. His brief includes elections to the European parliament, the
proposed elected second chamber and the proposed new assemblies for
Scotland, London and the English regions.
Labour has already decided on the 'additional member' form of proportional
representation for Scotland. The electoral system for London has yet to be
agreed, but could be along similar lines.
Prof Plant concedes that it will be difficult to combine the commitment to
PR with a system that guarantees equal male and female representation. The
additional member system could work by giving each elector two votes - one
for a constituency member and one for a political party.
The constituency MP would be elected on a first-past-the-post basis, as now.
Additional members would be drawn from lists provided by the parties and
allocated to each party so that its total number of seats is proportionate
to its vote. In effect, there would be two types of representative -
directly-elected constituency members and party appointees.
Labour intends to use the 'additional member' to balance the sexes. PR list
systems normally require parties to list candidates in order of preference,
so all the top names would have to be female, or male names would have to be
skipped - in effect, de-selected - until the required number of women had
been appointed.
There would be a political row if a government instructed parties to submit
women-only lists, so Labour's plan may have to be modified. . A Labour
government may have to hope that PR would, of itself, improve women's
chances. At the same time, it could exhort other parties to improve their
selection policies, and do much itself to improve Labour's practices.
If the Liberal Democrats were to wield influence in a hung parliament, the
Labour plan would be dead. Mr Malcolm Bruce, Scottish Liberal Democrat
leader, says weighting in favour of women would interfere with the
democratic process, and could turn the proposed Scottish parliament into an
'object of ridicule'.
Baroness Sally Hamwee, Liberal Democrat leader on the London Planning
Advisory Committee, is equally scathing. Quotas have the effect of
marginalising women, she argues; an objection she also raises against
Labour's proposed ministry for women's affairs.
