FT  28 AUG 92 / Weir eases engineering gloomwith profits advance of 23%
WEIR Group, the engineering concern with about 60 per cent of its sales
overseas, eased some of the gloom surrounding the UK engineering sector with
a 23 per cent advance in pre-tax profit in the first half of this year and a
higher interim dividend.
After increases in both interest income and contributions from associates,
the pre-tax figure rose from just over Pounds 15m to Pounds 18.5m. Turnover
stood at Pounds 194.8m, compared with Pounds 208.2m.
The group dominates the UK market for large, liquid-moving pumps and the
base for its strong export business is its low-cost manufacturing site in
Glasgow. It is cash-rich and has a record of acquiring other companies at
modest prices.
Lord Weir, chairman, said he did not want people to think that there was
'some magic' in the group's performance. 'Although we are doing better, it
is bloody difficult,' he said.
Weir's main rivals in the international pump and valve markets were Japanese
and German. 'We have been battling to improve productivity and keep costs
under control and, quite honestly, at today's exchange rates we are
competitive,' said Lord Weir.
He stressed the importance of cash generation. Although the net amount held
had slipped from about Pounds 45m in December to Pounds 40m in June, there
had been an inflow of Pounds 12m, leaving aside acquisitions. Interest
income rose by more than Pounds 700,000 to Pounds 1.67m.
Associates, mainly Weir-Houston and the consortium running the Devonport
Royal Dockyard, contributed Pounds 2.25m, against Pounds 1.8m. The
government is considering selling both Devonport and the other main naval
dockyard at Rosyth. Lord Weir expected his group and its partners, the BICC
subsidiary Balfour Beatty and Brown and Root of the US, to express an
interest.
Operating profit advanced by 18 per cent to Pounds 14.6m. Among buoyant
sectors were oil in the Middle East and power in the Far East. The order
intake, at Pounds 175m, was similar to the second half of last year,
although down on the comparable period which was distorted by large orders.
Earnings per share advanced to 16.4p from 14.4p. The interim dividend is
being raised to 3.5p, from 3.1p.
The share price gained 13p to close at 507p.
Lex, Page 14
