FT  03 JUL 92 / UK Company News: Necessity for organic expansion - Gary Mead
on Aegis' future following the departure of its chairman
CONSIDERABLE doubt hangs over the short-term future of Aegis, the holding
company of Carat, the largest pan-European media-buying and planning group,
following the sudden resignation last Friday of Mr Peter Scott, its
chairman.
In the face of weak advertising volumes, the group must cut costs, learn how
to grow organically rather than by acquisition, and tackle in France - by
far its main market - a government inquiry into media buying practices.
Despite the suddenness of Mr Scott's resignation, his departure had seemed
inevitable to many people within Aegis. He was, it is said, better suited to
acquiring new businesses rather than rationalising them.
The culture of Aegis was already changing to reflect this as two main
shareholders began to exert more influence. They are Mr Gilbert Gross,
co-founder of Carat Espace, who has a 27 per cent stake in Aegis, and
Warburg Pincus, the US investment group, with 14.5 per cent.
Mr Scott built the group, then an advertising agency called WCRS, by
acquiring a handful of US, European and Asian agencies, but the turning
point came in May 1988, with his purchase of 50 per cent of Carat Espace,
the French media buying and planning group.
WCRS bought the other half of Carat in December 1989 and the group's
direction changed to concentrate on media buying. Between May 1988 and
December 1991, Aegis made 16 acquisitions, mergers and start-ups across
Europe, from Barcelona to Moscow, a rapid expansion which coincided with a
severe recession.
Carat now has legitimate claim to being a pan-European group, with 60
offices in 18 countries. It buys and sells advertising space for more than
4,000 clients across Europe, claiming that this year it will have a 12 per
cent share of the Dollars 53bn (Pounds 29bn) a year display advertising
market.
But that rapid expansion, coinciding with the severe downturn in advertising
revenues, has taken its toll. Last year Aegis saw pre-tax profits fall by 19
per cent to Pounds 55.2m on turnover of Pounds 2.1bn, the first decline
since the group went public in 1983. In the UK alone Aegis lost Pounds
10.2m. Operating costs rose from Pounds 87.2m to Pounds 121m in the period.
Some Pounds 19m of the rise came from acquisitions, mergers and new business
start-ups.
'The fundamentals of the business still look good, but Aegis is in a very
poor position for 1992 and 1993 is on trust,' according to Mr Guy Lamming,
an analyst with James Capel. If the group continues to cut costs, it could
bounce back in 18 months or so.
As part of the economy drive, many of Aegis's functions are moving to Paris
and its London operations are to shrink drastically. Rumours persist within
the company that Mr Scott was not invited to relocate to Paris.
That suggestion is firmly denied by Mr Charles Hochman, currently Aegis's
deputy chairman and who has taken over from Mr Scott as Carat's chief
executive. Mr Scott resigned because he was to unwilling relocate his family
to Paris, he said.
'As far as I am concerned that is the reason why Peter Scott resigned and
anything else is pure speculation. What's happening today is a moment in a
process which started a few months ago and is going to continue. We are in a
phase of getting the operation more profitable, controlling costs, and
making our operation more efficient.'
The importance of Paris to the group began to increase this spring following
the death in April of Mr Francis Gross, Aegis's co-chairman. He founded
Carat with his brother Gilbert and was personally close to Mr Scott.
Without the support of Mr Francis Gross, with whom Mr Scott had been the
architect of the expansionary drive, Mr Scott became more isolated on the
board, people within the company said.
Mr Gilbert Gross, who has a reputation as more of a trader than a builder of
empires, was appointed last Friday as Aegis's honorary president. According
to an Aegis executive, SFEC - a company through which Mr Gross controls his
Aegis holding of some 27 per cent - is due almost Pounds 50m in deferred
payments over the next four years.
Mr Charles Hochman, Carat's new chief executive, and Mr Giles Gobin, a non
executive director, have represented Mr Gross's views on the Aegis board. Mr
John Vogelstein, Warburg Pincus's deputy chairman, is an Aegis non-executive
director. Following Mr Scott's departure, Mr Gilbert Gross has become
honorary president of the Aegis board.
But although some City analysts initially took fright last Friday, depicting
the departure of Mr Scott as a 'French coup', the reality is that the Gross
brothers and Warburg Pincus have been powerful voices on the board for the
last two years. If there were a 'French coup', it happened much earlier than
last Friday, and without any publicly-expressed disapproval from Mr Scott.
His departure leaves the core businesses intact but facing the French
investigation into the nature of media-buying. The Conseil de la
concurrence, the French equivalent of the UK's Monopolies and Mergers
Commission, has spent two years investigating the advertising industry in
France.
It is particularly concerned with the complete lack of transparency in the
media-buying business, where huge discounts obtained by media-buyers such as
Carat are rarely, if ever, passed on to advertisers. The Conseil is unlikely
to take action before April 1993, but its investigation hangs over the head
of all media-buyers, including Carat.
Carat is heavily dependent on the French market, estimated to be the fifth
biggest advertising market in the world. Despite its pan-European network,
more than 70 per cent of Carat's revenues are estimated to derive from
France. Analysts estimate its French margins are 4 per cent, which might be
cut to as low as 2 per cent this year.
Carat believes it is innocent regarding the alleged lack of transparency and
abuse of its quasi-monopolistic powers identified in a Conseil report. But
it could eventually lose some of the benefits it has enjoyed from high
volumes and big discounts - the very factors that underpinned the rationale
for creating a huge media buying group.
Given the turmoil in Paris, Mr Scott might be looking forward to family life
in London.
