FT  07 OCT 92 / Foreign Affairs: East of Maastricht - The Czecho-Slovak duet
is made even more discordant by efforts to stay in tune with the EC
Mr Vaclav Klaus, prime minister of the Czech Republic, makes no secret of
his admiration for Lady Thatch-er, the former UK prime minister. It is not
surprising to learn, therefore, that he is a Euro-sceptic, who regards the
treaty of Maastricht as 'a nightmare', and places more faith in bilateral
relations with individual west European countries than in the EC as such.
So, at least, it is confidently asserted in diplomatic and political circles
in Prague. But Mr Klaus has yet to go public with this view, even if he gave
a broad hint when, asked for his reaction to the French referendum result,
he said that a very narrow Yes was practically equivalent to a No.
Why should Mr Klaus be coy about his views on European Union? First, because
Czechs in general, and his own Civic Democratic party in particular, are
determined to 'return to Europe' after the long years of communism which
kept them away from what they regard as their natural home in the west.
Second, because Mr Klaus himself has espoused a special relationship with
Germany as the means to achieve this.
Both considerations make it impolitic to denounce Maastricht, unless and
until the west Europeans, especially the Germans, should decide to abandon
the project. Czechs do not wish to be thought of as half-hearted or lukewarm
Europeans. Therefore, so long as Maastricht is the official EC blueprint for
what Europe will look like at the end of the century, they feel the need to
proclaim that it also defines their long-term objectives, and that they will
be more than happy to accept its constraints.
When it comes to relations with the Slovaks, however, the Czechs find this
argument cuts both ways. On the one hand, they fear that being yoked to the
Slovaks may dilute their 'west European' credentials and hold them back in
their rush to embrace the capitalist way of life. On the other hand, it is
hard to explain why they are opposed to a union or confederation with
Slovakia when they claim to be in favour of a pan-European union as defined
by Maastricht.
Thus Mr Milos Zeman, the Czech Social Democrat leading the opposition to the
break-up of Czechoslovakia, made a shrewd move last week when he proposed to
transform the present federation into a Czecho-Slovak Union on the
Maastricht model, which would come to an end on the day that the Czech and
Slovak republics join the European Union itself. To Mr Klaus's fury, the
Czechoslovak Federal Assembly passed a resolution to draw up plans for such
a union, after his own proposal on the procedure for dissolving the
federation, agreed with his Slovak counterpart, Mr Vladimir Meciar, had
fallen just short of the required three-fifths majority.
The Klaus-Meciar proposal was defeated by an alliance between the Czech left
and the various opposition parties in Slovakia: Christian Democrats,
ex-communists and representatives of the Hungarian minority. But most of Mr
Meciar's supporters then switched sides and voted for Mr Zeman's 'union',
which sounds very like the 'confederation' formerly proposed by Mr Meciar.
Mr Klaus has consistently rejected the idea of a confederation, arguing that
no halfway house is possible between the present federation and two fully
independent states. He does accept that the two should form a customs union,
but rejects any notion of joint institutions or shared sovereignty, whether
in the field of defence and foreign policy or of economic, social and
environmental affairs. Even the single currency he would maintain only for a
short transitional period.
Mr Klaus's overriding fear is, evidently, that the success of his bold,
free-market policies in the Czech Republic would be endangered by the need
to subsidise a more protectionist and interventionist Slovak government. The
radical economic strategy he adopted as federal finance minister in 1990-92,
coinciding with the loss of cheap energy supplies and captive markets in the
former Soviet bloc, has had traumatic effects throughout the country.
Czechoslovak industrial output fell by 23 per cent in 1991, and a similar
figure is projected for 1992. Investment, hampered by tight credit
restrictions and high interest rates, was cut in half in 1991, while
consumer prices rose more than 50 per cent.
Admittedly this was a low rate of inflation by Russian or even Polish
standards, and this year it has fallen to less than 1 per cent per month.
But while many individual Czechs have taken to capitalism with gusto and are
visibly affluent, the incomes of the majority have not caught up with
prices.
Thus even in the Czech Republic Mr Klaus's policy is fraught with social
risk and political difficulty. He needs both time and a favourable
international climate for it to show dividends.
But Slovakia - which had a high concentration of uneconomic heavy industries
geared to the Soviet market, and lacks the advantage of proximity to Germany
 -is far worse placed to cope with the effects of such policies.
Unemployment, especially, has risen much more sharply in Slovakia, and this
has led many Slovaks to see Mr Klaus's policy as an anti-Slovak conspiracy
against which they need protection.
Mr Meciar seemed to offer that. He promised to secure greater autonomy and
to pursue an economic policy more suited to Slovak conditions. He also
offered emotional compensations to a people with an acute inferiority
complex: for 70 years the Slovaks have been alternately taken for granted or
talked down to by the Czechs, while the rest of the world has ignored them,
using 'Czech' as an abbreviation for 'Czechoslovak'.
The Slovaks may fairly be accused of wanting the best of both worlds: the
trappings of national sovereignty, combined with the security of federation.
They seem likely to end up with an independence more complete, and far more
uncomfortable, than they desired.
Unhappily it may have been President Vaclav Havel who gave Czechoslovakia
the coup de grace, with the televised address in which he solemnly warned
the Slovaks against voting for people with dictatorial tendencies - meaning,
quite clearly, Mr Meciar. This had the opposite of the effect intended,
drastically reducing his own popularity in Slovakia and boosting Mr
Meciar's. Not surprisingly, Mr Meciar and his supporters responded, after
the election, by blocking Mr Havel's re-election as federal president.
Mr Havel, for his part, has not concealed his disillusionment with the
Slovaks: he even lamented publicly that 70 years of Czech efforts to
civilise them and 'bring them to the west' had been in vain - thus perfectly
illustrating the Czech attitude that Slovaks object to.
He is now pinning his hopes on being the first president of the Czech
Republic, for which he will need Mr Klaus's support. He no longer insists
that a referendum be held before the federation is dissolved; and at a press
conference last Saturday he poured scorn on the proposal for a 'union'.
There was no case in history, he said, of a federation being replaced by a
union; and added - in a curious but revealing non sequitur - that
'Maastricht is really a federation'.
Mr Havel is undoubtedly a more genuine enthusiast for European Union than Mr
Klaus. Indeed, he proclaimed his belief that the process of European
integration would, in time, bring the Czechs and the Slovaks together again.
Yet, in order to toe the line that no halfway house is possible in the
Czecho-Slovak context, he feels obliged to assert that none exists, even in
the European context.
