FT  02 DEC 92 / Recruitment: Slaves to the competitive unconscious -
Readers' replies raise disturbing question about the personalities who tend
to rule the roost
FOR the whole of six days the Jobs column has been waiting . . .waiting . .
.waiting. And since the expected event is an acid test, I now know how
nuclear physicists feel when, after theorising that a certain particle must
exist, they sit fidgeting by their accelerators praying it will actually
show up.
In my case, no apparatus is required to test the theory. All it needs is for
someone to ask to borrow the book I wrote about a week ago. For the replies
from you readers to that article pose a problem which . . . .
But before going on, I'd better recapitulate lest any of you here today
weren't present last week. The book* is called Neanderthals at Work and its
main author, American psychologist Albert Bernstein, has a theory. It is
that organisations' workforces can be divided into three broad types of
people, of whom only one type characteristically win promotion to the very
top. The three are:
Rebels - Often creatively intelligent as well as technically expert, they're
indispensable in crises. The snag is that, although willing to work without
stint at things that give them a personal *John Wiley, Pounds 12.95.
buzz, they have little time for routine tasks, however necessary, and still
less for people problems. They therefore hardly ever climb far up managerial
hierarchies.
Believers - Embodiments of the work ethic, they spare no effort even at
tasks they dislike. Moreover, being fair-minded and straight-forward in
their dealings, they make the kind of managers under whom other people give
of their best.
Believers' strength, however, is also the root of their weakness. They draw
their motivation from their faith that diligent discharge of their
prescribed duties will be duly rewarded - a faith they hold so strongly as
to be blind to any evidence to the contrary. Consequently, they rarely rise
beyond the middle ranks.
The type who do get to the top are the Competitors. They are quick to learn
how the company system really works as distinct from the way the official
rules ordain, and they then manipulate it to serve their own ambitions.
Since their motivation is the urge to win personally, they take it for
granted that their way is best and so never question whether or not what
they are doing is in the best interests of the company.
Now, last week's report on Dr Bernstein's theory produced a large but
uncounted number of replies from readers, most of whom identified themselves
as of one type or the other. They also included several people known to me,
some of whom I have reason to believe operate as competitors.
The odd thing was that neither they nor any of the rest admitted as much.
The whole lot claimed to be either rebels or believers - which set me
thinking.
At first I decided it was just typical competitors' behaviour: they could
hardly be expected to show their true colours, after all. But then I was
struck by an awful thought.
Could it be that competitors don't know they're competitors?
Hence my idea of a test. What else besides hiding behind disguises would
competitors inevitably do, I wondered. One that occurred was that they'd
surely never buy a book if they could get it on loan. So I settled in to
await a would-be borrower, whom I could then confront with the evidence and
grill to find whether he or she was masking being a competitor, or simply
unconscious of the fact.
Alas, no one has asked for the loan. What's worse, now I've revealed the
trap I was setting, the whole scheme is blown - which is a pity. For the
un-consciousness or otherwise of competitors has a bearing on another of
Albert Bernstein's theses which this past week fortunately has seen
confirmed.
In his view, a big drawback of having competitors in command, is that their
typical deviousness about the ways they manipulate company systems tends to
stymie useful developments. 'The only way to make meaningful change in a
corporate culture is to be very specific about what that culture actually is
and how it works,' the book explains. 'The problem is that the people who
could write the explicit rules don't think it is in their best interest to
do so.'
Confirmation of the truth of those words has come from Pam Pocock of the
Strategic People consultancy of Chertsey, Surrey. Among its activities is
helping outfits whose top management wants them to change to meet new
demands, which necessitates identifying the values that make up the present
culture, and adjusting them as required.
In the process, besides putting out questionnaires and so on, the
consultancy uses a board game it has devised called Dilemma. In it, staff
acting the part of promotion-seeking managers are faced, in turn, with
ethical problems taken from real organisational life. For example, what do
you do if, while searching an absent colleague's desk for some important
data, you accidentally find a hidden pile of neglected work? The player
concerned then has not only to decide on an answer, but persuade the others
that it's the best one, before being awarded promotion further up the board.
What often if not usually emerges, says Ms Pocock, is a cultural picture
which differs from the one given by the initial questionnaires. First
inquiries about the things staff think their ultimate bosses value tend to
elicit lists headed by Teamwork, Quality, Customers and the like.
By contrast, deeper dredgings into the outfit's workings come up with terms
such Traditional, Bureaucratic and Hierarchical. The Dilemma game shows that
many employees are aware of the contradiction. Often the player choosing the
solution will have no difficulty in persuading the rest that it's productive
as well as ethically right, only to be sunk by the objection: 'But it just
wouldn't work in this firm, as you very well know.'
'It's hard to avoid thinking a good many company leaderships are saying one
thing and doing another,' Pam Pocock adds. 'In which case, if the workforce
is to act differently, there must be real change right at the top.'
In the Jobs column's view, however, the problem may well be deeper than
that. Even if the competitors' behaviour is merely deliberate as distinct
from un-conscious, it is nevertheless highly contagious for people of an
ambitious bent. Indeed, once the cult of winning personally has taken hold,
it is apt to skewer itself through the organisation from head to foot,
serving as a management training system all the more effective for being
recognised only by a few. At which point it might defy the most determined
as well as enlightened leader's efforts to cut it out.
So the best hope for companies bedevilled by the cult of winning might lie
in the other possibility - to wit, that competitors are not competitors
deliberately, but are simply unconscious of the fact. If so, there may be a
chance of awakening them not only to their real identity, but to recognition
of their destructive effects and the need to change their ways.
How to bring about the transformation is alas something else again. After
all, at least since Confucius 2,500 years ago sages have been telling
competitors how to behave more productively without as yet turning the
trick. But if readers have any better ideas, I'll be delighted to pass them
on.
