FT  18 NOV 92 / International Company News: Telecom NZ profits advance 2.6%
TELECOM Corporation of New Zealand yesterday reported a 2.6 per cent rise in
net profits to NZDollars 184.8m (USDollars 96.3m) for the six months to
September 30 from NZDollars 180.2m a year earlier, in spite of a fall in
operating profits to NZDollars 1.22bn from NZDollars 1.28bn.
Telecom NZ, whose main shareholders are Bell Atlantic and Ameritech, the US
telecommunications groups, announced an unexpected 11.25 per cent rise in
dividend.
Analysts said this was a sign that the company expected earnings to rise
strongly in the second half following a review of services, cost structures,
capital spending and revenue streams. Telecom NZ is listed on Wall Street,
London and main Asian exchanges as well as in New Zealand.
Mr Peter Shirtcliffe, chairman, said the company had performed well in an
environment of intensifying competition, by combining cost reduction
programmes with carefully focused growth strategies.
He said the result was satisfactory as the period did not include earnings
from the Auckland white and yellow page directories, which contributed
NZDollars 16.5m last year. These results will be included in the final
quarter's figures.
Mr Shirtcliffe said there was a continuing decline in some revenue streams
including from national calls which were down 13.8 per cent because of
competition. Earnings from international calls were also down.
Cellular revenue rose 25.4 per cent, with cellular connections up 34.1 per
cent compared with September 1991. National call volumes were up 1.6 per
cent, which Mr Shirtcliffe said was a reflection of a strengthening economy.
Smartphone and payphone revenue rose 68.4 per cent.
The company had handled competition successfully and held 86 per cent of the
market at September 30. Mr Shirtcliffe said the current review was designed
to produce important improvements which will result in earnings growth and
shareholder value. This would produce exceptionally strong cash flows and a
strong balance sheet. It would be helped by new technological services and
new products.
Operating expenses fell to NZDollars 876m from NZDollars 930m and operating
earnings rose to NZDollars 348m from NZDollars 338m. Investment income fell
to NZDollars 20m from NZDollars 27m and tax took NZDollars 77m compared with
NZDollars 87m.
Earnings per share were unchanged at 8 cents and the interim dividend is
being raised to 7.25 cents a share from 6.5 cents.
