FT  08 APR 92 / Delors signals more powers for Brussels
BRUSSELS will soon recommend a startling increase in supranational executive
power for the EC as the necessary price for enlarging the Community, Mr
Jacques Delors signalled yesterday.
The Commission report on enlargement, due for the Lisbon summit, 'will come
as a political, intellectual and institutional shock to the Twelve (existing
members) who, in my opinion, have not sufficiently realised what a Community
opening up to 35 states would be like', he told MEPs.
So far, only six countries have asked to join the EC. But, in what is
perhaps an exaggeration to magnify the need for 'big bang' institutional
change, Mr Delors now evidently assumes far more states will soon knock at
Brussels' door.
Hitherto, proponents of minimal institutional change, like Britain, which
takes over the EC presidency later this year, had been rather counting on Mr
Delors to tone down the long-stated desire of Mr Frans Andriessen, the
external affairs commissioner, for EC integration to be 'deepened' as it is
'widened'.
But Mr Delors said yesterday: 'We must see that widening is not at the
expense of deepening.' A very preliminary draft of the enlargement report
dating back to last November suggested removing all member states' right to
have at least one Commissioner, cutting the voting threshold needed to pass
routine business through the Council of Ministers, and introducing 'a
genuine European executive . . . to implement external policy'.
MEPs last night voted by 226 to 63, with 31 abstentions, in favour of the
Maastricht treaty on political and monetary union, despite lengthy criticism
of its 'shortcomings'.
Though the Maastricht pact only needs ratification by the 12 national
parliaments, two of the latter - the Belgian and Italian legislatures - have
said they will heed Strasbourg's views. But any enlargement of the EC
requires the approval of MEPs, who last night put on record their
pre-condition that the EC's 'democratic deficit' must be remedied before new
countries join it.
The European People's Party (EPP) of 122 Christian Democrat MEPs last night
voted by a two-to-one majority to admit as full members the 32-strong band
of UK Tory MEPs, plus two Danish conservatives.
This ends the isolation - especially marked during the Thatcher years - of
Tory MEPs who will now be part of one of Strasbourg's two big battalions.
The largest is the 180-strong Socialist group.
