FT  25 JAN 92 / Marcos launches flamboyant campaign
MRS Imelda Marcos yesterday launched her presidential election campaign in
shamelessly flamboyant style, saying she would grant amnesty to rebel
soldiers who had tried to overthrow President Corazon Aquino in coup
attempts.
The former first lady made the promise after imprisoned troops interrupted
her first sizeable campaign rally by shouting their support from the roof of
a military stockade.
Demonstrating the political awareness of her late husband, President
Ferdinand Marcos, Mrs Marcos jumped from her limousine to wave to the 30
soldiers clamouring from the prison roof.
'I would like to give an amnesty to the soldiers, insurrectionists,
radicals, communists and secessionists,' said the 63-year-old campaigner,
rounding-up the usual suspects who are blamed for the country's lack of
unity.
Mrs Marcos displayed composure as she was jostled by enthusiastic crowds and
hammed-up emotion as she promised that the country could once again be
great.
She was greeted with enthusiasm when she told the crowd outside army
headquarters that she doubted their lives had improved since she and her
husband fled into exile six years before.
Foreign observers have tended to write off Mrs Marcos's chances of winning
the May 11 elections, viewing her as a phenomenon of the past, who is still
accused of looting her country.
But the attraction of an enduring and colourful personality, especially when
pitted against lacklustre government candidates who have overseen a dismal
economic performance, may still make Mrs Marcos a contender.
The ruling party is most concerned that Mrs Marcos might combine forces with
another political escape artist from the Marcos era: the notorious business
man Eduardo Cojuangco.
They are likely to know who they are competing against after a rally today
to be led by Mrs Aquino. After considerable procrastination, Mrs Aquino is
due to anoint her chosen candidate.
While Mr Ramon Mitra, speaker of the House of Representatives, has already
won the approval of the majority of ruling LDP delegates at a party
convention, Mrs Aquino has been reluctant to endorse him. Instead, she
appears to favour General Fidel Ramos, her former defence secretary, even
though such a choice might split her party.
Mr Mitra and Gen Ramos stand on similar policy platforms, favouring further
economic liberalisation. What Mr Mitra lacks in popularity, compared to Gen
Ramos, he more than makes up for in political machinery.
However, despite promising for a year that she will endorse a candidate
today, there is still a chance that Mrs Aquino will not.
Mr Cojuangco, widely remembered as controller of the important coconut
industry, adopts a vocabulary that also suggests he is in favour of an open
and free market. However, the business community is aware that he built his
considerable wealth as a monopoly capitalist.
