FT  06 FEB 92 / UK Company News: TV franchises were jeopardised by high
bids, ITC minutes show
YORKSHIRE TELEVISION and Tyne Tees Television were on the verge of losing
their franchises because of bids that were feared to be too high, according
to confidential Independent Television Commission documents.
Both companies were on a list of five 'problem' decisions that were the
subject of a second ITC staff assessment considered by Commission members in
the franchise-awarding process.
The detailed assessment of the five companies concerned - Yorkshire, Tyne
Tees, TVNI - an unsuccessful bidder for the Ulster franchise - TVS
Entertainment, and Television South West - was available to the High Court
when it heard the judicial review of the TSW decision. The court also had
minutes of the principal ITC decision-taking meeting taken by Ms Caroline
Gladstone, assistant secretary of the ITC.
The content of the documents was never revealed in open court. Yorkshire and
Tyne Tees were referred to as 'Company A' and 'Company B'. Counsel in the
case started calling the group of high bidders 'The Fearful Five'.
It is believed that ITC's staff and its financial adviser, Hill Samuel, the
merchant bank, recommended that neither Yorkshire nor Tyne Tees should
regain their franchises. Yorkshire, in which Pearson, owner of the Financial
Times has a 20 per cent stake, bid Pounds 37.7m compared with the rival
White Rose bid of Pounds 17.4m. Tyne Tees bid Pounds 15.06m compared with
North East TV's Pounds 5.01m.
The ITC minutes also suggest that TVS was not turned down because of its
Pounds 59.75m bid, but because of uncertainties over MTM, its loss-making US
production company.
The ITC said that although the bid was very high, it clearly had shareholder
support. 'That doesn't take account of the MTM factor,' the minutes say.
Only one line is devoted to TSW, which lost its judicial review yesterday
but which was given leave to appeal to the House of Lords. The minutes say
that the staff recommendation (to turn down TSW) was supported.
ITC minutes clearly show how uncertain the regulatory body was about giving
Yorkshire a new franchise. The fact that it was a large company was seen as
a strength and it was suggested there would be extra cost savings because of
the links with Tyne Tees. Yorkshire has a 20 per cent stake in its
north-eastern neighbour.
Yorkshire may have been saved by the fact that Thames Television had lost
and the ITC did not want to lose a second large network production company.
The ITC declined to comment last night.
