FT  19 SEP 92 / Books: Portrait of the Revolution
A PLACE OF GREATER SAFETY by Hilary Mantel Viking Pounds 15.99, 871 pages
IT IS remarkable and perhaps telling that there have been so few successful
novels set during the French Revolution. One thinks of Dickens' Tale of Two
Cities, Anatole France's Les Dieux ont soif and Balzac's The Chouans, but
none of these would be widely accepted as great. There are even fewer works
of fiction which have the revolution as their central theme, or have
characters based on real historical figures.
It is equally curious that the narrative sweep of the revolution has
intimidated legions of historians and defeated most. There are plenty of dry
and rather unforgiving tomes; there are some entertainingly bizarre books by
Richard Cobb. Citizens was exceedingly well-timed for the revolution's
bicentenary, but was actively disliked by most historians, doubtless because
in his successful pursuit of literary and popular appeal Simon Shama bent a
few too many professional rules.
Such historical and literary difficulties have exercised generations of
scholars and writers, so when Hilary Mantel's thumper finally went to press
after 18 years' gestation, it was understandably accorded more than usual
interest. Mantel has enjoyed the privilege of explaining ahead of
publication what she is trying to achieve. To her the revolution is that
dangerous thing, a passion, almost an obsession. She aims above all to show
the private side of its central actors, to create around them a book one can
think and live inside. What were Danton, Robespierre and Camille Desmoulins,
their wives and mistresses too, like when the front door closed and the
public faces fell away?
Mantel is either confused or unsure how she wants to be judged. She might
make a fine historian. Her eye for facts and anecdote is keen, her research
certainly not lacking. Hers is unashamedly a Parisian revolution, and in
parts it is adeptly, impressively painted. But she wants to be a novelist,
so it is fair to address the writing as well as the endeavour.
Two hundred pages of our heroes' imagined early lives takes some reading,
and frankly not much happens; another 130 pages before Mantel has played out
the tame conceit that Desmoulins was bisexual - until then he is pretty
fevered anyway, so his confession comes as equal relief to the reader. The
characters are consistent, but their portrayal is not remarkably original.
Danton is done best, Desmoulins worst. Robespierre reminds one of nothing so
much as the austere perfectionist in Wajda's film Danton.
Could the action not have been hurried along towards the amazing period when
our actors briefly contested and won arbitrary and absolute power? And
therein lies the book's main weakness. This characterisation, background and
all, only has meaning, hence interest, because there were astonishing
events. Dispense with that and the actors have no stage, their personalities
pale. So we are offered a bad, long novel with a better history tacked on.
A simpler test is whether the book is a good read. Mantel's style is too
quixotic to pass. Dialogue is a clumsy mix of modern and dated idioms which
occasionally lapse into the ridiculous. Tenses are juggled anarchically,
perhaps deliberately to signal temporal confusion as a parallel of political
and moral chaos. Mostly, it jars.
