FT  14 MAR 92 / Travel: What Pounds 60,000 buys in the wilderness - Nicholas
Woodsworth on the rural good life in Canada
WHAT CAN YOU do with Pounds 60,000 these days? It is a good chunk of money,
but it hardly seems enough to set yourself up in life. You could buy an
Italian sports car. Or finance a child's education. Or pay the electricity
bills. Or, like Rod McNabb and Vlasta Ulovec, you could purchase 11 acres
and 700 apple trees on a small island in the north Pacific, and embark on a
life as an organic apple farmer.
Three years ago McNabb and Ulovec, Vancouverites with hectic, big-city
lives, decided they had had enough. Both in their early 40s, they had
pursued careers that kept them on a never-ending treadmill, he with the Post
Office, she as an architectural draft designer. For them Vancouver, scenic
as it is, had become too big, noisy and expensive. Like many other
city-dwellers, they dreamed of slowing down and taking time to enjoy life.
Two decades earlier, Vlasta Ulovec had fled Prague following the Soviet
invasion of Czechoslovakia, and went to Canada for a better life. Now, both
decided it was time to sell their house, drain the swimming pool, give away
the potted plants and flee once again - voluntarily this time. They became
urban refugees.
The way to Denman Island is not an easy one - this is a coast of inlets,
bays, sounds, inland passages and hundreds of small islands. From Vancouver,
you follow the coast northwards to Horseshoe bay, take a ferry across the
broad straight of Georgia to Vancouver island, drive 50 miles further north
and then board the small Denman ferry. You have to travel for the better
part of a day to get there, but it is a trip that takes you a world away
from Vancouver.
The McNabb-Ulovec establishment now sits on a gentle slope, surrounded by
woods and coniferous forest, not far from the Denman island sea-shore. It is
closer still to a small lake that makes for good swimming in hot weather.
From the upper orchard you can look up and across the Georgia strait to snow
on top of the Coast Range. Look down and you will see neat rows of apple
trees stretching across the grass to a cedar-shingled house in the distance.
Generally Rod McNabb is somewhere in the scenery. He may be up in the
orchard cutting grass, pruning trees or scheming ways to counter the latest
black ant invasion. If not, he is down at the house with Vlasta, talking
with friends, feeding the ducks or attending to the last batch of home-made
beer.
What can Pounds 60,000 buy you? On Denman island it can buy an orchard, a
hand-tailored wooden house, an old John Deere tractor with far too many
attachments, 60 assorted ducks and chickens, various outbuildings and barns,
a riotous front garden of flowers - and two milk cows named Sophie and
Squirt. Throw in a pick-up truck, two dogs and four cats and you have got
yourself a life. A busy one, at that.
Before they bought Apple Lane Orchard, Rod and Vlasta knew about as much as
we all know about apples. Depending on them for their survival, they now
know far more. Tending an apple orchard sounds idyllic; you watch the things
grow and make sure small boys do not steal them. Don't you? Apparently you
do not. Life may be more enjoyable than it was before for this couple, but
it is just as demanding.
As others before them have discovered, making anything grow is work. Making
apples grow, especially in a climate like this, is a constant chore. There
are late frosts, early freezes, grass and weeds to tend to, plant rusts,
fungi and scab diseases galore.
Growing the apples organically makes it even more difficult. There are no
chemical insecticides, herbicidal sprays or artificial fertilisers on the
McNabb acres. Instead there are kelp and composted manure piles around the
trees, ground-up seashell solutions for insect infestations, and ducks that
eat weeds. It all makes life more difficult and risky, but it seems to be
worth it.
At the Granville island produce market in Vancouver there are retired
British expatriates who haven't tasted apples like those McNabb grows since
childhood. There are Cox's orange pippins, Bramley seedlings and Westover
seek-no-furthers.
No matter how frantic they become growing apples, the McNabb-Ulovecs
appreciate their new lives on Denman island. They are not alone. Denman is
populated by 800 islanders. They are a hardy lot, much like the
turn-of-the-century settlers who originally moved there. They value
independence and practical skills. Above all, they enjoy a rural way of life
that is becoming harder to find.
Many have moved from cities for the simpler life, but brought along skills
that make them a living. Next to Apple Lane Orchard, in a Japanese-style
cabin hidden in a stand of firs, Tokyo-born Yoshi Yoshihara makes up large
wooden vats of traditional Japanese miso (fermented soyabean) and sends it
to specialist shops across the country.
Up the road, brothers Tom and Mike Dennis, former Berkley academics, pot and
sculpt. Across the way, Brian Grogan takes photos for the island paper and
bakes bread he will exchange for local eggs, milk and vegetables. Behind the
orchard, Rolf Ludwigson, another academic who specialises in trylobytes, has
founded DIRT, surely the most arcane organisation on the continent - Denman
Island Research on Trylobytes. Nobody makes a great deal of money, but then
nobody expects to.
The winters are long and wet. In summer there are difficulties with water
supply on the island. Rod and Vlasta would like to find time to travel but
the roof of their house needs replacing and apple scab is an ever-present
menace. On the whole, though, such a life seems a bargain at Pounds 60,000.
