FT  07 AUG 92 / Pressure grows for international action on Bosnia
PRESSURE on the United Nations to stop the fighting in Bosnia mounted
yesterday amid increasing international condemnation of Serbian aggression
in the former Yugoslav republic.
The pressure, fuelled by media reports about detention camps and an
escalation of violence, coincided with the release by the Bosnian government
of the latest casualty figures.
The Bosnians said at least 8,272 people had been killed in the four-month
war following the republic's declaration of independence. At least 1,569
people had died in Sarajevo, where 380,000 people have been besieged by Serb
fighters.
About 35,000 people have been wounded in fighting throughout Bosnia between
mainly Moslems and Croats on one side, and Serbs opposed to independence on
the other, the Bosnian statement added.
The European Community condemned what it called 'repulsive and despicable'
Serb camps used to detain Bosnian civilians in Bosnia.
A statement issued by the British EC presidency demanded that the government
in Belgrade press Serbs in Bosnia to allow international observers, above
all members of the International Committee of the Red Cross, immediate
access to the camps.
In an article in the New York Times, Lady Thatcher, former UK prime
minister, called for military action against Serbia, in an attempt to
influence US policy.
'A clear threat of military action would force Serbia into contemplating an
end to its aggression,' she said. Weapons should be supplied to the Bosnian
government, she added.
In New York, the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, which groups 46
Moslem countries, pressed the UN Security Council to draw up tougher
measures to stop the forcible deportation of Bosnia's Moslem population.
The OIC wants the UN to exempt Bosnia from an arms embargo. Tehran radio
quoted President Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani as pledging Iranian co-operation
with other Moslem countries to end the 'savage massacre of innocent and
defenceless Moslems in Bosnia'.
In spite of mounting demands for action, western governments remain
reluctant to respond militarily. President George Bush has ruled out
military intervention unless it has the backing of the UN, and is aimed at
supporting humanitarian relief convoys.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the British foreign secretary, played down the significance
of Lady Thatcher's remarks. 'They are not new, and they are not secret,' he
said.
Mr John Major, the British prime minister, again ruled out military
intervention. 'All the advice I have tells me that we
Continued on Page 14 Islamic nations press UN, Page 2
