FT  16 MAR 92 / Survey of Nigeria (1): Risky path to reform - The floating
of the naira is the most radical, if belated, initiative since the recovery
programme was launched
NIGERIA is facing its greatest challenge since General Ibrahim Babangida
seized power more than six years ago. Disliked at home, distrusted abroad,
the country's military government is attempting to revive a flagging
economic reform programme while implementing a flawed transition to civilian
rule.
Events over the next few weeks may well determine the outcome on both
fronts. Will the military government buttress this month's bold decision to
float the naira, and implement the accompanying tough fiscal and monetary
measures as promised? Or will it lose its nerve as consumer prices increase
following the naira's plunge from its manipulated official rate of 10.5 to
18 to the dollar?
Either course is painful, although the former offers a way out of the
economic crisis; the latter will take Nigeria down the path of Zaire or
Zambia.
The decision to float the naira is the most radical policy initiative since
President Babangida launched the structural adjustment programme in 1986,
less than a year after seizing office in a palace coup. Within 24 hours of
Alhaji Abdulkadir Ahmed, governor of the central bank, breaking the news in
a nationally-televised broadcast, the 80 per cent spread between the rigged
official rate and the market value almost vanished.
Reactions have been muted. Government spokesmen made much of the fact that
the easy profits made by many of the smaller banks, who sold their share of
the weekly foreign exchange allocations at a wide margin, now go into the
state's coffers. But prices will inevitably rise - how much depends on the
effectiveness of a liquidity squeeze - adding to a catalogue of complaints.
Many of the new civilian governors (who took over from their military
predecessors last December) are now discovering that they have inherited
over-spent treasuries and dubious business contracts.
Disclosure of a recent government decision to provide middle ranking army
officers with private cars on nominal repayment terms infuriated Nigerians,
who have seen their per capita income fall from Dollars 1,000 (calculated on
an overvalued exchange rate) to around Dollars 250. 'It's as if the army's
view of structural adjustment is 'do what we say, not as we do',' says an
angry businessman.
But there are many Nigerians who also look with misgivings at the prospect
of a civilian government in January 1993.
President Babangida's imposition of a two-party system, both parties created
by government with manifestoes written by civil servants, does not inspire
confidence that the Third Republic will have firm foundations.
Yet the continuation of military rule would, most Nigerians believe, be the
greater of two misfortunes, and the soldiers' renewed commitment to reform
is treated with scepticism.
President Babangida, however, will be looking for a positive response from
western partners. The devaluation removed the biggest obstacle in
negotiations with a visiting International Monetary Fund (IMF) team at one
dramatic stroke. No doubt the Fund, like a probation officer confronting a
hardened recidivist, will be wary. But most observers believe that a new
stand-by agreement could now be in reach, paving the way to further
rescheduling of Nigeria's Dollars 30bn external debt.
'It was a coup de theatre,' declared a diplomat, 'and the Fund was in the
audience.' It is evidence, say some observers, that government commitment to
Nigeria's reform programme has been restored.
Essential principles have been reaffirmed by the Central Bank governor in
his broadcast: fiscal restraint, prudent monetary policies, public sector
rationalisation, curbs on state spending. 'It is imperative,' he declared,
'that these actions be taken in order to consolidate and enhance the gains
of the structural adjustment programme' - words addressed, one suspects, as
much to profligate soldiers as to donors and creditors, anxious for
assurance that the past year's drift is ending.
But a look at the track record of the military government suggests that
caution would be in order. As far as back as February 1986, President
Babangida spoke of floating the naira, after delivering a budget that
promised a 'realistic' exchange rate.
Just under three years later, with inflation running at 50 per cent and the
naira overvalued by about as much, government attempted to make up lost
ground. The January 1989 budget paved the way to a new agreement with the
IMF. Yet one of the key conditions - the establishment of a market rate for
the naira - was broken before the ink of the government letter of intent was
dry. Looking back, the concessions seemed only to have postponed the
inevitable.
Doubt about the government's renewed commitment to reform is based on more
than a failure to bite the foreign exchange bullet. There is evidence of
mismanagement and wasted resources on a scale that has done great harm to
Nigeria.
Some of the most disquieting concerns are set out in a hitherto unpublished
World Bank report. It presents the findings of a Bank review of federal
government expenditures, carried out in early 1991. The report notes that
Nigeria's oil export receipts were some Dollars 2bn higher in 1990 than the
Bank had been projecting.
Pressures created by raised expectations, demands from state and local
governments, and the transition to civilian rule (due to culminate in
presidential elections this December) 'led to a breakdown in fiscal and
monetary discipline during 1990,' says the Bank.
The report notes that 'the practice of spending oil revenues through
dedication accounts and other devices outside the purview of statutory
budgetary and accounting controls has re-emerged on a large scale'.
The report continues: 'Some Dollars 1.5bn equivalent of revenues was
allocated under ill-defined and poorly documented procedures outside of the
normal accounting framework.'
These concerns, shared by creditor governments, have yet to be eased. At the
very least, they provide grounds for closer monitoring of government policy,
both by internal and external agencies, than provided for by current aid and
rescheduling terms. One early test of the government's fresh resolve will be
whether it continues to support unsuitable projects.
'A large number of projects are far from least cost', points out the same
World Bank report, 'either because of inappropriate choices of technology or
location, or because of overcharging by foreign suppliers.' The Ajaokuta
steel plant on which Dollars 3bn has been spent requires a further Dollars
2-3bn for completion, and will be a net loser of foreign exchange even after
capital costs are written off. The Dollars 1.4bn Ikot Abasi aluminium
smelter 'has capital costs well in excess of clearly competitive green field
plants in other countries', says the Bank report.
Nigeria has reached this critical stage largely through government
shortcomings. But the record also suggests that Nigeria's western partners
have been prepared to turn a blind eye to policy failures. The motives have
been mixed: commercial interests in the booming multi-billion dollar oil and
gas sector; a genuine belief in government's good intentions; an equally
genuine fear - often exploited by Lagos - that pressure would destabilise
Africa's most populous nation.
All will come into play as President Babangida presses his case for external
debt relief. He will argue that the success of his reform programme depends
on it; creditors will ask whether they can depend on the president to keep
the promises Governor Ahmed made on his behalf.
 ------------------------
     EXCHANGE RATE
 ------------------------
Average exchange rate
naira/Dollars
1991               9.96
Jan/Feb 1992       9.75
March 11, 1992    18.00
 ------------------------
