FT  01 DEC 92 / Europe facing steep rise in drugs traffic: Governments
ignoring threat, warns US law agency chief
THE HEAD of the US Drug Enforcement Administration warned yesterday of a
large increase in illegal narcotics imports into western Europe and said
European governments had not awoken yet to the threat.
Mr Robert Bonner, administrator of the DEA, told a meeting at the Royal
Institute of International Affairs yesterday that the danger was such that
western governments should make fighting narcotics a primary foreign policy
objective.
'Most of the EC seems oblivious to the fact that western Europe has become a
major export market for cocaine,' he said. An estimated 200 tonnes of
cocaine were exported by the Colombian drugs cartel into Europe last year,
most of it undetected, he claimed. However, the surge in trafficking was
indicated by a sharp increase in seizures: from 4 tonnes in 1988 to 16
tonnes last year. There was also an increase in the UK in the use of crack,
the smokeable form of cocaine.
Much of the cocaine was imported through Spain although the Netherlands,
Britain, Italy and Germany all experienced significant imports. Drugs were
also coming in 'through the back door' via eastern Europe, especially
Czechoslovakia and, to a lesser extent, Poland.
'I believe that the time is ripe for a third international conference this
century on opium and heroin. The time has never been riper for such a
conference,' he said. Previous international conferences were held in 1907
and 1912
The DEA's policy was to apply pressure on the so-called kingpins of the
trafficking organisations. However, this strategy was easier to pursue in
the case of cocaine, where 80-90 per cent of production was concentrated in
Colombia, than in the case of heroin whose production was highly
diversified.
Nonetheless, Colombian organisations had moved into heroin production,
surpassing traditional suppliers of opium (from which heroin is made) such
as Pakistan, Afghanistan and Lebanon, although Burma was responsible for an
estimated 50 per cent of output, and Laos was also a big supplier. The
Colombians could be expected to use established routes for cocaine to push
their heroin.
