FT  15 SEP 92 / Jeers replace early cheers
THE FEVERED enthusiasm of yesterday morning's tabloid headlines which
heralded the German move as a 'stunning coup' by Mr Norman Lamont, the
chancellor, soon gave way to grumblings that the cuts were not deep enough
to help the ailing British economy.
Mr John Townend, chairman of the Tory backbench finance committee, said the
size of the reduction was 'very disappointing'.
He said he was 'more than ever convinced' that the move had been motivated
by the need to get a Yes vote in Sunday's French referendum.
Mr John Carlisle, a prominent Tory Euro-sceptic, described it as 'derisory',
while Mr William Cash, a vociferous backbench critic of the government's
economic policy, attacked the move as 'a cynical and cosmetic exercise'.
He said: 'The fact is that it is not going to make very much difference. The
real question which still remains is what is the impact of our being tied to
the German economy when British jobs and massive unemployment and
bankruptcies are effectively being orchestrated by a policy which is being
made in Germany.'
Mr Howard Davies, director-general of the Confederation of British Industry,
said his organisation had hoped for more. 'Regrettably, the cut in the
Lombard rate is unlikely to provide the chancellor with much room for
manoeuvre to reduce UK rates in the short-term,' he said.
Across Europe, the euphoria which greeted the first sign that German rates
were finally moving downwards was tinged with caution and scepticism.
The European Commission heralded the cuts as an example of the European
Community 'pulling together'. Others said these were so slim that many
central banks still lacked the necessary room for monetary easing and gains
by other European currencies were limited.
There is an element of confusion and perplexity,' said Mr Steve Hannah, head
of research at IBJ International, the securities wing of the Japanese Bank
in London. 'What has limited reaction to the German move is the feeling that
it has only scratched the surface as far as the big issues facing Europe are
concerned.'
In Germany, reaction in some quarters was profoundly sceptical, although
others, worried about a German recession, were relieved at the cut in rates.
Mr Albrecht Schmidt, chief executive of Bayerische Vereinsbank, a German
bank, said that economic and inflationary conditions had 'not changed at
all'.
Mr Martin Hufner, chief economist of the same bank, argued that if the
Bundesbank were to retain its anti-inflationary credibility it would not be
able to cut rates further until the summer of next year at the earliest.
In France, where the central bank did not cut rates, the German move was
nonetheless welcomed by leaders fighting for a Yes vote in this week's
referendum on the Maastricht treaty. Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the prime
minister, said Germany had put the interests of Europe ahead of their own in
a move that was a 'great success' for Europe.
In Italy, Mr Gianni Zandanno, chairman of the Instituto Bancario San Paolo
di Torino, Italy's biggest bank, said: 'It would have made more sense if
this realignment had been matched by important economic measures sufficient
to redress our public finances.'
