FT  16 JAN 92 / Baker acts to avert stalemate in talks
MIDDLE East peace talks appeared to be stymied yesterday after Israeli and
Palestinian negotiators clashed over the issue of Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories of the West Bank and Gaza.
Mr James Baker, US secretary of state, called the heads of the peace
delegations in to see him yesterday morning, and the Israelis agreed to stay
in Washington for one more day of talks, remaining until noon Thursday
instead of leaving on Wednesday night as they had originally planned.
The State Department said yesterday's meetings were requested by the
delegations, and said Mr Baker had made only private comments, rather than
putting forward US suggestions on how to resolve the deadlock in the
simultaneous bilateral talks which Israel has been holding in Washington
this week with Syrian, Lebanese, Jordanian and Palestinian delegations.
While the Arab delegations, in particular, have repeatedly tried to bring
the US into the discussions, the State Department has insisted that it can
act only as a catalyst to the peace process and cannot get involved in
issues of substance.
The peace talks had seemed to take a step forward when delegates agreed on a
formula which allowed Israel to hold separate meetings to discuss Jordanian
and Palestinian issues while preserving its insistence that it would deal
only with a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation.
But after agreeing on what kind of table to sit around, the delegations
failed to make any further progress on what agenda to put on that table.
'It seems that the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations have come to a head-on
collision,' said Dr Hanan Ashrawi, spokeswoman for the Palestinian
delegation.
'We told them that there is no way in which negotiations can proceed or
succeed while Israeli settlement activity is continuing.' In another
development, the Palestinians have refused to accept an invitation to
multilateral talks due to take place in Moscow on January 27-28.
They want to take part with their own delegation, including Palestinians
living outside the occupied territories, rather than as part of the
Jordanian delegation.
Meanwhile, settlers in the occupied territories yesterday attempted to
establish four new makeshift settlements and demonstrated for tougher
government action against the Palestinian uprising, in protest against a
series of attacks on settlers by Palestinian gunmen in which four Israelis
died.
The army quickly intervened, arresting more than 20 settlers.
