FT  07 JUL 92 / Cuomo agrees to nominate Clinton: Democratic candidate needs
party unity
NEW YORK Governor Mario Cuomo yesterday agreed to give the formal nomination
speech for Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas at next week's Democratic
convention.
Mr Clinton, who has had feuds with fellow Democrats during the US
presidential primary season, has thus made sure that at least one running
squabble will be smoothed over in time for his big moment, when the party
anoints him as its candidate in the November 3 election.
Mr Cuomo's shadow has loomed over the Democrats this year. His partisans
hoped he would run in the primaries himself; when he did not, they began to
plot ways to draft him as candidate at the convention.
By winning his agreement, Mr Clinton has taken a significant step towards
building the party unity which the Democrats have traditionally found so
difficult to achieve.
With 57 per cent of the convention delegates committed to voting for him, Mr
Clinton is assured of the nomination, but he cannot yet boast solid support
from fellow Democrats.
Of the defeated primary contenders, only Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa has
formally endorsed the victor, and several Democratic heavyweights, including
Governors Ann Richards of Texas, Robert Casey of Pennsylvania and Lawton
Chiles of Florida, have been unenthusiastic about their fellow Democratic
governor. But Mr Cuomo's absence from the convention, which will take place
in his home city of New York, would have been a particularly glaring signal
of disunity.
Party managers now hope Mr Cuomo can match his eloquence at their 1984
convention, when he enthralled the audience with a indictment of the Reagan
presidency.
Although Mr Clinton's opinion poll showing has recently shown a modest
revival - some polls last week showed him leading both independent
challenger Mr Ross Perot and President George Bush - he still clearly needs
a successful convention to bolster his fragile candidacy.
Mr Cuomo's selection to nominate Mr Clinton should also quell lingering
speculation that the Arkansas governor might pick him as his
vice-presidential running mate. He is expected to announce his choice this
week.
