FT  17 NOV 92 / Survey of Business Travel (15): Rhythms to drive the blues
away - Dr Michael McGannon sums up the latest research on beating jet lag
BUSINESS travellers with hectic flight schedules have reported to medical
researchers two main sources of stress - jet lag and Aids.
The chances are good that health and professional performances will be
compromised by the accumulated stresses of international travel, unless
steps are taken to overcome the problems.
The scientific evidence shows that long-distance air travel through multiple
time zones can precipitate health problems, ranging from temporary sleep
disturbances to debilitating heart disorders.
Call it what you like, rapid time zone change syndrome, circadian rhythm
shifts secondary to transmeridian travel or jet lag, this modern phenomenon
is simply another example of how modern technology and behaviour patterns
have been allowed to override human biology. Jet travel has caused a
fundamental mismatch between normal sleeping habits and the fast-track
business world that expects business people to be as alert at 3am in Tokyo
as they were at 9am in London or New York.
During the past 30 years, great advances have been made in understanding the
basic neurophysiological processes governing the processes of adaptation to
light and darkness.
An entirely new field of research has been born: chronobiology. Proper
functioning of many of the body's vegetative functions, including
sleepiness, wakefulness, appetite, intestinal function and body temperature,
are directly dependent upon the natural light-dependent cycle known as the
circadian (diurnal) rhythm.
Because this circadian or diurnal rhythm generally runs on a 25-hour cycle,
it will constantly reset itself on a daily basis instead of lagging behind.
This naturally elongated schedule explains one curiosity of jet travel:
travelling eastward, say from New York to London, will shorten the calendar
day, thereby catapulting the traveller's biological cycle into the following
morning when the normal pattern dictates sleep. This results in severe
fatigue, loss of mental lucidity, disorientation as the rhythm searches for
a new reference point by which to re-set itself.
Using various external prompters such as light, meals, activity and social
interaction to resychronise the body, the brain is generally able to reset
one to two hours of lost cycle a day, so that the trip eastwards might throw
you off for a week.
Of those external cues used by the body to adapt itself, light is the single
most powerful synchronising agent for resetting the biological clock in the
brain; the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), which is connected to light
sensing cells in the eye.
According to pioneering research on light at Harvard University, resetting
the biological time clock can be accomplished by precisely timing exposure
to bright light at certain times during the circadian cycle.
This resets the clock earlier or later or simply deadens the cycle's peaks
and troughs. Related research also shows that the pineal gland, located deep
in the brain, Descartes's 'seat of the soul', actually secretes a powerful
light-related hormone - melatonin - which has a fundamental role in the
resetting of the body's time clock.
Furthermore, researchers at the Johnson Space Center have shown that the
prolonged immobility of overseas flights causes the body to excrete
excessive amounts of potassium essential to optimum physical performance.
This loss accounts for the decreased muscle strength, diminished physical
(and mental) reflexes, confusion and, quite possibly, disturbances in heart
rhythm. Physical exercise (the day of the flight) helps release potassium
into the blood, thus compensating for losses resulting from flight
immobility.
Given the obvious individual differences between people, there does not
appear to be a universal remedy for jet lag. What follows are practical ways
to capitalise on the latest research findings.
When I asked several hundred successful travelling managers what strategies
they used to battle jet lag, two strategies were reported - abstinence from
alcohol and exercise.
Solutions to battling jet lag should be divided into three groups: Before
departure: First, try to re-set your biological clock. For long trips of a
week or more, it really pays to try to gently change the daily rhythm (by
one hour a day before departure) to simulate the new time zone. In other
words, if travelling from Europe to the west coast of America (where bedtime
is about nine hours earlier), get to sleep one hour earlier every day for 3
to 4 days before departing.
For shorter trips of two to three days, attempt to 'tough it out' by
sticking to the home schedule. That way, at least, you will not need to
adapt twice in as many days and can arrive home hitting the ground running.
While in flight: If you are really serious about beating jet lag there are
several 'absolutes'. Proper hydration is one absolute, because humidity of
the aircraft's cabin air can be uncomfortably low (3 per cent).
Re-humidifying the air to more comfortable levels (25 to 35 per cent)
requires about 200 litres/hour on a Boeing 747 or two tonnes of water for a
10-hour flight: that can get very expensive.
Your strategy should be the same as the flight crew: re-humidify yourself]
Kill two birds with one stone by drinking at least one glass of orange juice
(potassium and water) every hour while awake. Do not worry, an overdose of
orange juice is not possible] Furthermore, resist the seduction of free
alcohol and coffee, two substances that will induce lethargy by wringing the
system dry and causing potassium losses. Alcohol and coffee will set you up
for the worst case of jet lag possible.
Before dozing off (something which will be easy if the body has been
previously fatigued by exercise), do a few arm lifts: using the arm rests,
lift your weight (discreetly) off the seat several times. This will help
keep the blood circulating well while you sleep.
After arrival: Promise yourself that you will arrange your schedule (by
arriving the day before meetings) to accommodate a physical work-out
sometime prior to appointments. This will ensure that the vital organs
(including the brain) receives well-circulated blood richly saturated with
oxygen.
Until the light researchers find a way to install bright light on aircraft
or in hotels in a way that safely dissipates the heat generated and makes it
accessible to all, use exercise and light together to reset the body's time
clock.  Chronobiologists say the best time to do this for eastbound
passengers would be to take a jog (or any aerobic work-out) mid morning or
early evening. Jogging or working out in bright light will hold back the
clock until you catch up. Do not go to bed until the evening and then stick
to local schedules.
Studies on soldiers involved with large troop manoeuvres abroad reveal that
jet-lag diets and over-the-counter anti-jet-lag pills have little scientific
validity.
Light therapy, combined with an intelligent assortment of hydration and
exercise, appears to be the best drug-free treatment for those whose
sleep/activity patterns are disrupted by travel.
I am amazed to find that modern executives are still victims of folklore
when it comes to Aids. In brief and simple terms, you cannot acquire the
Aids virus, HIV, by casual contact (parties, pools, conferences, the
workplace, toilet seats or insect bites). It is spread by having sex with
HIV-infected individuals, intravenous drug use and receiving contaminated
blood products. Engage in high-risk activity and you will become a high-risk
yourself.
For those who have stayed for relatively long periods in developing
countries, certain routine tests should be considered upon return, including
a complete blood count and smear, liver function tests, urinalysis, TB skin
test and when exposure is reported or suspected, serologic tests for Aids,
Hepatitis B and various parasites.
Lastly, be proactive in your approach to dealing with modern travel because
if you are failing to plan, you are planning to fail]
