FT  29 JAN 92 / UK News (Employment): Clarke starts consultation on teacher
training
MR KENNETH CLARKE, the education secretary, yesterday launched a
consultation document on his plans to reform teacher training, making it
more school-based.
The government wants to move graduate trainee teachers out of colleges and
into schools. Under the scheme, secondary schools will be invited to bid to
become approved teacher-training institutions, and graduates training to
teach at secondary level will be obliged to spend at least 80 per cent of
their courses in schools.
Resources for teacher-training will move from colleges to schools, and
criteria for courses will focus mainly on teaching practice - as opposed to
theory - which students will be expected to have acquired by the end of
their one-year post-graduate certificate of education course.
Mr Clarke's Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education will consult
schools and colleges on the proposals for two months but, unless there is a
change of government in the interim, courses conforming to the new
regulations will start in September, and all colleges will be obliged to
follow them by 1994.
The four-year Bachelor of Education degree is unaffected by yesterday's
announcement, but Mr Clarke emphasised his desire to reduce the length of
the course and increase its emphasis on teaching skills.
Mr Andrew Smith, Labour's teacher-training spokesman, emphasised the
'enormous practical problems for schools in making this work, which the
government has yet to address'.
The plans envisage schools bidding to take about 10 trainees each.
Performance indicators - such as exam results, staying-on rates and truancy
levels - will be used to select schools, and students will train in more
than one school.
Independent schools will be eligible to join the scheme. Mr Clarke said
graduate trainees will be expected to 'experience schools within a variety
of settings'.
Students will be required to satisfy at least 20 tests before being declared
'professionally competent'. These will include proving they can motivate and
interest pupils, set demanding targets, maintain discipline, and use a mix
of teaching methods appropriate to the age, ability and attainment of
pupils.
