FT  30 MAY 92 / Poachers on the wild ocean: Michael Wigan tells a tale of
skulduggery and shrinking salmon stocks
According to Sir David Nickson, chairman of the Atlantic Salmon Trust, the
only epitaph for the Atlantic salmon is: 'Lost at sea.'
NOTHING produces more dark murmurs and knowing winks in fishing circles than
the suggestion that skulduggery is rife on the high seas - that salmon have
become a substitute for European Community fishing boats hemmed in by tie-up
restrictions and quotas of dwindling fish stocks.
The stories are intriguing, heightened in drama by their association with
truly wild places - faraway St Kilda, where islanders with prehensile feet
used to live on gannets, or the Outer Hebrides, regarded by many inhabitants
as hardly part of the UK at all.
One theory is that Irish boats, which tirelessly patrol the British/Irish
territorial line, take on board salmon caught illegally at sea off Scotland
and land them as part of their legitimate drift-net catch on their return
home.
Certainly, north-western Irish salmon catches have been large -
'astronomical' in the words of Group Captain John Proudlock, secretary of
the Association of Scottish Salmon District Fishery Boards, which is
responsible for conserving salmon in its home waters.
The Irish have persisted with drift-netting even after most other nations
banned it as a danger to fishery resources, and large catches inside the
Irish 12-mile fishing limit seem surprising in view of recent depleted
catches in Irish rivers.
Then again, a 12-mile limit can be an elastic dimension in Irish minds, and
Irish boats regularly stray 50 miles or more from the west coast and beyond.
Who is to say whether the salmon in the hold were caught outside the 12-mile
limit (breaking both EC and Irish law), or within it?
Are they indeed fish from off the Emerald Isle at all? One known fact is
that the western Irish seaboard is the migratory route for salmon returning
from the sea to rivers in western England, such as the Wye. This, however,
has not visibly exercised the consciences of some Irish skippers. There are
places still where a fish is a fish.
There are also places where a 'territorial boundary' is a flexible
conception. Irish/British waters, as well as lands, are vexed by sovereignty
disputes. The first official claim to St Kilda was lodged by the British
government to isolate the fall-out area for American rockets. No one wanted
Russians picking up the bits in the east Atlantic. The 200-mile sovereignty
limit around St Kilda enormously increases British territorial waters, which
irks the Irish. The suitably nebulous Irish claim is not that they own St
Kilda, but that Britain does not.
The result of this quandary is the presence of a grey area between the
Irish/British sea boundaries, where the Irish fisheries protection service
is supposed to monitor Irish boats, and the British theirs. They co-operate
only to chase out anyone else.
Can the fishery protection service actually protect salmon, even though its
main duties cover other fish stocks in the sea?
The firepower certainly looks good. In Scottish waters, where the majority
of British salmon are found, the Scottish Fisheries Protection Agency
(SFPA), revamped in April 1991, can deploy four fishery cruisers, one Royal
Navy offshore cruiser, two fixed-wing aircraft, a helicopter (hired) for
peak season, and a maximum of three launches.
The problem is that its remit covers 185,000 square miles of seawater. Two
fishing boats transferring a catch in this area would be, can we say, a drop
in the ocean. To the cynical, the fact that co-operation between Irish
fishing boats and the Irish protection service extends to the latter telling
the former about patrols in advance is disquieting.
The SFPA also battles against procedural problems. Finding fishermen who are
committing offences is only the first step in getting a conviction. In 1991
in Scotland, only three cases of salmon poaching at sea were successfully
prosecuted (fines ranged between Pounds 500 and Pounds 5,000). Yet, 110
individual nets measuring more than 6,000 yards were seized in addition to
20 miles of gill-nets.
Why so many nets and so few offenders? The answer is that fishermen spying a
fishery protection vessel on the horizon, or a spotter-plane, cut loose
their nets. Many of those found by the agency have been abandoned, which is
profoundly unecological. No one would abandon valuable nets if they were
fishing legally.
In Scotland, poaching cases are presented to the procurator fiscal, who
decides whether to proceed. The SFPA is reticent about how many cases the
fiscal turned away in 1991, but admits that the majority never reach court
for, having submitted the case, the agency may have trouble backing it up.
Tracing ownership of an abandoned net is time-consuming. Tracing the origins
of a fishing boat can be, too; even the ownership of the boat. Fishing crews
under questioning have even disagreed about who is the captain. The agency
has six months in which to establish the facts.
These types of problems surfaced in a notorious re-flagging case in which
Denmark, a fellow signatory to the North Atlantic Salmon Conservation
Organisation, was discovered netting salmon under bogus Panamanian and
Polish colours. Investigations revealed that although the boats were really
Danish, the company head office was in Austria. The catch was being landed
in Poland and was re-entering western Europe on the black market. To add to
the headaches of the SFPA, in Scotland poaching offences have to be
corroborated by a witness to the act. Successful cases must be foolproof.
There are many ways in which wild salmon can end up on fishmongers' slabs.
Boxes of Scottish farmed salmon are regularly transported by lorry to the
main fish markets in London and Aberdeen. Among them are boxes of slightly
different-looking fish, salmon still, but with sharper fins and a more
elegantly-cleft, longer tail.
These are boxes of wild salmon. They are not from Scottish legal netters -
those using what are called 'fixed engines' to catch inshore or in-river
fish; they are poached at sea.
Time was when the price differential between farmed and wild fish meant no
one would want to sell wild fish over farmed. Not so in today's
viciously-squeezed market. With a commodity in over-supply, the price gap
may be no more than 10p a pound.
Ex-policeman Walter Beattie is the fishmongers' inspector for Scotland, a
man whose ancestors have been salmon netters for three generations and who
has spent his working life in the salmon business. He points out that wild
fish can easily be hidden in a container-load of farmed salmon; after all,
the volume of traffic in the farmed fish is huge. To persuade the police to
get a warrant to stop a lorry, empty all the boxes of salmon, and go through
them for wild variety presents insurmountable difficulties.
On the wider front, Beattie thinks that confiscation of fishing gear acts as
a deterrent to trawlermen with expensive boats, especially when salmon
prices are low. However, the small-time operator who gets a kick out of
poaching is, in his view, ineradicable. This man uses a little creel-boat at
night, fishes close-in and is ever-watchful, ever-daring.
Such people could potentially have a substantial effect on salmon runs. But
the big operators with high-tech gear, scooping out whole shoals at sea, are
far more damaging to the species. The sea is a roomy place, and some
desperate fishermen have everything to play for. On the other hand, Beattie
adds, there is abundant hype about the abuse of salmon and, often,
unnecessary worry.
Perhaps. But the only surviving Atlantic salmon run of antediluvian
proportions is off north Russia. Here there is ice, the Russian navy - and
no one else.
