FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (2): In rude health - but watching Japan
/ The economy, in preventing overheating, the government does not want to
inhibit growth
BY THE standards of the fast-developing countries of east Asia, Malaysia's
growth over recent years has been impressive. By the standards of western
economies, still trolling the economic depths, Malaysia's growth is a cause
for envy, if not amazement.
For the fourth consecutive year, Malaysia's economy grew by more than 8 per
cent in 1991. The evidence of this sustained boom is everywhere:
condominiums are being built on virtually every corner of Kuala Lumpur and
other cities. Roads are choked with the Proton Saga, Malaysia's
home-produced motor car. A country which not so long ago had unemployment
problems is facing serious labour shortages.
There is an air of economic confidence about. Since the beginning of the
year, the Malaysian dollar (the ringgit), has appreciated by between 7 and
12 per cent against major currencies. Large amounts of funds have been
lodged in the country, attracted by some of the highest interest rates in
the region.
Now, after running in the fast lane for a number of years, the economy looks
as if it is taking a short breather and contemplating the far-off finish
line target set by the government: full industrialisation by the year 2020,
demanding an average annual growth rate of more than than 7 per cent over
the next 27 years.
While the planners are making their projections, others are grappling with
some of the adverse effects of sustained growth: increased consumer and
public expenditure, rising rates of inflation, more imports and a growing
balance of payments deficit. But while seeking to apply the brakes to an
economy which shows signs of overheating, the government does not want to
inhibit the momentum for growth. Latest growth forecasts for this year vary
from 8.9 per cent at the top of the scale to 7 per cent at bottom. In the
first quarter of this year growth was 8.9 per cent.
The manufacturing sector has been the great success story of the economy.
Over the past 20 years, Malaysia has been transformed from a commodity-based
to a manufacturing economy. In the early 1970s, more than 80 per cent of
exports were commodities - mainly rubber, tin and petroleum products. In
1991, manufactured goods accounted for nearly 65 per cent of export
earnings, with electronics and electrical goods leading the export charge.
Overall, exports grew by 18.9 per cent in 1991, though imports grew by 30
per cent.
The manufacturing sector's performance has held up remarkably well, despite
the downturn in some of Malaysia's main export markets in the US and Japan.
In the first quarter, output in the manufacturing sector increased by 10.4
per cent compared with a 15.3 per cent rise in the same period in 1991.
However, this slowdown was in part offset by a marked increase in commodity
production, mainly of palm oil.
But the balance of payments is clearly an area of considerable concern. At
the beginning of last year, the Ministry of Finance forecast a current
account deficit of MDollars 4bn for the year. By the end of 1991, the
deficit had reached MDollars 12bn. In the first quarter of 1992 the trade
deficit widened to MDollars 2.2bn from MDollars 363m in the previous
quarter. Bank Negara, the central bank, forecasts that the deficit will
widen to MDollars 13. bn (about 10 per cent of GDP) by the end of the 1992.
The main share of the current account deficit is on services and foreign
investment income. Most analysts expect little change in the situation in
the short to medium term. The government has had some success in moderating
merchandise imports, in part as a result of tighter fiscal measures designed
primarily to fight inflation. Central bank officials are now predicting a
small surplus in the merchandise account by the end of the year, compared
with a deficit of MDollars 0.7bn last year, the first merchandise trade
deficit for nearly 10 years.
The fight against inflation is the other area that preoccupies Malaysia's
economic policy makers. Buoyed by renewed confidence in the economy, and
influenced no doubt by the conspicuous consumption indulged in by many of
the elite, Malaysians have been on something of a spending spree,
particularly in the first half of 1991 when domestic credit rose 70 per cent
on an annualised basis.
A number of privatisations in recent months, including the vastly
oversubscribed sale of a 22 per cent government stake in Tenaga Nasional,
the country's electricity utility - now the biggest company on the Kuala
Lumpur stock exchange - introduced another heady element into the financial
atmosphere.
Mr Anwar Ibrahim, the finance minister, surprised many by announcing a
mildly expansionary budget at the end of last year with continuing increases
in public expenditure. The government has, however, made determined efforts
to dampen consumer credit and limit the growth of the money supply.
In recent months the central bank has mopped up more than MDollars 2bn in
excess liquidity from the banking system as part of its anti-inflationary
campaign. It has tightened up on car purchase credit arrangements, resulting
in the first fall in car sales since 1987. Inflation is now about 4.5 per
cent on an annual basis, though food costs are rising considerably faster.
'With pragmatic monetary policies, and a little bit of luck, we could even
bring inflation down to 4 per cent or lower,' says Mr Anwar. Central bank
officials say they will not be happy until inflation is between 2 and 3 per
cent, and promise a new set of anti-inflationary measures in the next budget
at the end of the year. 'We want to make spending a bit more painful,' said
one official.
On the public expenditure side, the government is on the one hand determined
to push ahead with vital infrastructure projects to fight bottlenecks
already appearing in the economy, but on the other is conscious of the
dangers of runaway expenditure. In the first quarter of this year government
spending went up by 40 per cent to MDollars 7.1bn, mainly due to pension
adjustments and payments of salary arrears to civil servants.
Some projects, both public and private, are being reassessed. Costs overruns
on one project, the North South Highway, have reached MDollars 2.54bn,
against an original cost of MDollars 3.45bn. The government says the private
sector, both foreign and domestic, must be encouraged to play a greater role
in infrastructure development.
Whether or not that investment is forthcoming is crucial to the success of
economic plans. Malaysia is still very dependent on foreign investment:
about 60 per cent of the total investment in the manufacturing sector over
the past five years came from abroad. A number of investment tax incentives
for foreign investors have recently been removed. The government believes
they are no longer relevant to attracting more high technology, less labour
intensive projects.
Foreign investment dropped by 10 per cent last year to MDollars 15.95bn. In
the first six months of this year, MDollars 8.9bn of foreign investments
have been approved, though a small number of petroleum industry projects
account for the bulk of this figure and the number of new investment
applications from abroad is falling. While there has been a pick-up in
domestic investment, it seems that many Malaysians are still unwilling to
make substantial long-term investments - without the participation of
foreign capital.
Investors, both domestic and foreign, voice concern about the erosion of
Malaysia's competiteveness due to increased wages and the strength of the
Malaysian dollar. Some domestic manufacturers say they will be forced out of
business unless there is intervention to stop the ringgit rising any
further, though the central bank has been firm in its view that it cannot
interfere in the workings of the currency market. Manufacturers, it says,
have no choice but to improve their efficiency.
But no matter how efficient Malaysia's production becomes, it's economic
health is still to a very great extent dependent on a range of forces
outside its control. The fortunes of both the US and Japanese economies are
central. Together the US and Japan account for well over 30 per cent of
Malaysian exports. Japan accounts for nearly 25 per cent of foreign
investment in Malaysia, much of it in important projects such as production
of the Proton car. A serious downturn in Japan, the financial engine of
growth not only for Malaysia but for many other economies in the region,
would have serious consequences.
Till now, Malaysia has defied the consequences of bad economic times in its
main markets. That is going to be increasingly difficult to accomplish in
the months and years ahead.
