FT  30 APR 92 / Poor nations accuse the rich of breaking their own rules:
The developing world's growing frustration at the west's failure to practise
what it preaches
MANY developing countries probably left this week's IMF/World Bank meetings
feeling somewhat frustrated. The anodyne official communiques made all the
right noises yet there was a sense that rich countries, beset by their own
economic problems, had difficulty focusing on the Third World.
The need to divert scarce capital and human resources to support reform in
the former communist countries played a role in this, although many
developing countries recognise that they, too, stand to gain from an
enlargement of the international economic community. The problem lay more in
the perceived reluctance of industrialised countries to follow talk with
action.
Mr Alejandro Foxley, the Chilean minister who chairs the joint IMF/bank
development committee, summed up his frustration by contrasting the Group of
Seven industrialised countries' demands for radical structural reform in the
former Soviet republics with their reluctance to take even modest steps to
eliminate their own economic distortions - some of which are hurting the
developing world.
He pointed out that rich countries spend Dollars 250bn on agricultural
protection - about five times the total devoted to official development
finance. 'It was disturbing,' he said, that the Uruguay Round trade talks
were languishing because rich countries lacked the courage to make reforms
that would adversely affect only a tiny percentage of their mainly urban
populations. Many developing countries have unilaterally reduced trade
barriers and implemented a range of market-oriented policies: they cannot
understand why their teachers in the industrialised world refuse to obey the
rules.
Mr Foxley warned that if developed countries did not soon agree to
liberalise trade, Third World countries might be obliged to form their own
regional trading blocs. He hoped such pacts would be compatible with Gatt
rules, but there is an obvious risk they might undermine multilateral trade.
The development committee's final communique noted these tendencies, but its
only new proposal on trade was the minor recommendation that the bank and
IMF publish regular assessments of the impact of changes in trade patterns
on poor countries.
The Third World is also disappointed that real growth in overseas
development assistance has petered out. In 1990 prices, official aid
totalled Dollars 41.3bn last year, fractionally less than the previous year.
The grant component fell from Dollars 26.5bn to Dollars 24.7bn. Yet the
demands for funds are growing: to take one example the drought in southern
Africa looks like being one of the worst in decades.
Mr Lewis Preston, the bank's president, argued vigorously for more cash for
the poorest countries. But in its communique the development committee
regretted the increase in poverty, but lamely agreed only to 'discuss all
resource flows and transfers in more depth' at next September's IMF/bank
meeting. The bank is pressing for a substantial increase in funds for the
International Development Association (IDA) - its soft loan affiliate. But
with most of the large donors running big budget deficits, the 10th
replenishment of IDA (which covers the three years beginning next July) is
unlikely to do more than keep pace with inflation. Meanwhile, many new
countries - including former Soviet republics in central Asia - will meet
IDA's Dollars 800 a year per capita income means test.
As the Earth Summit in Rio draws closer, the environment forms a third
source of friction between rich and poor countries. The development
committee communique, echoing the analysis of the bank's forthcoming World
Development Report, declared that 'continued, even accelerated economic
growth and human development can be consistent with improving environmental
conditions.' Life may not prove so simple.
Mr Foxley is probably not alone in fearing that rich countries will use the
environment as an excuse for sneaking in new trade barriers, whose real
purpose would be to mollify special interest groups at home. Another
possibility is that industrialised countries will prove genuinely committed
to a cleaner global environment, but turn to trade sanctions as the only
effective way of forcing compliance with tougher standards.
The underlying problem is that worthwhile environmental improvements will be
costly. To make an impact, the bank reckons developing countries will have
to spend at least 2-3 per cent of gross domestic product every year - a
large sum in poor countries facing many competing claims on resources.
Judging from the communique, as a gesture ahead of the Rio conference,
industrial countries will support an expanded role for the Dollars 1.3bn
environment facility set up by the World Bank and United Nations to pay for
environmental projects with global pay-offs. But this will still be a drop
in the ocean. Rich countries do not appear willing to commit resources on
the scale needed to really help the Third World.
