FT  11 MAR 92 / The Budget (News): Ending scheme may cut funds to small
companies - BES
FINANCIERS involved in the Business Expansion Scheme believe its abolition
of the scheme at the end of 1993 will lead to a big upsurge in demand in the
meantime.
Many leading figures in the industry were delighted that the scheme had been
extended for two more tax years, but some said its abolition would cut off a
source of funds for small companies.
Mr Tim Villiers, chief executive of the BES Association, condemned the move
as 'throwing out the baby with the bathwater'.
He added: 'I think it's astonishing to cut out private investors completely
in an area where corporate investors have been so reluctant to come forward.
The venture capital industry does not meet the needs of the companies the
BES has catered for.'
But Mr Charles Fry, chairman of Johnson Fry, which leads the market in
raising BES funds, was delighted by the news, which he said made the
position clear for all parties. 'I welcome what the chancellor's done; it
makes a lot of sense, and we look forward to the next 18 months and raising
a lot more money.'
He predicted a 'double whammy' sales 'bonanza' for next year, caused by a
rush to take advantage of tax incentives at the end of the 1992-93 tax year
and at the end of December 1993.
The BES gives tax relief on investments of up to Pounds 40,000 per year, at
the top marginal rate of tax, provided they are held for five years.
There was relief that the chancellor had taken no measures to outlaw
'assured exit' BES schemes. These substantially cut the risk involved by
buying rental accommodation for colleges or housing associations, in return
for a promise to buy back the property after a fixed period of five years.
BES tax relief has allowed sponsors to offer massive returns.
Last year, such schemes accounted for 75 per cent of the total Pounds 255m
raised by the scheme - up from Pounds 165m the previous year. Mr Anthony
Yadgaroff, a BES analyst with the Allenbridge Group, said funds raised so
far in the current tax year amounted to Pounds 280m, of which Pounds 235m
had gone to 'assured exit' schemes.
Two of these schemes raised money for 'mortgage rescue' schemes, which buy
houses which would otherwise be repossessed and rent them to the previous
owners. These involved awkward legal arrangements, as BES companies were not
allowed to buy properties where the tenant was known in advance. The
Chancellor's decision to remove this rule was greeted by sponsors as a great
aid to marketing.
