FT  17 FEB 92 / Appointments: Aiming for quality of life
Equity &amp; Law's new direct salesforce is headed by a man who thinks he can
bring 'quality' to the business of selling life insurance
Bob Bullivant, 41, formerly sales and marketing director of Target Group,
has been named general manager of Equity &amp; Law Personal Financial Planning.
This is a new venture by the life insurer to establish its own distribution
channels. Equity &amp; Law has hitherto relied heavily on independent financial
advisers to sell its products, but acquired the distribution arm of Target,
which was strong on the direct sales side, from TSB last year.
Bullivant's job is to build a team of 'a smallish number of high-producing
individuals bringing in high quality business in tune with the Equity &amp; Law
image'.
This involves an emphasis on training - with salesmen having to complete a
three-month programme before they can be let loose with a full licence on
potential customers. PFP starts with 120 people, more than half from the old
Target team, and is scheduled to rise to 500 by 1995.
Before his spell at the recently troubled Target, Bullivant says he had
accumulated wide experience of sales management in 'quality' areas of the
market, including GRE and Leslie &amp; Godwin, the insurance broker. His
principal aim in his new role is 'to preserve the good name of Equity &amp;
Law'.
*****
Paul Fisher, an Inland Revenue veteran with a few years subsequently at
Price Waterhouse, is joining Cotswold-based share valuation specialists
Bruce Sutherland.
Sutherland is one of the few outfits, aside from the big accountancy firms,
which will value the shares of private companies in cases ranging from
matrimonial disputes to major corporate transactions. It counts some of the
country's largest private companies among its clients.
Bruce Sutherland himself, in his late 60s, is still actively involved in the
business, but wishes to devote more time to finishing a book on aspects of
share valuation.
Fisher, who is 41, joins as a principal. He was chief examiner in the shares
valuation division of the Revenue, before 'seeing the light' and moving to
PW. He is now glad to be out of the hothouse of a big firm and London life.
