FT  27 JUN 92 / The Lisbon Summit: Poorer states face wait for money
THE EC's poor southern members and Ireland appeared last night to be losing
their battle to win firm commitments now from their richer partners on
increased financial transfers from the Community budget.
Britain and Germany gained majority support for postponing concrete sums
until the Edinburgh summit in December, although both insisted that the
commitment to 'cohesion' reached at Maastricht still stood.
Fears that delays in agreeing the so-called Delors II finance package could
sour public support for Maastricht in the southern countries mean this
summit is likely to reaffirm the EC's commitment to cohesion.
In February, Mr Jacques Delors, European Commission president, proposed
increasing EC revenue by a third from next year to 1997. This would mean a
rise in the budget from Ecu66.7bn (Pounds 46.82bn) now to Ecu87.5bn (Pounds
61.42bn) in 1997, at 1992 prices, yielding an increase from Ecu18.6bn to
Ecu29bn in structural and cohesion finance for the poorer member states.
There is wide consensus on the need to step up spending significantly on
foreign policy and aid. But Mr Delors appears to be backing down on seeking
similar increases for research and training, as part of a more co-ordinated
EC policy to sharpen industry's competitive edge.
Faced with unyielding opposition led by Britain and Germany yesterday, he
suggested postponing the overall increase in revenue for two years, with his
original proposals coming into effect in 1995-99.
A majority was crystallising around this compromise last night, with Spain,
Ireland, Greece and Portugal (with some support from France) holding out
against it.
Mr Felipe Gonzalez, Spanish prime minister, said the original Commission
proposals were the minimum Spain could accept. Postponement to 1999 would
give the impression that economic and monetary union - scheduled for 1997 or
1999 at the latest - was being postponed.
President Francois Mitterrand said 'we have to fulfil all the undertakings
of Maastricht, but especially the structural commitments.'
The UK, which takes over the EC presidency next week and will have to
conclude the debate on EC future financing, said there was still Ecu5.7bn in
headroom under the existing budgetary ceiling, without raising it by a
third. It added that further cuts in the farm budget, and the net
contributions of new entrants to the EC from the Nordic and Alpine
countries, would add still further financial flexibility.
