FT  25 SEP 92 / Business Travel Management (6): Fewer suits, fewer hassles -
The Airlines
DESPITE THE aftermath of the Gulf war and a well-entrenched recession which
have dealt hammer blows to the airlines, business travellers are still
taking to the skies in vast numbers on overseas corporate trips. Britain's
Guild of Business Travel Agents, whose members reputedly handle more than 75
per cent of all business air traffic, has announced a Pounds 3.6bn turnover
for 1991, a 4.3 per cent increase on the previous year.
The same story is reflected in the performance of individual airlines. Dan
Air, for example, has announced a 27 per cent increase in its July-August
1992 figures for business travel over the year before.
But what the statistics do not reveal are the marked changes in the profile
and demands of the business traveller in the past couple of years. These
changes have been brought about by shifts in work style and company
structure, the globalisation of industries and, inevitably, tougher controls
on travel budgets.
According to Ms Fiona Stewart of the Henley Centre for Forecasting, there
has been a decline in the 'macho' approach to air travel. 'We are no longer
going to have business class full of grey-suited business men. Today people
are more casual in their dress, there are more female business passengers,
more vegetarians and less interest in the glass of champagne and bag of
goodies.'
Ms Stewart believes that the airlines need to look very closely at these
changes, not only with regard to in-flight service but also on the ground
where the need for convenience also has to be recognised. 'People want a
hassle-free journey to the airport and through the airport,' she says.
But it is not just the profile and requirements of the business traveller
that have changed. The type of person making travel arrangements inside
organisations has changed too, according to British Airways research. 'The
decision in terms of what travel policy should be implemented may previously
have been made by a travel manager or even the personnel department,' says
Mr Kevin Hatton, BA's general manager for UK and Ireland sales. 'But today,
as companies tighten their belts, that same policy will be set by people far
higher up the corporate structure.'
Recession-survivors in an airline industry which has suffered heavy
casualties have responded to a tougher, more demanding marketplace with a
variety of products and services. New technological developments such as CRS
systems have helped corporate clients to manage their travel arrangements
more swiftly and effectively with payments facilitated through a bank
settlement plan: this ensures that the travel agent presents the company
with a single bill while the bank settlement plan sees that all other
parties are paid.
L a r g e r c o m p a n i e s w i t h a guaranteed number of business
passengers can also exercise buying leverage. Many of the airlines admit to
being prepared to offer a favourable rebate: this can be as little as 2 per
cent but in some cases as much as 10 per cent of the bill. According to
Business Traveller magazine, the best deals are to be had on the long-haul
routes where there is more competition between airlines than on short-haul
flights in and around Europe.
Despite the bargaining element that has emerged in the business travel
market, companies such as British Airways and American Airlines are keen to
emphasise the importance of maintaining a good yield on ticket sales to
protect their long-term business. 'We want to be able to secure the best
yield possible,' says Mr Brandon O'Reilly of American Airlines. 'We don't
want the average ticket value to go down and leave us in the position of not
being able to reinvest in our product and service.'
Mr Hatton of BA claims that his airline has turned away business from
companies which has been motivated purely by cost. 'We won't always go to
the bottom rate as it just is not good for us. Without the margin we can't
reinvest.'
The airlines also claim success in doing their homework on what both
business travellers and their employers want from carriers. Virgin Atlantic,
for example, says it has emphasised product value with its Upper Class fare
 -claimed to be first-class travel at business class prices with a free
limousine thrown in - and Mid Class category to appease the traded-down
business class passenger who found himself paying a full economy fare.
Service on the ground has not been neglected, either. KLM has recently
opened a new Pounds 500,000 business class lounge at Heathrow's Terminal 4
complete with fax, phones and free drinks. And the business class traveller
flying between Dubai and the UK with the E m i r a t e s airline will get
free chauffeur-driven car transfers from three British airports. (Emirates,
incidentally, plans to introduce satellite telephone communications for
passengers in its wide-body aircraft.)
Japan Airlines has announced a range of value-added benefits in a bid to win
the loyalty of travellers on its key routes. Its Big Express services
available to first and executive class passengers will include special
baggage arrangements, improved in-flight services and, on arrival, a free
phone loan and priority baggage service.
Gatwick-based Dan Air, meanwhile, is also targeting improvements for the
business traveller. Its Class Elite service offers dedicated airport
lounges, wider seating on the aircraft and priority disembarking. As many as
45 per cent of Dan Air's scheduled flights are business travel. This makes
it a highly important market sector for the airline.
Mr Robin Wilkins, Dan Air's general manager, believes his company's ability
to sustain customer loyalty lies with the provision of more flights at more
convenient times and more support on the ground. 'It is the interchanges in
air travel that cause the problems. Our aim is to be able to provide a
seamless service,' he explains.
American Airlines, which claims to be the largest US airline operating in
the UK, also lists a wide range of business travel benefits, from a special
Admirals Club equipped with personal computers, fax machines, telephones and
meeting rooms to an air miles credit scheme and priority baggage handling.
Across the board, the picture is that the airlines have become serious about
meeting the needs of the business traveller and the companies which foot the
bill. But are they getting the complete package right? Mr George Paton, a
member of the Guild of Business Travel Agents, believes they are: 'The
airlines are aware that we are in an age of the consumer and that they have
to produce a product to suit a market and attitude that wasn't prevalent 15
years ago. The airlines have very sophisticated marketing policies. The ones
that will succeed are those who truly understand the market.'
Travel agents are, of course, the first link in the chain for the business
traveller. A good one will be able to secure the best deals and negotiate a
path through the maze of special prices, exclusive lounges and bonus
incentives on the ground and in the air. The choice is becoming more complex
and bewildering all the time as airlines fight for market share and premium
yield on tickets. But on long-haul flights at least, the bargains are out
there.
