FT  18 NOV 92 / Wanted: party mechanic to lead Republicans
ONE of the first tasks facing the Republican party after its defeat in the
presidential election this month is the choice of a new party chairman.
Candidates flocked to Wisconsin this week to impress the Republican
governors who will have an influential voice in the selection.
Some irritated the current party chairman, Mr Rich Bond, by starting to
campaign for the post before the election. Practice has it that a new party
chairman is appointed after a presidential campaign, either by the president
himself, or if he is defeated, by the party.
Senator Robert Dole, the minority leader in the Senate, and many Republican
governors believe they are their party's best spokesmen for the four years
ahead; they want a mechanic to head the party organisation - and preferably
one who will not be working on the side for one of the party's presidential
hopefuls.
'What we ought to be working on is the next election and not someone's
campaign in 1996, so I want someone who is willing to do that and doesn't
want to profit from the job,' said Senator Dole.
Governor Kirk Fordice of Mississippi added: 'I think we need somebody who is
not influenced by the Washington syndrome, who is literally from outside the
Beltway. We don't need somebody who is going to use this job to further his
career in the lobbying business.'
Among those working the hallways at the governors' meeting was Mr Charles
Black, who helped lead President Bush's campaign. This may not help him,
however, and to many leaders he is too much of a Washington lobbyist.
Former Governor Pierre Du Pont of Delaware wants to turn the party
organisation from a campaign apparatus into a policy workshop, but he may be
too much of an ideologue.
More of a mechanic is Mr Spencer Abraham, who is credited with building a
strong grassroots party organisation in Michigan and who now runs the
Republican congressional campaign committee. He is not necessarily helped,
however, by Vice-President Dan Quayle's campaign on his behalf. Similarly,
Ms Lynn Martin, the labour secretary, may not be helped by Mr Bond's
backing.
Mr Haley Barbour, a former Mississippi state party director, argues for a
'nuts and bolts' chairman who will direct the party's resources to the state
and local level. Like Mr Black, however, he may be tarred with the
'lobbyist' brush.
Other candidates have yet to emerge. 'Just hold off for a while,' Senator
Dole urged his party colleagues. 'We've got plenty of time.'
