FT  10 SEP 92 / Book Review: Mind the gaps
BRIGHT AIR, BRILLIANT FIRE: On the Matter of the Mind By Professor Gerald
Edelman Allen Lane, Pounds 20, 280 pages
Putting the mind back into nature' is the slogan of Professor Gerald
Edelman's crusade. One of the world's leading brain scientists, and winner
of a Nobel prize in 1972 for his work in immunology, he has turned to the
philosophy of science to address what he calls a 'series of crises' in the
science of the brain and nervous system.
The problem he sets himself is to explain, in biological terms, how people
came to have minds. By 'minds' he means not brains, but self-consciousness -
awareness of ourselves. It is a question that has occupied philosophers for
centuries. He makes grand claims: 'We are at the beginning of the
neuroscientific revolution. At its end, we shall know how the mind works,
what governs our nature, and how we know the world.'
He argues convincingly against recent theories that the brain is built like
a computer. Neuroscientists who use the model of a circuitboard to explain
the activity of 'the most complicated object in the universe' will find
accurate predictions of its behaviour elusive, he says.
Far from being 'hard-wired' like a computer, the connections between the
10bn neurons in the cortex of the brain are constantly changing. New paths
are forged and strengthened by experience and patterns of behaviour. Edelman
describes this adaptation of the maps inside the human brain as 'neural
Darwinism'.
Edelman has the gift of explaining difficult scientific concepts clearly and
quickly. A well known advocate of popularising science, he begins his public
lectures by reciting Keats and Emily Dickinson, and scatters his text with
pictures of startled frogs and mutant flies, quotes from Woody Allen and
anecdotes from Manhattan life.
But his book fails to make the bridge between biology and soul in the way he
intends. And while his populist style is entertaining, it depends on
metaphors which promise much but are eventually insubstantial or inexact
when he departs from neuroscience and comes to the crux of his argument.
For a start, as one of his rivals has commented, the parallel he draws with
Darwinian evolution is unconvincing. Darwin argued that species evolved by
mutation and the survivors were 'selected' by fierce competition. Neural
structures, however, do not reproduce or compete in the same way as animals.
To say that they do is almost to start to ascribe consciousness to their
parts.
Similarly, an early chapter on the spectacular successes of genetics in
'reading' the characteristics of an organism from a strand of DNA is not
woven into his case that it may eventually be possible to 'read' thought and
morality from the structures of the brain.
The awkward metaphors multiply as the book moves from science to philosophy.
Edelman briefly quotes and then dismisses many philosophers who have
grappled with the problem of the nature of consciousness and the self,
notably Descartes and Kant. Past writers could not have known what we now
know about the structure of the brain, he says, with the patronising air of
the chief detective summing up at the end of the thriller.
But he discusses few of the philosophers who would have dismissed his quest.
Notably, he gives little space to Wittgenstein and his followers, who would
have argued that Edelman's speculation about whether a lobster has
self-consciousness was meaningless. Some philosophers would argue that a
lobster shows none of the signs of what we mean by self-consciousness. Only
by distorting the way the term is normally used would one be led like
Edelman into examination of its nervous system to see whether it is
conscious.
Edelman's bending of ordinary language increases in later chapters. In one
definition he says: 'To clarify the issue, let us agree that . . . memory is
the ability to repeat a performance'. That is a peculiarly limited version
of what we normally mean by memory, but it allows Edelman to build a robot,
called Darwin III, which he argues shows 'memory'.
Edelman's theories will comfort those who feel that science leaves no place
for the soul, and that scientists cannot tell jokes and do not read Keats.
His ideas also deserve attention because of his conclusion that 'every
psychiatric illness has a biological cause'. He makes no secret of his dream
of finding the neural answer to many types of mental distress, and he and
his fellow-thinkers are likely to attract thousands of dollars of research
money in pursuit of that goal.
But, by the end, his book does science few favours. Darwin's original theory
of evolution may be a poor model for brain development, but it is a good one
for the growth of scientific knowledge, which emerges gradually as competing
hypotheses are tested and eliminated. Darwin's own theories have, more or
less, survived that demanding test in the past 130 years. So probably will
Edelman's contribution to immunology and to brain science. His excursions
into the philosophy of mind, however, show fewer of the characteristics of
fitness to survive.
