FT  15 JAN 92 / EC must embrace eastern states, says Hurd
MR Douglas Hurd, the British foreign secretary, yesterday suggested bringing
Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary speedily into a broader form of European
political union to help support their fledgling democratic systems.
Spelling out eastern Europe's vulnerability to economic and political
backlash, Mr Hurd said it was against western Europe's interest that 'a
quagmire of disillusioned, disappointed and disgruntled states' should arise
east of the Oder-Neisse.
In all the former communist countries - including the independent republics
in the former Soviet Union - 'democracy is not irreversible,' Mr Hurd told
the Foreign Affairs Committee of the House of Commons.
'Democracy must deliver the goods - in a literal and a metaphorical sense.'
Eastern Europe had probably been 'innoculated for the time being' against a
return to totalitarianism by their experience under communism. But,
reflecting their much longer history of one-party rule, this was not true of
the Soviet republics, Mr Hurd warned.
Incorporating Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary into a wider 'political
dialogue' with the EC would help bridge the gap before they became full
members of the Community. He said he would be 'disappointed' if this step
did not take place before the year 2000.
Mr Hurd hailed the association agreements signed between the three eastern
European countries and the EC last month, intended to speed up their
integration in the economic sphere.
He voiced renewed concern about the problems of controlling nuclear weapons
across former Soviet territories. This will be a key issue in his
discussions in Russia, Kazakhstan and the Ukraine during a visit to India
and the former Soviet Union starting today.
Russia has agreed to take over the nuclear control obligations of the Soviet
Union. Two of the other republics with strategic nuclear weapons  - Ukraine
and Belarus - have agreed to become non-nuclear signatories to the Nuclear
Proliferation Treaty, while Kazakhstan will probably do so before long.
