FT  21 NOV 92 / Shake-up in ERM likely after plea by Spain
A REALIGNMENT of currencies in the European exchange rate mechanism is
expected this weekend following a request from Spain to devalue the peseta
in the system, European monetary officials said last night.
The EC's monetary committee, which hammers out the details of realignments,
is expected to meet today in Brussels to consider other possible moves among
the eight currencies that are still full members of the European monetary
system.
It was understood that pressure was mounting on the Irish authorities to
devalue the punt, a move that was resisted because of forthcoming Irish
elections. Speculation in financial markets also pointed to the Portuguese
escudo as a possible candidate for devaluation within the ERM.
It emerged last night that Spain had been seeking a 5 per cent devaluation
of the peseta against the D-Mark for at least two weeks.
Denmark, whose currency, the krone, came under heavy selling pressure in
foreign exchange markets yesterday, has apparently refused to move its
central rate against the D-Mark. The French franc will also stay pegged to
the D-Mark at existing parities in recognition of the government's
franc-fort policy.
There was no question of either the Italian lira or sterling re-entering the
ERM this weekend.
It is thought that a realignment could trigger a cut in German interest
rates, although the scale would depend on the extent of the effective D-Mark
revaluation. Earlier yesterday Mr Helmut Schlesinger, Bundesbank president,
said there was minimal room for manoeuvre.
Reports of a possible realignment broke as trading in European markets had
virtually ceased. They caused an intense burst of speculation, pushing the
dollar up to a five-month high against the German currency of DM1.6090 as
dealers calculated that German interest rates would fall if there were a
weekend realignment. In New York it closed at DM1.6055.
Sterling finished in the US at Dollars 1.513 after closing at Dollars 1.5205
in London.
Amid a flurry of often conflicting news agency reports, the peseta fell
sharply to its ERM floor against the D-Mark of Pta72.649, while the escudo
fell to Es90.50, just above its Es91.75 floor against the D-Mark.
Last night's speculation followed Sweden's devaluation of the krona earlier
this week, which continued to cause ripples across the world's foreign
exchange markets yesterday.
Dealers believe the peseta, escudo and punt are overvalued against the
D-Mark, and need to devalue to boost economic growth.
EMS rebuff to Sweden, Page 3
Currencies, Page 13
