FT  11 NOV 92 / Fujimori out to win after redrawing rules: Sally Bowen looks
at Peru's forthcoming elections
A BEWILDERING array of logos will confront Peruvian voters on congressional
election day, November 22. Eighteen party symbols, including a ship's wheel,
clasped hands and a broom, will vie for the voter's preference. But other
long familiar symbols - the Apra star and United Left's flag - will be
notably absent.
For the Peruvian political panorama has greatly changed since President
Alberto Fujimori dissolved the previous congress and suspended the
constitution on April 5. He has adroitly redrawn the rules of the political
game and, ever a shrewd interpreter of the national mood, positioned himself
for what looks set to be a comfortable majority in his new, one-chamber
house.
September's spectacular capture and the consequent speedy sentencing of Mr
Abimael Guzman, leader of the Shining Path guerrilla movement, proved a
timely boost to Mr Fujimori's personal popularity. Mr Manuel Torrado,
political analyst at Datum, a leading Lima market consultancy, now gives the
Peruvian president an approval rating 'higher than any other head of state
in the world'.
Improvisation has been Mr Fujimori's strongest suit ever since his
unprecedented 1990 presidential victory, which broke every rule in the
election consultants' handbook. This time, he has resuscitated his original
but ineffectual 'Cambio (Change) 90' party and merged it with a group of
'independents' called 'New Majority' to form an official list.
The leader of this pro-government effort is Mr Jaime Yoshiyama, previously a
respected mines minister and head of the government's privatisation office.
His campaign advisers portray him as a successful entrepreneur and a
'provincial' made good. As a politician and potential leader of the future
congress, he looks naive and inarticulate.
But this, in today's Peru, is a virtue. Mr Yoshiyama's appeal to the
electorate is strongly reminiscent of the 1990 Fujimori message. His
running-mates are 'independents, pragmatists, technocrats' - above all,
non-politicians.
'Peruvians are rejecting the politics of the past,' says Mr Torrado. 'Voting
had become a product of despair, since hope had already been killed a
hundred times. There's no support for any pre-1990 politician.'
Aware of this, Peru's two most powerful traditional parties - claiming they
will not collaborate with a 'dictator' - have decided to boycott these
elections. They are former President Alan Garca's left-wing Apra party and
twice-president Fernando Belaunde's centrist Popular Action Party.  Between
them, they are thought still to command the backing of around a quarter of
all Peruvian voters.
Where will this sizeable chunk of votes end up? Probably in widespread
spoiling of ballot papers, opinion surveys indicate. But paradoxically, this
type of protest-voting will only bump up the final percentages for each
list, benefiting the 'official' party still further.
So far, Peruvians seem to be viewing the electoral process with resigned
apathy. Opposition criticism of Mr Fujimori has generally been muted as
politicians, reeling after months of unrelenting attack from a hostile
executive, struggle to depict themselves as constructive.
Among the established parties and individual members of the dissolved
congress reconciled to participation in next week's elections are the
Popular Christian Party headed by Ms Lourdes Flores Nano, a respected, young
lawyer; Mr Rafael Rey Rey, who entered politics in 1990 alongside
presidential candidate and author Mr Mario Vargas Llosa, who founded the
'Renewal Movement'; and former Aprista Mr Jose Barba Caballero, who has
broken party ranks to found his own 'Democratic Co-ordinator' movement.
Left-wingers are lightly sprinkled among other lists.
But Mr Fujimori looks unbeatable. His unabashed electioneering on behalf of
the official alliance - and overt warnings to the electorate that Peru will
be 'ungovernable' if he fails to secure a majority in the new congress -
seem already to have convinced upwards of a third of the Peruvian
population.
The unexpected discovery of a Dollars 400m (Pounds 258m) fiscal surplus has
permitted a carefully-timed relaxation of the government's austere economic
programme to permit spending on 'social' projects. Small-scale public works,
and more traditional presidential handouts, are finally reaching even Peru's
remotest areas.
These slight signs of economic reactivation, combined with a series of
unquestionable successes against the country's two guerrilla movements, seem
to have been enough to imbue the volatile Peruvian electorate with an
overdose of national optimism. But analysts fear that, even with the renewed
inflow of international funding expected in the wake of the elections,
expectations of a swift economic upturn may be dashed.
Whether the now rudderless Sendero Luminoso guerrillas prove strong enough
seriously to disrupt next week's elections is a final imponderable. Some
Sendero experts forecast the movement will seek to regroup and focus its
threats on municipal elections early next year, rather than on the
congressional polls.
