FT  12 FEB 92 / International Company News: Implant dispute prompts shake-up
at Dow Corning
THE magnitude of the silicone breast implant controversy has been reflected
in a management shake-up at Dow Corning, the biggest maker of the devices,
which has appointed a new chairman and chief executive to help cope with
growing concerns about the product.
Mr Keith McKennon, a former executive at Dow Chemical, has been named Dow
Corning's chairman and chief executive.
He replaces Mr Lawrence Reed as chief executive and Mr John Ludington, as
chairman. Mr Ludington will retire, but will remain a director of the
company. Mr Reed was named chief operating operator and will retain his role
of president of the company.
Mr Ludington said the changes came after the board decided 'the company must
focus top executive attention to both the complex issues related to silicone
beast implants as well as the ongoing operations of the company.'
Dow Corning is a 50-50 joint venture between Dow Chemical and Corning.
The move comes one week ahead of a Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) advisory
panel meeting to decide if silicone implants are safe enough to remain on
the market.
There has been a moratorium on the devices since January.
Mr Robert Rylee, head of Dow Corning Wright's health care businesses, said
the company was committed to continue 'the research on the safety of the
materials used in implants and report the results to the FDA and the
public,' regardless of the FDA panel's decision.
The recognition of the importance of the implant issue is a significant
change in stance for Dow Corning. When the FDA advisory panel ruled in
November that the implants had not been proved safe, the company said it
strongly disagreed with the decision. Dow Corning later became an outspoken
critic of what it termed 'baseless innuendo and anecdotal claims' made by
critics of breast implants which the company said overlooked scientific
data.
Although the implants contribute less than 1 per cent to Dow Corning's
Dollars 2bn annual sales, the controversy has taken its toll on Dow and
Corning's shares amid growing concern that the company will be swamped with
law suits. Dow's shares fell Dollars 1 to Dollars 56 1/4 yesterday, while
Corning's dropped Dollars  5/8 to Dollars 29 7/8 .
