FT  22 JUN 92 / Leading Article: President John Major
LAST WEEK'S Irish referendum result gives a reprieve, but not yet definitive
salvation, to the project for European union embodied in the Maastricht
treaty. It does not even restore the status quo ante June 2. The unexpected
Danish No vote on that date, however narrow, continues to affect the climate
and agenda of the entire EC in a way that the expected Irish Yes vote of
last Thursday, however overwhelming, cannot do.
At the end of this week the EC's political leaders will gather in Lisbon for
the first post-Maastricht meeting of the European Council. Before June 2 it
had been understood that the main business of this meeting would be to
consider the modalities of negotiations with would-be new members. Britain,
which takes over the presidency next week, would still like to press ahead
with that discussion and to fix the opening of the actual negotiations early
in the new year. British governments have consistently supported the
enlargement of the EC, which fits with their vision of it as an open
free-trade area, and have made themselves strenuous advocates of its
extension, at a later but not too distant date, to former communist
countries in central and even eastern Europe. The thought that new members
might have difficulty in accommodating themselves to a tightly integrated
political and monetary union is, in British eyes, a pro rather than a con.
Shared misgivings
British logic therefore sees the Danish revolt against Maastricht as no
obstacle to the enlargement process. On the contrary, it makes sense to deal
with both problems at once, since Danish misgivings about an
over-centralised Union are likely to be shared by fellow Scandinavians. But
precisely for that reason other governments, which regard making a success
of political and monetary union as the priority, insist that negotiations
with new members cannot start until the Maastricht treaty is safely
ratified, so that applicants know what it is they are applying to join.
That view seems likely to command a majority, and Mr John Major may
therefore not be able to devote his presidency to the enlargement issue, as
he had advertised his intention of doing. If in the end Maastricht does
unravel - either because the French use their referendum to dispose of
President Francois Mitterrand in the way they once disposed of Charles de
Gaulle, or because the German Lander make themselves the spokesmen of
increasingly widespread public anxiety about the demise of the D-Mark, or
even (just conceivably) because the opposition joins forces with Tory rebels
to force a referendum in the UK - then indeed it will make sense to involve
the candidate countries in discussion of what, if anything, is to take its
place.
Intense suspicions
Mr Major might then find ways to turn the unravelling to his advantage. But
he cannot be the one to unpick a knot which he himself tied. Domestically,
he cannot afford to denounce an agreement he once described as 'game, set
and match to Britain"; and in the Community he cannot afford to nourish the
intense suspicions harboured by so many of his partners about the sincerity
of Britain's commitment to European union in any form.
Much of the next six months will inevitably be devoted to efforts to
preserve Maastricht, by devising formulae to placate the Danes and other
Eurosceptics, while at the same time inventing legal artifices to enable
eleven member states to implement the treaty without Denmark if that proves
unavoidable. Much time will also have to be devoted to the Community budget.
Yet the EC must not fall into the trap of imagining that the world will
stand still while it wrestles with its internal problems. If it does so it
will fail lamentably in dealing with the countries to its east, where the
economic and political disintegration is proceeding at an alarming pace; and
it will fail, above all, in reaching a solution to the impasse in GATT, a
crisis more immediate and as urgent as anything involved in Maastricht.
As an experienced global power, Britain should be well placed to take the
lead in dealing with this external agenda, provided it can disarm its
partners' suspicion that it is using external problems to block or derail
the longer-term process of integration.
