FT  04 JAN 92 / Arts: Stop mugging the paying public - Video
I AM in an office at 20th Century Fox in Los Angeles and Mel Brooks is
screaming at me across his desk. 'Hollywood - this is the lead of your
article] - Hollywood doesn't care about art. It just wants to make hits]
People think Home Alone is a good movie because it made Dollars 550m
worldwide. But people think it's a good film because they like things that
are easy, they like bland crap] I made a film called Life Stinks. . . .'
And he is off, talking my ears raw about Life Stinks and how good it is and
how it salutes the human condition and how 'the marvellous spirit of comedy
surfaces even in the depths of degradation.' What has happened to the man?
Five minutes ago he had a sense of humour.
The video age has happened. Mr Brooks knows that Life Stinks is coming out
on video in Britain, a country I represent via a pink newspaper, and this
presentation of his is 'Publicity Push 2: the Cassette Phase.' It is his
last chance to ensure that a film that made no money at the box-office
(except, he points out insistently, in Italy) makes some from the video
market.
Life Stinks is not a good film, but it is decent-hearted and it, yes,
salutes the human condition. Month by month the video lists fill up with
items that have no interest in any condition other than that of their
distributors' wallets. January is a worse month than most, because the
quality product came out before Christmas and we are now deluged with things
like The Brain Eaters, Earth Vs The Spider and Psycho IV, interspersed with
last year's spendthrift also-rans like The Godfather Part III (CIC).
A video shop is a wondrous place: all that blood and violence splashing
about on cassette jackets. But although the most lurid jackets are usually
those advertising made-for-video cheapies, identifiable by key words in the
titles like 'murder', 'scream' or 'blood,' mainstream commercial films now
have to compete with these eye-catchers. So they re-surface on video, after
a possibly shaky theatrical run, wearing a bold, bright jacket with splashy
graphics and a scroll of critical encomia. Never mind that few critics can
remember saying anything good about the film concerned.
At the same time men like Mr Brooks must indulge in their lunatic hype to
coin a little more money from a failed film in order to keep their places a
little longer on the Hollywood payroll.
It is a demented cultural-economic climate. Critics are sometimes asked why
they express negative or carping opinions about a work of cinema. The answer
is: because they are the only people allowed to do so. No one else connected
with the industry, when assessing a film, is permitted to point out that the
Emperor is naked; or even to offer hints that the weather is a little
chilly, your majesty, and you might want to throw on a scarf.
The reason that advertising overkill exists in the video arena even more
than the theatrical one is that few critics are any longer on guard duty.
Most of them have done their job, or think they have, the first time around
in the BC or 'Before Cassette' era. Hence the anomaly that when a film is
video-released and most viewers actually come around to seeing it, no
professional guidance is on offer: except from video magazines which largely
exist to sell, not to assess, the software.
Two ringing exhortations, therefore. Critics, you should be more aware of
how and when film viewers actually view films. Men and woman of the
industry, you should stop trying to mug the paying public whenever it comes
around the corner into Video Alley without a policeman in sight.
Enough, or I shall risk shouting across the furniture like Mr Brooks. Let us
now graciously salute that film-maker's talent, forgive him for Life Stinks,
and remember that nearly all his good films are on video. They include The
Producers, Blazing Saddles, Silent Movie and (my favourite) The History Of
The World Part 1. Meanwhile the best non-Brooks January release is Listening
To Britain: A Jennings Trilogy (Imperial War Museum, COI). This comprises
three of Humphrey Jennings's masterly war documentaries combining
patriotism, humour and a tender, caustic visual poetry.
