FT  07 NOV 92 / FT Pink Snow (8): Fine words - and even finer print / Arnold
Wilson peruses the latest batch of travel agents' brochures
IT IS perhaps fortunate that skiing tour operators are unable to follow the
progress of their expensive, lavishly produced brochures after they land on
my doormat at No 193.
They invariably arrive in such a flurry that they are unceremoniously dumped
in a rapidly-increasing pile by my right foot. There they remain for days
one end, mostly unread, with their press releases, launch and lunch
invitations and, for all I know, the odd Pounds 10 note left languishing
inside the front cover, preserved in Cellophane rather than aspic until they
are suddenly ripped open in time of need.
However, we do look at them eventually, I promise - and even keep them in
the attic for a year or two.
Sometimes perusing them too closely can backfire. I remember recently
discovering that one rather shameless operator had actually 'painted' a
snowdrift against the wall of a hotel - presumably because in a last minute
panic they could only find a slide of the hotel in summer. Perish the
thought that they were trying to pretend there was snow when there wasn't .
. .
For the tour operator, of course, brochures are their very lifeblood and a
major expense. So you could imagine how incensed Touralp and Silver Ski
were, for example, when their entries were partly transposed in a major
advertising feature in a certain newspaper the other day, and each ended up
with the other's telephone number.
One paper had an affectionate gloat at some of the errors they had spotted.
One company, they noted had inadvertently got the Matterhorn the wrong way
round. On closer inspection, however, it wasn't the main picture of the
mountain, but a small second picture in the brochure.
Currently, the problem with brochures is whether or not to reprint them in
order to increase prices to cope with the effects of the weakened pound
following the sterling crisis on Black Wednesday.
Brochures already printed with the slogan 'No Surcharges Guaranteed' can be
reprinted without the slogan, or - more cunningly - with the slogan (to make
it still look like a good offer) but with higher prices inside. Skiers
should make sure they are looking at the latest brochure when they book.
Some brochures are still desperately hard to decipher - others are
simplicity itself. And above all, most are riddled with superlatives.
Crystal Holidays, for example, claims to be the 'UK's top specialist ski
company' with 'an amazing choice of the finest and widest choice of the
world's top ski resorts' with service 'second to none'.
The Ski Company is slightly more poetical, quoting a guest who writes: 'We
woke up to a cat purring outside the closed shutters, the sound of church
bells and the aroma of freshly-baked bread.' Managing director David Kemp
responds in his brochure: 'That strikes as much of a chord with me as
endless pre-dinner champagne.' Apart from being considerably cheaper, of
course . . .
Ski Turkey, on the other hand, makes no bones about it: 'In Turkey
hospitality is a way of life, genuine and often overwhelming. A visitor is
accepted as a guest sent from God, and must be treated well.' Not that well,
surely?
Snowtime claims: 'We think of everything.' They certainly try to. 'Peruse
our brochure' they plead. 'Our service and facilities include free skiers'
shuttle buses, a creche run by professional nannies, free ski guiding, free
drinks parties and film shows, snow scooter excursions, guaranteed prices
and a snow guarantee that makes all the others laughable]'
Andrew Dunn writes more modestly in his brochure: 'A Ski Scott Dunn chalet
holiday makes no outlandish claims.' But elsewhere in the brochure he
changes his mind and claims his company: 'Offer the very best in skiing
holidays . . . there really is no winter travel alternative . . . our chalet
girls really are the best.'
Mr Dunn adds: 'Please note that none of our chalet girls live in the chalets
with you, benefiting both you and them.' One can certainly see how it would
benefit them] Maybe I'll book with Snowtime. After all, it thinks of
everything.
