FT  14 JAN 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Putting your money where
your mouth is - Personal guarantees
Few aspects of the relationship between the banks and their smaller business
customers generate more emotion than the issue of personal guarantees.
Deciding to trade as a limited company offers no protection because bank
managers routinely require directors to sign personal guarantees anyway. Nor
is this just a question for the smallest of firms: the directors of
businesses with turnover of up to Pounds 10m have been asked for personal
security.
A recent suggestion from the Institute of Advanced Legal Studies was for the
family home to be excluded from personal assets liable to be forfeited.
The bankers argue that many young businesses may have few assets - sometimes
just Pounds 2 of paid-up capital - and the only prudent way to cover the
risk on their loan is to demand a personal guarantee, backed by a charge on
the owner's house. It is not uncommon for unscrupulous business owners to
shut down one business and, protected from their creditors by limited
liability, start up again under another name.
Worries like these explain why nearly 26 per cent of small business owners
provided personal guarantees compared with just 24 per cent who provided
business collateral, according to a survey by the Forum of Private Business,
a lobby group.
Taking up personal guarantees also acts as an additional motivation, the
banks believe. 'Most small businesses are entirely dependent on one or two
individuals,' says Andy Hunter, deputy head of small business services at
National Westminster Bank. 'Without personal guarantees they could walk away
when the going gets tough.'
But small business owners reject this argument and say that the fear of
losing your home as well as your business puts an intolerable strain on the
individual. 'We find it insulting that banks should demand personal
guarantees to demonstrate commitment,' says Stan Mendham, chief executive of
the forum.
'When a bank takes security it stops worrying about you and feels less need
to provide advice,' says Richard Parkinson, managing director of The Bank
Relationship Consultancy.
Small business owners claim they are frequently brow-beaten into providing
personal guarantees when they are desperate for funds. The Hertfordshire
businessman quoted above recalls his bank manager asked for an unlimited
guarantee saying: 'It is only a formality.' But the business's income dried
up and the businessman was forced to put his business into liquidation.
There followed a two-year battle, eventually successful, to resist pressure
to call in the personal guarantee.
For their part, the bankers have developed a weary caution to their
customers' complaints that they were cajoled into giving guarantees. 'It is
only a sensitive issue when we call the guarantee in,' says Stuart White,
manager of the enterprise unit of Midland Bank.
White, and other bankers, insist they do not 'rush in with all guns blazing'
when it comes to calling guarantees. The banks are sensitive to the bad
publicity which would result from putting families out on the street. They
will therefore attempt to recoup their losses by selling business assets,
personal insurance policies and share securities before calling in their
charge on the business owner's home.
What they hope is that the owner will realise the extent of his problems and
sell up, perhaps moving to a smaller house. But what may appear to be
sensible advice from the point of view of the bank manager can look like
unwarranted pressure in the eyes of the unsuccessful businessman or woman.
Personal guarantees are probably more likely to be asked for than in the
past in the present tough economic climate. But before providing guarantees,
would-be borrowers should:
Do all they can reduce the likelihood of the bank manager asking for
guarantees by providing as much information as possible on the state of
their business. In particular, businesses should provide information to
demonstrate how they are managing their cash as well as forecasts of future
cash flows.
Refuse to sign unlimited guarantees. Guarantees and the charges and
mortgages which support them should roughly match the amount which has been
borrowed, says Parkinson.
The banks sometimes argue that it is not necessary to place a limit on the
guarantee since they are only able to recoup the amount they are owed. But
business owners claim that bank managers will refuse to increase a loan
facility on the grounds that the borrower can offer no further security -
even when the security already pledged is far larger than the original sum
borrowed.
Place a time limit on the guarantee. If they sign an open ended guarantee,
it may be difficult persuading the bank manager to release them from it
later. Insist that the guarantee is subject to regular review or tie it in
to performance criteria so that the guarantee expires when the business
generates sufficient profits and assets of its own.
If a guarantee has been lifted, make sure this fact is recorded at Companies
House or at the Land Registry, advises David Burton of The Centre for
Consultancy (Surrey). It is not the bank's job to set these records straight
and the business may have problems raising loans in future if expired
charges are still on the record.
Make sure that the earnings on any securities or cash deposited with the
bank to support a personal guarantee are credited to the customer's account.
Take professional advice. The bank's contract documents can be all-embracing
and the pressure to sign personal guarantees can be continuous - in regular
review meetings and even at social occasions. Do not sign on the spur of the
moment and weigh the cost of taking professional advice against the possible
loss of personal assets if things go wrong.
Finally. Do not be afraid to negotiate. The bank may tell you that its
method of valuing businesses and personal assets has to be applied but the
customer does not have to accept this. It may tell you that the wording of
its legal contracts cannot be changed but the customer should negotiate all
the same.
All of the banks which have produced codes of conduct for dealing with
business customers - Midland, Lloyds, NatWest, Barclays, Bank of Scotland
and TSB - refer to the issue of collateral and personal guarantees. But they
have not won high ratings from the Forum of Private Business, which has
attempted to assess the banks' codes. With the exception of the Bank of
Scotland, which was rated 50 per cent for its policy on security, all were
rated just 33 per cent.
The forum wanted a clear explanation of the security required; of the period
for which it would run with review dates; and one month's notice of any
changes in the security needed. The banks do not appear to have matched even
these basic requirements.
The Forum of Private Business Tel. 0565 634467. The Bank Relationship
Consultancy Tel. 071 600 2867. The Centre for Consultancy (Surrey) Tel. 0483
898888.
