FT  06 JUN 92 / Pensions law to be put under scrutiny
AN INDEPENDENT commission to examine UK pensions legislation and recommend
reforms is to be announced by the government on Monday.
Pressure for pensions reform has risen close to the top of the political
agenda since it was discovered that more than Pounds 400m was missing from
the pension funds of companies controlled by the late Mr Robert Maxwell.
The government's review will examine, among other things, ownership of
pension fund surpluses, the feasibility of a compensation scheme for funds
which fail, and whether trust law is suitable for such funds.
Meanwhile, it emerged yesterday that Maxwell company pension schemes have
taken the first legal steps to recover missing assets from banks and
financial institutions. Lawyers for Mirror Group Newspapers pension scheme
have filed two separate actions naming five institutions from which it is
seeking up to Pounds 88m in compensation for assets which disappeared
following unauthorised stock lending.
The suits charge breach of fund management agreements and say fund managers
failed to obtain clear permission of pension fund trustees before they
followed out instructions to loan stock.
The first suit, which names Myers, charges that unauthorised stock lending
led to losses of Pounds 11.3m and Pounds 38.5m from the two fund managers
respectively. Each managed a portion of the Common Investment Scheme, a pool
of the assets of the five Maxwell company pension plans. The suit also names
Lehman Brothers which it says received a majority of proceeds from the stock
lending activities.
The second suit makes claims totalling Pounds 68.8m against Bank of America
National Trust and Savings Association, which acted as custodian for shares,
as well as Credit Suisse which received proceeds from alleged unauthorised
stock lending. Laywers for the MGN pension scheme are charging that BIM had
no authorisation from the scheme's trustees to instruct other fund managers
to engage in stock lending.
The independent commission's review will closely follow that suggested in a
report issued in March by the cross-party parliamentary social security
committee. Several of its recommendations were specifically aimed at
preventing the type of unauthorised stock lending described in the MGN
pension scheme's suit against its fund managers.
The committee made no specific recommendation on the ownership of surplus.
Any effort to prevent companies from putting pension fund surpluses to their
own use is likely to be fiercely resisted by industry.
The new commission is expected to issue a preliminary report within six to
nine months.
A secret world, Page 4
Heat grows, Weekend, Page IV
