FT  06 NOV 92 / Shephard stresses rights of individuals
MRS GILLIAN SHEPHARD, employment secretary, yesterday said that the Trade
Union Reform and Employment Rights Bill would strengthen the rights of
individuals and remove obstacles to the creation of new jobs.
The bill is broadly based on the green paper published last year by Mr
Michael Howard, the then employment secretary.
It abolishes wages councils, the statutory bodies that set minimum rates of
pay for 2.5m workers, and incorporates new provisions based on a proposed
European Community directive on pregnancy. Abolition has been foreshadowed
several times by Mr Michael Forsyth, a junior employment minister.
The green paper received a lukewarm reception from most employers'
organisations. Employers are divided over abolition of wages councils while
the Trades Union Congress has lobbied hard against the move.
The legislation is a logical extension of the framework established by five
employment acts during the then Mrs Margaret Thatcher's time as prime
minister.
Together with the Trade Union Act of 1984, the laws drew unions into a
tighter legal framework. The 1984 act provided for secret ballots before
strikes. The new act will consolidate this by compulsory postal ballots at
all union elections.
The bill contains 34 clauses covering:
Union executives and ballots: The clauses tighten procedures for the
election of union executives.
Unions will have to notify all candidates in an election whether it is
willing to provide them with campaigning assistance and, if so, how much.
Financial affairs of unions: Clauses tighten the way unions conduct their
financial affairs, such as requiring information about the salary and
benefits of each member of a union executive. Presidents and general
executives will be included in the return to an in-dependent certification
officer.
There will be increased monitoring of union activities contained in earlier
acts and unions will be brought closer in line with what is required of
companies.
Union subscriptions: The automatic 'check-off' of union dues is to be more
closely regulated.
Employers will not be able to deduct union subscriptions from a wage unless
the worker authorises this in writing every three years. Unions fear that
this - one of the most controversial parts of the bill - could adversely
affect their depleted finances as members might reconsider membership if
regularly reminded of the cost.
Industrial action: Several clauses strengthen the current restrictions on
how unions can behave.
They will have to conduct postal ballots and must inform employers seven
days before holding a strike.
In addition, the ballot before any call to strike will have to be
independently scrutinised.
Unions will have a tight timetable in which to call strikes. At present,
industrial action must start within 14 days of a ballot result. Placing it
before independent scrutiny could pose timescale problems. Postal ballots
could lead to lower rates of partici-pation.
Maternity rights: All women will have a new minimum entitlement to 14 weeks
continuous leave.
At present only women with two years' continuous service are entitled to six
weeks at 90 per cent of pay and a further 12 weeks on maternity benefit.
Existing rights in relation to dismissal on grounds of pregnancy will be
amended.
This will mean that laying off a woman at any time from the start of her
pregnancy to the end of her maternity leave will be deemed unfair unless
unconnected with her condition. Previously women could be dismissed for
reasons 'connected' with pregnancy.
Health and safety: The act offers protection against dismissal arising from
victimisation.
This would cover workers who, in conditions of imminent danger, seek to
protect themselves and other employees. Wages councils: Part 11 of the Wages
Act 1986, under which 26 wages councils fix minimum basic and overtime rates
of pay, will be repealed.
Industrial tribunals: The jurisdiction of industrial tribunals will be
extended to cover claims for breach of employment contract. Employment
lawyers consider this to be long overdue. At present wrongful dismissal
claims are brought before the High Court.
Choice of union: Workers will have the right to join the union of their
choice. This strikes at the heart of one of the main roles of the Trades
Union Congress - regulating and policing flows of people from one union to
another.
Under the TUC's Bridlington rules on inter-union disputes, affiliated unions
are prevented from taking dissatisfied members from other unions.
Unlawful action: Individuals deprived of goods or services due to an
unlawful strike will be able to pursue high court proceedings to restrain
wildcat action. Lawyers see this as a litigator's paradise while employers,
such as British Rail, have greeted the proposal coolly.
Employment protection: A clause on this amends the Transfer of Undertakings
(Protection of Employment) Regulations 1981, which implements the European
Community's Acquired Rights directive, Catherine Milton writes.
The clause will be felt most by companies taking on contracts to provide
public services.
They will normally not now be able to cut the pay and conditions of staff
who transfer to the public sector without negotiations. This is likely to
reduce savings from contracting-out.
