FT  16 APR 92 / Business Law: Agents; the regulation revolution
Few EC directives aimed at harmonising national laws for the single market
are likely to have as profound an effect as the self-employed commercial
agents directive.
The draft Commercial Agents Regulations are the UK Department of Trade and
Industry's attempt to implement the directive. But the DTI recognises the
upheaval that the Regulations will mean for many UK businesses. The
Regulations are therefore unlikely to come into effect before the January 1
1994 deadline set by the European Council.
Nevertheless, as this date is little more than two years away, and the
changes will apply to all commercial agency agreements in force at that
time, UK businesses which act as agents or use them need to plan for how the
Regulations will affect their operations.
Last autumn, for example, Glaxo concluded six agency distribution agreements
with five wholesalers. Instead of buying and selling at a profit, an agency
fee will be paid to these wholesalers. How long will these arrangements
last?
One clothing manufacturer,
Mariett, is engaging agents under appointment letters only until the
Regulations are formalised.
Similar actions are expected in other industries, in particular in certain
parts of food manufacturing and jewellery.
The Regulations impose duties on principal and agent which are either
broadly similar to the common law position or make good sense. For example,
requiring the principal to provide his agent with the necessary
documentation and information for the performance of the contract.
Such duties should not create too many difficulties for principals except in
industries where documents are scarce. But the Regulations go further. A
principal will have to notify his agent as soon as he expects that business
volume will be significantly lower than the agent could normally have
expected.
Separately, a manufacturer will also be required to inform his agent of his
acceptance, refusal or non-execution of business arranged by the agent. The
agent will therefore have to be informed of any omissions by the principal
in completing a transaction.
All provisions on the rights/duties of principal and agent will be mandatory
 -it will not be possible to contract out.
There will also be express provisions on the agent's remuneration where the
contract is silent on this subject.
Transactions on which commission is payable to an agent will fall into two
categories: those concluded during the period of the agency; and those
concluded after the agency has been terminated. This is a new concept in
English law.
Commission will be payable to the agent provided:
the transaction is mainly attributable to the agent's efforts during the
period covered by the contract and was entered into within a reasonable time
after the termination of the contract. No cut-off point is specified for
transactions entered into after termination of the contract. Express
contractual provision will therefore need to be made in respect of
commission payments after termination if the possibility of dispute as to
reasonableness is to be avoided;
the order for the goods reached the principal or the agent before the
contract was terminated and the agent would have been entitled to commission
had the contract not been terminated.
The Regulations also state when the commission will become payable. These
provisions increase the burden on a principal of paying his agent. He will
no longer be able to delay payment merely because he has not himself been
paid by the customer. On the contrary, when a commission falls due, a
principal will have to pay his agent not later than the last day of the
month after the end of the quarter in which it became due.
The agent will also be entitled to a statement showing how the commission
has been calculated and access to all the information necessary to check it.
To avoid disclosing embarrassing or confidential information, the principal
will need to maintain records solely for the purpose of enabling commission
to be calculated.
Commission will be lost if, through no fault of the principal, no contract
between the customer and the principal is completed. But, again, radically,
the Regulations will provide that if a principal is indemnified for
non-performance of the contract, (for example, under an insurance policy or
guarantee), his agent will not lose the right to commission.
Regardless of any contrary agreement, either party will be entitled to
receive from the other a signed written statement setting out the terms of
the agency contract, including terms subsequently agreed.
An agency entered into for an indefinite period will be capable of being
terminated by either party giving written notice to the other. But the
period of notice will not be less than one month during the first year of
the contract, two months during the second year and three months during the
third and subsequent years of the contract. Alternatively, the parties can
agree on a longer period of notice. However, it will not be possible for
that period to be shorter for the principal than for his agent.
The most controversial departure from existing English law will be the
agent's right to compensation on termination of the contract. Compensation
will be payable if the principal terminates the contract (except as a result
of the agent's breach). Compensation will also be payable if the agent
terminates the contract as a result of the principal's breach or because of
the agent's inability to perform the contract (for example, because of
illness), or because of frustration of the contract.
Compensation payable will cover losses, liabilities, costs and expenses
incurred as a result of termination of the contract. Compensation will take
into account the commission that would have been earned had the contract
been properly performed, and the principal derived substantial benefit from
the agent's acts.
Compensation will also take account of the agent's costs and expenses
incurred on the principal's instruction, which he has not been able to
amortise. Compensation will not to be payable if the agent transferred his
contractual rights or duties to another person.
A written claim for compensation will have to be given to the principal
within one year of the termination.
Restraint of trade limitation clauses in agency contracts will also be
introduced by the Regulations. Validity will necessitate their being in
writing, reasonable, limited to a two-year period, and relating to the
geographical area, customers and the kind of goods in respect of which the
agent has a right to act.
These provisions concerning contract termination have been a part of the law
of certain EC countries for some years. In significant ways the provisions
are comparable to those in respect of unfair dismissal remedies under
English law.
Amendments may be made to the draft Regulations before they come into force.
But amendments will not alter the fact that, for many agency contracts, the
regulation of agents will be turned upside down.
The author is a partner of City solicitors Fox Williams.
