FT  10 JAN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Australian offshore oil project
given green light
THE AUSTRALIAN government has given the go-ahead for offshore oil
exploration in the Otway Basin, 200 km (125 miles) south-west of Melbourne,
in spite of threats of sabotage by environmental activists.
Mr Alan Griffiths, the federal Resources Minister, said Broken Hill
Proprietary would be allowed to drill exploration wells in the area under
strict environmental supervision. However, Mr Griffiths said it was 'in the
national interest' for BHP to start exploration quickly, without carrying
out the environmental impact study which is usually required.
The announcement follows growing pressure on the government to speed up the
approval process for major projects to help reduce unemployment, which
stands at a post-war record of 10.5 per cent. The government said BHP had
agreed to observe a strict environmental management plan, which would be
supervised jointly by the federal government and the state government of
Victoria.
BHP said the plan would ensure the protection of the marine environment in
the basin, which is an important breeding ground for the Southern Right
Whale between April and October.
Greenpeace, the international environmental organisation, said the decision
was 'appalling,' and threatened direct action to prevent drilling. The group
used rubber dinghies to disrupt BHP's seismic survey of the area last year.
'It (is) absolutely appalling that this decision has been made without any
environmental impact statement,' said Mr Rick Humphries, Greenpeace national
liaison officer.
Federal government officials suggested the field could contain more than 3bn
barrels of oil, compared with Australia's existing reserves of about 1.9bn
barrels. The biggest producing field, in the Bass Strait, contains about 1bn
barrels.
However, BHP said the area was 'assessed to be frontier exploration, and as
such has a relatively low probability of (containing) major hydrocarbon
accumulations'.
