FT  01 MAY 92 / World Trade News: EC-US near accord on cutting jet subsidies
EUROPE and the US appear close to ratifying the tentative agreement reached
last month to reduce government support for new commercial airliner
programmes.
Mr Ray Waldman, director of government affairs at Boeing, said all the
remaining issues which have held up ratification were expected to be
resolved during 'the next few days'.
The accord, which limits direct government development support for new
aircraft programmes to 33 per cent of their total development costs, had
been held up by disagreement over limits on indirect government support for
commercial airliner projects from military programmes and other sources.
However, the US and the four European government partners in the Airbus
consortium (France, Germany, Britain and Spain), appear to have reached a
compromise to fix a limit on indirect supports.
Airbus said yesterday the agreement envisaged a ceiling of 4 per cent of a
company's total annual turnover.
Boeing described the EC-US aircraft subsidy agreement as a 'good trade-off',
although the company, the world's largest manufacturer of commercial jets,
would have preferred a complete ban on government development subsidies. Mr
Frank Shrontz, Boeing chairman, said the agreement 'will go a significant
way to putting discipline in the market place'. But he added Boeing's
long-term aim was 'zero subsidies and zero government involvement' in
commercial programmes.
Boeing is now increasingly concerned by Taiwan Aerospace's proposal to
acquire a substantial equity stake in the commercial aircraft operations of
McDonnell Douglas, its main US competitor. Taiwan Aerospace is considering
buying up to 40 per cent of the Douglas commercial aircraft subsidiary for
Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1.1bn) and co-operating with Douglas in the development
of the MD12, a four-engine 400-600 seater jumbo which will challenge
Boeing's dominance of the large airliner market.
'If the Taiwan deal happens, I hope the next Douglas product will not be
another subsidised programme,' Mr Shrontz said.
Boeing has already formally expressed its concern to the US government about
the potential emergence of a what it calls an 'Asian Airbus'.
Mr Larry Clarkson, Boeing's vice-president for planning, told a US
Congressional committee that the proposed Taiwan-Douglas deal raised serious
questions because Taiwan was not presently bound by the Gatt and OECD
agreements. Mr Waldman said it was clear the Taiwan government had an
aerospace programme to encourage Taiwan Aerospace and other parts of the
Taiwan industrial community to enter the business through government funds,
soft loans, tax breaks, the construction of a government sponsored
industrial park, and 'all sorts of gimmicks which kept Airbus afloat'.
Boeing said it wanted to see the new EC-US agreement on Airbus subsidies
extended to other countries, including Taiwan, eventually to form the basis
of a multilateral agreement on commercial aircraft trade.
This process, however, was likely to take time. Boeing is therefore pressing
the US government to undertake bilateral negotiations with Taiwan to agree
on aircraft trade rules.
