FT  13 MAY 92 / Survey of The Reforming of Russia (5): A new balance must be
struck - The regions and peoples within Russia face three massive
interlocking sets of problems
DEPRIVED of an empire in the space of six years, Russia now struggles to
control her own territorial space. Reform here has marched at a much slower
space than in the economy, or in such civil freedoms as speech and travel:
naturally, for here is the most intricate knot which the new state must
unravel.
It faces three massive interlocking sets of problems. First, the Russian
government must find a new relationship with the peoples within Russia,and
with the authorities of the administrative/national divisions which have
been bequeathed it by the Soviet system.
These divisions - autonomous republics, districts and regions - were
formally 'autonomous:' actually, they were strictly subordinate to a
centralised state and party.
In the time of collapse of these institutions over 1990-91, the republican
and local administrations took powers into their own hands - indeed, they
were explicitly encouraged to do so by Mr Boris Yeltsin, who later became
President of Russia with a necessarily quite different agenda.
Now, a new balance must be struck: one which allows devolution of government
to effective administrative authorities while retaining - or rather, winning
back - effective power for the centre.
A Federation Treaty, signed in April of this year with much celebration, was
advertised as doing just that. In fact, it leaves out of its scope two
important republics, Tatarstan and Chechen-Ingushetia: even more
importantly, those republics within the treaty have in many cases struck
unpublicised deals with the central government which give them large control
over, particularly, exports - and which undercut the ostensible rule of law
with a reversion to the past practice of backstairs arrangements.
Secondly, and linked to the first, is the necessity to make the central writ
run everywhere. The dissolution of the centralised state has left, not
market relations, but a legislative and economic free-for-all in which all
seek to maximise their position.
Regions, districts, cities, even enterprises seek to escape government
control, especially taxes. Where they can, they look abroad for export
contracts, in order to obtain hard currency.
The buying, selling and grabbing of property, nominally under state control,
goes on relatively freely, usually without effective intervention or
hindrance.
The corruption of public authorities at every level, against which the
Government and the parliament constantly rail, makes the observance of
central power not a matter of law, but at best of negotiation.
Thirdly, Russia must come to terms with the fact that millions of Russians
now live in 'foreign' countries which they had been accustomed to regarding,
at least in part, as extensions of their homeland.
In Ukraine, Kazakhstan, the Baltic States, the Caucasus and in Central Asia,
men and women who had settled in areas often colonised by Russia for
centuries find themselves in the vertiginous and poignant position of having
to choose a nationality, and all that goes with it - language, culture,
education, loyalty.
It is as yet ill-equipped to deal with these issues. Most importantly, it
has no reform constitution. The Congress of Russian Peoples Deputies which
met for much of April had before it several competing drafts of a new
Russian Constitution - but refused to consider any of them.
The state thus still operates on the basis of a patched up Soviet-era
constitution - which still, bizarrely, acknowledges the existence of the
Soviet Union, thus giving the communists the opening to argue that the
destruction of the Union was unconstitutional.
The official draft of the constitution assumes the existing territorial
divisions, and seeks to apportion powers between them and the central
government: only the draft of the constitution prepared by Mr Anatoly
Sobchak, the Mayor of St Petersburg, seeks to replace these divisions with
new administrative areas - on the basis that the old are hopelessly enmired
in the structures of the old regime and cannot be 'democratised' simply by
being shifted under the aegis of a presidential, or for that matter a
parliamentary, republic.
The creation of the Commonwealth of Independent States in December last year
 -even while the Soviet Union still had a formal, legal existence  - was
designed in Russian minds to provide a framework within which some things
would continue as before - including a common citizenship.
The inability of the CIS to provide such a framework, or so far to
substantially mitigate the tensions between communities within its
territories, faces the Russian state with the necessity of finding for its
'expatriates' a modus vivendi with the states in which they are now located.
This has yet to appear.
Three critical areas will point the way. In the three small Baltic states of
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania live nearly 2m Russians.
All three of these states have set out constitutions which, at the minimum,
would force the Russians who stay to learn the local language (which many
had never tried to master, living as they often do in Russophone
communities) in order to hold a job, and would often disqualify recent
entrants from citizenship.
Discussions between the Russian and the Baltic governments on these issues,
and on the removal of the former Soviet army from these states' territories,
have been sporadic and slow: constant expressions of frustration are made on
both sides.
Second, in the TransDnester area of Moldiova, a strip of land between the
Dnester River and Ukraine, live a majority of Russians and Ukrainias: the
former have been especially active in proclaiming the area a republic, and
have conducted a sporadic war with the Moldovan militia.
The desire of the Russian government to seek a federal solution to the issue
meets the so far uncompromising demand on the part of the Moldovan
authorities that Moldova be a unitary state - while powerful elements in or
near the government raise the possibility of a future unification with
Romania, to whose people the Moldovans are ethnic kin.
Third, the Crimea, in the south of Ukraine, is soon to hold a referendum on
independence with the option of an alliance with Russia.
Crimea, Russian territory until capriciously given to Ukraine in 1954 by Mr
Nikita Kruschev, has a majority of Russians: it is also home to the Black
Sea Fleet, the bulk of which Russia claims.
The return of Crimea is a popular cause in Russia: its loss cannot be
tolerated by the Ukrainian government. A crisis over its status could
threaten the security of the very large Russian community in Eastern
Ukraine, until now peacefully integrated with the Ukrainian population.
These are the national challenges which now face Russia: all are, of course,
susceptible to compromise and to negotiation, and in most cases there are
forums and mechanisms in which such negotiations can take place, or actually
are taking place. But their success depends on the ability of the
governments in question to be able to deliver, and to survive, compromise:
and in nearly every case, the post-Communist governments have come to power
under the banner of a resurgent nationalism, often at least covertly
strongly anti-Russian.
At the same time, as the recent Congress showed, both the 'nationalist' and
the 'democratic' forces in Russia regard the protection of Russian interests
as the fundamental base of their politics, the neglect of which would
threaten their fragile cohesion and popularity.
The largest element of hope is that the present Russian government is headed
by leaders who appear ready to go to the political limits to avoid the
charge of acting in an 'imperialist' fashion. There has been no official
support for the TransDnestr rebels: no official agitation among the Baltic
Russians.
In a recent interview, Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the Russian foreign minister, made
clear that in every one of these crucial theatres, he was open to compromise
and to a settlement which answered the criteria of human rights, not of
narrow Russian national interests.
Internally, the flashpoints of Tatarstan and Chechen Ingushetia have not
been confronted with military power but finessed - put into negotiating
processes with the clear statement that seperate arrangements should govern
the relationship between the Russian authorities and these states.
In both these cases, there are signs that internal dissent to the present
governments might take a 'pro-Russian' form - or at least, propose a
solution in which the clear dependence of both on the Russian market and
infrastructure would find a correlative in the political level. The example
of Georgia - where a violently anti-Russian nationalist government was
overthrown in favour of one led by Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, the former Soviet
Foreign Minister, which seeks rational accommodation, is encouraging.
But the problems cannot be forever finessed. To withstand the further, and
deeper shocks which economic reform promises all of the states of the former
Soviet Union, central power must be seen to be both effective and
undiscriminating.
The law must be seen to be the law from St Petersburg in the north west to
Vladivostok in the south east. The construction of a law-governed state, the
as-yet unrealised project of national independence, is a its earliest, most
fragile stage.
