FT  22 MAY 92 / Management: Yes, Prime Minister - Lucy Kellaway slips past
security cameras and through a discreet door to find Britain's top civil
servant. Sir Robin Butler is a mandarin who really does say
When Mrs William Waldegrave was shown around Whitehall recently by her
husband, the new minister for the Civil Service, she was taken aback by Sir
Robin Butler's office. The top mandarin's room was larger and finer than her
husband's, she noted coolly.
You do not need to be the boss's wife to register that Sir Robin, cabinet
secretary and head civil servant, works somewhere special.
From the stately entrance to the Cabinet Office at 70 Whitehall, the visitor
is in for an experience. First come the top-security electronic entrance
gates. These open on to grimy modern corridors which lead to the Tudor
'cockpit passage'. The mood changes again: deep red carpet, oil paintings
and outsized marble fireplaces reveal the source of power is not far away.
After some delay, Sir Robin emerges from the connecting passage to 10
Downing Street, where he has been busy with plans to make public a little of
what goes on behind that discreet door.
'So sorry to have kept you,' he says, smiling graciously. Sir Robin seems a
cardboard cut-out of the old-style mandarin: courteous, intelligent,
well-informed. He has adapted himself to the whims of four different prime
ministers and is more than equal to making visitors at ease.
He opens the door into his office. The sun streams in from three large
windows overlooking a well-known part of London. The Civil Service may be
becoming more open, yet the exact location of its top people's offices
remains secret.
The room is magnificent. Larger than a squash court, and with a soaring,
pink-domed ceiling, it was designed by William Kent in 1736 for the
Treasury. 'It is not just big and grand, it is aesthetically pleasing,' says
Sir Robin, uncharacteristically stating the obvious.
Despite the pressures of his timetable, the cabinet secretary seems without
a care as he describes how the room occupies the site of Henry V's cockpit,
and how later, Queen Anne was held there under house arrest. More recently
still, it was the model for Sir Humphrey's office in the TV series, 'Yes
Minister'.
The sense of tradition is so pervasive that there is little scope for
successive incumbents to make their mark. Yet even if Sir Robin had a free
hand, he surely would not have changed it much. He certainly would not have
followed racier Treasury colleagues in employing young London designers for
a re-fit. Instead, the man slots naturally into his surroundings. His
innovations have been modest: he has put blue velvet chairs and sofas round
the fireplace where he sits when he is 'fixing things with people, or
receiving international visitors'. He uses his fine desk only when alone.
'I'd rather be chummy than domineering,' he says.
He has also removed the photographs of statesmen favoured by his
predecessor, Sir Robert Armstrong. In their place sit snaps of his family
and of their house in Cornwall, incongruous under a glowering portrait of
Handel.
His most notable addition has been a stag's head - a golf trophy won by
himself and Terry Burns (now permanent secretary to the Treasury). They no
longer hold the title, but Sir Robin - who is still a keen sportsman and
cycles around town to meetings - keeps the trophy as Treasury staff found it
offensive on animal rights grounds.
The personal effects suggest that their owner is correct but not stuffy.
Indeed, in his old job at the Treasury, he became so frustrated at the dirt
on his windows that he abseiled down the outside of the building to clean
them.
'It was a threat. I said that if no one cleans them, I'd do it myself. There
was already a bolt on the wall, and I attached myself to it with a safety
harness.' He takes promises seriously, it seems.
On his first day in the Cabinet Office, Sir Robin 'cowered into the corner',
but now he feels so comfortable that he fancies his stately chamber has 'the
sense of a house'.
He says he likes the mixture of 'history and high-tech', although to the
visitor, the latter is scarcely in evidence. There are a few telephones,
some of which have innocuous-looking scrambler devices attached. Otherwise,
a television and a Dictaphone are the most advanced pieces of equipment.
There are no computer screens - Sir Robin does not know how to use them.
Instead he relies on his staff.
Next door, in a powder pink corner room, three brainy looking women are hard
at work. To help with his fully-packed day and to deal with cabinet matters
he has a PA, an assistant PA, a diary secretary, someone to look after his
papers and four secretary-typists.
From the atmosphere in both rooms, you might be in the 1950s or 60s, rather
than the decade of the Citizen's Charter and the management revolution in
Whitehall. Yet Sir Robin insists that things have changed: 'The job has
become much more of a rush, there is greater openness of access, there are
many more people coming in here to see me.'
He is not always playing host, however. As head of the Civil Service, he
sometimes dons his management, rather than policy, hat and goes visiting.
Whenever the prime minister is out of town, he calls on rank-and-file
government workers.
What does he think of the squalid conditions that some of them work in? Not
perfect, but getting better, he says, ever the diplomat. 'Local staff have
their own budgets and can take their own decisions. That has improved
standards. People work better and with more pride if they are proud of their
environment,' he says. Evidently, it is true of him.
