FT  10 FEB 92 / Save Planet Earth from economists: America
Mr Lawrence Summers, the World Bank's chief economist, has a fine mind. As a
young Harvard professor in the 1980s he gained a reputation for brilliance.
He sympathises with many liberal causes and served as economic adviser in
Governor Michael Dukakis's ill-fated presidential campaign in 1988. But he
appears to have one blind spot: the environment.
This matters because the World Bank is emerging as a key player in the
global environmental debate. Will the bank back efforts to impose effective
controls on carbon emissions? Will it make development loans conditional on
strict environmental controls? Will it support trade sanctions against
countries which refuse to clean up their dirty industries?
Mr Summers is well placed to mould opinion within the bank on such
controversial issues. Perhaps more importantly, he is responsible for this
year's World Development Report, always a powerful pedagogical tool. This
year's report - which will be devoted to the economics of the environment -
is being published ahead of schedule in an effort to influence debate at the
United Nations conference on the environment in Rio this June. The 'Earth
Summit' could help set global environmental policy for this decade.
In January, at the American Economics Association meeting in New Orleans, Mr
Summers made little effort to hide his feelings. He listened in exasperation
to papers arguing that global warming could prove a more serious economic
threat than hitherto realised. His own view was that it was a grossly
overrated problem. Even on the most pessimistic assumptions, it would cause
damage equivalent to only half a year's growth of gross national product
(GNP) over the next half century. The implication was that efforts to curb
carbon emissions should not be a priority.
The leaking of a confidential bank memorandum last week provided further
insight into Mr Summers's thinking. 'Just between you and me, shouldn't the
World Bank be encouraging more migration of the dirty industries to the LDC
(less developed countries)?' he wrote in a memo to senior staff dated
December 12. He listed three reasons:
The economic cost of pollution depends on the loss of earnings from
increased illness and death. These costs are lowest in the lowest wage
countries. 'I think the economic logic behind dumping a load of toxic waste
in the lowest wage country is impeccable and we should face up to that.'
Pollution costs start low but rise more than proportionately with the output
of toxic substances. It thus makes sense to shift dirty production to places
where environments are still clean. 'I've always thought under-populated
countries in Africa are vastly under-polluted; their air quality is probably
vastly inefficiently low compared to Los Angeles or Mexico City.'
The value attached to clean and healthy environments increases as living
standards rise. The poor, in effect, cannot afford to have scruples. 'The
concern over an agent that causes a one in a million change in the odds of
prostate cancer is obviously going to be much higher in a country where
people survive to get prostate cancer than in a country where under-five
mortality is 200 per thousand.'
Mr Summers subsequently said these comments were an 'ironic' attempt to
stimulate debate rather than serious policy proposals. The bank apologised
on behalf of Mr Summers and said that protection of the environment was one
of its main objectives. It did not condone the dumping of waste in other
countries.
The memo's purpose is unimportant; it is the tone of the remarks that is
revealing. It is hard to believe that anybody who cared deeply about the
environment would write that way, even in a confidential memo. If you cared,
you would not describe clean air as inefficient; you would not refer to an
argument for dumping toxic waste in poor countries as 'impeccable'.
For Mr Summers, the environment seems to be just a pile of raw material:
something you use up in creating GNP. It is not an uncommon attitude in
America. In dashing for growth over two centuries, the US, after all, has
despoiled its own continent. The air quality in the Blue Ridge mountains
near Washington, once a natural paradise, is now sometimes so poor that
people are advised not to leave their cars. Many rivers are poisonous. Urban
landscapes are often indescribably ugly. But, hell, most Americans are happy
enough. Why should the developing world not follow suit?
Viewed through the distorting prism of market economics, Mr Summers's
arguments may appear logical. But should decisions on the location of
factories really be determined by estimates of where human life is cheapest?
And if the answer is yes, why stop there? Environmental controls are costly.
Why should the bank - or anybody else - try to impose any environmental
restraints in the third world? Let it enjoy dirty growth. Let the factories
smoke. If the globe warms up a few degrees, so much the better: we'll all
get a suntan. If the outside world becomes totally inhospitable, we can
always live in pressurised plastic bubbles.
This is a recipe for ruin. The challenge is to find an equitable way of
financing clean growth everywhere. Rather than figuring out ways to export
dirty industries, we should be trying to prevent poor countries from
repeating our own awful environmental mistakes. This requires vision from
institutions such as the World Bank, not mean-spirited utilitarianism of the
kind Charles Dickens satirised in Hard Times.
