FT  21 JAN 92 / Survey of Egypt (2): At centre stage again - Egypt resumes
its geopolitical pre-eminence
WHEN Dr Boutros Boutros-Ghali was elected Secretary General of the United
Nations last November - the first Arab to fill the post - it capped a highly
satisfactory year for Egyptian diplomacy.
Mr Boutros-Ghali's appointment to the key UN job followed the election last
May of Dr Esmat Abdel Meguid, the former foreign minister, to the Secretary
Generalship of the Arab League. At no time in the four decades since the
1952 revolution and the coming to power of Gamal Abdel Nasser have Egyptians
been quite so prominent in international forums.
The return of the Arab League headquarters to the banks of the Nile after an
absence of more than a decade and the election of Dr Meguid confirmed a
trend apparent for some time: the re-emergence of Cairo as the regional
diplomatic hub.
Not that the Arab League plays much of a role these days: its effectiveness
has been diminished by continuing divisions in the Arab world left over from
the Gulf crisis. Iraqi malevolence makes it difficult for the League to take
initiatives across a fairly broad range of issues, but officials note in
defence of the organisation that it is better for Baghdad to be involved in
deliberations than for it to be left out in the cold.
Mr Amr Moussa, Egypt's new foreign minister, is seeking to energise Egyptian
diplomacy both at a regional and at an international level in the light of
upheavals in Eastern Europe and in the Soviet Union, and Europe's move to a
unified market this year. To this end, Mr Moussa raised with European
Community foreign ministers in Brussels in December the possibility of
creating a new regional forum for European states and non-community
countries of the Mediterranean littoral - stretching from Morocco in the
west to Turkey in the east.
Egypt wants the 'Mediterranean forum' to provide a framework for the
discussion of such issues as security, trade and the environment. Mr Moussa
made it clear in an interview that Egypt was keen to hitch itself to
European security arrangements being developed under the umbrella of the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE). 'I believe that the
essence of new thinking and new security in the Middle East is to link up
with the world. And you cannot do that without cooperating with Europe and
establishing a new forum based on the Mediterranean region,' he declared.
Egypt is also deeply concerned about disruption to its traditional East Bloc
markets caused by the disintegration of the Soviet Union and the dramatic
economic changes among the old Comecon group of states, many of whom were
among Egypt's most reliable trading partners. Egypt's cosy state-to-state
trading relationship with the Soviet Union amounting to about Dollars 1bn
annually in two-way barter trade is now an institution of the past.
Mr Moussa and his advisers fear that Egypt will be slow to respond to these
dramatic changes and trade will suffer as a consequence. The new foreign
minister, who is in his fifties, perhaps understands better than his
predecessors the link between an effective foreign policy and sound economic
policies at home. Egypt's economy, he says will have to become 'more
international in its outlook'.
Egypt's traditional consensus role in Arab forums has been most conspicuous
in its efforts to help facilitate the US-sponsored Middle East peace
process. The only Arab state to have established relations with Israel,
Egypt continues to devote considerable diplomatic energy to faltering
attempts to promote Middle East peace. Cairo was helpful in securing Syrian
and thus Lebanese cooperation, and also used its weight to back Palestine
Liberation Organisation moderates in their decision to sanction the
participation of Palestinian surrogates in negotiations with Israel.
The PLO leader, Mr Yasser Arafat - snubbed by Egypt because of his support
of Iraq in the Gulf crisis - is a regular visitor, once again, in Cairo.
Egypt's return to prominence in Arab forums has been facilitated by it close
relations with both Saudi Arabia, the smaller Gulf Arab states, and with
Syria. The Cairo-Riyadh-Damascus axis, which solidified during the Gulf
crisis, is, for the time being, dominant in Arab forums.
Egypt's relations with Jordan have also begun a slow improvement, but
mistrust persists over King Hussein's role in the crisis. Egyptian leaders
suspect that he was more deeply implicated in Iraqi designs than he has been
willing to admit. Cairo's other regional concerns have focused on the
fortunes of its two closest neighbours: Libya and Sudan.
A conspicuous feature of relations with Tripoli has been Egyptian efforts to
calm international anger over allegations that Libyan agents bombed US and
French passenger planes in 1988 and 1989. Egypt, which has worked extremely
hard to encourage Libya's Colonel Muammar Gadaffi to moderate his behaviour,
fears that a sanctions campaign will undo its efforts. It was noticeable
that Col. Gadaffi turned to Cairo for support when international pressure
grew.
Egypt's concerns about neighbouring Sudan go deeper, since the stakes are
much higher. Further upheaval in Sudan and possible growing antagonism
towards Egypt could threaten its lifeblood, the Nile, whose twin tributaries
join at Khartoum, the Sudanese capital. Cairo believes that a weak military
leadership in Sudan is being manipulated by the militant Islamists, and this
poses serious dangers not only for internal Sudanese stability, but may lead
to a further worsening of relations with Sudan's neighbours.
Egyptian leaders have never made any secret of the fact that they would not
hesitate to go to war to protect the nation's sole water source. the
question is to how much circumstances need to deteriorate in Sudan before
Egypt felt obliged to intervene.
