FT  21 FEB 92 / Kravchuk to be given more power to reform
CITING the urgent need to implement economic reforms, Ukrainian President
Leonid Kravchuk yesterday won preliminary parliamentary approval for widely
expanded presidential powers.
The legislation is likely to strengthen Mr Kravchuk's hand in increasingly
bitter disputes with Russia by bringing the historically Russified regions
of eastern Ukraine more firmly under his control.
A slim majority of Ukrainian MPs yesterday endorsed the first reading of a
bill creating a centralised, prefectural administrative system with
presidential representatives in each Ukrainian region. They will be
empowered to enforce presidential and parliamentary decrees on local
governments and enterprises.
'I support the introduction of a presidential system,' said Ms Larysa
Skoryk, a radical nationalist deputy. 'There is no other way of breaking
through the regional Communist party apparat.'
Ms Skoryk's support is another sign of the growing alliance between
nationalist forces and the ex-Communist president. It could be strengthened
further this weekend when Mr Kravchuk meets with opposition parties to
discuss the formation of a national unity cabinet which would be more able
to implement radical economic reform than the current conservative
government.
Such a cabinet would also likely be more firmly committed to asserting
Ukrainian independence in confrontations with Russia over military and
economic issues.
These disputes have troubled western observers. Yesterday, US defence
department officials visited their Ukrainian counterparts to seek guarantees
about the safety of nuclear weapons stationed on Ukrainian territory and
about Ukraine's plan to dismantle or remove the weapons by 1992.
The Ukrainian position on repaying the former Soviet debt received a boost
yesterday from Dr Erhard Busek, the Austrian vice-chancellor, who said in
Kiev that Austria was pleased with Ukraine's offer to pay its share of the
foreign debt independently and to take on some of the debt of the smaller
republics. Dr Busek predicted that the Ukrainian position would be accepted
by the Paris Club of creditors.
AP-DJ reported yesterday that the Paris Club will discuss setting a date for
talks with Ukraine when it meets privately next week.
