FT  15 OCT 92 / Mexican ruling party pushed towards reform
RARELY can the fortunes of Mexico's two main opposition parties have changed
so rapidly. Humiliated three months ago by a bitter defeat in its former
stronghold, the western state of Michoacan, the leftist Party of Democratic
Revolution (PRD) is now celebrating the forced resignation of the state's
governor last week.
The resignation followed months of PRD protests, marches and sit-ins against
what it claimed were irregularities in an election where the PRD alleged it
was outspent 50:1 by Mexico's ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party
(PRI), whose governor Mr Eduardo Villasenor has now quit.
The resignation has also pushed political reform to the front of the agenda.
The PRD has had little success in elections but its ability to disrupt them
and make states or municipalities ungovernable has forced the government to
negotiate. For those PRD members to whom deep political reform is more
important than the occasional election win, this is a considerable victory.
Three months ago, while the PRD was lamenting its loss in Michoacan, the
centre-right National Action Party (PAN) was enjoying its victory in the
northern state of Chihuahua, its third governorship in the party's 53 years.
Last week, the costs of that victory became apparent. Nine senior officials
resigned in protest at the party's pro-government line, thereby undermining
its credibility as an opposition.
The nine dissidents included Mr Pablo Emilio Madero, former presidential
candidate, and Mr Bernardo Batiz, former party secretary-general. They
announced they were leaving because of the PAN's support for the PRI and the
authoritarian leadership of the party, under its president Mr Luis H.
Alvarez.
The dissidents are said to be mulling over forming a new, Christian
democratic party, which could further split the anti-government vote. Under
Mr Alvarez, the PAN has supported many government economic reforms, and
voted in favour of new electoral laws which many Mexicans believe did not go
far enough.
The resignation of the governor of Michoacan, who has been replaced by
another PRI official, brought heavy criticism, much of it from outside the
ruling party. The PRD highlighted the unfairnesses of the election in
Michoacan but had failed to demonstrate that fraud affected the result.
In little more than a year, five Mexican governors or governors-elect have
been booted out, three within months of their election. The resignations
have weakened what little confidence there was in Mexico's democratic
institutions.
Mr Federico Reyes Heroles, a political commentator in La Jornada newspaper,
wrote: 'In Michoacan, Mexico is paying the costs of the injustices and
incongruences of barbaric politics that, between hyped announcements of
modernisation, still govern us.' He and others reached the same conclusion:
elections in Mexico are decided in the street, rather than at the ballot
boxes.
The government forced Mr Villasenor to resign, not just because the state
had become ungovernable, but it seems also in the hope his departure would
pave the way for a reconciliation with the PRD.
This week and last, Mr Porfirio Munoz Ledo, number two in the PRD, has been
been meeting the interior minister, Mr Fernando Gutierrez Barrios, to settle
the conditions for municipal elections in Michoacan in December. The PRD is
demanding ceilings on PRI spending and equal access to newspapers and
television.
If, as now seems likely, the PRD were granted such conditions, an electoral
precedent would have been set. Many in the government are opposed to
allowing wider political competition but the Michoacan election fiasco shows
that, without some political reform, opposition protests and demonstrations
can only grow.
