FT  31 OCT 92 / The Financial Times Guide To Post-16 Education 20: Breaking
the exam taboo gives intriguing results - The most extensive survey of
A-level results including state schools
IN 1978, early in my 14 years as an elected parent governor of a Brent,
North London, comprehensive school, I asked if the governors could see
details of the school's examination results. 'No', I was told, 'they were
far too open to misinterpretation.'
Such secretiveness persisted until 1980, when the UK government proposed
that schools receiving public funds would be required to publish their
examination results, subject by subject and grade by grade.
At once an unholy alliance of producer interests - the Headmasters'
Conference arm-in-arm with the National Union of Teachers - went to the
Secretary of State and implored him to think again. But, buoyed up by a 1979
election promise by Margaret Thatcher, the government held firm.
Unfortunately, however, it failed to collect this data centrally and make it
widely available. All that the 1980 Act required was that schools should
keep a copy of this data and make it available for inspection. They were not
even required to send a copy to anyone on request, even if payment and
postage was offered.
So when, in 1981 and 1982, my colleagues and I tried to conduct a census of
the examination results of all the schools in the country, we failed. Nearly
a third of schools and local education authorities (LEAs) refused to send us
the information which legally they were required to make available. And
another third only cooperated when we promised them anonymity.
Now, a decade later, the wheel has come full circle. Next month the
Department for Education will publish A-level and GCSE results for all the
state schools in the country. And today the FT publishes, in rank order, the
A-level results for more than 1,000 schools - roughly half independent and
half state. This is nearly all the leading independent schools but less than
20 per cent of state schools with sixth forms. It is to date the most
extensive comparison of national results.
What do they show? First, that the exact ranking of a school is not
important. A shift of 50 or even 100 places up or down makes little
difference to the average results for pupils, especially in the middle of
the table.
Nevertheless, some striking differences do emerge. An average pupil at a
school in the top third - with three A-levels at grade B - performs much
better than one from a school in the bottom third - two A-levels at grade D.
That is the difference between being received with open arms at almost any
university in the country and a severe struggle to find a place on a degree
course of any kind.
It is also striking how much the tables are dominated by independent
schools. There are only four state schools in the top 100 (three grammar;
one comprehensive) and 70 in the top third (49 grammar; 21 comprehensive).
By contrast, in the bottom third of the 1,100 there are 258 state schools.
There are also disproportionately large numbers of single sex schools among
the high performers - both state and independent - with many of the top
independents being wholly or predominantly day schools rather than boarding
schools of the traditional kind. Many of these high-achieving independent
day schools were partly state funded direct-grant schools up to the mid
1970s until such schools were abolished by the last Labour government.
Even more interesting for parents are the tables for different localities.
Here the picture varies dramatically from area to area. In some counties an
appreciable number of state schools, predominantly grammars, produce results
which are better than or just as good as those from local independents. But
in many areas, mainly urban but some rural, independent schools predominate
and only a handful of state schools - again predominantly grammar - have
comparably good results. In many parts of the country, however, there are
few schools of either kind which appear in the top third of the table; in
these areas the state schools tend to be largely comprehensive.
These differences appear to confirm earlier studies which emphasise the
unevenness of access across the country to schools with good A-level
results. As Alan Smithers and Pamela Robinson, of University of Manchester's
education department, found last year, 40 per cent of pupils with three
A-levels come from independent and grammar schools which have only 11 per
cent of the cohort. They concluded that: 'For many of the school population
A-levels is very much a minority sport and for them there is virtually no
mainstream post-16 education' (their emphases).
The Financial Times data also confirm other evidence that there may be
important benefits when schools of different types coexist and compete in
the same locality. For example, two studies of the public examination
results of 70 per cent of schools in the country showed that the examination
results of pupils at comprehensive schools which co-existed with selective
grammar schools in the same area were about 5 per cent higher than those for
pupils at comprehensive schools in wholly comprehensive areas.
Even more interesting is the listing by the Financial Times of school fees
alongside the results. Even a cursory glance shows great differences in the
results achieved for a given level of expenditure. For example, the top
ranking independent school achieves roughly one grade D for each Pounds
1,000 of day fees, compared with a grade B for the same amount of money at
another school with lower fees in the top 20.
Moreover, the results attained by state schools appear in a different light
when viewed against an average expenditure per pupil in state sixth forms
which is half the average day school fee (Pounds 4,940) for the independent
schools in the table. The highest ranked state school achieves roughly one
grade A or B per Pounds 1,000 while a state school in the middle third of
the table achieves roughly one grade C per Pounds 1,000.
These disparities become even greater when boarding fees are included. For
example, the top independent wholly boarding school achieves slightly better
than one grade E per Pounds 1,000.
Soon somebody will divide results per pupil by costs per pupil and compile
tables based on a value for money index for schools, like the price/
earnings ratio for shares. It should, but probably will not be done by
Professor Stewart Sutherland and his revamped Her Majesty's Inspectorate,
the Office for Standards in Education.
But who better than the FT to break the taboo and publish the data. After
all: 'No FT, no comment.'
Dr John Marks is Director of the Educational Research Trust.
