FT  27 MAR 92 / London Stock Exchange: Good results boost share prices
A NOTICEABLE increase in equity turnover masked what was viewed by a number
of senior dealers as a largely uninspiring session in the market.
Nevertheless, shares posted widespread gains, shrugging aside the latest
opinion polls and focusing on another series of largely encouraging company
news reports. The FT-SE 100-share index closed 7.3 higher at 2,472.2.
Sentiment in London was also helped by expectations, subsequently proved
correct, of a firm opening on Wall Street.
The latest opinion polls, which continued to give Labour a small lead over
the Conservatives, were seen as slightly disappointing for a market which
had built up a head of steam late on Wednesday in anticipation of a poll
favouring the Tories.
In the event, the market proved extremely resilient to such news, opening
marginally firmer and gradually gathering strength before dipping off
towards the close.
Up 1.5 at 8am, the Footsie was 14.1 ahead at the day's peak as Wall Street
opened. The index was said to have been pushed higher by programme trade
activity, before succumbing to profit-taking and closing 7.3 points up,
The initial driving force came from evidence of a sizeable trading
programme, said to have been weighted towards the buy side, executed late on
Wednesday, and printed on the Seaq ticker first thing yesterday. At least
two more programme trades, one in mid-morning and the other in the early
afternoon, were responsible for boosting turnover.
Seaq revealed that turnover reached 527.7m shares at the close, the highest
daily total this week. But statistics revealed that daily turnover by value
has failed to top the Pounds 1bn mark, widely regarded as the benchmark of
profitability for market firms, this week.
Of the big company news stories, Burmah Castrol, the lubricants/specialist
chemicals group delighted the market with excellent figures and a positive
statement on prospects, and the shares bounded ahead in good volume.
Rank Organisation, the UK's premier leisure group, was another exceptional
performer, responding to a positive note published by Smith New Court's
leisure team pinpointing recovery prospects.
Lonrho, the controversial international conglomerate, delivered the worst
performance of the Footsie constituents, the shares sliding 7.8 per cent as
the market recoiled from the political aspect of its deal with Libya.
Commenting on the state of play in the election campaign the strategy team
at County NatWest said: 'If Mr Kinnock becomes the next prime minister the
market would probably have another 5 per cent to fall. However, the election
outcome is still wide open.'
Kleinwort Benson pointed out that the market should not miss what it says
may currently be judged as minor issues, namely that the season continues to
impress plus evidence that the economy is at last moving off the bottom.
The securities house also points to the continued firmness of Wall Street
where it says evidence of US economic recovery is accumulating.
