FT  04 APR 92 / Kohl wants ex-Soviet states barred from joining the EC
FORMER republics of the Soviet Union should not be allowed to join the
European Community, Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany said in Bonn last
night.
Presenting an ambitious vision of a continent comprising two linked economic
blocs, he said the eastward expansion of the European Community should stop
with the accession of Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia. Former Soviet
states should form their own economic zone, he added.
Outlining what he called his 'future Ostpolitik', he urged the Community to
sign special treaties with the newly-independent countries to help them
rebuild their economies and develop a second economic group which could act
as a 'bridge from Europe to Asia'.
Formal association agreements with Germany's nearest eastern neighbours
would allow them to become full EC members.
'The EC should also relate to the states of the former Soviet Union, but not
in the same way. The right means is through special eastern treaties, which
go beyond conventional co-operation agreements, rather than association,' Mr
Kohl told an audience which included Mr Jacques Delors, European Commission
president, and Mr Edward Shevardnadze, former Soviet foreign minister who
now heads the state council in Georgia.
'Our realistic aim must be to support them in their efforts towards real
economic integration among themselves,' Mr Kohl said. Once this had been
achieved, the goal must be to interlock the enlarged EC with the eastern
economic group.
Painting a picture of a politically stable, economically successful and
militarily secure Europe, he stressed the role of Nato. It had to remain as
the anchor of European security. Most importantly, only the continued
existence of Nato could guarantee 'the necessary presence of the US in
Europe'.
The Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe should also be given a
greater say in security matters.
To stabilise the situation in the east, he said, the west would have to open
up its markets to help businesses generate investment capital. In future,
all financial and economic aid should be directed towards helping the new
democracies to help themselves.
The economics minister, Mr Jurgen Mollemann, meanwhile announced a DM500,000
(Pounds 175,500) subsidy for an east-west economics conference to be held in
Munster next month. About 200 east European politicians and economists will
be entertained at Bonn's expense while Group of Seven and Portuguese
delegates will pay their own bills.
Yeltsin's deputy quits, Page 2
