FT  15 DEC 92 / Business and the Law: Patent improvement - Robert Rice
explains how changes to EC regulations will affect the Community's
pharmaceutical industry
It looks like being a happy new year for Europe's pharmaceutical industry:
on January 2, after years of wrangling and intensive lobbying, the European
Community will adopt a regulation granting up to five years' extra patent
protection for drugs.
The extension of the effective period of marketing exclusivity for drugs
through a system of supplementary protection certificates (SPCs) is designed
to give pharmaceutical companies a fair return on the growing cost of
researching and developing new drugs, and to prevent research work moving
from the EC to the US or Japan where drugs already enjoy extended patent
protection.
As with all legislation born of political compromise, however, the European
SPC system is far from straightforward. The procedure for obtaining a
certificate is complex. The extent to which different EC states can alter
the effect of the regulation by the way they implement it threatens a
bureaucratic and administrative nightmare. Generic producers and companies
making patented drugs under licence face a period of uncertainty.
For a long time, there has been widespread concern that necessary safety
testing for new drugs imposes a heavy penalty on pharmaceutical inventions
compared with other sectors of technology.
Patents in Europe generally last a maximum of 20 years from the application
date. But, according to Ms Patricia Harris, an intellectual property lawyer
with City solicitors Lovell White Durrant, the development period for new
drugs - from discovery to marketing authorisation - lasts an average of 12
years. In complex areas of research into diseases currently regarded as
incurable such as Alzheimer's, motor neurone disease and multiple sclerosis,
the development time may be even longer.
This means that by the time they have obtained approval to market the drug,
companies have little of the patent term left in which to use their monopoly
rights to recoup the increasingly heavy costs of research and development,
she says.
Although there has been little evidence of research migrating to the US or
Japan, where patent protection is longer, or of it being abandoned, European
governments accepted that it would be foolhardy to wait for signs of decline
in the EC pharmaceutical industry before taking action.
Consumer organisations, however, warned that extended patent protection
could push up the overall drugs bill for public health services across
Europe by restricting the market for generic products.
But governments recognised that, far from pushing up the overall drugs bill,
extended protection could be used to drive pharmaceutical prices down, says
Mr Martin Paltnoi, a pharmaceuticals marketing consultant. This is because,
once a reasonable period of marketing exclusivity is guaranteed, the
rationale for allowing drug companies to charge high prices to recoup
development costs over an uncertain and short period of patent cover no
longer exists.
Working out the duration of an SPC will not be easy. It will be available
for the length of a drug's development period minus five years and for a
maximum of five years. The development period is defined as the time between
filing the patent in the EC country in which the SPC is sought and the date
that it is first authorised for use in the EC as a whole.
Ms Harris says this means that if the development period is five years or
less no supplementary protection will be available. If the development
period is between five and 10 years an SPC of up to five years will be
available, and for development periods of between 10 and 20 years a full
five-year SPC will apply.
The procedures are also complex. A separate application will have to be made
in the patent office of each member state in which supplementary protection
is required. Applications will have to be filed within six months of the
drug being authorised for use in the relevant country. For drugs already
patented and authorised in the relevant member state on January 2 1993,
transitional provisions will apply and any applications for an SPC must be
filed by July 2 1993.
Under the transitional provisions for SPCs, a product must generally have
been first authorised for use in the EC after January 1 1985. However,
Belgium, Italy, Germany and Denmark have adopted different dates, while the
transitional provisions will not apply at all in Greece, Portugal and Spain,
where the regulation will not come into force until 1998. To complicate
matters further, the Spanish government has started proceedings in the
European Court to have the regulation set aside.
The changes mean an administrative headache for the national patent
agencies, Mr Paltnoi believes, as they struggle to find out when and where
in the EC a drug was first authorised for use in order to calculate the
length of an SPC. Without a pooling of international data, accurate
verification of first authorisation may prove impossible in many cases, he
warns.
Ms Harris warns of an uncertain period for companies producing patented
drugs under licence. Licences are usually expressed to last 'for the
duration of the patent'. But an SPC does not extend the patent, it simply
grants additional protection. Licensees who want a continued exclusive
licence to produce and market a drug under an SPC will have to renegotiate
their licence agreements.
The SPCs will go some way towards meeting the industry's requirements for an
adequate period of patent protection in Europe, says Ms Harris. It will also
be watched with interest by other industries, such as agrochemicals, which
also experience problems in recouping R&amp;D costs because of the length of
time it takes to obtain marketing authorisations.
