FT  05 OCT 92 / Survey of Technology in the Office (14): Work-related
illnesses - Ergonomics
OFFICE staff have not traditionally expected to suffer serious, disabling
injuries at work in the way that construction workers often have.
Yet there is now overwhelming evidence that white-collar workers face
dangers when they sit at their desks. These dangers can have serious
implications for incautious employers who may face a flood of damages claims
or productivity setbacks as a result of high levels of absence.
A machine operator at Vauxhall Motors in Luton who contracted repetitive
strain injury (RSI) and had to give up her job was awarded a record Pounds
59,617 in damages and loss of earnings by a judge at Luton County Court
earlier this year.
A recent case involving BT keyboard operators granted damages of Pounds
6,000 but a loss of earnings award has not yet been decided. In another
case, GMB general union received Pounds 67,000 between them for loss of
earnings.
In 1989-90 more than 750,000 people took sickness absence because of
work-related illness, and some 8,000 lives and 27m working days in Europe
are lost each year due to work-related accidents and ill health, according
to the Health and Safety Executive. The HSE believes the problem is growing.
The visual display unit has invaded desk space and become virtually
ubiquitous in offices in the developed world. However, the revolution in
equipment was not matched with a revolution in working practices or office
furniture and it is small wonder that office workers have found their new
equipment created new problems.
The most well known and the biggest of the new maladies is musculo-skeletal
injury, in particular Repetitive Strain Injury (RSI), the painful, sometimes
disabling disorder that affects necks, shoulders, arms and hands.
In the US, RSI now accounts for more than half of all reported work-related
injuries. In the UK, it is a growing problem among white-collar workers
affecting professionals, secretarial staff, computer users and high-volume
data handlers.
RSI refers to a variety of complaints. Sufferers report symptoms ranging
from mild discomfort to severe, disabling pain which affects their personal
as well as their professional lives.
Some disorders, such as tenosynovitis and capsulitis are well understood by
the growing army of experts. Others are less easy to diagnose and tend to be
lumped together under vague headings such as damaged nerve tissue. None is
easy to cure.
But RSI is avoidable and employers who have made concerted efforts to
reorganise their office environments have seen dramatic decreases in its
incidence.
Employers who have ignored the risks to their staff will soon have an
additional reason to keep those risks to a minimum. By the end of this year
the UK must have domestic legislation which meets the requirements of a
European Community directive.
The legislation is highly specific. It refers to 'display screen equipment'
but excludes computer systems open to the public and automatic teller
machines in banks and building societies, as well as calculators,
typewriters and lap-top users not typically used for long periods.
The directive applies to the workstation as a whole, covering chairs, desks,
modems and printers. These references and a catch-all heading of the
'immediate work environment' means employers will have to think carefully
about the implications of all office environment.
It is not just the physical pieces of equipment which employers must ensure
comply with the directive; humidity, lighting, radiation and noise are all
addressed.
Employers will be obliged to conduct workplace evaluations to check they do
not present health risks to their staff. The directive specifies that screen
workers must be properly trained, allowed free eye testing and any necessary
glasses and that screen work must be interspersed with periods of activity
or breaks.
RSI is not the only risk to white-collar workers. There is the potentially
fatal building-related illness which covers legionnaires disease as well as
other dangerous bacteria which lurk in convenient recesses provided by
modern air conditioning systems and elsewhere.
Then there is sick building syndrome, less dangerous but more difficult to
tackle because it is hard to diagnose and no one really knows for sure what
causes it.
It can affect staff in ways which even they do not recognise immediately but
which can have a serious affect on both their health and the health of their
businesses. The World Health Organisation estimates the syndrome affects a
third of European and North American offices. The House of Commons
Environment Committee put the annual cost to the UK economy alone as between
Pounds 330m and more than Pounds 650m a year in absenteeism.
A wide variety of symptoms range from sore throats, dry eyes (some staff
have been unable to wear contact lenses), headaches and coughs through
exacerbated menstrual disorders to lethargy, dizziness and depression.
Sufferers typically report that their symptoms only show up when they are at
work and disappear as soon as they leave. Their close friends and families
appear to be immune.
The Health and Safety Executive takes a gloomy view. It recently concluded
that 20 years of research had failed to uncover any definite cure or cause
for the condition. The HSE is funding research at London University which is
comparing the sickness and absence data of more than 10,000 office-based
civil servants with measurements of environmental factors and building
maintenance work.
Evidence suggests that stress at work is also an important cause of sickness
absence. The HSE believes occupational stress could have an impact on
physical health.
