FT  26 FEB 92 / Survey of Kuwait (8): A lucrative operation - Sheila Jones
joins ordnance clearance experts in the desert
'TREAD in my footsteps. There should be no mines here but I'd rather not
take the risk.'
Paddy Blagden leaves a trail of large footprints in the sand. This is the
southern triangle of Kuwait, about 1,500 sq km of desert stretching from the
outskirts of Kuwait City down to the Saudi border. It is alive with mines,
unexploded bombs and live ammunition.
Mr Blagden is in charge of the British team making safe the second-largest
of Kuwait's six sectors, divided up for clearance after the war.
Iraqi soldiers laid millions of mines across the desert. Crates of live
ammunition are piled up at Iraqi dug-outs alongside anti-aircraft guns.
Unexploded Rockeye bomblets are strewn about. On a southern desert road
about 50km from the Saudi border, a large, silvery bomb is up-ended in the
sand.
So far, only a few priority areas have been cleared: Kuwait City, the
northern beaches and, most importantly, the oilfields.
Kuwait City was littered with grenades and small ammunition. It was cleared
by the allied forces soon after the occupation ended but not before hundreds
of Kuwaitis, including many children, were killed and maimed by the
munitions left behind. It could be another two years before the whole
country is cleared.
It is a lucrative operation for the handful of ordnance companies and the
many subcontractors that have won the clear-up contracts. And it is the
first time such work has been handed over to private companies.
Royal Ordnance, the British Aerospace subsidiary, was awarded the contract
to clear the British sector by the Kuwaiti government last year. The
contract, which also includes part of Kuwait City, the beaches, oilfields
and Failaka island off the north-east coast, is thought to be worth about
Dollars 100m.
The biggest contract - worth about Dollars 200m - was awarded a few months
ago to Conventional Munitions Systems of the US against competition from
three other US companies, UXB, States International and Olin Ordnance. CMS
is still mobilising its team for the US sector and it has yet to start the
clearance.
The British, French and US authorities are responsible for the three most
heavily-mined sectors in central, southern and western Kuwait. The
government has contracted the Bangladeshi, Pakistani and Egyptian
authorities to make safe the three sectors in the north and north-west.
Bangladeshi soldiers are also conducting quality assurance sweeps of areas
that have been cleared.
Royal Ordnance was the first to win a clearance contract and by February
this year it was the only company to have started work.
'We were required to act quickly because of the oilfields,' says Mr Blagden.
'The big priority in Kuwait was to get revenue coming in again. Before any
firefighters were able to get to any burning well head, the access to that
well head had to be cleared. It was an appallingly difficult job.'
The oil wells were ablaze, belching out dense black smoke, fumes and hot oil
droplets. The surrounding desert was a mass of oil lakes and congealed sand.
'It was what I imagine hell to be like.'
The company started work on the oilfields in May and access to all the wells
was cleared in time for the last oil fire to be put out in November. The
contract was the subject of hefty overrun penalties. Royal Ordnance has also
cleared a 27-kilometre stretch of northern beaches down to the port of
Shuaibah. These were fortified with trenches and barbed wire entanglements
strewn with anti-personnel mines.
Royal Ordnance has subcontracted the land reinstatement work, such as
refilling cleared trenches, to Marr-Bell of the US.
Work started this month on the southern triangle which the company is
committed to finishing by the end of June. Here, the Iraqis laid 84 linear
kilometres of mines which stretch out in neat rows as far as the eye can
see. In all, there are about 1m mines to be cleared, a mix of anti-tank
mines and the small, spiked anti-personnel mines known as Bouncing Bettys
(the Valmara V-69. It jumps two feet in the air on impact, then explodes).
Failaka Island was cleared by soldiers from the Royal Engineers under Royal
Ordnance contract last year.
Now deserted and without power and water, the island was used as an Iraqi
military base. It used to be a smart holiday spot for Kuwaiti day trippers.
About 550 families lived there.
Most of Failaka's buildings and installations are badly damaged and looted.
Some are scattered with Iraqi equipment: maps, a radio transmitter and
remnants of military uniforms.
In one house, a recently installed bathroom suite is intact. Toys, books,
clothing, crockery and family photographs are in heaps on the floor.
The only people on the island now are the ordnance and reconstruction
workers.
Virtually all the men working on Kuwait's clearance are ex-military,
employed on short-term contracts. Many are former combat engineers and
explosives experts.
In the past six months, Royal Ordnance has laid off about 100 British
workers and recruited Gurkha engineers at about half the wages.
The company says the lay-offs were partly for commercial reasons. It adds
that all its current workers are qualified for the work they are doing.
It now employs 290 workers, against 440 six months ago.
Mr Steve Macpherson, a Glaswegian in his 30s, is on contract for Passive
Barriers, a UK explosive ordnance disposal company which has been operating
in Kuwait as a subcontractor since April last year.
'I came here mainly for the money,' he says. 'If I stay a full year I should
have about Pounds 30,000 to take home. It'll pay the mortgage.'
Mr Macpherson, a former mines instructor with the British army, has just
finished clearing Failaka harbour, dredging the water for stray bomblets and
hauling out battered pleasure boats.
'I'd rather be sifting this muck than unemployed at home,' he says.
Passive Barriers has picked up 20 or so small contracts, mainly clearing
areas to enable repairs and reconstruction.
It has cleared cable and pipeline areas, water pumping stations, ports,
buildings and private patches of land.
The company had hoped to get one of the large contracts to clear a whole
sector.
'We haven't done as well as I had hoped,' says Mr Brian Ashwell, Passive
Barrier's Kuwait director. 'The contracts have been worth thousands rather
than millions although it has been worth our while being here.'
Even with the clearance operation barely underway, a complicated network of
contractors and subcontractors has sprung up.
Some companies complain of a lack of central control and regulation.
'There should have been a centralised operation and there wasn't,' says Mr
Blagden. 'I think the Kuwaiti MoD decided it would be expensive and was not
really necessary.
'There is relatively little control over the way in which ammunition, in
particular, is removed from Iraqi positions and stored. It's extremely
dangerous.'
There have been several explosions at central munitions dumps (but no deaths
or serious injuries) and there is likely to be growing pressure from
clearance companies for central regulation as more operators start work in
the months ahead.
