FT  02 OCT 92 / People: Henderson moves Buckley to pensions
Henderson Administration, the big fund manager which has lost a lot of
pension fund clients over the past couple of years, has put Ian Buckley, its
new investment chief, in charge of its pension fund business.
Buckley, 43, who joined Henderson in May from Sun Life Asset Management, has
been appointed managing director of Henderson Pension Fund Management
(HPFM), which accounts for a third of the group's funds under management. He
replaces Robin Hindle Fisher, 33, who has been doing the job since 1990 and
is leaving to become an assistant director of Phillips &amp; Drew Fund
Management.
The poor performance of Henderson's pension fund business, which resulted in
the client defections, pre-dated Hindle Fisher's appointment; Colin Day,
chairman of HPFM, says Hindle Fisher has done a 'terrific job' and he was
'sad to lose him'.
Client losses had been stemmed and 'we are beginning to find our way back on
to new business presentations and consultants' lists', says Day. However, he
noted that it took a while for potential clients to be convinced that
Henderson's recent improved performance was not just a 'flash in the pan'.
As a result of the change Buckley will be involved in everything from
investment performance to managing client relationships.
*****
Michael Fallon, a junior education minister in the last government who lost
his Darlington seat in April, has picked up his first non-exec-utive
directorship. He is joining the board of Quality Care Homes, a Darlington
company owning and operating nursing homes that was recently listed on the
stock exchange. He is Quality Care's first non-exec-utive director.
Based mainly in London, Fallon says he is pleased to retain links with his
old constituency, where he still has a house. 'It is also good to be
associated with a business that is expanding. This company has been
particularly successful at putting up purpose-built nursing homes right in
the urban areas they serve.'
Duncan Bannatyne, founder and managing director, aims to have 1,000 beds in
20 homes across the north by the end of 1994.
Fallon, who says he has had a number of approaches since he lost his seat,
stressed that he was 'certainly not seeking an early return to parliament'.
He is pursuing 'a number of business interests' in London, but will not
identify them: 'There are some perks to being a private citizen.'
