FT  10 APR 92 / Congress attack on foreigners' tax reporting
THE US Congress is taking aim once again at what it believes to be
widespread evasion of US taxes by foreign-owned businesses.
A number of Congress members claims that foreign companies are
systematically understating the earnings of their US subsidiaries, and so
evading US corporate income taxes, by using inflated transfer prices to
siphon profits back to their home base.
In a hearing at the House ways and means committee yesterday, methods to
plug this hole were suggested, ranging from a new border tax to an
alternative minimum tax levied at 5 per cent of sales on foreign
subsidiaries.
'In our society, a teacher or a factory worker can pay more in federal
income tax than a major multinational corporation with billions in annual US
sales,' complained Congressman Jake Pickle, chairman of the ways and means
sub-committee on oversight.
But Treasury and Internal Revenue Service officials urged Congress not to
press ahead with new legislation until they have had time to see whether
reforms on transfer pricing, enacted in 1990, have worked.
Mr Alan Wilensky, treasury deputy assistant secretary for tax policy,
acknowledged that foreign-owned businesses showed a much lower rate of
return on assets than comparable US-owned companies, but warned that the US
might face retaliation if it introduced rules that discriminated against
foreign companies.
New tax data for 1989 - before the new 1990 rules took effect - showed that
foreign-controlled companies made an average return of 0.51 per cent of
assets, compared with 1.97 per cent for US-controlled companies. Gross
profits amounted to 22.01 per cent of sales for foreign companies, compared
with 29.89 per cent for US-owned companies.
Congressman Duncan Hunter argued that the US Treasury was losing more than
Dollars 30bn (Pounds 17.4bn) a year because foreign companies were
artificially lowering their US profits.
Ms Shirley Peterson, IRS commissioner, acknowledged that there might be some
income shifting by foreign-owned businesses, but estimated the maximum tax
loss at Dollars 3bn.
Even so, a study commissioned from the accountancy firm KPMG Peat Marwick by
the Organisation for International Investment, a Washington-based lobbying
group, argued that, although foreign-owned companies' rates of return were
much lower than US-owned companies, this was partly accounted for by the
fact that their new investments have been growing three times faster.
KPMG suggested that IRS data were inadequate for a conclusion that transfer
price abuses were occurring, and that comparisons of gross profit margins
were probably misleading.
