FT  10 JUL 92 / Leading Article: Power prices
THE FIRST full-year results from the electricity industry have done little
to dispel the view that it was privatised not only with the wrong structure
but on the wrong terms - at least from the point of view of the consumer.
Profits are so buoyant that many regional power distributors have been able
to produce real dividend increases of 10 per cent, so contributing to the
severity of the recession. Two of them have been so embarrassed that they
decided to hand part of their profits back to customers.
One year is a short time in which to judge a complex business that still has
a lot of shaking down to do. Part of the profit surge came from a price
catch-up to which the electricity companies were entitled under their
complex pricing formula. Professor Stephen Littlechild, director general of
Offer, the industry regulator, has promised to leave the formula alone until
1994-95, because he believes that the electricity companies need that degree
of certainty to increase their efficiency.
This view has merits. But if it is already clear that the terms on which the
industry was privatised were more than just marginally too generous, it also
has serious flaws. One is that the price formula ensures that benefits
earned by the electricity companies through cost reductions flow to the
shareholders, rather than customers. Once the economy recovers, that
generous starting point is likely to ensure that profits will remain
inordinate even if electricity prices rise at less than the rate of
inflation. Another flaw is that should present trends continue the
adjustment which is bound to follow the 1995 pricing review will be so large
that the industry will have to go through another disruptive upheaval.
There are, admittedly, still big uncertainties in the market, above all the
renegotiation with the generators of supply contracts for coal prior to the
privatisation of British Coal. These contracts, which should be concluded by
the end of the summer, could have a big impact on electricity prices.
Professor Littlechild has, however, already begun to squeeze other links in
the electricity supply chain. He has warned the generators that they might
face a monopoly inquiry if they engage in predatory pricing. He has also
just imposed a tough new price formula on the National Grid Company, which
has a monopoly on the grid. Both moves were intended to address complaints
from wholesale users of electricity, such as ICI, about fast-rising
electricity prices.
Once the new coal contracts are concluded, it would make sense for the
regulator to follow the process through by imposing pressure on the regional
distributors as well, by reconsidering both the price formulae and the
threshold for outside direct supply to their customers. These are risk-free
utilities. Customers should not suffer because the initial formulae were too
generous to shareholders. Voluntary hand-outs are not a substitute.
