FT  13 APR 92 / US set to block EBRD expansion in east Europe
THE US is set to block the drive by the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development for an expanded role in eastern Europe, at the first annual
meeting of the Bank beginning in Budapest today.
Mr Nicholas Brady, US treasury secretary, yesterday categorically rejected
proposals by Mr Jacques Attali, EBRD president, to relax the bank's
stringent commercial criteria for investments and set up a facility for soft
loans.
'That would be a diversion of the EBRD's efforts,' said Mr Brady. He called
on the bank to maintain its focus on promoting private enterprise and
commercially viable projects. 'Economic restructuring would not be advanced
by the EBRD adding a pittance of a soft-loan programme.'
Mr Attali raised the idea of loans on easy terms as a response to the EBRD's
growing realisation over its first year of operation that suitable
investment projects are scarce. The EBRD's room for manoeuvre has proved
limited - on the one hand by the requirement to support only commercially
viable projects, and on the other by the rule that it should not act as a
substitute for private investors.
Mr Attali said in a recent interview: 'The bank has more money than it has
projects.' The EBRD committed about Ecu500m (Pounds 358m) to credit and
equity financing in its first year, a sum which is expected to double and
then redouble over the next two years.
Mr Attali is today proposing the creation of a subsidiary institution within
the EBRD for soft loans in order to circumvent the rule that 60 per cent of
its investments should be in competitive private sector projects.
EBRD officials also saw soft loans as a means of promoting the smooth
conversion of military industries. 'We have to take into account that the
military-industrial sector is huge and still employs a vast labour force,'
said Mr Mario Sarcinelli, vice-president and head of the EBRD's development
arm. 'This sector cannot be converted overnight. An abrupt and radical
recipe would have unforeseeable consequences.'
The emphasis on conversion of military industry follows the bank's increased
focus on the former Soviet Union. The country's disintegration into separate
republics also raised the membership of the EBRD to 55.
Support for Mr Attali from several west European delegations sets the scene
for a sharp dispute with the US at today's meeting of the EBRDs board of
governors. Mr Brady's uncompromising remarks could spark a revival of the
tension between the US, the EBRD's largest shareholder, and some European
countries, which soured the bank's inception.
Mr Brady's remarks came against a background of criticism that multilateral
financial institutions such as the EBRD, World Bank, International Finance
Corporation and International Monetary Fund were still tripping over each
other in efforts to help eastern Europe out of economic crisis. 'For them
all to do each others' jobs is not the way to go ahead,' agreed Mr Brady.
However, EBRD governors have repeatedly stated that its relations with the
other international institutions have improved.
