FT  10 NOV 92 / Leading Article: The Matrix case
THE CASE against three former executives of the Matrix Churchill company,
withdrawn by the public prosecutor yesterday, has cast a disturbing glare on
the apparent ineffectiveness of government controls on exports of military
hardware. What is not clear, however, is whether these procedures were
merely ineffective, or whether in some sense the government was conniving at
the circumvention of its own declared export control policy, in pursuit of
quite different foreign policy objectives.
The executives were accused of selling machine tools to Iraq during the
Iran-Iraq war, despite a government ban on military-type exports to either
of the warring parties; but it emerged in court that Mr Alan Clark, former
trade minister, and government officials had deliberately encouraged the
company to conceal what they knew was the military end-use of the machine
tools.
The weaknesses of the export control procedures were inevitably compounded
by the involvement of British intelligence. Illicit arms exports may seem to
be a useful channel for acquiring sensitive information. Yet Britain, along
with its allies, proved anything but well-informed about Iraq's political
intentions and about its weapons programmes. So perhaps the trade was more
advantageous to Iraq than to Britain.
One plausible explanation for the circumvention of the arms embargo was that
the British government secretly supported Iraq in the war against Iran. In
principle the embargo was imposed equally on both countries, and no doubt
the government would have viewed an even-handed stalemate with equanimity.
Yet it undoubtedly feared most the prospect of an Iranian victory, with the
accompanying danger that the fundamentalist regime in Tehran could dominate
the whole Gulf.
Such a judgment was certainly shared by the French government. But the big
difference between British and French policy was that Paris openly
proclaimed a strategic alliance with Saddam Hussein, whereas British support
remained unofficial. The invasion of Kuwait showed that it was more prudent
to fear Iran than to trust Iraq.
As a result, the British government has been embarrassed by the latest
revelations; whereas France suffered the deeper shock of a betrayed
alliance. But if British governments depart for reasons of state from
declared high principle to hard realpolitik, at least they should do so with
greater competence than was shown in the Matrix case.
