FT  06 FEB 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Blowing hot and cold
over Europe - Guy de Jonquieres welcomes the launch of the EC refrigerator
and microwave
Lord Young, when Britain's trade and industry secretary, said that the
European Community would have a true single market when it had a common lamp
bulb fitting. Perversely, the EC continues to duck that particular
challenge. However, the day of the Euro-fridge and Euro-microwave is at
hand.
They are to be launched shortly by Whirlpool, the US domestic appliance
manufacturer which last summer took control of the white goods businesses of
the Dutch Philips group and is seeking to weld them into a pan-European
marketing strategy.
Philips' failure to treat Europe as a single market has bequeathed Whirlpool
an immensely complex range, with so many national variants that only a fifth
are sold in more than two countries.
Fridges and freezers come in no fewer than 2,300 model specifications and
microwaves in 560. Though many of the variations are minor, they all add
expense. Whirlpool reckons harmonised designs could cut production costs by
as much as 10 per cent.
In the next few weeks, the company will start shipping three identical
models of refrigerators and microwaves to 5,000 dealers in seven EC
countries. The dealers are affiliated to Euronics, an 18-month-old
federation of independent electrical retailers which put the idea to
Whirlpool soon after it was formed.
The plan also calls for standardised packaging and instruction manuals,
co-ordinated advertising and promotion and reciprocal guarantee and
servicing arrangements between Euronics dealers in different countries.
Marcel Vloemans, Euronics' managing director, expects the scheme to yield
substantial efficiencies by encouraging bulk purchasing, simplifying
administration and after-sales support, and enabling dealers in different
countries to trade stocks of product.
Indeed, his members are so confident that they have committed themselves to
a 40 per cent year-on-year increase in sales of Whirlpool fridges and
microwaves. Whirlpool, which claims the agreement is the first in its
industry, aims to conclude similar 'partnership' deals with other retailers.
The agreement reflects a wider change in the marketing of European
electrical and consumer electronics products, as manufacturers and retailers
close ranks in an effort to capture bigger scale economies and expand market
share.
Much of the running is being made by the retail trade, even though it
remains far more fragmented and nationally-based than manufacturing. Still
more surprising, the pace is being set by small independent dealers. The
growth of multiple chains has prompted the independents to band together
across frontiers in groupings such as Euronics, in an effort to buy in bulk,
cut costs and improve customer service.
As a result, individual outlets are becoming more selective about the range
of brands they stock. The keener competition for shelf and floor space is an
important reason spurring Whirlpool and other manufacturers to tie retailers
into long-term 'partnerships'.
Expert International, a Swiss-based federation of 2,800 dealers in 14
countries, says almost half the consumer electronics products they sell are
supplied by only four manufacturers, down from nine in 1989. It expects the
trend to continue and to spread to white goods.
However, Wim van den Tooren, managing director of Expert, says few
manufacturers are yet organised to negotiate with dealers on a pan-European
basis. Because many still leave sales and marketing to loosely co-ordinated
national subsidiaries, they are also sometimes slower than retailers to spot
cross-frontier trends.
Van den Tooren says that until two years ago, some manufacturers' trade
prices for the same products diverged by as much as 35 per cent between
countries. Only after Expert pointed out the discrepancies did suppliers
start harmonising European prices.
Another obstacle to pan-European marketing is the difficulty of offering
uniform guarantees. Though a few manufacturers, such as Sony, have recently
made their guarantees transferable across borders, they remain bound by
widely varying local regulations.
In Italy, three-year guarantees are common for white goods. But in Germany,
where the law entitles consumers to insist that defective products be
replaced, guarantees are often limited to six months. Sony is trying to find
a way round the problem, but admits it may be hard to please all its
dealers.
Expert's members found another solution by agreeing to offer free one-year
insurance. 'If you buy a video camera from an Expert store in Norway and
damage it in Spain, you can exchange it at one of Expert's Spanish outlets,'
says van den Tooren.
The development of pan-European customer support and service is closely
linked to progress on product standardisation. This has already gone a long
way in consumer electronics: about 95 per cent of components in a Sony
television chassis are common throughout Europe, even though transmission
standards differ between countries.
Progress is slower in white goods. In France, Finland, Norway and the
Netherlands, the best-selling washing machines are top-loading designs, but
elsewhere front-loaders pre-dominate. Furthermore, spin speeds are higher in
the north of Europe than in the south. Cookers and stoves are even more
diverse.
Many appliance manufacturers are reluctant to force the pace of
standardisation for fear of antagonising housewives who have grown used to a
particular type of design. Vloemans of Euronics believes it is much easier
to standardise new types of product.
But others think product variations reflect the habits of suppliers, rather
than of consumers. 'There is no basic reason why products should differ,'
says van den Tooren.
