FT  10 NOV 92 / Inquiry urged as arms to Iraq case collapses
THE government yesterday faced demands for an inquiry into its policy of
selling defence equipment to Iraq in the run-up to the Gulf war, after the
trial of three directors of a Midlands machine tool exporter collapsed.
Four government ministers, it emerged yesterday, tried to suppress 500 pages
of confidential Whitehall documents which, said defence lawyers, detailed a
'secret policy' to promote UK exports of defence-related equipment to Iraq.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, home secretary, Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry
secretary, Mr Malcolm Rifkind, defence secretary, and the Foreign Office
minister Mr Tristan Garel-Jones, had all argued unsuccessfully for the
documents to be suppressed on the grounds of national security.
The documents suggest that several senior ministers in the government of Mrs
Margaret Thatcher, including the former prime minister, were briefed on this
policy and that the effort to arm Iraq continued to within weeks of
Baghdad's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990.
Two notes between senior Whitehall officials also reveal that, 18 months
earlier, the Department of Trade and Industry, with Ministry of Defence and
Foreign Office backing, approved the export of sophisticated engineering
equipment to Baghdad which could be used in the development of nuclear
weapons.
The collapse of the Old Bailey prosecution of three former directors of
Matrix Churchill, the Coventry machine tool maker, who were charged with
breaching export controls by pretending that machine tools sold to Iraq were
for civil use, followed an admission by Customs and Excise that it could no
longer sustain a case against them.
Evidence given during the trial by Mr Alan Clark, a former trade minister,
was 'inconsistent' with his earlier statements to Customs investigators, the
court was told.
Mr Kevin Robinson, lawyer for defendant Mr Paul Henderson, former managing
director of Matrix, rejected this explanation. 'Clark is the public excuse',
he said. 'All Alan Clark did was tell the truth in the witness box.'
In an interview with the Financial Times, Mr Henderson described yesterday
how he had worked for British intelligence in the former Soviet bloc and
Iraq for more than 15 years.
The documents released yesterday showed how from October 1987, ministers and
civil servants, supplied with information by the security and intelligence
services, had known Matrix Churchill products were destined for use in
Iraq's defence procurement programme.
Leading Labour calls for an inquiry, Mr Robin Cook, the party's trade and
industry spokesman, called for full disclosure of the role played by the DTI
in the affair. 'Mr Michael Heseltine must now tell us how much the DTI knew
about weapon deals with Saddam and why they connived at arms exports instead
of controlling them', he said.
Both the DTI and Downing Street yesterday refused to comment on the lawyers'
allegations. The DTI tried to distance itself from Mr Clark, saying his
comments in court had been personal opinions, not government policy. Mr
Clark refused to comment, apart from saying that the matter had now been
concluded.
The three Matrix Churchill directors accused of deceiving the DTI in the
company's applications for export licences were Mr Henderson, Mr Trevor
Abraham, its former commercial manager, and Mr Peter Allen, its former sales
director.
The Matrix Churchill Case, Page 9
Editorial Comment, Page 20
