FT  18 MAR 92 / Call for renewed Soviet power fails to draw mass support
THE MOST serious efforts to resurrect the spirit and institutions of the
Soviet Union since its collapse at the end of last year passed yesterday in
an atmosphere of part farce, part bombast, part genuine emotion - but with
little sign that those now calling for a restoration of Soviet power have
widespread support, writes John Lloyd in Moscow.
A meeting yesterday evening in Manezh Square in central Moscow attracted
some 25-30,000 people, a large demonstration by past standards of
Communist-dominated protests but much smaller than had been expected
following the organisers' intense efforts to turn out supporters in
strength.
Calls for 'unity' and 'fairness, patriotism and a national spirit,' and that
'the Soviet Union lives' were enthusiastically answered from thousands of
throats. But speeches were brief and many fell flat. Earlier, an
extraordinary session of the Sixth Congress of Peoples' Deputies of the
USSR, which had been formally dissolved last year, was held by the 200-odd
deputies who bothered to turn up in the Palace of Culture of the small
agricultural town of Voronovo, 60km south of Moscow. They had again been
unable to have the use (either they had been refused or simply had not
bothered to ask) of the council chamber of the nearby city of Podolsk or a
sports complex in the country.
The putative rulers of the Soviet Union, having found the Voronovo Palace of
Culture, then began a meeting of less than an hour by candlelight, having on
the way lost most of Moscow's domestic and foreign press corps, which had
been directed to the sports complex.
They elected a 15-person praesidium headed by Mrs Saji Umalatova, a deputy
from Chechen Ingushetia, and containing figures like Colonel Viktor Alksnis,
General Albert Makashov, a former contender for the Russian presidency, and
Mr Roy Medvedev, a one-time dissident who has remained attached to
socialism. Gen Makashov was proposed as a future USSR president.
They adopted a series of resolutions, many by acclamation at the evening
meeting. These affirmed the existence of the Soviet Union, described as
'unconstitutional' the agreement to create the Commonwealth of Independent
States, called for a moratorium on the division of the armed forces and
claimed that Mr Mikhail Gorbachev, the former USSR president, had not freed
himself of the responsibility for the disintegration of the country by his
resignation.
Col Alksnis said after the session that 'we have to employ moral pressure'.
