FT  11 NOV 92 / Survey of Corporate Treasury Management 4: Cash is now
definitely king - Liquidity management is at the heart of the treasurer's
role
'In the end, accounting and investment all comes back to cash. Whereas
manufacturing profits is relatively easy, cash flow is the most difficult
parameter to adjust in a company's accounts.'
Terry Smith, Accounting for Growth
IF EVER there was doubt on the matter, cash is now definitely king. The
recession has forced investors to look carefully at the cash flow of
companies. Companies have responded by improving cash flow and squeezing
working capital.
For company treasurers, this means getting back to basics. For all the
attractions of derivative financial products and the lure of the capital
markets, liquidity management is at the heart of the treasurer's role. This
is unlikely to change. Indeed, as the economy pulls out of recession, the
cash position of many companies is, if anything, likely to worsen.
There have been hard lessons along the way. Polly Peck reported a Pounds
160m pre-tax profit in its last full year of existence, but a glance at the
cash flow statement showed ballooning indebtedness. Thankfully, new
accounting standards have laid down strict guidelines for company cash-flow
statements. Armed with comparable information for all UK companies - and the
hard lessons of recession - investors are not likely to ignore the role of
cash.
Financial Reporting Standard 1 (FRS1), which came into effect this year,
makes some significant advances over earlier 'flow of funds' statement -
which often simply involved a new presentation of information found
elsewhere in the accounts. FRS1 demands new information and makes sure that
companies show cash flow separated into five distinct areas: operating
activities, return on investments and servicing of finance, investing
activities, financing and tax. It also strictly defines cash or cash
equivalents as instruments with a maturity date of less than three months.
Some companies are going even further than FRS1 to show the real nuts and
bolts of cash flow. Wellcome, the pharmaceuticals company, is including a
cash statement in its report and accounts which follows the form of its
internal management accounts.
The accounting standards may have changed, but the essence of cash
management within companies is the same as ever. The foundation of cash
management is the cash-flow forecast, done annually by most companies and
then honed by monthly and weekly forecasts. Really efficient cash management
involves monitoring daily flows, so there is no unnecessary use of overdraft
facilities, for example, while surplus cash is sitting elsewhere in the
business.
Perhaps the biggest policy issue for companies is whether cash management
should be centralised within group treasury or devolved to operating
subsidiaries. Like the decision whether to organise the treasury as a cost
centre or profit centre, the choice is usually a matter of corporate
culture. The cost savings of having a centralised cash management operation
must to be measured against the risk that cash management disciplines will
be lost in operating subsidiaries.
Companies overcome the problem in a variety of ways. The most common
approach is to ensure the treasury treats operating subsidiaries as if it
were a commercial bank - charging them at cost of funds for credit and
giving credit when the current account is in surplus.
The recession, though, has brought new challenges. The pressure on companies
to squeeze working capital is intense. This is beyond the remit of the
treasurer alone, involving real operating efficiencies such as reducing the
turnover of stock, and collecting debts earlier.
Other than the mechanics of monitoring cash flow, the treasurers' key
concern is to have external finance available to cope with an unexpected
cash squeeze. For such unforeseen eventualities, secure bank credit lines
are the answer.
This is one reason why complex multi-option banking facilities are out of
favour with many corporate treasurers. The structure, which involves a core
committed loan facility topped up by an uncommitted panel of lenders, left
some companies - Laura Ashley is the best example - starved of funds when
they most needed an injection of cash.
The recession has also brought some hard lessons for companies with a pile
of surplus cash to manage. The deteriorating credit quality of banks -
although the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International
belongs perhaps in a different category - has raised the issue of
counterparty risk to a prominence undreamed of few years ago.
For example, many corporate treasurers invested spare cash in variable rate
notes issued by financial institutions. The notes carry a long maturity but
were 're-marketed' or auctioned every three months to offer investors a cash
proxy. This worked well until the credit quality of some issuers was called
into question. Then the re-marketing process seized up because sellers
unable to find buyers and the notes became relatively illiquid.
Against this, lower interest rates mean that simply holding cash on deposit
is a less attractive option. Cash-rich companies such as Associated British
Foods, which has a long-standing cash pile of around Pounds 500m, will have
to work hard to prevent lower interest rates translating into sharply lower
profits.
