FT  10 AUG 92 / Britain's hospital chaplains face day of judgment
HEALTH SERVICE managers are praying for some divine inspiration after
hospital chaplains agreed to talks on relating their pay more closely to
performance.
Performance pay is spreading rapidly throughout the public sector as part of
the government's Citizen's Charter.
However, chaplains and many of their clergy colleagues employed by the
Church of England believe extending the principle to them would present
managers with an unholy headache.
'We do not see it getting very far,' said Mr Alastair Henderson, assistant
national officer for the Nalgo public services union which represents many
of the 220 health service chaplains.
'How can you assess the quality of the work of people whose job is to deal
with the sick and dying?' he said. 'Any performance targets you set would be
completely meaningless. The number of bedside visits would tell you nothing,
for example.
'In crude Christian terms, a measure of success could be whether a patient
has eternal life. I do not think that health service managers have quite
grasped how to judge that.'
Many chaplains are equally puzzled. The Reverend Gillian King, a chaplain at
Kingston and Esher health authority, said: 'How effective a chaplain is, is
a matter between the chaplain, the patient and God. How can you define and
relate that to pay? I don't know. Having said that, we are accountable and
we are regarded in many respects as senior managers.'
In the Church of England, moves are in train to introduce performance
appraisal but there are no plans to relate this to pay.
Canon Hugh Marshall, chief secretary of the Church of England advisory board
of ministry, which advises on pay and conditions, said: 'How do you evaluate
a priest's ministry? It would not be easy this side of the pearly gates.'
Nalgo agreed to the performance pay talks as part of this year's pay
agreement.
The deal provided for increases of 4.75 per cent, taking salaries to between
Pounds 17,345 and Pounds 20,291, and accommodation allowances to Pounds
2,880. Chaplain assistants earn between Pounds 12,187 and Pounds 14,258.
The clause on performance pay was the same used in various agreements which
have been made for differing groups of health service workers this year.
The agreement also calls for a look into pay determination generally, and Mr
Henderson believes there may be scope for linking settlements to those of
other health service workers.
However, he said many managers already believe that performance pay is
unlikely to get off the ground.
