FT  26 JUN 92 / De Klerk concedes day of mourning
PRESIDENT FW de Klerk, in an unprecedented response to the violence in South
Africa, yesterday in effect made next Monday a day of national mourning to
mark the funeral of the 42 victims of the Boipatong massacre.
He announced last night that the government would allow its employees to
attend the funeral and 'related mourning services' and called on the private
sector to do the same.
While making no mention of the African National Congress call earlier this
week for Monday to be a day of mourning, Mr de Klerk has given the move his
blessing.
In doing so, he may have helped to ease tensions on what will be an
emotional and fraught occasion.
'It is the government's sincere prayer that the atrocious events at
Boipatong will finally cause all South Africans to reflect,' Mr de Klerk
said in statement.
The announcement came at the end of day of local and international efforts
to break the country's political impasse.
Chief Emeka Anyaoku, the Commonwealth secretary-gen-eral, is expected to
arrive in Johannesburg by the weekend for a meeting with Mr de Klerk, while
the UN secretary-general, Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, will meet Mr Nelson
Mandela, the ANC president, in Dakar, Senegal, on Sunday.
But South African officials played down speculation about a greater
international role in the crisis.
Mr de Klerk has said a figure of 'international repute' would join the
judicial commission that will investigate the Boipatong massacre, but
officials ruled out further outside involvement in efforts to end political
violence.
Efforts to arrange a meeting this week between Mr de Klerk and Mr Mandela
before the ANC leader flies to Dakar failed yesterday. The ANC said that Mr
de Klerk's office had said the president was 'unable to meet Mr Mandela
until some time next week.'
Meanwhile, the Reserve Bank said that South Africa's economic recession, now
in its third year, deepened in the first quarter of 1992, with real GDP
declining at an annualised rate of almost 2 per cent.
The outlook was 'fairly bleak", said the bank in its quarterly report,
citing 'disastrous dimensions' of the current drought, continuing political
violence, and uncertainty about constitutional negotiations.
