FT  16 JUN 92 / Survey of Belgium 92 (8): Channel tunnel challenge looms
large - Ostend and Zeebrugge
SINCE the 12th century, Bruges has faced up to almost every challenge the
sea and seafarers can throw at a port.
Its harbour silted up in the 15th century and it lost its pre-eminence as a
maritime, commercial and financial centre to Antwerp and Amsterdam.
Then the new port of Zeebrugge - inaugurated in 1907 - suffered a blow to
its trade in the late 1970s when Texaco closed down its Ghent oil refinery,
and a blow to its image a few years later when the Herald of Free Enterprise
ferry tragically capsized just outside the harbour.
Having survived such shocks, it is hardly surprising that Mr Walter Falleyn
of the Bruges-Zeebrugge Port Authority (MBZ) is philosophical about the
imminent challenge of the Channel tunnel:
'If they play fair - that is, if Eurotunnel isn't subsidised in any way - we
think they won't be able to compete with the tariffs that the ferries can
offer.
'What ics more, we believe passengers will prefer the ships to the tunnel.'
Zeebrugge and Ostend, its Channel neighbour, are nonetheless bracing
themselves for the competition. Zeebrugge has installed two new ferry berths
to cope with jumbo-ferries and is in the process of constructing a new
distribution park to help enhance its reputation as a freight terminal.
Ostend, meanwhile, has begun its own more modest refurbishment and
improvement programme, investing in a new jumbo-ferry terminal, a new lock,
quay walls and a larger turning space for freight vessels.
'It's a new start for the port of Ostend because we haven't had much
investment before now,' says Captain Rafael Ghys who is the master in charge
of the city harbour.
Competition between the two ports is a reality but it is not cut-throat. 'We
try to keep out of each others' waters,' explains Mr Falleyn. In fact,
Ostend and Zeebrugge are competing in subtly different markets, a point
underlined by P&amp;O's recent decision to restrict its Dover-Zeebrugge service
to freight.
The P&amp;O flag still flies over the Felixstowe-Zeebrugge passenger-freight
service, and on the Ostend-Dover passenger-freight route operated by RMT,
the Belgian state shipping line.
But according to Mr Falleyn, Zeebrugge is not greatly worried about the loss
of some passenger traffic.
Indeed, the port seems happy with the other niche passenger market it has
built up over 20 years with North Sea Ferries - which sails overnight to and
from Hull in the north-east of England.
It is freight, however, which remains Zeebrugge's great strength and income
from cargo helps the regionally-owned port authority pay for continuing
improvements.
In 1991, the port loaded and unloaded some 30.9m tonnes of cargo, 233,111
containers, 192,635 new cars and 748,314 lorries. Zeebrugge's growth slowed
slightly last year, but on average cargo traffic has been expanding at 14
per cent annually for the past eight years.
More than half that cargo is European, but Zeebrugge is also trying to push
itself as an attractive destination for shipping companies further east.
An MBZ team recently visited South Korea in an attempt to woo container and
car manufacturers. 'We think there are a lot of things coming up in the east
 -think of China, for example - and we don't want to miss the boat,' says Mr
Falleyn.
Ostend, with a higher proportion of passenger business, will have more
riding on competition with the Channel tunnel, come 1994. Its main assets
will be the ferries and jetfoils of RMT-P&amp;O and Sally Line, which operates
out of Ramsgate in Kent.
The port's freight traffic is more modest than Zeebrugge's and has been
declining since the early 1980s.
The city and state harbours handled some 5.89m tonnes of cargo last year,
compared with 8.83m tonnes in 1981.
On the other hand, some 1.88m passengers passed through the port, against
Zeebrugge's 1.67m.
But Mr Eric De Praetere, RMT's general manager, says the statistics do not
paint an entirely accurate picture because RMT and P&amp;O share the income from
cross-Channel freight traffic whether it goes to Ostend or Zeebrugge.
'We are really aiming for a mixture of traffic,' he says.
Indeed, most of the increased capacity on the new jumbo-ferry introduced by
RMT on the Dover-Ostend route last month is earmarked for freight trucks,
although it will also carry 1,200 passengers in much greater luxury than
they are used to on Channel crossings.
Ostend's future as a passenger port depends to a large extent on maintaining
its position in the north European rail network, with convenient connections
through to Brussels, Cologne and beyond, which accounts for more than a
quarter of its passenger traffic.
That position is likely to be shaken once a dedicated express service opens
between Brussels and the tunnel.
'I've already had a lot of discussions with the continental railway
administrations and I don't believe they intend to have the TGV as the only
option,' says Mr De Praetere.
He believes, like his Zeebrugge counterparts, that the ferries will compete
on price if nothing else - provided P&amp;O can also convince British Rail that
it should maintain its existing rail services to the Dover ferries.
