FT  19 MAY 92 / Inflation surge highlights gloomy state of Israeli economy
AN UNEXPECTEDLY high rise in inflation, until recently one of the few
indicators in Israel to show an encouraging trend, has highlighted the
gloomy state of the immigration-burdened economy as the June 23 general
election campaign picks up pace.
While the debate between the ruling Likud party and the Labour opposition
tends to be dominated by the political issue of how to resolve the
Arab-Israeli conflict, the government is worried that record unemployment
levels and lack of significant growth will damage its prospects among such
key constituencies as new immigrants from the former Soviet Union.
The government statistics bureau tentatively reported a pick-up in
industrial exports and investment in recent weeks, saying this could presage
a recovery. Tourism is sharply up this year. But most figures offer the
government little comfort.
The consumer price index rose 1.8 per cent in April, the highest monthly
increase since last August when an inflation surge driven mainly by rising
house prices began to reverse. April is traditionally a high inflation
month, but there were hopes that the index, which rose by 18 per cent in
1991, would be held lower at a time of stagnation in the economy.
A report by Bank Hapoalim says a slowdown that began in the second half of
last year continued through the first quarter of 1992, its index of
industrial production showing a downward tend from last August. Newly
published final government statistics for 1991 show gross domestic product
rose 5.8 per cent last year. But per capita growth was negligible because of
a similar rise in the population from Russian immigration.
The biggest worry has been the poor performance of exports. Meant to be the
engine of successful immigration absorption, exports fell 2 per cent in
1991.
Bank Hapoalim said industrial exports suffered a downward lurch in the first
quarter of more than 4 per cent in dollar terms compared with the last
quarter of 1991.
Unemployment has risen to about 12 per cent of the workforce. Among new
immigrants the rate is almost 40 per cent, a figure which is blamed for a
steep fall in the flow of newcomers despite economic hardship in the former
Soviet republics.
The US, attempting to defuse a public row with Israel, said yesterday that
UN Resolution 194 - covering Palestinian 'right of return' - was not part of
the terms of reference of the Arab-Israeli peace process, Reuter reports
from Washington.
Last week the State Department said it still supported the resolution.
