FT  19 JUN 92 / Letter: Alternative view of Mexico
Sir, Edward Mortimer's article (Foreign Affairs, June 10) about Mexico
contains useful insights, but shows how journalists are frequently charmed
by attractively adorned dictators.
The National Solidarity Program did not spring from Salinas' work at
Harvard, but out of political necessity. The job of stealing an election,
for example, is made easier if only a quarter or even half the precincts
require rigging. In contrast to massive, pre-election social spending
programmes of the 1960s and 1970s, Pronasol is a rifle-shot approach to
acquiring political support, but one with neither transparency nor public
accountability for the sources and uses of funds spent.
The PRI uses Solidarity to funnel hundreds of millions of dollars into
public works projects in opposition strongholds, buying votes from otherwise
recalcitrant citizens. Mortimer paints an image of Mexicans thanking El
Presidente for his generosity, a surreal scene reminiscent of feudal times.
Mortimer rightly observes there is no effective political opposition in
Mexico (at the moment, at least). But he fails to note that the vast
political and financial advantages made possible by Washington's support,
and the related access to foreign credit, make discussion of effective
political opposition to single party PRI rule an absurdity.
Mortimer criticises the limited role played by the press, but might rather
have said that honest Mexican journalists live with very real danger.
Indeed, consider the privileged foreign journalists: First, the visiting
scribe, like Mortimer, attends a carefully orchestrated political rally and
rides comfortably in the presidential jet. The result: a filtered,
pasteurised look at Mexico, though thankfully Mortimer does mention the
violent deaths of journalists.
Then there are the local correspondents, the insiders, who know the
realities and players in Mexico City very well indeed, but decline to write
about difficult subjects like fraudulent elections, trade deficits, drugs,
or corruption within the privatisation process, for fear of being excluded
from the next drinks party in fashionable Polanco.
Dictatorships like China, Mexico and Kuwait will disappear only when
journalists stop treating them with undue reverence. If we could but pierce
the carefully maintained facade of Salinastroika with well chosen words,
Mexico's people might feel our moral support, as did the peoples of eastern
Europe, and thereby discover the will necessary to create a truly viable
democracy. Viva Zapata]
Christopher Whalen,
editor,
The Mexico Report,
1717 K Street NW,
Suite 700,
Washington DC 20006
