FT  03 FEB 92 / UK News (Employment): Union leaders admit upsetting Japanese
UNION leaders have for the first time acknowledged that a resolution adopted
last year by the Trades Union Congress on inward investment has caused
widespread concern among the Japanese business community.
In a report about a recent visit to Japan, leaders of Britain's two largest
unions and the TUC deputy general secretary say the resolution featured in
virtually every discussion they had. Concerns were expressed
'uncharacteristically forcefully', they say.
The visit and report, to be discussed by the TUC's international committee
today, followed the TUC's adoption at last September's TUC Congress of a
motion saying that several Japanese projects 'have brought an alien approach
to trade union organisations'.
Words such as 'alien' and 'feudal', used in the debate to describe
Japanese-style beauty contests among unions for single-union deals,
registered widely in Japan, according to the TUC report.
The TUC has until now played down the effect of the resolution on Japanese
thinking, and Japanese businessmen have avoided public criticism of the TUC
stance.
The TUC had sought to assure the Japanese that it welcomed overseas
investment in Britain and that there was no intention of a racist slur.
Privately, many union leaders believe the passing the resolution was a
mistake. At the time, only the AEU engineering union and the GMB general
union opposed it.
Today's report - by Mr John Monks, TUC deputy general secretary, Mr John
Edmonds, GMB general secretary, and Mr Bill Morris, general secretary-elect
of the TGWU general union - says the TUC's reservations about the resolution
were widely known in Japan.
That, however, had been 'overshadowed by the fact that a motion with what
appeared to them as crude anti-Japanese sentiments had been carried'.
The report suggests joint work with Nikkeiren, the Japanese equivalent of
the Confederation of British Industry, to ease tensions and difficulties.
In Japan, the three UK union officials told Japanese business and union
leaders of concerns that beauty contests did not normally involve
consultation with workers until after single-union deals were concluded, and
usually contained provisions for avoiding industrial action. That had led to
charges that the agreements were undemocratic.
