FT  23 OCT 92 / Bingham Report - Investigation into the BCCI scandal:
Governor outlines stronger measures
MR ROBIN Leigh-Pemberton, governor of the Bank of England, made this
statement yesterday in response to the Bingham report:
'Lord Justice Bingham has made some significant criticisms of the Bank's
supervisory approach and draws attention to a number of very important
lessons to be learned. I have announced today a series of important changes
in the Bank which will strengthen our supervision in the future, and
especially our approach to fraudulent or criminal activity.
'The changes include the appointment of Ian Watt, a distinguished and
experienced accountant, to head a new special investigations unit at the
Bank; this will pursue any suggestion of fraud or criminality and ensure
that necessary action is taken either by the Bank or by other authorities.
'They include the appointment of Peter Peddie, who has great experience of
the City and the Bank, to head a new legal unit to make sure that the Bank
uses its Banking Act and other powers to the full.
'They include measures to make the contribution of the Board of Banking
Supervision even more effective.
'And they include strengthening of communications within the Bank and
between the Bank and government.
'I believe our supervision will benefit greatly from these measures, taken
together with the new minimum standards for international supervision agreed
earlier this year in the Basle committee, and the measures announced by the
chancellor to strengthen our Banking Act powers and to create new
inter-departmental ma-chinery for the investigation and pursuit of fraud.
'I am conscious of the acute distress that the fraud in BCCI has caused to
thousands of innocent depositors and businessmen. The scale of the fraud was
unique and was concealed from auditors and supervisors around the world for
many years. No supervisor, however alert and sophisticated, can give an
assurance that fraudulent conduct will never occur, or that people will not
lose money because of it. Our objective is to make such frauds increasingly
difficult to perpetrate and to conceal.
'Our supervisors do an exceptionally difficult job, in circumstances where
their successes are necessarily unseen, and I am pleased that Lord Justice
Bingham has commended the professionalism with which the UK region of BCCI
was supervised by the Bank.
'There have been many cases where our supervisors have played a crucial role
in successfully protecting depositors by ensuring that banks maintain
prudent standards, by identifying and dealing with weaknesses before they
be-come a serious threat, and by programmes of remedial action.
'The general record is good, and I believe that Lord Justice Bingham is
right in saying that the present system of supervision has served the
community well. I want our supervisors to have the resources, training and
above all the support they need to do this difficult but critical job. That
is why Lord Justice Bingham's recommendations are so important, and why we
are implementing them in full.'
