FT  14 MAR 92 / Arts: Too beautiful to be fashionable? - William Packer
breathes a sigh of relief not to be confronted with conceptual art
AFTER WHAT seems like weeks on end of turning a sceptical eye on what passes
for the most significant of British art of our time in the opinion of our
more au courant dealers, collectors and institutional curators, it comes as
some considerable relief to turn again to some proper painting. No matter
that none of it is self-consciously avant-garde, or that none of the artists
concerned is likely to see the right side of 45 again: the young, like the
poor, are always with us.
Jennifer Durrant is the one abstract painter among them, whose latest
canvases now fill the Concourse Gallery at the Barbican (level 5: until
March 25). She works habitually on the largest practical scale for a studio
painter, 9 feet by 10 or so. The imagery in the work is unspecific but
nevertheless richly associative. If anything, it proposes a cosmic space,
her bright, ambiguous elements wheeling and turning like planets in their
pictorial firmament. Yet it swings back from the most expansive space that
the imagination can comprehend to the smallest, to those no less limitless
inner and secret spaces of biology under the microscope.
The imagery, formal elements of active colour disposed in mutual relation
across a colour field or ground, is rich in organic association, redolent of
seeds and pods and urgent, microscopic, seminal activity. The canvases are
beautifully sustained, the paint thin and translucent. The surface is
constantly flickering and alive, often physically interrupted by the
overlaying of canvas upon canvas, edges and interstices catching the light
with the irregular run of pigment.
Miss Durrant in mid career is as distinguished a painter as any in her
generation. Yet her work is too seldom seen, for it, like so much else, no
longer fits the orthodoxies of curatorial interest. It is too instinctive,
perhaps, too conspicuous in its lack of any conceptual programme or
rationale, harder to talk or write about than simply to see. It has no
politics, no fish in a tank to relieve imagination of particular
responsibility. It is, perhaps, too beautiful.
Mutatis mutandis, as much may be said of Dick Lee, whose latest work is now
on show at Cadogan Contemporary (108 Draycott Avenue SW3, until March 28).
He is a painter of the landscape, the domestic agricultural landscape of
Suffolk and Normandy, and also of the studio and domestic interior with its
natural informal clutter of still life. Whatever: at nearly 70, he is as
good a painter as any we now have.
His handling is deceptively casual, the paint indulged in the easy touch and
sweep of the hand, loose and free. But the ease is deceptive, the rigour of
the construction and the consistent articulation of the pictorial space ever
apparent. All is looked at long and hard, the form described, the space
understood and registered with an admirable simplicity. This is
old-fashioned painting of the Modern British School, in the knowledge of
Sickert and Camden Town seen through a filter of French experience and
sensibility, and as thoroughly contemporary as could be.
The other exhibitions I can do little more than recommend. Susan Pye's first
solo show, long overdue, is at the Pike Gallery, a new gallery in Wandsworth
(145 St John's Hill SW11, until March 29). She is something of an
expressionist, her table-top still-lifes, landscapes of a sort, teasing
their way towards abstraction, but never quite. The smaller work tends
towards the decorative and exuberant, the larger remaining the more austere
in feeling, more thoroughly worked and impressive.
I have yet to see the shows of Maggi Hambling, at Bernard Jacobson (14a
Clifford Street W1, until April 4), and Harry Holland, at Jill George (38
Lexington Street W1, until April 3), but I shall most certainly do so.
Beyond curiosity as to detail, I have no fear in recommending them, for I
know the work well in both cases. I have already seen in the studio much of
the Jemma series of monotypes, of the female nude, that Maggi Hambling is
showing; as with Zen calligraphy, with the monotype there is no going back,
and these images are as remarkable for their commitment as for their
spirited accomplishment. And by the form book, Harry Holland's odd and
ambiguous metaphysical still-lifes should be as beautiful as anything
currently on show in London.
Will the guardians of our national collections feel it worth their while to
get along to see them, or the works of any other of today's artists?
