FT  11 JAN 92 / Private View: The conscientious baker's boy who used his
loaf - Philip Johnson-Laird, psychology professor at Princeton
IF HE had stuck to his first profession of quantity surveyor he could have
gone on playing rugby for Rosslyn Park on Saturdays and jazz piano and
vibraphone for extra money in the evenings.
But he could not stand the apprenticeship. He tried to escape by
volunteering for the Fleet Air Arm, only to be told his eyesight was too
poor.
When release came, with National Service call-up, it was too late. He was
now under the influence of the early CND and of the philosopher Bertrand
Russell - every one of whose books he had read - and declared himself a
conscientious objector.
The tribunal sentenced him to two years and 60 days' alternative service. He
complied by becoming first a hospital porter and then a bakery worker.
By this time, the youth who had left school at 15 with only a 'praeceptor's
senior certificate' because his father could not afford to keep him on, was
feeling the weight of his lack of education. During his bakery lunch-breaks
he studied for 'O' levels and 'A' levels. Encouraged by an academic friend,
Sheila Jones, a founder of CND, he got into University College, London, to
read psychology and logic (Russell's influence again). He was 25.
Last year, Philip Johnson-Laird was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in
London, one of the oldest and most prestigious scientific bodies in the
world.
The citation reads: 'Distinguished for his contributions to the psychology
of reasoning and language. His suggestion that the lexical meanings of words
could be treated as computational procedures supports the views that
comprehension involves the construction of mental models, and that reasoning
lies in their manipulation.'
In short, Johnson-Laird's work is to think about thinking.
But he no longer does it in England. Like about 10 per cent of the Society's
British-born Fellows, Johnson-Laird works in the US. After posts in London,
Sussex and Cambridge, he succumbed three years ago to repeated invitations
to migrate with his wife Maureen ('Mo') Sullivan and their two children to
Princeton, New Jersey, where he is Professor of Psychology.
When I first met him, the former baker's boy was tapping something into a
small computer in the front room of his neat, colonial-style house just off
the university campus. He was teaching the computer to improvise modern
jazz. He explained that he was writing a program to make explicit a theory
about how people create: the computer input consisted of symbols denoting
musical chords and the output an improvised bass line such as a jazz pianist
might lay down.
I asked him to describe his scientific quest.
'I am interested in how the mind works. I want to put forward theories about
it - what it is doing and how it is doing it - rather than what various
neurons in parts of the brain are doing.
'My topics are how people reason, how they understand and use language, the
nature of consciousness and emotions, how people create new ideas.'
It involves laboratory experiment and computer modelling. The point of the
model is to make the theory more explicit, therefore more testable and more
useful, and also more open to other scientists' scrutiny.
'The model sharpens up your theoretical ideas. It prevents you bullshitting.
If you can build a computer program of it, then you're not taking too much
for granted. We must try and escape from the web of words and pin down what,
for instance, Freud really meant by 'repression'. It's very problematic.'
Johnson-Laird doubts whether science will achieve an explanation of human
consciousness in his lifetime. He is a more hopeful of cracking the code of
creativity. There are different sorts, he said. 'It is reasonably easy to
understand how people work in some well-defined genre: composing a
Wordsworthian sonnet, for instance, or making a chemical assay - or jazz
improvisation.
'Then there is the process involved in making a new piece of science, like
the jump from Newtonian to Einsteinian mechanics, or, in painting, the shift
from Impressionism, through Cezanne, to Cubism. Nobody, in my opinion, knows
anything about how that's done. Maybe it's never going to be answered. It
could be that it's essentially magic.'
But Johnson-Laird thinks he has an answer to the controversy about whether
there are universal rules for reasoning or whether the criteria for
rationality are local to cultures in their own place and time.
'Take an African tribe that believes in witchcraft. One view is that these
people are making mistakes in thinking. Another is that you have to
investigate what their criteria are and then you discover they are not. I
think the answer is that there is indeed a universal core of what it means
to be rational. But there is not a set of working principles, so we do
actually make errors in reasoning.'
Why did you come to America?
Johnson-Laird applied a psychological test to his answer. 'What I say may be
just rationalisation. Social psychology shows that people are not aware
sometimes of the true causes of their decisions. At the time I suppose it
was a gut reaction.'
I wondered how much of his disillusionment was party political.
Did Bertrand Russell shape your youthful views? I asked.
'I went to a Methodist public school and I suppose I had imbibed standard
Tory party views about things. I remember in 1956 going to Trafalgar Square
to hear Nye Bevan, when he made his famous 'Eden must go' speech. I was
stunned by his oratory. He got 100,000 people to charge down Whitehall,
pursued by the mounted police. But why I read Russell, I don't remember.'
Did you count yourself a Left winger?
'I was sort of moving in that direction.'
What do you count yourself now?
'I would count myself a democratic socialist.'
Did you come to America because the money was better?
'Certainly it was a large salary. It would be hypocritical to deny that
money was a factor. But I would hate readers of the Financial Times to think
that by coming to America they are suddenly going to get rich. You get paid
a lot more money, but you pay a lot more money. Our daughter is at
university and that costs a lot. I'm living in a smaller house, driving
basically the same car and . . . anwyay, my life isn't really about making
money.'
Among the reasons he gave were restlessness, the presence at Princeton of
psychologists with whom he wanted to work - and vice versa - and government
cuts at the beginning of the Thatcher decade.
'I so hated what happened to universities as a result of the cuts. In many
ways it was not so much the lack of resources, but what it did to people's
morale. Money became the subject of conversation. Wherever you went, people
would ask you how were you coping.
'When I was professor at Sussex I had a traumatic year as chairman of the
faculty. It was the worst year of my life. It got to the point where we
wondered whether we would have enough money to buy the feed for the animals
in the laboratory.
'There is a saying in American academe that Thatcher did more for American
universities than anybody since Adolf Hitler. Now that's a gross
exaggeration. But it would be interesting to look at what's happening to
people in their later career. It's not just a matter of counting heads.'
Johnson-Laird said fewer of the brightest undergraduates were taking PhDs
because there was no obvious academic career in Britain.
Perhaps, I suggested, the government correctly took the view that academic
institutions had become bloated and inefficient. Wasn't there some
productivity gain to be made?
'There's always a proportion of dead wood in any walk of life,' he replied.
'The question you have to ask is whether measures of productivity are
appropriate to universities. With undergraduates you might want to count
heads, but the other thing, clearly, is research.'
Charles Darwin, he added, had spent years researching Origin of Species and
would have failed any modern productivity test applied by the Universities
Funding Council. 'My philosophy is - and this has nothing to do with my
socialist leanings - if you really want to get good research out of people
then you shouldn't have them looking over their shoulder to see whether they
are still going to have a job in a year's time. People have got to feel that
they can sit around - maybe not quite as long as Darwin did - but at least
not feel that pressure.
'The thing in Britain is that the politicians continue to run it as though
it was a super-power, spending for example vast sums of money on the
Falklands War (which incidentally I regarded as unnecessary) and still
spending money on maintaining armaments.
'My feeling about Britain is like Bertrand Russell's, who drew the analogy
with Holland's loss of empire in the 17th century. The great things about
Britain are the ideas the British have contributed in the arts and in the
sciences. The universities are not the only place where this happens: I'm
talking equally about the Royal Shakespeare Company, the National Theatre,
the art schools and so on. But we should put our money where our strengths
are.
'It's so easy to mess a system up and so hard to get it back in running
order. The worry is not what's going to happen in the next five or ten years
but what's going to be happening - maybe here in America, too - in the long
term. Will British universities survive to be productive and creative in 25
years time?'
Do you see yourself working in Britain again?
'Maybe. At the moment we are both very happy here.'
