FT  25 APR 92 / Ethnic rivalry casts shadow over hopes for Afghan peace: UN
envoy warns of anarchy unless mujahideen commanders curb personal enmities -
Prospects for a lasting settlement of a long and bloody civil war
AFGHANISTAN stumbled this week towards the end of a 13-year-old civil war,
possibly sealed yesterday with agreement among rival guerrilla leaders
meeting in Pakistan to form a 51-member council as an interim government.
Mr Benon Sevan, the UN special envoy on Afghanistan, has been negotiating
the setting up of an interim mujahideen-dominated administration to take
over from the communist regime in Kabul, which has virtually collapsed after
the overthrow 10 days ago of former President Najibullah. He has warned
guerrilla leaders of the danger of anarchy and civil war if they continue to
pursue ethnic and personal rivalries.
Over the last week all the main provincial cities - Mazar-i-Sharif, Herat,
Kandahar, and yesterday Jalalabad - have been taken over in bloodless coups
by different coalitions of mujahideen groups co-operating with local army
commanders. The overthrow of the communist rule that remained in power after
the Russians left two years ago has thus so far gone smoothly.
All week there have been scenes of apparent reconciliation between
mujahideen guerrillas and the army they have been fighting for so long.
At Charikar, north of Kabul, the temporary headquarters of the
northern-based coalition, Shah Ahmed Masood, the main guerrilla leader,
warmly embraced General Abdul Majid, deputy commander of an Uzbek militia
force that Mr Najibullah used for his most brutal offensives.
The local accords on a transfer of power outside Kabul seemed to have been
matched yesterday by a agreement on the fate of the capital - both the
largest city and the one where the ethnic mix is the greatest - and over the
setting up of an interim administration for the country. Yesterday's
agreement appears to end the squabbling between guerrilla commanders and the
political organisations based in Peshawar over how to fill the vacuum in the
capital.
The rivalries centre on the polarisation between Mr Masood and the leader of
the hardline Hezb-i-Islam guerrilla group, Mr Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. This is
partly a conflict between men who have quarrelled in the past and still
detest each other - but more worryingly it reflects deeper ethnic divisions
that could over time lead to the break-up of Afghanistan.
Mr Masood, the most successful field commander of the war, is a
Persian-speaking Tajik from the north. His coalition of Tajiks, Uzbeks,
Hazaras, Ismaelis and Shias reflects the resentment of the non-Pushtun
population of the country at Pushtun domination. The Pushtuns from the
south, who account for only 40 per cent of the population, have
traditionally provided government leaders.
Mr Hekmatyar, a politician and a Moslem crusader more than a field
commander, who spent much of the war in Peshawar, is the best known
representative of Pushtun nationalism. But his extremism and
unpredictability have lost him the confidence of other Pushtun leaders and
made him disliked in the capital.
In the power struggle that may yet unfold, yesterday's accord
notwithstanding, the Pushtuns feel squeezed by the prospect of non-Pushtun
domination on the one hand and distrust of Mr Hekmatyar on the other.
Mr Masood has greater military strength than Mr Hekmatyar - with his
alliance including General Abdum Momen, a former divisional commander in the
north under President Najibullah, and Mr Rashid Dostam, head of the powerful
Uzbek militia, whose defection from Mr Najibullah was crucial in his
overthrow. Mr Masood's strategy all week has been to hold back from entering
Kabul to allow time for an interim administration to be formed. But he
desperately needs Pushtun backing.
The pressures for some form of accommodation are strong. Street opinion in
Kabul is uniformly against further fighting.
Pakistan seems to be reining in the belligerence of Mr Hekmatyar. The
international community is exerting pressure through the UN with the arrival
of Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the secretary general, in Pakistan yesterday.
The question now is whether the interim administration can hold the country
together. Even among Uzbeks of the north, the goal remains Afghan unity
rather than secession. The central Asian republics of the former Soviet
Union, Iran, and Pakistan are all in favour of preserving Afghanistan.
This week's events outside Kabul have shown a willingness by the mujahideen
to work with the security forces and the existing bureaucracy. The mood does
not seem to be one of mass reprisals.
There is no immediate food problem. Senior Afghan officials believe the
volume of aid will be large - relative to the country's size and capacity to
absorb it - for the task of reconstruction. Two million people were killed
in the war and a further 2m disabled.
But Afghanistan is also a country with a record of putting individual,
regional and ethnic rivalries before national unity. 'I am a pessimist,'
said a former senior official. 'I think the rivalries will continue and at
some stage result in armed clashes.' It could be that such skirmishes will
develop into serious conflicts leading to the disintegration of the country
over the next 10 years.
Thirteen years of civil war have transformed Afghanistan into an arms depot
in which there is no shortage of weapons to pursue conflicts. Local military
bosses like Mr Dostam in the north will not easily cast aside their
ambitions. If the country does begin to fall apart, its neighbours - Iran,
Pakistan, and the central Asian republics  - will not resist the temptation
to intervene. Iran, which sees Afghanistan as part of its historic sphere of
influence, has already embarked on an active policy in support of
Afghanistan's non-Pushtun minorities. The outcome of the drama now unfolding
will thus have its repercussions throughout central Asia.
