FT  28 JUL 92 / International Company News: Questions over Uni's future
THE surprise exit of Mr Jan Erik Langangen, president and chief executive of
Uni Storebrand, Norway's biggest insurer, and the appointment of Mr Per
Terje Vold as interim president has provided more questions over the
company's future than answers.
Uni Storebrand's board appointed Mr Vold to succeed Mr Langangen but also
tendered its own resignation. Uni's nominating committee is due to meet soon
and is expected to accept the resignation.
Mr Langangen's departure was the result of pressure from disgruntled
shareholders who had grown increasingly dissatisfied with his handling of
the company's stake in Skandia, the Swedish insurer, for which he had
ambitious plans.
Uni paid NKr4.7bn (Dollars 798m) for a 28.3 per cent limited-voting stake in
Skandia. Uni's Skandia investment this year has plunged in value by about
NKr2.5bn, together with Uni's share price which has been halved to about
NKr25 since the turn of the year.
The board's resignation is a condition of the participation a group of key
shareholders in a Uni share issue which would allow the company to meet
capital adequacy requirements.
Mr Langangen was seeking to make Skandia the cornerstone of his vision for a
Nordic insurance alliance, although Uni's stake in the company held limited
voting rights.
Stonewalled by Mr Bjoern Wolrath, Skandia's president, Mr Langangen was left
with a large shareholding without the necessary clout to influence the
future of Skandia. He was counting on his company's key shareholders to
guarantee a capital expansion of NKr1.5bn-NKr2bn. Failing to win their
backing, Mr Langangen resigned and the board tendered its resignation.
Fresh capital would also allow Uni to retain the Skandia stake for at least
a year without pressure to sell. It could then dispose of the stake without
a significant loss.
Uni's board is due to meet tomorrow to map out a plan for the capital
expansion which Mr Vold says is his first order of business.
Questions have also been raised over the future of Mr Langangen's post as
chairman of Statoil, the Norwegian state oil company. These could become
pressing if Statoil participates in Uni's share issue.
