FT  10 JUN 92 / Big business not big on Perot: Critics, worry about personal
qualities
THEY WERE only throwaway answers to a hypothetical question, but they
pointed up a distinct lack of enthusiasm within American big business for
Texas billionaire Ross Perot's putative presidential candidacy.
Executives from leading US companies at a conference in Virginia were asked
what they would say to the independent Perot, one of the country's most
successful entrepreneurs, if he won November's election and asked them for
advice.
'Resign,' shot back Mr Howard Allen, former chief executive of Southern
California Edison, one of the nation's largest producers of electricity. The
response of Mr Robert Allen, chairman of American Telephone &amp; Telegraph, was
more guarded but still barbed: 'It would be refreshing,' he said, 'to hear
Ross ask for some advice.'
Mr Perot's populism may be wowing the electorate from California to the
Carolinas and picking up support from small business, but the nation's
biggest companies are sticking firmly to their traditional backing of the
Republican party, which means supporting President George Bush.
A recent poll of 115 chief executives by Fortune magazine found that 78 per
cent would vote to return Mr Bush to the White House, with a mere 11 per
cent favouring Mr Perot and 4 per cent Arkansas Governor Bill Clinton, the
Democratic party's candidate.
At first glance this might seem surprising, given that US businessmen often
grumble that one of their number could surely do better than professional
politicians in breaking through Washington's habitual policy-making
gridlock. Indeed, Fortune found that 65 per cent of respondents felt a
business executive would make a good president.
But many believe that Mr Perot is singularly lacking in the personal
qualities needed to negotiate a path through the capital's warring interest
groups and entrenched bureaucracy.
They acknowledge that Mr Perot is a brilliant salesman (which would come in
handy wooing votes in congress) and that he has shown throughout his career
the rare ability to cut to the heart of complex issues, take rapid and
decisive action, and elicit extraordinary personal loyalty.
On the other hand, they worry about his reputation for dictatorial business
behaviour, for reducing arguments to overly simplified black-and-white, and
for deciding on a course while refusing to listen to contrary advice.
This mix of qualities may have been vital to his success: his single-minded
drive and self-confidence was certainly there when he quit as a top salesman
for International Business Machines in the early 1960s and founded
Electronic Data Systems (EDS), the computer services group which made his
fortune. However, his critics argue that the qualities of a successful
entrepreneur are not necessarily those needed to run a huge corporate
bureaucracy, let alone a government machine which sees politicians come and
go and which has countless ways to frustrate commands.
'Politics requires compromise, and nothing in Perot's background suggests he
is prepared to do that,' said a leading Wall Street figure who asked not to
be named. 'He's shown no evidence of being able to handle people who do not
share his views. I don't think he'd make a very good president.'
There are businessmen who believe Mr Perot's qualities are exactly what is
needed in Washington: Mr Alan 'Ace' Greenberg, chairman of investment bank
Bear Stearns, says: 'I've known Ross for 10 years. I like him. I think he's
brilliant. He's who I want for president.'
But many critics home in on Mr Perot's battle with General Motors - the
closest thing to a government bureaucracy that you will find in US business
 -as an example of the problems he would face in the White House.
After selling EDS to GM, Mr Perot joined the motor company's board and tried
to help stem its long decline in the face of Japanese competition. He
quickly and acutely identified many of the company's problems but then
antagonised much of middle and senior management with his blunt exposition
of their errors, while failing to rally his boardroom colleagues to his
cause.
A frustrated Mr Perot was eased off the board, and GM deferred many
fundamental reforms until its non-executive directors staged a more subtle
boardroom revolt.
Personal qualities apart, many top businessmen say it is hard to judge Mr
Perot's candidacy until he starts giving a clear idea of where he stands on
policy. 'All he's done so far is make some general statements it is hard to
disagree with,' one chairman points out.
None of this is likely to worry the iconoclastic Perot, who often makes
clear his contempt for corporate bureaucrats and chief executives with
'their blow-dried hair, their Dollars 3,000 suits and their 23-year-old
trophy wives'. Last week he dismissed US big business as part of the
establishment and said that the future lay with small business which, he
said, was at the moment being starved of credit.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that small business views Mr Perot as a role
model and enthusiastically supports his candidacy.
Mr Todd Mason, author of an unauthorised biography of Mr Perot, points out
that he has frequently timed important events in his life - marriage, the
founding of EDS, its sale - to occur on his birthday, June 27. It is
conceivable he will use the occasion, now only about two weeks away, to
announce his formal candidacy. However, if he does, not many top businessmen
are likely to send congratulations.
IN contrast to a general lack of enthusiasm for Mr Ross Perot's presidential
candidacy among most business leaders, executives at US high-technology
companies strongly support his campaign, writes Louise Kehoe in San
Francisco.
According to a survey published this week by the American Electronics
Association, a trade group representing more than 3,000 US high-tech
companies, 55 per cent of the 408 chief executives who responded named Mr
Perot as their preferred candidate. President George Bush won 29 per cent,
Governor Bill Clinton only 4 per cent.
Mr Richard Iverson, AEA president and chief executive, said: 'I believe the
poll results reflect the current preferences of executives across the
spectrum of the US electronics industry.'
Mr Perot's appeal to electronics executives is not surprising, as he is
regarded in the industry as one of its own 'self-made men'.
He is viewed as an entrepreneur who ploughed some of his wealth back into
the industry through investments in start-up companies such as Next
Computer, led by Mr Steve Jobs, the co-founder of Apple Computer.
Mr Perot's tough line on Japanese trade is also well received in the
electronics industry. His call for a 'level playing field' echoes the
sentiments of US semiconductor and computer industry executives.
