FT  21 OCT 92 / International Company News: Proton motors through industry
scepticism - The risky road being travelled by Malaysia's national car
WHEN Dr Mahathir Mohamad, Malaysia's prime minister, announced more than 10
years ago plans for a car manufacturing plant in the country there were
plenty of sceptics.
Malaysia was at an early stage of industrial development, and the technical
and management skills necessary to run such a project were in short supply.
The question was, how could a relatively poor country with only 18.5m people
sustain such an ambitious and costly enterprise?
On the face of it, the sceptics would appear to have been wrong. Perusahaan
Otomobil Nasional - or Proton for short - produced its first car in 1985.
Last year it produced 102,000.
Proton now has a 65 per cent share of domestic car sales, and exported its
first car in 1987.
Now, according to the company, it is the fastest-selling car in its class in
the UK, with cumulative sales to September 30 of 45,000. Proton's latest
export model, the Catalyst, is on display at this week's Birmingham motor
show.
Company finances appear secure: after a partial privatisation this year
Proton has borrowings of MDollars 592m (USDollars 236m) and cash of MDollars
913m, giving a net cash position of MDollars 381m. In the year to March,
Proton earned taxable profits of MDollars 408m on turnover of MDollars
2.2bn. In the previous year, taxable profits were MDollars 261.5m on
turnover of MDollars 1.8bn.
Driven by its success, Proton recently announced a MDollars 1.2bn expansion
programme aimed at bringing production at its plant outside Kuala Lumpur up
to 120,000 units by the end of next year, 150,000 units by 1995. A large
portion of the new production is planned for export to the UK and elsewhere
in Europe.
Despite its initial achievements, doubts persist about Proton's long-term
prospects.
Proton's success reflects the growth in the Malaysian economy. Sales were
sluggish for the first three years of production but took off as the economy
moved into the fast lane in 1988-89. Since then, domestic sales have
increased by an average 50 per cent per annum.
Sales have been helped considerably by government protection.
As a result the Proton enjoys a cost advantage in the domestic market of
more than 30 per cent against equivalent makes.
While few doubt the basic qualities of the Proton and a certain Malaysian
pride in what is called 'the national car", sales would be lower without
protection.
Proton also has cost advantages in export markets. Under the European
Community's generalised system of preference (GSP), Proton has full
exemption from UK import duties. Continued GSP status is vital for Proton's
UK sales.
Mitsubishi, the Japanese conglomerate, has played a big role in Proton's
success. Initially, Mitsubishi had a 30 per cent stake in the company, the
rest being controlled by Hicom, the Malaysian government's heavy industrial
holding company. With various restructurings and the recent flotation,
Japanese involvement in Proton has dropped to around 20 per cent, with the
government still controlling just under 50 per cent.
Japanese management and technology is central to Proton. Some key management
positions are still held by Japanese. But there are disagreements between
the Malaysians and Japanese.
The Proton is based on Mitsubishi's 1984-88 Lancer model. The Malaysians are
said to be increasingly frustrated by their Japanese partners tardiness in
transferring technology.
Mitsubishi is said to be unhappy with Proton's export drive: it threatens
Mitsubishi's own car sales in some markets. The Malaysian government has
hinted that a big management shake-up is in the offing, with greater local
control.
Some Japanese car plants produce more cars in a month than Proton produces
in a year. Though Proton, with shop floor wages of only about MDollars 500
per month, has labour cost advantages over competitors in Japan or Europe,
sales of mass-produced cars are dictated by economies of scale.
'Proton has more or less reached market saturation at home,' says one
analyst. 'To recoup its huge investment costs and to gain economies of scale
it has to expand - and that means more exports. It's a very big challenge
for a small carmaker."
Mr Ben Yeoh, general manager of Proton's business division, agrees. 'We have
to export. The domestic market alone cannot support our investment and
production.'
Already Proton's margins are being stretched, particularly on exports. Mr
Yeoh admits there are only small returns from UK sales. A Proton is now
cheaper in the UK than in Malaysia, prompting criticism that the Malaysian
taxpayer is subsidising British sales.
Perhaps the most serious challenge to Proton's future is a project for a
second 'national car'. In collaboration with local partners, the Japanese
Daihatsu group will manufacture a small car in the 600cc to 900cc range.
Again, the project is the brainchild of Dr Mahathir. There are worries about
the domestic market's ability to sustain a second car manufacturing concern.
The new car will be much cheaper than the Proton. Once again, the sceptics
are out in force.
