FT  30 OCT 92 / Malaysia hell-bent on maintaining rapid growth: The problems
of success for one of the world's fastest-expanding economies
LAST MONTH Dr Mahathir Mohamad, Malaysia's prime minister, launched what was
described as the single largest property development in the world - a new
city centre for Kuala Lumpur, with two 85-storey office towers as the main
feature.
The development, the initial phase of which will cost MDollars 3bn (Pounds
730m) in its initial phase, is seen by some as a symbol of Malaysia's
new-found economic confidence.
But to others it is a questionable prestige project - another sign that
Malaysia is bedazzled by its own economic success.
Today Mr Anwar Ibrahim, the Malaysian finance minister, delivers his 1993
budget to parliament. Mr Anwar is in a position that most finance ministers
would envy: Malaysia has one of the world's fastest growing economies.
For a sixth year, the economy will grow by more than 8 per cent in 1992 -
government projections suggest 8.5 per cent for 1992 and 8 per cent for next
year. Though export growth has slowed as a result of the downturn in
Malaysia's main markets in Europe, the US and Japan, exports are still
likely to grow by nearly 11 per cent this year.
The country is industrialising fast. In the early 1970s more than 80 per
cent of exports were commodities - mainly rubber, tin and petroleum
products. In 1992 nearly 70 per cent of exports will be manufactured goods.
According to government projections, per capita GNP will rise 11 per cent
this year to MDollars 7,554. Unemployment problems of a few years ago have
given way to serious labour shortages.
Managing economic success is the main problem facing Mr Anwar.
The government says it has been restraining economic growth to prevent
overheating. But serious infrastructural and other strains are increasingly
evident, raising doubts about the government's growth management policies.
Kuala Lumpur's traffic jams are rapidly becoming as bad as those in Bangkok
or Manila. There are growing power shortages and supply disruptions.
A power failure in September blacked out most of peninsular Malaysia for
several hours.
A fire at Kuala Lumpur airport earlier this month disrupted air traffic for
more than two weeks.
'The government has been a bit cavalier in going for growth above everything
else,' said one economist. 'It refers to 'happy problems' of inflation and
labour shortages. But these are very real and have to be tackled
effectively. If not future growth will be threatened.'
Last year Mr Anwar, newly appointed and seen as the likely successor to Dr
Mahathir as prime minister, surprised many by delivering a mildly
expansionary budget.
Finance officials insist they have not been reckless but some government
projections have gone seriously awry.
At the beginning of last year the ministry of finance forecast a current
account deficit of MDollars 4bn for the year. By the end of 1991 the deficit
had reached MDollars 12bn.
The government now concedes that the current account deficit is of concern.
Various government measures taken in the second half of 1991 and early 1992
have resulted in a substantial drop in imports. However, a growing deficit
in services, which includes 'invisibles' such as substantial profit
repatriations by foreign companies, will result in a projected MDollars
7.9bn current account deficit this year.
Inflation is another problem. Earlier projections were for an inflation rate
of below 4 per cent this year.
Despite various monetary measures, including high interest rates which in
turn have driven up the value of the ringgit, the Malaysian dollar, the
final inflation figure for the year is likely to be close to 5 per cent.
Sharp rises in food prices have hurt the poorer sections of the community
the most.
Malaysia's competitiveness as a manufacturing base could be eroded by both
further increases in the ringgit's value and wage rises. Wages in the
manufacturing sector rose 9.6 per cent in the first half of 1992 against 6
per cent a year earlier. In the public sector wages are rising by between 8
and 10 per cent this year.
While Malaysia continues to be a favourite destination for foreign
investors, the economic slowdown in much of the industrialised world has
caused a drop in inward investment.
Government officials predict a fall of 7 per cent in foreign investments
this year to MDollars 10.4bn.
A degree of belt tightening is likely in today's budget.
Some incentives for foreign investors might be withdrawn and a drop in
corporate tax rates is likely. Hints have been made that Mr Anwar may
announce the phased introduction of value added tax.
Cutbacks in some areas of government spending are likely to be announced but
the government is committed to an increase in development expenditure next
year - to MDollars 10.1bn from MDollars 8.6bn in 1992.
The range of projects being undertaken in the coming years is extremely
ambitious.
Between MDollars 8 and MDollars 12bn will be spent on a new international
airport outside Kuala Lumpur.
Malaysia Airlines, which is more than 50 per cent owned by the government,
is purchasing MDollars 10.6bn worth of new aircraft.
Infrastructural facilities are being built in preparation for the
Commonwealth Games, to be held in Kuala Lumpur in 1998. Plans are being
finalised for a second home-produced car manufacturing plant.
To meet projected economic growth targets - set at 7 per cent in each year
up to 2020 - there are plans to increase power supplies fourfold at an
estimated cost over the next 10 years of MDollars 40bn.
The government realises it cannot possibly bear the cost of all these
projects. Financial backing from the private sector, both domestic and
foreign, is vital.
In the past Malaysia has confounded those who accused it of running too
fast.
There is very little talk of any slowdown or notice being taken of the chill
economic winds blowing from elsewhere.
And the construction crews are already at work building those new symbols of
success in central Kuala Lumpur.
