FT  26 FEB 92 / Survey of Kuwait (4): A financial strait-jacket - The
Economy
EVEN given the crippling effects of the Gulf war, Kuwait is scarcely a place
of slender means. The word 'austerity' need never cross the lips of
policymakers in a country of fewer than 1.5m people sitting on more than
94bn barrels of crude oil.
Nevertheless, the war took an expensive toll. Aside from the direct costs of
paying coalition allies some Dollars 22bn for waging the war, lost oil
revenues, the liquidation of billions of dollars' worth of assiduously
cultivated foreign assets and a reconstruction bill which may top Dollars
20bn, Kuwait's economy was also left in a distraught and disorganised mess.
The inevitable result will be to leave Kuwait's income heavily denuded over
the next few years and its expenses correspondingly inflated.
This year, however, is election year and Kuwait's government is determined
that voters will not fault it at the polls for its generosity. The
government's ability to cushion Kuwaitis, with more limited available means,
will be the policy test of the next year. The wisdom of its doing so rather
than adjusting Kuwaitis to a leaner economy is, however, likely to be a
matter of debate for some few years thereafter.
For the present, the government faces the task of balancing Kuwait's books.
In its provisional budget for 1992, still awaiting formal approval by the
National Council, the government estimates revenues will reach KD870m. Just
over 80 per cent of earnings will come from oil, output of which is likely
to be near pre-war levels of 1.5m barrels a day (b/d) by the year end.
Revenues will be about a third of pre-war income, which also included
earnings of KD1bn from the country's overseas investments, held in the
Reserve Fund for Future Generations which before the war was valued at
Dollars 65bn. However, local economists reckon that at least Dollars 30bn of
this has been liquidated to help cover war costs.
Government expenditure for 1992 is projected at KD6bn, a 67 per cent rise on
the last published budget in 1990, much of it accounted for by a 43 per cent
rise in expected defence spending to KD2.6bn. The resulting deficit is put
at KD5.3bn - although this figure excludes KD2.9bn of 'extraordinary'
war-related spending, including KD2bn of payments to Desert Storm allies and
at least KD500m for consumer debt write-offs after liberation and gratuities
to departing Palestinian civil servants.
The scale of the deficit prompted Kuwait to arrange a Dollars 5.5bn
syndicated loan late last year through J. P. Morgan. Treasury bill and bond
issues will also be used to make up the shortfall, together with drawings on
available reserves.
However, it is the prospect of future deficits which worry some local
economists, who argue that unless the government is far more savage in
cutting its expenditure, the country faces a highly expensive spiral of
accumulating deficits.
According to the Al-Shall economic consultancy in Kuwait, civil service
salary payments alone will consume 49 per cent of likely oil revenues for
1993 - which the consultancy estimates at about KD2.2bn, assuming exports of
1.4m b/d at an average price of Dollars 15 a barrel. Adding the cost of the
government's proposed buy-out of bank debts, that is to say interest payable
on bonds to be issue to the banks, will take this to 65 per cent of
projected revenues. 'Kuwait faces a real and extended deficit for a very
long time to come,' says Mr Jassem al Saddoun, Al Shall's managing director.
Given the high level of recurrent government expenditure, quite apart from
the tally of reconstruction costs, Mr al Saddoun says the government is
ill-placed to afford much in the way of pre-election bounties. Nevertheless,
in addition to the write-off of consumer loans, the government earlier this
month approved a 25 per cent rise in civil service salaries, adding a
further KD285m to its wage bill for 1992.
Behind such decisions lies the government's determination to ensure that
Kuwait's voters, when they tick ballot papers in October, return a tame and
government-friendly National Assembly. 'Economic decisions are, such as they
are, being taken for political rather than economic reasons,' says one
diplomat.
Other observers, including senior bankers and economists, privately voice
concern that they see no sign that the government is looking beyond the
October election to devise any sort of guiding economic policy for the rest
of the decade, beyond pumping as much oil as possible and banking on being
able to repay whatever short-term debts it may incur. 'My main worry is that
nobody is thinking at all,' confides one banker bleakly.
Such critics propose that the government should, for example, open the oil
and financial services sectors to overseas investors to encourage
efficiency, privatise what it can of its infrastructure and spread what it
can of less essential rebuilding costs over a decade rather than over the
next three or four years.
'It's a golden opportunity now to cut the fat and boost only areas where
Kuwait has a comparative advantage,' says one economist. The government is
clearly aware of the financial strait-jacket it will have to wear for the
next few years, and is cautiously looking at ways in which it can cut costs.
The option of raising revenues through income taxes, although some
opposition figures bravely suggest such things in private, is, as in most
other Gulf states, most unappetising.
Instead, the government is more likely to affect what cuts it can in the
high level of subsidies paid on public services. Cooper and Lybrand, for
example, has been commissioned to conduct a study into privatising parts of
the telecommunications industry although no moves on this are expected much
before the middle of 1993. The electricity ministry has also hinted that it
is looking at ways of reducing the huge subsidies on power: the average cost
of a kilowatt of Kuwaiti power is 20 fils, (there are 1,000 fils to the
dinar) towards which the consumer pays only about 2 fils.
In addition, despite the huge rise in overall government expenditure
outlined in the 1992 budget, the government has sought to cut spending in
most ministries by 20 per cent against the budgeted 1990 figure for each
department - although since the 1990 fiscal year was rudely interrupted,
this is a fuzzy target.
But critics of the government argue that such measures are no more than
prudent book-keeping and do not substitute for an overall economic strategy.
In particular, some economists argue, present policies portend a further
fattening of Kuwait's already flabby public sector with little incentive for
private enterprise.
At one level, the government's big pay award to the public sector has
already provided a further disincentive to Kuwaitis, 90 per cent of whom
already work for the government, from entering the private sector.
More crucially, however, the government has effectively dealt two reeling
blows to the private sector - and the Kuwaiti merchant families who run it -
by deciding first to slash the size of the emirate's post-war population
and, second, effectively to abandon all ambitions for Kuwait's non-oil
industrial and manufacturing sector.
The loss of 400,000 Palestinians, most of them long-settled families in
Kuwait, has already had a shattering effect on the market for some Kuwaiti
trade companies and will have a depressing knock-on effect on lending
opportunities for Kuwait's banks.
So far, the government has announced no formal policy towards the industrial
private sector but merchants and bankers are taking it as read that the
government has given up on what before the war had been heavily-supported
attempts to develop local industry. Although this in its way also cuts
government spending - and, some would argue, wasted spending, given the
indifferent performance of the small manufacturing sector before the Iraqi
invasion - it nevertheless closes off yet another part of the
fast-diminishing private sector.
This might not matter were it not for the fact that more than half of
Kuwait's population is under the age of 14 - meaning that the economy will
have to expand somehow to offer these young Kuwaitis jobs. In Mr Saddoun's
view, the result will be not just underemployment, already rife in Kuwait,
but real unemployment.
In the end, however, the government may simply decide that rather than
subsidise the private sector with oil revenues, creating what one local
economist calls 'fake industry', it will simply swell further the ranks of
the public sector. In which case, the only calculation about the Kuwait
economy which matters over the next few years is that for likely world oil
demand.
Starkly put, of course, this is perhaps the only economic calculation in
Kuwait which ever matters.
