FT  07 JUL 92 / Survey of Software at Work (15): New-found confidence - Case
Study / RAC Enterprises' Booking Operation / The RAC went for bespoke work
on a software package - and the supplier ended up advising on everything
from furniture to staff recruitment
A BESPOKE system contract based on an existing software package was the
approach adopted by the RAC's holidays and continental travel services unit
when it set up its central booking operation.
This approach was felt to be best mainly because of the time constraints:
the RAC had six months to get the system running before the next big holiday
booking season started in January 1991.
The RAC has offered ferry and travel services for many years from its 17
local administration centres. The operation is part of RAC Enterprises,
which includes information, vehicle inspection, hotel inspection and other
services.
'Customers would post bookings to the local centre or phone or visit,
although the centres are generally not in the high street, so they are not
in the most accessible places,' says Miss Fiona Holdsworth, general manager
of travel and information services.
'We felt that a central system would make for a smoother operation and
improve customer service. It would help with staff training and management.
There would be one Freefone number from anywhere in the country, which would
help customers and also enable us to promote the service nationally.'
Under the old system booking forms were filled in by hand, ferries were
booked by telephone or through a viewdata system and the forms were sent to
the RAC's IBM mainframe computer centre at Milton Keynes, where the
information was keyed into a basic accounting system. It could be a
fortnight before a postal booking got a response.
The new system was going to handle bookings on-line, while the customer was
on the telephone, so fast communications and processing were important. It
was therefore decided after discussion between RAC Enterprises, based in
Croydon, in south London, and the Milton Keynes computing centre, that a
local self-contained system would be the best approach for what is a largely
autonomous business.
In addition, the computing centre was already committed to major development
of the membership database system and could not have taken on another big
project. RAC Enterprises' time constraints also weighed against developing
the system from scratch.
Evaluation of the need and the options was done by a working group
consisting of RAC Enterprises' finance director, Mr Niall Addison; the
administration manager for the RAC Enterprises' European services, Mr Frank
Cleghorn; the then reservations manager; plus RAC Enterprises' own systems
manager, Mr Jeremy Lewis. Mr Lewis is the only computing specialist at the
Croydon office: he advises RAC Enterprises and liaises with the Milton
Keynes computing centre.
RAC Enterprises only found four software packages which even came close to
meeting its need. The contract went to Travellog Systems for three main
reasons, Frank Cleghorn says - 'they had a system running at the Caravan
Club, which has a similar business to our own. They had a major grasp of the
ferry industry and the complexities of timetabling, pricing, promotional
offers and so on. This knowledge was vital, because there had to be a short
learning curve, given our timescale. Thirdly, they were fairly well advanced
with the Unicorn electronic data interchange protocol which links
reservation systems with ferry companies' systems.'
Travellog's knowledge of the ferry holidays business led the RAC to contract
the company to manage the whole project, not only providing the reservations
system but also overseeing installation of an automatic call distribution
system, drawing up furniture selection criteria and handling staff
recruitment. This was despite concern about Travellog's size.
'There was a question mark over Travellog's size and we discussed this at
some length and visited their premises and met the staff,' Mr Cleghorn says.
'They're not a large company - but this was also a plus: we got very close
to people of all levels, from the chairman to the people on the job from
day-to-day. We had an excellent relationship: we saw everything they were
doing and could get some quick fixes when necessary.'
He adds: 'I'm convinced that we got a lot more development done than we
might have with a big company, because we could contact anyone in Travellog
and they all knew all about us.'
This involvement of all levels of Travellog staff is reflected in the offer
by the company's chairman, Mr David Stern, to chair the project management
team, which also included the RAC managers from the initial evaluation
group, plus a telecommunications specialist and a hardware specialist from
corporate systems, the Travellog project leader, and outside suppliers, such
as British Telecom and the provider of the Pounds 110,000 automatic call
distribution system, 'David Stern has big project management experience, but
we did feel he might be biased if Travellog failed to meet a target,' Mr
Cleghorn says. 'But Travellog certainly did not escape his whip when
necessary.'
A lot of time was spent on the system specification, at Travellog's
insistence - 'we feel it is essential to get a black-and-white
specification,' says Travellog director Andrew Osborne. 'That way the
customer knows what he's getting and we know precisely what we're doing. We
always put a lot of emphasis on this stage and make the customer sign it off
formally.'
Mr Cleghorn at the RAC says: 'We, too, spent a long time on the
specification, distributing it to users, finance people and marketing
people. We knew what we wanted - in particular that the on-line system
should be driven by our sales approach. So, for example, a ferry booking is
usually sold first, but the system then flows into breakdown assistance and
insurance screens, to encourage add-on sales.'
Mr Osborne at Travellog says the system eventually delivered is probably
around 80 per cent standard core software used at other customers and 20 per
cent bespoke. The core software is mainly parts of the system invisible to
the user but controlling the whole process, while the 20 per cent is mainly
associated with the screen displays presented to the users and tailored to
the RAC's needs.
There was also bespoke work on the insurance processing, because RAC
Enterprises handles this differently from other Travellog customers.
Travellog originally sold its systems on minicomputers from US manufacturer
Prime, using Pick, in effect an operating system with a built-in database
management system. 'We have always used a fourth-generation programming
language, because it gives the flexibility we need for customising systems,'
Mr Osborne says. 'Pick has a very flexible database: for example, there is
no pre-definition of the sizes or numbers of data records.'
However, the RAC has a strong IBM policy at both mainframe and personal
computer level.
'Corporate systems said they would prefer us to go IBM - and the central
3090 installation certainly gives us muscle in getting support and service,'
says Mr Cleghorn. Travellog therefore picked IBM's RS/6000 system,
well-known for its speed. Mr Osborne says it has outstanding price
performance and Mr Cleghorn describes it simply as an amazing machine. The
system's response to an RAC user's instruction is virtually instantaneous
and well inside the four seconds specified by the RAC.
However, the RS/6000 runs under IBM's AIX version of the Unix operating
system, so Travellog had to convert its core software to run with Unix. For
this, it found a software product called Universe from US company, Vmark.
This, in effect, runs Pick under Unix. Mr Osborne says the entire system was
transferred to Unix in just two or three days using Universe.
The RAC system was Travellog's first experience of the RS/6000. Since then
it has used the machine in six other contracts.
Once the project was under way the tight deadlines meant the management team
had to meet at least weekly - 'we couldn't afford to put anything off,' says
Frank Cleghorn.
'While we were driving the system development along, we were planning the
office layout, choosing furniture and drawing up staff recruitment criteria.
All this was running in parallel.'
The RAC relied heavily on Travellog in all these activities, because of its
experience with other companies. The office was to be semi-open plan to
encourage an open, friendly and team atmosphere, with low, sound absorbing
screens to provide a degree of privacy. Cables and power points were to be
hidden to ensure tidiness and efficiency. And furniture had to be
ergonomically designed. Several chair and desk combinations were tested by
users before the final choice was made.
In addition, the RAC called on Travellog's experience to determine the
number of staff who would be needed to handle the predicted business. Frank
Cleghorn says they had to have good keyboard skills and a good telephone
manner and be fairly extrovert - 'they shouldn't be afraid of asking a
customer if he would like insurance or something else on top of the ferry
booking he had phoned up for.'
He adds that most people can become reservation agents on the system after
two weeks' training.
The RAC has found that development can become never-ending - 'it wasn't long
after we went live that managers realised just what we had and wanted more
management information from it, even though we had asked them before
implementation what reports they wanted,' Mr Cleghorn says. 'This extra
development started as soon as the system was installed. It's difficult to
sign something off completely when you've never had it before.'
Fiona Holdsworth adds: 'You have to make sure, nonetheless, that it's
information that will be used and that you're not just producing some extra
report because someone thought it might be useful to see this or that moving
average.'
The system has proved its worth by helping RAC Enterprises to beat its
budget forecasts by 15 per cent in the first four months of 1992.
But its success is also reflected in the fact that it is being taken into
other areas - 'our success on the continental travel side has given us the
confidence to use the system in these other services,' says Fiona
Holdsworth.
