FT  08 JUL 92 / Bosnian carve-up in the making: Judy Dempsey on why a
unitary republic may never emerge
THE declaration at the weekend of a Croatian state within the borders of
Bosnia-Hercegovina has prompted fears it could be too late for a unitary
republic to emerge from the civil war.
European Community peace efforts in recent months may in fact have played
into the hands of Serbia and Croatia, which agreed secretly last year to
carve up Bosnia along ethnic lines.
The plan was drawn up in March 1991, by Croatia's President Franjo Tudjman
and President Milosevic of Serbia.
Negotiations were postponed after the federal Yugoslav army, backed by
Serbia, invaded Slovenia in June 1991. When the federal army, supported by
Serb nationalists, attacked Croatia last July, Zagreb and Belgrade
re-started negotiations on Bosnia.
At the time Bosnia's President Alija Izetbegovic, said: 'Any carve-up of
Bosnia would be sheer madness. This republic is an ethnic-patchwork. It
would lead to a terrible bloodbath.'
Bosnia's Croats, then led by Mr Stjepan Kljuic, Bosnia's Moslems, and the
Serbs of Sarajevo, keen to maintain the integrity of their multi-ethnic
capital city, pleaded with the EC to send monitors to Bosnia. They also
asked the UN to send peacekeeping troops before it became too late to keep
the peace.
But Mr Marrack Goulding, the UN's special envoy to the former Yugoslavia,
said earlier this year that it was impossible to send peacekeepers. 'There
was no consensus among the three ethnic groups in Bosnia.'
The consensus did not exist for one reason. Serbia, represented by Mr
Radovan Karadzic, leader of Bosnia's Serbian Democratic Party (a sister
party of the ruling party in Serbia), persistently blocked any attempts by
Bosnia's moderate Moslem, Croat and Serb communities to have UN peacekeepers
deployed.
With little prospect of the UN playing any peacekeeping role in Bosnia,
Croatia and Serbia used the opportunity to co-operate more closely in
dividing the republic.
Last January, for example, President Tudjman intervened in Bosnian politics
by replacing the moderate Mr Kljuic, head of Bosnia's Croatian Democratic
Union (a sister party of the ruling party in Croatia), with Mr Mate Boban.
Unlike Mr Kljuic, who was born in Sarajevo and regards himself as a Bosnian,
Mr Boban was born in the predominantly Croat region of western Hercegovina.
He considers himself a Croat nationalist. Mr Boban's promotion led to closer
co-operation with Mr Karadzic.
'We saw what was happening then,' said a senior UN official involved in the
Sarajevo relief effort. 'Although the UN was on the sidelines, we could see
why outside Serbs and Croats - unlike the people from Sarajevo and other
ethnically mixed cities - did not want us in. It would thwart their plans.
It was up to the EC to stop this division. If you want my personal view, the
EC's record in Bosnia has been shameful.'
Portugal, which took over the EC presidency in January, tried to tackle the
crisis. Under Ambassador Jose Cutileiro, who worked closely with Lord
Carrington, chairman of the Yugoslav peace conference, Lisbon drew up a plan
for Bosnia-Hercegovina.
'The EC March 9 plan was perfect for Zagreb and Belgrade, and for Boban and
Karadzic,' said a US diplomat. Under it Bosnia-Hercegovina's three leaders
would reorganise the republic into three autonomous ethnic units of Moslems,
Serbs and Croats. It was left unclear as to how the boundaries of each unit
would be drawn. The plan failed to take into account that some areas were so
ethnically intertwined that a simple division was not possible.
US and east European diplomats said Mr Izetbegovic was pushed into accepting
the plan because he did not want to be accused of blocking it. 'Essentially,
the EC plan gave Croatia and Serbia carte blanche to divide Bosnia,' a
Hungarian diplomat says.
By the time the EC recognised Bosnia-Hercegovina in April, Serb irregulars
and the Serbian-controlled Yugoslav army were blockading Sarajevo airport so
as to cut off the capital from the outside world as a first step in dividing
the city. They were also destabilising eastern Bosnia.
Mr Milosevic was simultaneously trying to create a corridor across northern
Bosnia aimed at linking Serbia with Knin, the self-proclaimed Serbian
republic in south-west Croatia.
Croatia was primarily concerned with protecting Croats in western
Hercegovina and with the eventual goal of carving out a swathe of territory
which would be annexed to Croatia. This strategy is reflected in last
weekend's announcement of the Croatian state of Herceg-Bosnia. Earlier Mr
Karadzic's Serb forces declared several autonomous Serb republics in Bosnia.
'The tragedy of all this is that the people of Bosnia - Moslems, Serbs, and
Croats - have lost. Like the people of Sarajevo, they see themselves as
Bosnian. They do not want ethnicity or identity imposed on them by outsiders
from Croatia, Serbia, or Montenegro,' according to a Hungarian diplomat.
'If they choose to be Bosnian, instead of belonging to one ethnic group,
they will be forced to choose their ethnicity, or else be killed or forced
to flee,' he said.
UN officials, journalists, aid workers and diplomats know precisely what
ethnic cleansing entails. The pattern is uniform, and methodical.
Serb forces surround the villages and towns. The citizens are given an
ultimatum. Either they surrender, and as a result are often put into labour
camps, deployed in the front line, or used as hostages; or else they flee -
if they are lucky.
'I think we, the people of Sarajevo and Bosnia, now realise we are alone,'
said Mr Mirsad Becerovic, a Moslem reporter at Radio Sarajevo. Mr Dragan
Miskovic, a Serb editor at the Bosnia-Hercegovina newsagency, says the
people of Sarajevo will never allow outsiders to divide their city. 'We will
never be broken. This is our city. This is our home.'
