FT  09 SEP 92 / The French Referendum: Opinion polls show race is still
close
LEADING industrialists, academics and Catholic clerics yesterday joined the
French campaign in favour of European union, as the latest polls showed a
continuing close race between supporters and opponents of the Maastricht
treaty.
A survey by polling institute IFOP yesterday gave a mere 50.5 per cent
majority for Maastricht, a sharp retreat from recent results. Another poll
by Sofres put the majority at 53 per cent, but said nearly a fifth of voters
had not yet made up their minds.
Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the prime minister, acknowledged yesterday that the
result would be tight.
Mr Jack Lang, education and culture minister, who is in charge of the
official Yes campaign, admitted last night that French governments had made
a mistake in the past in failing to associate the public with the
development of the European Community.
Support for the treaty is strongest among the younger age groups, according
to another IFOP poll, showing a 57.5 per cent majority among 18-to-24 year
olds.
The heads of Saint-Gobain, the glass and pipes maker, Lafarge Coppee cement
group and BSN, France's largest food company, urged voters to support
monetary and political union in the September 20 referendum.
'If we say No, the D-Mark will be the major reserve currency. There won't be
a second chance,' said Mr Antoine Riboud, chairman of BSN. 'We can't go on
with the risk of a devaluation of the lira or the peseta.'
However, French business is almost as divided on Maastricht as the public
generally. Only 53 per cent of industrialists favour the treaty, according
to a poll in yesterday's Figaro.
The church entered the campaign for the first time yesterday, with an appeal
for a Yes in Le Monde newspaper by Mgr Joseph Duval, Archbishop of Rouen and
president of the Roman Catholic Bishops' Conference.
According to a BVA poll for the magazine Paris Match, only Britain among
France's main European Community partners would vote against European union.
British voters would reject European union by a 56 per cent majority in the
event of a referendum, said BVA. Italy would produce 76 per cent in favour
of the treaty, while 68 per cent of Spanish voters and 60 per cent of
Germans support European union.
