FT  15 FEB 92 / Travel: Putting flesh on the bones of old Berlin - A capital
with a split personality, and the pleasures of Potsdam
THE WALL is still there.
Stretches of battered, brightly-graffitoed masonry now seem to be protected
by coiling wire and weeds to show posterity how one side of the street used
to be divided from the other, while all around road builders attempt to turn
reunified Berlin into a working reality.
From the vantage point of the line of the Wall, there does not seem a great
deal of difference between what was west and what was east, since downtown
Berlin had hitched up her skirts and rushed westwards towards the Ku'dam and
left its perimeter to go to seed.
A few blocks either way, however, and the contrast is striking. Crossing the
invisible no-man's land is like going through a looking glass. Beyond, the
visible world is in time-warp, a grand but not so old European capital
crumbling but as yet undespoiled. No doubt the late 20th century will soon
catch up with it. In Berlin and Potsdam, I felt like a vulture picking on
the old bones of the Prussian eagle before it returned to life.
Unter den Linden, as if by magnetic force, draws sightseers first up one
side and then down the other, from the Brandenburg gate and the Tiergarten
to the Lustgarten. Taxi ranks at either end account for the fact that the
surrounding streets are deserted.
Can any other boulevard boast such a sequence of ponderous, grandiose,
neo-classical and baroque public buildings? To the north: the state library,
Humboldt university, Schinkel's new guardhouse - behind whose Greek temple
portico burns the flame for the Unknown Soldier - and the monoliths of the
museum island, dominated by Schinkel's long, low Altes museum. Inside the
Pergamon museum you find not only the gargantuan late altar of Zeus and
Athene but, even more fantastically, the azure-tiled processional way and
Ishtar gate of Nebuchadnezzar's ancient Babylon.
To the south lies Langhan's Altes palais and the old library, and
Knobelsdorff's charming opera house. The gothic rather than neo-classical
church behind is by Schinkel, again, and now houses his museum-cum-shrine.
The buildings are grimy, the streets cobbled, the shops still untempting.
Perfect small baroque town palaces are in tatters: the Neue museum starkly
rises, battered and boarded up.
There is the Grand Hotel (recently taken into new ownership) for those who
want to explore the drama of this urban ghost town of the old East - the
Adlon, like the Royal palace, has long since gone. The favoured grand hotel
of the old West is the Kempinski on the Ku'damm, the street a blaze of light
and life that illustrates what Unter den Linden has been spared. Here, it
seems , no one goes to bed. After a relaxed, authentically inauthentic
dinner at the Paris Bar, one might stroll into Fofi's on Fasanenstrasse, the
new artistic and literary - '90s-smart rather than bohemian - strip. At 2am
the atmosphere changes, and there is a sense that the evening is just
beginning.
The energy of Berlin picks one up and sends one hurtling through a weekend.
Street Berlin is as fast and funny as Glaswegian. A rather drunk young man
stumbled into what had been a third-class carriage on the S-Bahn with
slatted wooden seats: 'I always travel ply-wood class,' he claimed loftily.
Berlin is surprisingly green, dauntingly large and widely dispersed. There
is far too much to see in one weekend. The decisions to be made are tough:
Komische oper, Deutsches theater or the exquisite Schauspielhaus? Whether to
go to the Bode or the new picture gallery in the suburb of Dahlem (the
latter, an extraordinary concentration of European masterpieces, wins hands
down). Should one pay homage to the celebrated Nefertiti in the Egyptian
museum or cross town to genuflect at the Pergamon altar?
On the banks of the Spree is Walter Gropius's Bauhaus archiv. Upstream is
the Japonisme of Mies van der Rohe's New National Gallery, part of an
outcrop of new museums in which the applied arts museum must rank as the
most hideous in Germany. Does one go to the Prussian Baroque Schloss
Charlottenberg, with its French garden sprinkled with delightful pavilions,
its Caspar David Friedrichs and oriental and European porcelain? Or to
Potsdam?
Once again, the latter won hands down. But avoid the motorway. The
picturesque Koenigs-allee, which takes one through the smartest suburbs of
Berlin, is fringed with forests and glistening lakes. We went on a Saturday,
the last glorious day of an Indian summer. It seemed that everyone else had
the same idea. After crossing the Glienicker bridge, we seemed to become
part of a fleet of black BMWs filled with curious Wessies, inching our way
through the shabby cobbled streets.
Potsdam is an architectural fantasy. Its town centre is Italianate, its
perimeter gothic revival. At its historical heart is an 18th century Dutch
quarter. A 19th century Russian military village lies to the north.
Merchants houses imitate the banqueting house in Whitehall; the pumping
station is an Islamic mosque complete with minaret and dome. On Telegraph
hill, in 1920-21, Erich Mendelsohn built the town's most idiosyncratic
monument, the Einstein tower.
Parks and palaces (of which there are seven) are at the heart of this summer
seat of the Hohenzollerns. Sanssoucci - in name at least - spawned a progeny
of suburban Edwardian villas. The original is a miracle of 18th century
escapism. Frederick the Great had it built to his own design (with the help
of Knobelsdorff) as a 'source of relaxation, and domestic life, for the
enjoyment of nature and the Muses'. It stretches like a long, low, ochre
limb across the top of its hill surrounded by vineyards and larch groves.
From the top one descends gently to a circular fountain via seven curved
terraces planted with vines and fig trees.
Swags of creeping stucco vines trail along the Kleine Galerie that was once
lined with fetes galantes by Watteau, Lancret and Pater. In the glossy
yellow Voltairezimmer (in which the great man never stayed) monkeys are
surrounded by bunches of grapes, melons, plums and cherries. Gilt musical
instruments and masks cascade down the walls of the exquisite rococo
circular library and white-and-gold music room. Even the caryatids that line
the garden facade of this far-from-artless rustic retreat seem unusually
spirited.
To the north, through an elegant colonnade, views stretch towards the
picturesque classical ruins. To the south lies Frederick himself, only
recently reunited as he wished with his beloved whippets. His grand,
separate picture gallery, which looks more like an orangerie than the
orangerie, offers a rare glimpse of a typical 18th century picture
collection. Original masterpieces by Rubens and Van Dyck, and Caravaggio's
powerful Doubting Thomas, who is poking an inquiring finger into Christ's
wound, happily rest toe to tip with minor works.
Sanssoucci's pleasure gardens are half restored, a combination of patchy
grass and municipal flowers beds out of character with the austere hedges
and statuary. Most delightfully fanciful of all its follies is the 18th
century Chinese tea house. This rotunda is flanked by life-size gilt
Chinamen with European faces eating and playing music under vast golden
palms, its cupola tipped by a gilt mandarin under a parasol. Here tea was
taken surrounded by the life-size and fantastically costly porcelain animals
modelled by Kandler at Meissen.
Frederick's Sanssoucci is all playful conceit, innocence and delight, its
scale intimate, its charm enchanting. In shocking contrast, the vast Neue
Palais he built in the 1760s to celebrate his escape from defeat by the
Russians is all swagger and chill great rooms. One redeeming feature, apart
from the first-rate furniture and textiles, is the hall-cum-grotto which,
apart from the usual sea shells, glitters with reef gold and encrustations
of minerals, semi-precious stones and fossils.
We left the steamy warmth and mounds of whipped cream of the 18th century
panelled tearoom to pick our way out through the park in the dark. This, it
seems, is the only time that the park at Sanssoucci is deserted. Here,
during the Potsdam conference of 1945, the Allies had divided up Berlin.
