FT  17 SEP 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Putting new life
into the business of death - Kate Button lifts the lid on American funerals
As the streamers unfurl, balloons pop and the calypso band clatters
castanets, you could be forgiven for thinking you were attending a birthday
party. However, in California it is quite likely to be the celebration of a
loved one's death.
A new-found enthusiasm for the macabre on the west coast of America has led
to the transformation of the traditional funeral into a more personalised
event; an innovative and lucrative market has developed to cater for the
eccentricities of the deceased and the bereaved.
In the US, the Federal Trade Commission calculates the cost of a funeral -
on average Dollars 4,000-5,000 excluding a headstone and cemetery plot - is
the third largest single expenditure an individual is likely to make, after
a home and a car. Casket mark-up can be 15 times cost and traditional
funeral administration fees have risen sharply in recent years.
The high cost of dying has encouraged enterprising individuals to arrange
their farewell celebrations before they depart, thus ensuring that the
ceremony reflects their personality and they receive value for money.
Memorial celebrations range from fancy dress parties, pre-taped video
performances by the deceased and champagne cruises to scatter ashes at sea.
With increasing awareness of environmental issues, cremation is fast
becoming a popular alternative to customary funeral burials. In an effort to
meet the increased demand for unconventional requests, start-up funeral
service businesses are appearing all over the west coast offering a variety
of options which the traditional funeral directors fail to supply.
For Dollars 1,500, the deceased can be cremated and have their ashes
scattered at sea or laid to rest in a flower garden designed specifically
for that purpose. The more adventurous can have remains encased in a
mini-rocket and catapulted into outer space to orbit the earth for eternity.
Dale Suess, historian and consultant to the industry says: 'The traditional
funeral industry doesn't offer options and if you want cremation you are
considered cheap. The businesses that succeed in this industry will be those
that provide what the people want.'
In San Francisco, a 'death boutique' called the Ghia Gallery opened in 1990
offering custom-made urns which can double up as table lamps or high-tech
robots. More bizarre is jewellery designed to carry the ashes of the dearly
departed. For those who still prefer burial, the Gallery has an
Egyptian-style sarcophagus at Dollars 7,995 or, specifically for female
customers, a coffin lined with mirrors, which doubles as a vanity mirror
prior to 'departure'.
'The lid has been taken off the last taboo', says Alex Ghia, the gallery's
founder. 'The institutionalised way of dealing with death showed us a
glaring lack of individuality and personal meaning. We offer the public
choices for dealing with death.'
Funeral venues are also benefiting from the less traditional west coast
approach to death, as it becomes increasingly acceptable for mausoleums and
cemeteries to be used for events other than funerals.
The Neptune Society Columbarium (NSC), a mausoleum in Richmond, California,
regularly stages ballet performances, Himalayan bells concerts,
Shakespearean plays and recitals for the San Francisco Saxophone Quartet,
which recently recorded its latest album there. The giant rotunda, with its
stained glass windows and tiered balconies, houses the cremated remains of
more than 15,000 people and promises any performing artist a capacity crowd.
For a percentage of the ticket sales, the venue can be used for almost any
performance 'within the realms of good taste', says Ron Cox, the Neptune
Society manager. In May, it hosted its first wedding.
While the cost of staging a performance at the NSC is considered reasonable,
the cost of buying a niche in which to store the deceased's ashes is less
economical. A niche shared by 10 or 12 unrelated individuals starts at
Dollars 1,500, and a personal niche ranges from Dollars 3,500 to Dollars
30,000. This does not include cremation, a service or an urn.
Such expenses are encouraging innovative Californians to reject the
traditional brass or marble urns for anything from milk churns and tobacco
jars to cookie tins. And for the purposes of cremation, chipboard caskets
are used, draped in satins and velvet.
As the US begins to draw back the shroud which envelopes the funeral
industry in macabre and sombre tradition, individuals are able to choose
from options never before considered tasteful or acceptable. And while the
environment benefits, a new market is born to cater for the demand of civil
choice. In California at least, where there is death, there is a livelihood.
