FT  19 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Secret players in the campaign - Securit:
Efforts to thwart the IRA
IT IS the most secretive issue of the campaign, but politicians can ill
afford to ignore it.
Just over two weeks ago the IRA served notice that it would try to disrupt
the general election. Within days a bomb on a south London railway track
disrupted commuters on Budget day.
It is thought that at least one terrorist cell could still be at large on
the mainland. Senior police officers say there is no room for complacency,
particularly given the IRA's past record of singling out politicians as
targets.
The plain clothes special branch officers openly shadowing senior
politicians are only the most visible aspect of the security operation.
Foremost behind the scenes is the Metropolitan Police's Anti-Terrorist Squad
(S013), responsible for tracking IRA intentions and movements in
co-ordination with other departments including M15, M16 and the Royal Ulster
Constabulary.
One Conservative party official said: 'We are in the hands of the police.
Details of an itinerary are released only the day before and only in terms
of a general area. The specific location is given out only a few hours
before.'
The aim is to keep to a minimum the time an IRA hit squad might have to
organise an attack on a target.
So restricted is knowledge of Mrs Margaret Thatcher's schedule that when
local party officials tacked the red carpet down on what turned out to be
the wrong part of an Isle of Wight wharf last week it was widely interpreted
as an attempt to wrong-foot terrorists.
'There is a fine line to be drawn between our need to protect potential
targets and the party's need not to have a politician's access to the public
too restricted,' says a senior police chief.
According to one security expert the election campaign is putting huge
organisational strain on the police force.
'There is not a hope in hell of protecting everybody,' he says, 'and even
keeping up with the main players in the campaign is going to prove a real
headache.'
Additional reporting David Owen and Alison Smith.
