FT  01 FEB 92 / Travel: On the road to Fes - Morocco combines startling
physical beauty with cultured sangfroid. It is ideal for the trekker, the
loafer and the honeymooner. Loafer Michael Thompson-Noel travelled elegantly
and stayed in the best hotels
PERHAPS YOU are familiar with Morocco and its pleasures: its size and
variety and intense physical beauty; its culture, which is deep, and its
relaxed conviviality; its friendliness, food and the ease with which
visitors can move around.
If not, writes Michael Thompson-Noel, you are as lucky as the man who has
never read Raymond Chandler. A surprise awaits you: an exceedingly pleasant
one.
My most eye-opening visit to Morocco happened some weeks ago in the company
of a man who knows Morocco well and whose enthusiasm for it serves the
country well. This was Chris Lawrence, managing director (and owner) of The
Best of Morocco, the specialist UK holiday company. Lawrence has been
visiting and running holidays to Morocco for 25 years, so there is not a lot
he doesn't know.
From London we flew to Ouarzazate via Casablanca. The next morning we drove
along the Valley of a Thousand Kasbahs to Erfoud via Tineghir and the Todra
gorge. This is wonderful countryside, as is the area around Rissani, from
where we ventured into the desert, to Merzouga, and rode camels across the
dunes - touristy, but why not? Then we continued to Fes via the modern ski
resort of Ifrane. And then, by air, to Marrakech.
In short, we covered a lot of ground, encountered excellent food and hotels,
and enjoyed plenty of R&amp;R in cities like Fes and Marrakech that everyone
ought to visit at least once.
Morocco's hotels are one of its biggest pluses for travellers who like
comfort. The ones we stayed in were: Karam Palace, Ouarzazate; Hotel Salam
Erfoud; Palais Jamai, Fes, and Es Saadi Hotel, Marrakech. All were
excellent. And we visited one exceptional restaurant: Yacout in Marrakech
(advance booking essential), which is located in the back streets (you
wouldn't find it on foot) and serves fine food in a dream-like setting.
(Your hotel will book you in, and order a Merc to drop you at the door).
These hotels, and more, feature in The Best of Morocco's current brochure
(to October 31) whose inclusive holidays range from weekend breaks to long
stays. As well as Agadir, Fes, Tangier and Marrakech, the brochure includes
Ouarzazate, Taroudant, Zagora and Essaouira.
There are seven-night Land Rover Saharan safaris with full board (four-star
hotels) from Pounds 513; two, three or four-night weekends in most big
cities (half-board in a five-star hotel) from Pounds 289; golf holidays
(there are excellent courses in Marrakech, Agadir, Rabat and Mohammedia,
with very low green fees and no waiting); skiing (lift-pass: Pounds 2.80 per
day); horse or mule trekking (various one-week programmes from Pounds 699);
fishing (there is outstanding fishing in the lakes of the Atlas mountains,
50 miles from Marrakech), and fly-drive (pick-up and drop-off at any
Moroccan airport), from Pounds 243 for flights and car for a week.
Chris Lawrence also organises six different escorted tours with weekly
departures: The Great South (two itineraries, one week from Pounds 473),
Imperial Cities (two itineraries, one week from Pounds 463), Grand Tour of
Morocco (two weeks from Pounds 683) and Medinas and Kasbahs (one week from
Pounds 499).
The Best of Morocco is at Seend Park, Seend, Wiltshire SN12 6NZ. Tel:
0380-828533, fax: 0380-828630.
Michael Thompson-Noel flew c/o Royal Air Maroc, which has six flights a week
from London to Morocco and is at 205 Regent St, London W1.
