FT  06 JUN 92 / Silence is Arab legacy from Six-Day War: The reluctance in
Egypt to examine Nasser's role in the 1967 defeat
IN the Arab world, and in Egypt in particular, it is known as the naqba, or
disaster. People are not obliged to be any more specific when referring to
the 1967 Six-Day war in which the Arab armies were humiliated and swathes of
Arab territory fell under Israeli control.
While Israelis dance triumphantly before the Wailing Wall to celebrate the
25th anniversary of the reunification of Jerusalem under Jewish control, the
Arab world remains quiet about a bitter memory that time has not erased.
In Egypt, the normally voluble press tip-toes around the issue, and retired
public figures who had some role in the war find it inconvenient to respond
to journalist's requests for interviews.
Like a family scandal there is a conscious attempt to pretend that it didn't
really happen. Remarkably, in the past 25 years there has been no serious
investigation of the steps which led towards the war.
'If was a very, very humiliating war,' says the revisionist Egyptian
historian, Dr Abdel Azim Ramadan. 'What happened in June 1967 had never
happened throughout Egypt's whole history. Egypt had a big army, a strong
army and a lot of weapons, and that all disappeared not in six days, but in
a few hours.' Dr Ramadan, a university teacher and newspaper columnist, is
one of very few Egyptian intellectuals who has tried to deal squarely with
1967, and with the responsibility for the disaster of President Gamal Abdel
Nasser.
His book, Destruction of Idols: The Story of the 1967 War, ascribes the
defeat to the 'rottenness' of a system which accorded dictatorial power to
the very few.
He says: 'The June war was the outcome of a political order which could
produce nothing except defeat . . . faults couldn't be rectified because
only criticism can rectify faults and no-one could write or say anything
against the regime without getting heavy punishment.'
Criticism of Mr Nasser, a towering figure in the Arab world before the war,
is painful for prominent Egyptians even today, since many were caught up in
the nationalist fervour of the time. There is a tendency, therefore, to
excuse his mistakes and find other scapegoats, among them Field Marshal
Abdel Hakim Amer, the military commander, who later committed suicide (some
insist he was murdered).
But even for those most protective of Mr Nasser's historical reputation,
including his confidant, the newspaper editor and columnist Mohammed
Hassanein Heikal, it is impossible to disguise the dimensions of Mr Nasser's
political mistakes in the weeks before the war, and his under-estimation of
Israeli military capabilities.
It was Mr Nasser who, by withdrawing permission for the stationing of a UN
deterrent force on Egyptian soil, by blockading the Strait of Tiran to
Israeli shipping and by re-deploying Egyptian troops in the Sinai, gave
Israel the pretext for its devastating pre-emptive strike, its casus belli.
It was also Mr Nasser's decision, under pressure from both his Soviet
quartermasters and the US, to refrain from firing the first shot, thus
refusing the element of surprise. In the event, the war was effectively over
in a few hours early on June 5 after Egypt's air force was demolished on the
ground.
Whatever the reasons for Mr Nasser's folly, and there is some evidence that
he hoped the gravity of the situation would quickly attract international
intervention, as was the case in the 1956 Suez crisis, the 1967 war marked a
watershed in Arab affairs.
Mr Tahsin Bashir, a former spokesman for Mr Nasser, believes the Nasser
revolution, with its secular Pan-Arabist flavour, was killed in June 1967.
The death of Nasserism contributed to the re-birth of religious
fundamentalism across the region, and a surge in 'Palestinianism', as the
Palestinians came to the painful conclusion they were deluding themselves in
relying for their salvation on Arab regimes.
On the odd occasions that mainstream Arab commentators have sought to deal
with the legacy of 1967, they have not been able to resist reference to
'conspiracy'.
Thus, to this day, attempts are made to explain away the disaster by
referring to an alleged collusion between the US and Israel, but no strong
evidence supports a contention that senior US officials were party to a plot
to entrap Mr Nasser.
Indeed, some Arab writers believe an attachment to a conspiracy theory to
explain the mistakes of 1967 is foolish and counter-productive. Mr Gamil
Mattar, a columnist in the London-based Arab daily, Al Hayat, writes: 'Some
of the Arab politicians, especially those who were the main players, have
deliberately used the term plot. The word plot is always used by those who
have been politically or militarily defeated to cover up for their
inadequacy.'
Jerusalem: ethnic powder keg, Weekend Section, Page I
