FT  08 APR 92 / Letter: Weakness of science and wealth creation link
Sir, I hope that your editorial on the blighting of British science these
past 10 years and more ('Science Matters', April 2) will be widely read and
pondered. While science everywhere always clamours for funds, there being an
infinite number of questions on the road to a Theory of Everything, it is a
fact that the UK has suffered more than most other developed countries over
the past decade.
The UK has no minister for science because only a very small minority has
any understanding of the relationship that should exist here, as it does
elsewhere, between scientific inquiry and wealth creation. As you imply, the
relationship is non-linear and hence complex. But one aspect is abundantly
clear, namely that only wealthy countries can seriously engage in serious
science.
The UK undoubtedly was, until recently and maybe still is, second to none in
the quality of its scientific community and of the work it undertook. The
weakness that is now being exposed, is the persistent delicacy with which
academe fingered the potential of its findings.
Material gain was, and still is, demeaning to too many of those dedicated to
knowledge for its own sake. The consequences and ramifications of this most
honourable posture were negligently unforeseen for a very long time. So now
we have, not only a rack of ministers and would-be ministers with no
understanding whatsoever of the role that science should play in society,
and not only a clutch of main board directors similarly maimed, but also two
or more generations of young people, trudging through an education system
that has eschewed anything that looks difficult. Most certainly they will
not be able to contribute in a significant manner to providing the
wherewithal for academics to pursue their aims.
This is indeed an unhealthy state of affairs and one can only grimace at the
tenacity of those who sing the praises of 'jewels in the education crown'
when it is all too obvious that the excellence the system can provide for
the few will ensure that they remain, for their whole working lives, grossly
underfunded. What academics must now urgently attend to is just as obvious.
D A A Fagandini,
6 Alleyn Park,
Dulwich,
London SE21 8AE
