FT  02 DEC 92 / Business and the Environment: A hard nut to crack -
Eco-friendly business ventures which pave the way for sustainable
development
Ben Cohen of Ben &amp; Jerry's ice cream company says it all came to him at a
rainforest benefit hosted by the Grateful Dead. Eager to help nature but
also to make a profit, Cohen saw green when he came across a (legal) organic
commodity at the concert: the Brazil nut, a renewable Amazon resource
extracted by the Kayapo Indians.
Three years later, the US company buys Dollars 1.6m (Pounds 1m) of Brazil
nuts from the Kayapo to make its popular Rainforest Crunch ice cream, a
vanilla-caramel concoction.
Eco-business ventures are a growing though still limited field. They usually
follow a two-pronged approach. First, companies source raw materials from
ecologically threatened areas around the globe to promote the use of
sustainable resources which provide indigenous peoples with foreign capital.
Direct investment in the Amazon, for instance, ties the Indians' welfare to
the welfare of the rainforest, prompting them to protect it against
destructive cutting and burning by developers.
Second, businesses can capitalise on the public relations boost in a market
where most things 'green' are popular. The firms also often support
conservation efforts organised by environmental groups which work with the
people.
This shift in attitude follows years of distrust. Many businesses are
involved in such projects, and no longer stand accused of 'window dressing'.
Meanwhile, conservationists now work closely with the local population, who
were once considered the problem, to develop products and sell them to
interested firms.
Cultural Survival, the US non-profit foundation which sold Cohen on the
Brazil nut, tries to find buyers for products made by indigenous groups with
little access to western markets. The group acts as a trader for 15
commodities from 11 countries to make 125 products. Sales to businesses with
'socially responsible' sourcing practices reach Dollars 2m annually with
clients such as The Body Shop, the cosmetics chain, and retailers like
Macy's and the Nature Company eager to foster a progressive image.
Jason Clay, director of Cultural Survival, acknowledges the trade volume is
scant compared with the Third World's development needs and has barely
scratched the hidden potential. But he expects his nascent operation,
started in 1988, to reach sales of Dollars 50m in five years.
Cultural Survival also benefits directly from the sales. Companies agree to
pass on 5 per cent of their premium to fund the group's programmes. These
include getting indigenous people titles to their land so they will protect
it against ruin; and resource management programmes, needed to raise
standards of living.
Working with local groups to expand commercial opportunity was pioneered
during the 1980s by Chico Mendes, the Brazilian rubber tapper murdered in
1988. The Mendes spirit is in evidence in Ecuador's Esmeraldes region where
the locals produce tagua, an ivory-like palm nut, that can be used to make
buttons. With assistance from Conservation International, another non-profit
body, sales to retailers such as Smith-Holkin, LL Bean and Esprit have
generated Dollars 75,000.
On the surface, this may seem more like charity than business, but the group
says its presence has given conservationists needed leverage in local
politics. For example, Esmeraldes now has a land-use plan and it
successfully opposed a banana plantation development on protected land. The
new thinking has also led environmentalists to reassess their staple
programmes, such as the popular debt-for-nature swaps which have been
criticised for stirring inflationary pressures and creating a market for bad
debt that should be forgiven, not bought.
Conservation International, which pioneered debt-for-nature swaps in 1987,
is using this tool to promote eco-business ventures in Guatemala. Its
Dollars 1.4m debt-for-nature swap funds, for the first time, commercial
extractive activity.
The programme is run in the Maya Biosphere Reserve, a 1.75m-hectare region
in the nation's northern Peten province. The local population of some 15,000
Mestizo people, part Spanish and part Indian, depends on the forests'
natural endowment. But over-harvesting and deforestation has depleted the
forest.
Local people are taught proper harvesting techniques that maximise
sustainable use of the reserve's three primary non-timber products. 'If they
look out over the forest and see their economic future, and the economic
future of their children, they become allies in the ecological conservation
of their forests,' says Jim Nations of Conservation International.
