FT  03 JUL 92 / De Klerk accuses ANC of sabotaging talks
SOUTH AFRICAN President F W de Klerk last night accused the African National
Congress of sabotaging the peace process in a nationally broadcast speech
that dashed hopes of an early resolution of the country's political crisis.
Mr de Klerk, delivering the government's response to ANC demands for
resuming the stalled constitutional negotiations, accused the ANC of
'fabricating an artificial crisis'.
The confident tone of Mr de Klerk's speech suggested he may have reached a
turning point in relations with the ANC.
Earlier, he met leaders of other black political parties, including Chief
Mangosuthu Buthelezi, head of the mainly Zulu Inkatha Freedom Party with
whom the government has an informal alliance. This revived speculation that
Mr de Klerk sees the alliance as the basis of a future government.
He said the ANC's reasons for withdrawing last week from negotiations for a
post-apartheid constitution were 'completely unconvincing'.
The ANC's withdrawal, sparked by the massacre last month of 42 people at
Boipatong near Johannesburg, was in protest against government intransigence
in talks and continuing violence.
Mr de Klerk said the ANC wanted to achieve seizure of power through mass
mobilisation. He said the government would not tolerate such efforts and
would 'take all steps necessary for preventing the country from sliding into
anarchy'.
But Mr Hernus Kriel, law and order minister, said later the government had
not at this stage considered imposing a national state of emergency.
Mr de Klerk renewed an offer of talks with the ANC and Inkatha in an effort
to find common ground on ways to end political violence, the issue that led
to the current stalemate.
Mr Roelf Meyer, constitutional affairs minister, said that although certain
ANC demands had already been addressed bilaterally and at the Convention for
a Democratic South Africa (Codesa), the constitutional negotiating forum,
these 'can and should be further addressed'.
There was no immediate response from the ANC, but it had rejected an earlier
offer of talks.
Workers ponder role, Page 6
Editorial comment, Page 16
