FT  15 JAN 92 / International Company News: Implant-maker moves to calm
investor fears
A LONG-STANDING controversy over the safety of silicone breast implants has
turned into a public furore across the US this week, frightening thousands
of patients and casting a financial shadow over the leading manufacturer of
the device, Dow Corning Corporation, writes Martin Dickson in New York.
The row heated up last week when the US Food and Drug Administration ordered
a moratorium on the use of silicone breast implants until new information on
their safety could be assessed. And it grew to fever pitch this week when US
newspapers disclosed company documents which, they alleged, suggested Dow
Corning had rushed breast impacts to market without sufficient safety tests.
The implants are used in plastic surgery to enlarge a woman's breasts for
cosmetic reasons or to replace breasts lost to cancer. Critics claim that
silicone can leak from the implants and migrate to other parts of the body,
causing complications.
Dow Corning, a 50-50 joint venture between Corning, the glass products
manufacturer, and Dow Chemical, the large chemicals group, has strongly
denied the allegations. Yet mounting stock market concern has led to a 16
per cent drop in Corning's share price since Monday morning, prompting Mr
Jamie Houghton, the company's chairman, to issue a statement yesterday
claiming that investors were 'grossly over-reacting'.
However, investors fear that the latest controversy over Dow Corning's role
in the development of the implant business could open the floodgates to
hundreds of product liability lawsuits, embroiling the company and its
parents for years in costly litigation.
An estimated 2m women worldwide have received breast implants over the past
30 years, more than 1m of them in the US, and Dow Corning is by far the
largest American manufacturer. Other producers include McGhan Medical,
Mentor and Bioplasty.
Dow Corning has already had a foretaste of the potential problems: last
month, a jury in San Francisco awarded Dollars 7.34m in damages against the
company to a woman who alleged that ruptures in her breast implants were
linked to an auto-immune disease. Dow Corning is appealing against the
judgment, pointing out that two of the plaintiff's doctors said in court
that her disease preceded the implants.
However, the jury said that Dow Corning fraudulently failed to disclose the
risks of implants.
The plaintiff's case relied heavily on internal Dow Corning documents dating
back to the 1970s, when silicone implants were being developed, which
appeared to show a lively debate within the company over the safety of the
devices. The documents appear to have played a role in last week's FDA's
moratorium, which came as a surprise, since the agency had been expected to
follow an advisory panel recommendation last November to leave silicon
implants on the market.
The controversy intensified this week when US newspapers, notably the New
York Times and Wall Street Journal, published summaries of the internal
documents and claimed these suggested Dow Corning may have rushed the
product to market without adequate tests.
However, Mr Robert Rylee, chief of the company's health care business, hit
back, claiming that the reports were a mis-characterisation of the facts,
that internal company memos were not science, and 'the cumulative body of
credible scientific evidence shows that implants are safe and effective'.
The next crucial point is likely to come in February, when the FDA is
expected to follow up its 45-day moratorium with fresh recommendations.
Meanwhile, Dow Corning announced yesterday it had shut down its silicone
implant production lines in the US and was taking a Dollars 25m pre-tax
charge in the fourth quarter to cover the costs of the controversy. It also
pointed out that the breast implant business covered only 1 per cent of the
company's 1990 sales of Dollars 1.7bn, much of which involves chemicals with
a wide variety of uses.
At parent Corning, Mr Houghton said he expected that the row would have no
significant impact on the group's long-term performance.
Corning's share price fell Dollars 2 1/8 to Dollars 66 1/4 in early trading
yesterday but rallied to close unchanged at Dollars 68 3/8 . On Monday
Corning's share price had fallen Dollars 10 5/8 . Dow Chemical, which fell
only Dollars  7/8 , to Dollars 53 7/8 , on Monday, yesterday lost a further
Dollars 1 3/4 to close at Dollars 52 1/8 .
Analysts said that Dow's share price had been hit less because it was a much
larger company than Corning, with annual sales of Dollars 19bn compared with
Dollars 3bn, and because Corning, having enjoyed a strong rally in recent
months, was vulnerable to a correction.
Amid all the flying accusations, those suffering most are the women who have
undergone breast implants. The American Society of Plastic and
Reconstructive Surgeons says its members have been flooded by calls from
frightened patients, but they have been unable to fully address these fears
because they have not been given access to the FDA's new safety information.
For all concerned, some very uncomfortable weeks still lie ahead.
