FT  10 OCT 92 / Cambodia's fields of pity: John Westbrooke tries to make
sense of a country's tragic past
NOTHING looks special about the killing fields of Choeung Ek. They are just
fields, in the countryside some 10 miles outside Phnom Penh, Cambodia's
capital. But one day in 1980 a cow's hoof sank into the soil and,
investigating, its owner found human bones.
There are many such cemeteries round the country, the legacy of the
murderous Khmer Rouge regime which ruled Cambodia from 1975 to 1978. At
Choeung Ek, 9,000 skeletons were exhumed from a series of shallow mass
graves, each some 10ft across.
You can walk round inside the slender tower put up as a memorial. On shelves
in the middle are 8,000 skulls, labelled according to sex and age ('Juvenile
female Kampuchean, from 15 to 20 years'). They might be centuries old, but
they are not: had they lived, many would have been younger than me.
I asked Mr Sann, my guide - a former English teacher who trained in
Singapore - if any had been identified. Only the Europeans, he giggled (Sann
giggled a lot); eight or nine of these had been named and returned to their
families. But he pointed to a collection of disinterred rags under the
bottom shelf: 'Last year, a lady found some shorts here. Her husband's'
Outside, a notice board mourns the dead in words which are, somehow, the
more disturbing for their fractured English: 'We seem to be looking at the
horrifying scenes and the panic-stricken faces of the people who were dying
of starvation, forced labour or torture without mercy upon the skinny body,
they died without giving the last words to their kith and kin.'
To save bullets, many were just hit on the head with hoes while tractor
engines were revved-up to drown the screams. Guards are posted around the
monument; Sann said they were scared to go near it after dark.
In the circumstances, perhaps there should be an eerie stillness around the
memorial. But that is not so. There is a school nearby and you can hear the
children laughing and playing; little girls in white blouses and navy skirts
waved as we drove by.
Down the bumpy roads are stalls selling beer, cigarettes and petrol in soft
drink bottles. Ordinary little houses, on stilts, have porches decorated
with pictures - mostly of the Buddha, but I spotted one of a young lady in a
transparent nightdress.
So, I was little wiser as to how Cambodians felt about the years of terror.
The story is appalling. The Khmer Rouge rebels led by Pol Pot were welcomed
as liberators after overthrowing the corrupt Lon Nol regime (Phnom Penh fell
just before Saigon at the end of the Vietnam war); but, working to a plan to
turn all of Cambodia into a sort of collective farm, they proclaimed 1975
Year Zero, renamed the country Kampuchea, and drove everyone into the
countryside to work in the fields.
Anyone suspected of being a saboteur, or an agent of the hated Vietnamese,
or of anyone else, was likely to be tortured and killed. This included any
intellectuals - anyone, for instance, who spoke a foreign language; even
anyone who wore glasses.
So, how did bespectacled, English-speaking Sann survive? He giggled. 'My
students protected me. Many of them joined the Khmer Rouge. They remembered
me and protected me and my wife and family. (Giggle). I had to work in the
country on a farm. My wife was on another farm but I was allowed to see her
every month. My mother and my father and my sister were killed. (Giggle).
But my students protected me.'
Why was he giggling? It seemed impertinent even to wonder.
The Khmer Rouge laid claim to an area of South Vietnam and, after a series
of border clashes, the Vietnamese invaded Cambodia. Within days, the Khmer
Rouge had fled. (Pol Pot now lives in Thailand; the Thais, like the US, seem
not to mind, on the ground that any enemy of Vietnam is a friend of theirs.
Some of his former associates are still in power).
Returning Cambodians found Phnom Penh a ghost town used as a storehouse.
Houses in one street were used for keeping left shoes; right shoes were in
another street across town. Its population, swollen by refugees to 3m in
1975, is still less than a third of that; of the country's 7m people, about
1m had died.
One of the things the Vietnamese discovered was Tuol Sleng, a school in
Phnom Penh used as an interrogation centre. Now, it is a museum; as with the
killing fields, the Cambodians want everyone to see it.
Notices list the Security Regulations: 'Don't try to hide the facts by
making protests this and that. You are strictly prohibited to contest me . .
. While getting lashes or electrification, you must not cry at all . . . If
you disobey any point of my regulations, you shall get either 10 lashes or
five shocks of electric discharge.'
Several rooms had fresh corpses in them when the Vietnamese arrived; they
buried the bodies but the rooms are otherwise as they were found,
bloodstains and all.
Most unsettling, though, is the display of victims. The meticulous
interrogators photographed them all as they arrived; and the photos, row on
row, hundreds on hundreds, line the walls of the old schoolrooms. Almost
all, 17,000 of them, were tortured until they confessed; then they were sent
to Choeung Ek.
Confessed to what? What did the Khmer Rouge want of them? You can see, by
stretching the imagination, why it might (for instance) have suited Hitler
to demonise the Jews; but what sense can the mass slaughter of Cambodians by
Cambodians have made? Can you even call it genocide when they were killing
their own race?
Not all of the victims died: half a dozen escaped alive from Tuol Sleng when
the Vietnamese came. One of them is still there - showing tourists around.
What are you doing here? I wanted to ask him. Why haven't you fled to the
ends of the earth to get away from this place? But then I remembered Sann's
unfathomable giggles and realised that, whatever this man might answer, I
would never understand it; so I did not ask.
Sann was reunited with his family and adopted two orphaned children. Now, he
works for the government, like many Cambodians, but his wages (only about
Dollars 5 a month, anyway) had not been paid for months. He supplements his
income by guiding tourists, dubbing films into Khmer, and occasional
teaching.
The Vietnamese have gone home; the UN is trying to run the country (sending
in troops to scour it for unexploded mines); and businesses such as hotels
are being sold abroad for the hard currency. Cambodia is in a mess.
