FT  03 OCT 92 / Truth of the Matter: The quality of mercy - Hugh Dickinson,
Dean of Salisbury, considers the call for mercy killings following a
doctor's conviction for giving an elderly patient a fatal injection
WHAT PRICE the tyranny of the abstract noun? I met the phrase for the first
time recently and recognised its face at once. Abstract nouns get canonised.
They get put in manifestos and men and women - though fewer women I suspect
 -proceed to shed their life blood, and other people's, in defence of them.
Meanwhile reality has moved on and the abstraction is beached like some
beautiful empty shell after the tide has ebbed.
Is 'The Sanctity of Life' one such? Or more emphatically, 'The Absolute
Sanctity of Life'? My mother's family were farmers in South Africa and
somewhere in the family folklore there is a story of a young man and his
best friend riding out into the bush to shoot game. Some 20 miles from home
they encounter and wound a lion. But the friend is thrown from his horse and
terribly mauled by the wounded beast. His injuries were appalling and
agonising. Obviously he cannot survive the long rough journey home.
To leave him and ride for help is to abandon him to the lions. To stay with
him only a prolongation of his terrible pain. The only kindly solution is
quick and merciful oblivion. The bullet in the back of the head was his only
option and so he shot his friend.
Most Christian moral theologians would agree. In spite of much loud advocacy
from Christian protest groups, I do not find the Absolute Sanctity of Life
written anywhere in scripture or tradition. 'Thou shalt not kill' means 'no
murder'. But killing abounds in the Old Testament. The long held concept of
The Just War has a respectable place in Christian moral theology, and was
much in play in the months leading up the Gulf War.
So the Sanctity of Life seems easily suspended when more urgent interests
supervene. There are more than 100,000 Iraqi corpses, (mostly unlettered
peasants) in the desert sands following the Gulf War - but then a good deal
of holy oil got spilt as well. For, whatever we may say, most of us,
governments and terrorists alike, believe and act on the belief that there
are a good many other things further up the sanctity scale than human life.
Other abstract nouns, no doubt.
But when I come to lie in mortal pain, I don't want any abstract noun
standing between me and merciful oblivion. I have had enough experience of
pain in my 60 years inside this creaky body to be sure of that, but I
certainly do not want to put my doctor in the postion of having to break the
most solemn oath of his profession, to save life not to take it. He must not
cross that boundary.
There has been much comment in the press about the case of Dr Alan Cox,
tried and convicted in Winchester Crown Court for the attempted murder of a
patient. The moral and practical issues are immensely complex and confusing
and not much helped by abstract nouns. Public debate is essential for I have
no doubt that the pressure for some form of legal euthanasia will become
irresistible in the next 50 years. If we are to go that way we must get it
right.
Clearly the Winchester jury was right in law. Dr Cox intended to kill. He
was therefore guilty. But mens rea (guilty intent) is a slippery fish. The
doctor's choice of drug was not a painkiller but a heart stopper. A bullet
would have had the same purposes and effect. He chose to end the pain by
ending the life. But his intention was not malign, it was benign.
If 'Always do unto others what you would have them do unto you' is the
greatest moral precept of human relationships then it could be said he was
doing the same final act of loving service that his friend did for the young
man mauled by the lion. I would hope so to be loved myself in such a case.
Should we say then a friend may do it but a doctor may not - even to end
intolerable pain?
Moral philosophers have a useful concept of 'double effect'. In this case we
have two effects: pain killing and life killing. It is morally acceptable
for a doctor to administer a drug to kill pain even if the immediate or
longer-term consequence is the death of the patient. It is morally
unacceptable for a doctor to administer a life-killing drug as a way of
ending pain. A + B is alright, B + A is not. It is a subtle line, you may
think, between 'kill to end the pain' and 'kill the pain and so end the
life', but it is one on which their solemn oath and our essential trust in
our doctors stands or falls. It is too dangerous to allow mercy killing to
go on sub rosa amid a kindly conspiracy of silence among the medics.
The conclusion I draw from this, though with some trepidation, is not that
euthanasia in such circumstances must be always banned. It is rather that
the burden of this decision must not be left to doctors. The vast majority
of cases will continue to fall on the acceptable side of the line, and will
offer patients the benign exit through pain killing drugs: but these
exceptional cases will have to be held by the community through appropriate
panels in partnership with the best medical advice. Death is not a medical
responsibility. It belongs to all of us.
The case of excessive pain is not the only one that will come to claim the
panel's attention. There is a continuum through irreversible coma,
Alzheimer's, to premature senile dementia and on to mental handicap and
inconvenient old age. This is the dreaded slippery slope. But the social
pressure to move on to that slope is already irresistible. Many doctors are
standing at its upper edge. Legal enforceable guidelines or legally
constituted panels are the only bulwark against the slide.
The ethical problem in these cases is rather different but if we do not
address it and find an acceptable legal protection for it I believe we will
find people taking their own lives and the lives of their dear ones into
their own hands. Less benign agencies may follow.
What totalitarian regimes or venal doctors might get up to once the wall is
breached is certainly frightening but I do not think they will be deterred
more in the future than they have been in the past by us shouting the
Sanctity of Life into their unheeding ears. Tight legislation will do more
to save life and provide easeful death than any abstract nouns.
