FT  03 SEP 92 / International Company News: Toyoda Machine to pull out of
plant in France
TOYODA Machine Works, the Toyota Motor affiliate, plans to close a French
machine tool plant once viewed as the company's strategic foothold in the
European market.
The closure, planned for next year, is a sign of the general restructuring
of Japan's manufacturing industry, which is attempting to reduce capacity
and is being forced to review foreign investments made during the 1980s.
Ernault-Toyoda Automation (ETA), based in Cholot, near Nantes, has been
making automatic lathes and machining centres, but Toyoda Machine said
yesterday the manufacturing operations are likely to cease and ETA will
become a sales and service company for imported machine tools.
Toyoda Machine reported a consolidated net loss of Y4.8bn last year, and
blamed its poor performance on the downturn in Japan's domestic economy and
troubled markets in Europe and the US. The company was forced to set aside
Y3.8bn to cover losses at ETA, and has forecast a group loss of Y2.5bn
(Dollars 20m) for the current year to the end of March.
The Japanese machine tool maker has closed a US plant and announced early
last year that ETA's workforce, now at 200, would be halved. Its attempts to
salvage foreign manufacturing bases were undermined by the sharp fall in
capital spending at home, as the industry last fiscal year reported a 24 per
cent fall in new orders.
Several Japanese manufacturers are known to be reviewing overseas
investments that appeared to be wise strategic purchases during the 1980s,
but which have since become a burden to a faltering parent company.
Meanwhile, other manufacturers are trimming product lines and revising
longer-term expansion plans.
Toyoda Machine took a stake in Ernault, a French machine tool maker looking
for an infusion of cash and technology, during the early 1980s.
Ernault-Toyoda Automation became a Toyoda Machine subsidiary and the
Japanese parent has continued to pump fresh funds into the ailing company.
