FT  07 JUL 92 / Survey of Italy (17): It's not as much fun as it should be -
Tourism
EMBASSIES in Rome and their consular posts throughout the country are now
gearing up for the busy season. July and August will produce a sharp
increase in the number of 'distressed citizens' whose Italian holidays have
been spoiled by the theft of passports, tickets, money and belongings.
Unwary tourists are easy prey for the pickpockets, bag snatchers, muggers
and other delinquents who plague the large cities. The notoriety of the
route 64 buses from the capital's Termini railway station to St Peter's is
such that the transport authority has posted signs to warn travellers to be
on their guard. Rome's 'A' underground line is another high risk route.
Travelling under one's own steam does not, however, guarantee a trouble-free
trip. Owners of cars with foreign plates often become neurotic in Italy, a
condition that lifts only when safely across the border and heading home.
The car break-in - often by smashing a window  - is an inconvenience that
many foreign visitors have suffered.
But the tourist is not only an easy victim for petty criminals. The
traveller in Italy is a soft target for legitimate businesses like hotels,
restaurants and taxis. Over recent years tourists have learnt that Italy has
become a high cost destination.
Figures from the Bank of Italy reveal a significant drop in the
competitiveness of tourist services. For foreign tourists, the index of
Italian competitiveness fell steadily during the 1980s, and was about 20 per
cent lower last year than in 1982. During the mid and late-1980s the
situation was even worse for Italian tourists with the competitiveness of
home destinations declining by about 30 points, though there was an
improvement between 1989 and 1990.
Higher prices and tariff increases this year seem likely to weaken Italy's
competitive position even more. The setting of hotel room-rates was freed
from official control last year, and this has led to rises of more than 10
per cent on 1991's rates.
It is argued that Italy has a unique cultural and historic heritage, thus
enjoying a monopoly position that gives the tourist business considerable
licence in pricing. Visitors to Venice, Florence and, to a lesser extent,
Rome, experience this in hotel rates and restaurant bills that are generally
high and sometimes exorbitant.
How much more can the tourist be squeezed? Probably not much. Venice and
Florence are increasingly destinations for day-trippers who stay in cheaper
accommodation away from the cities and then travel in by car, coach or
train.
But this mass movement of tourists has made the experience of visiting these
historic cities less agreeable for those who pay high prices to stay in
them. The fact that crowds are a problem has been highlighted by proposals
to limit access to both Venice and Florence.
If visitors to Italy's centres of art and culture return home with a sense
of disappointment from an experience that has not lived up to expectations,
there are several factors to blame.
It is not only the high cost. Tourists often have an overall impression that
Italy is not really organised for them. The absence of public conveniences
near major attractions is one shortcoming. Another is the inadequacy of
reliable information. Fortunately, individual Italians display considerable
warmth, hospitality and readiness to assist visitors that helps to
compensate for structural and institutional weaknesses.
But such kindnesses do not always make up for the closed doors that
frequently confront expectant visitors to museums and galleries. A recent
report by Touring Club Italiano says that nearly one half of Italy's museums
are closed.
The report also notes that more than 300,000 works of art and 18,000
archaeological pieces have been stolen from museums, churches and
collections in the past 20 years. That this sacking of Italy's artistic
fabric has not caused a furore says much about public and political
indifference to the country's heritage. Maintaining this, Italy's unique
tourist attraction, does not seem to rank high in the country's priorities.
Last month's report that Rome's Colosseum was in danger of collapsing, an
eventuality that should be kept at bay by financial help from Banca di Roma,
led to revelations of a nationwide situation that is far from encouraging.
That Venice is in peril has been widely known for years. In the surrounding
Veneto region most of the historic villas need urgent attention. Further
south the problems of Pisa's leaning tower are just a symbol of a much wider
damage and decay that also affects the walls Lucca, Urbino and Pesaro, the
towers in San Gimignano, Etruscan tombs in Tarquinia, Apulia's baroque
masterpieces, baroque and Grecian treasures in Sicily and many other items
in the heritage inventory.
Indifferent to its artistic heritage, Italy also seems to care little for
its wildlife and scenic resources. Few ornithologists would choose Italy for
a holiday. Indiscriminate hunting, ineffectually opposed by the authorities,
has radically cut the numbers of many protected species.
Legislation was approved at the end of last year for the establishment of
protected areas, but implementation programmes remain paper projects.
Unrestrained development has ruined beautiful stretches of coastline,
particularly in the south.
What about the beaches? The comments from Touring Club Italiano are not
reassuring. Last year Italian resorts won 55 European 'blue flags' for
cleanliness, safety and overall service. Only 29 beaches are flying the flag
this summer.
Nevertheless, seaside resorts may enjoy higher numbers of visitors, both
Italian and foreign. The Yugoslav civil war is diverting tourist trade to
the benefit of Italy's Adriatic coast. This ought to give a welcome boost to
the invisible trade account. Revenues turned down last year for the first
time since 1986. But an even steeper fall in Italian travellers' spending
abroad allowed the account to close with a larger surplus than in 1990,
thereby halted a declining sequence that started in 1986.
Are Italy's authorities becoming interested in tourism? A television
campaign this summer is encouraging Italians to welcome tourists by being
less noisy, less aggressive on the roads and by not littering the cities
with refuse. Perhaps a much-needed clean-up will get under way, for there is
plenty to do.
