FT  23 DEC 92 / BT may have to write off Pounds 55m against profits
BRITISH TELECOM may be forced to write off Pounds 55m against current year
profits for premiums on the repurchase of government debt, under a proposed
ruling expected early next year from the Accounting Standards Board.
Three of the regional electricity companies are also likely to have to
account for the costs of repurchasing debt totalling Pounds 50m between them
in their current financial years.
The treatment is expected to be required under a ruling from the urgent
issues task force of the Accounting Standards Board, which could be
effective by early next year. But it is opposed by Scottish Power.
The task force warned last week that it plans to ask all companies to
recognise immediately the gains or losses when they repurchase debt. Up till
now, companies have been able to write off these costs or benefits over the
life of the original debt.
The issue came into focus as a result of the government debt auction in
November, at which four of the privatised utilities bought back their debt
to reduce borrowing costs. The premiums were due on December 15.
British Telecom said it has not yet decided how to treat the costs of
repurchasing two tranches of government debt totalling Pounds 320m, believed
to total about Pounds 55m. Scottish Hydro-Electric announced earlier this
month that it intended to show the full cost of the repurchase of Pounds
116m in debt in its accounts for the year to March 31 1993. That will result
in a redemption charge of Pounds 12.5m, offset by annual savings in interest
payments of Pounds 4m.
Mr John Rennocks, finance director of Powergen, said yesterday that his
company had also decided to adopt this treatment. But Mr Donald Whyte,
finance director of Scottish Power, said that it had already adopted a
policy of longer-term write-off. He stressed that this treatment did not
simply boost short-term profits and had reduced short-term gains from a
repurchase of debt from the National Loan Fund.
The company paid a premium of Pounds 18m buying back Pounds 142m of the debt
in the most recent auction, which will be offset by annual interest savings
of between Pounds 2.5m and Pounds 4m at current rates.
'We have made it very clear we will write off the debt over the period it
was redeemable,' he said. 'To do otherwise would be inconsistent and lead to
distortion of earnings. Obviously we would give our views if asked and we
might consider given our views even if not.'
