FT  22 OCT 92 / Arts: Congreve's witty play about the ways of wit - Theatre
A witty play is a gem, but a witty play about the ways wit works within the
world is something far more luminous. Like Shakespeare, Moliere and Wilde -
and like Jane Austen - Congreve could not only relish wit but criticise it
too. In The Way of the World, he shows some characters who have wit without
sincerity, others who have sincerity without wit, and, in Millamant and
Mirabell, two who have wit and sincerity perfectly fused. They are as
ideally destined for each other as Beatrice and Benedick, or Lizzie and
Darcy.
One of the many pleasures of Peter Gill's new staging of this classic for
the Lyric, Hammersmith, is that he sets Millamant and Mirabell so perfectly
in relief. All around them are people who are funny without meaning to be
(Lady Wishfort, Sir Wilfull Witwoud), or people who try so hard to be funny
that they are themselves ridiculous (Witwoud, Petulant), or people whose
lives have rendered them serious (Mrs Fainall). But, to Millamant and
Mirabell, wit is as natural as breathing. And so is sincerity. Amidst a
little world brimful of plots, they scheme without malice. Against a parade
of modishness, they are fashionable without affectation.
They are critical of their world - and of each other. There are moments when
their attraction seems as hopeless as that of Moliere's Misanthrope and his
Celimene. As Millamant rejects him, she laughs and says 'What would you give
that you could help loving me?'; and he replies 'I would give something that
you did not know I could not help it.' With Jeremy Northam, the line is as
gravely moving as in Gielgud's famous recording of the scene. In voice and
stance, in every passing inflection, he has easy authority. Barbara Flynn is
equally natural in the even harder role of Mirabell. She is constantly -
enchantingly - capricious, yet without a scrap of artifice.
Everything that Sheila Hancock does as Lady Wishfort is amusingly perfect.
She looks like a wolfhound masquerading as a French poodle, her eyes blaze
out eagerly above her rouged cheeks, and her body language mixes posiness
and impulsiveness mixed in a brilliantly babbling stream. But, even as I
chuckled, something in her pacing made me feel that she had applied
everything from outside: disbelief was not suspended. As the fop Witwoud,
however, Tom Hollander carries off all his enchantingly silly prattle with
an amazing kind of innocence.
Eleanor David performs the sly Mrs Marwood with the perfect facade of mild
decorum, only in passing hints revealing her secret malice and corruption.
Though Jonathan Phillips paces about too busily as Fainall, he catches the
cruel rage at this character's heart; and Emma Piper conveys the brave
resignation and unspoken sadnesses of his wife. In a few economical shards,
Tom Piper's sets summon up different scenes of 1700 scenes and make them
beautiful.
The Way of the World is at the Lyric, Hammersmith, until 21 November.
In Monday's paper, our review of Carlo Bergonzi's farewell recital was
written by Alastair Macaulay, not David Murray. Our apologies.
