FT  15 APR 92 / Survey of Seville and World Expo '92 (10): A beneficial
conquest - Spanish Viewpoint / Pilar Cambria argues that Spain should feel
pride, rather than shame, at its record of colonisation in Latin America
FOR the past 18 months public debate about 1492 and all that has dwelt
excessively on the guilt that Spaniards are expected to feel over their role
in Latin America.
There is no calm debate about the implications of the discovery of America,
simply an insistence that things would have been better all round if on
October 13, 1492, after a day's rest on the island which he called San
Salvador, Columbus had simply turned round and gone home.
However, the Spaniards who found America were motivated by three things that
we have never tried to hide - idealism, economic necessity, and a scientific
curiosity about geographic theory.
Of course, among the Discoverers there were psychotics worthy of attention
by Sigmund Freud as well as cruel and greedy men. But there were no
professional exterminators.
It is absurd to assume that Hernan Cortez had genocide in mind as he moved
into huge and unknown Mexico with an army of 200 footsoldiers, 15 horsemen
and 1,500 friendly Indians.
In the eyes of the great Aztec Empire, Cortez and his cast must have
resembled a line of ants that August of 1519. Pizarro did not take many more
troops with him to the Peru of the Incas, who numbered 20m.
Reading Bernal Diaz del Castillo, one of Cortes' soldiers and the best
reporter of the times, the Discoverers seem like wide-eyed Indiana Joneses,
constantly amazed by new worlds, new cultures and new adventures.
And how quickly they did their work. By 1550, only 58 years after Columbus's
navigational 'mistake', the American continent had been mapped in detail
from the Rio Grande to Tierra del Fuego. After Europe it was easily the best
documented continent.
As both technocrats and idealists, the Discoverers knew exactly what they
had to do. If the hostility of the Mayas, the Incas, the Aztecs or the Carib
Indians demanded war, then they fought. But their objective was not war but
to claim new souls for their God and land and riches for their Kings. They
were not choosy about the prizes either. Gold and silver were valued, but so
were Andean llamas, tobacco, tomatoes and potatoes. And there were no slaves
among that booty.
The Spanish and Portuguese coined a new verb in Mexico and in central and
South America - colonizar (to colonise). But it would soon become common
usage by the other European powers as well.
Spain and Portugal, a historian has written, 'sent to America handpicked
subjects - not groups of prisoners  - who created families, homes and cities
and rebuilt there the same laws as in the mother country. They went to
America because they had found it but also with the blessing of the Catholic
Church justifying occupation if it was accompanied by evangelising. And in
those days to evangelise was to civilise.'
So the Spaniards went, and gave political and administrative identity to
their American territories; as a civilising vehicle they used a common
language, Castilian, and they educated Whites and Indians in the same
schools and universities from the beginning of the 16th century. They
eliminated polygamy, cannibalism and human sacrifice.
Spaniards took to America their ways of loving and believing, of hoping, of
dreaming and of dying. And they did it in the only easy and efficient way -
el mestizaje (crossbreeding).
Today, 55 per cent of the population of Mexico is mestiza. The union, which
did not result from wholesale rape, began quickly. An Indian woman became
Hernan Cortes' closest companion during his Mexican adventure and he is said
to have loved her passionately.
We Spanish do not expect much praise for having invented this humane form of
colonisation. Crossbreeding is, for us, quite natural, and we were not doing
anything in America that other peoples had not done for centuries in other
places.
It is easy to criticise October 12, 1492 and its consequences. But the
Discovery meant the beginning of a new trade route, new colonies and a new
cultural frontier. For those already there - Mayas, Incas, Caribs and Aztecs
 -it constituted a great leap forward from Prehistory to Modernity. Sooner
or later, America would have had to make that leap.
Many people say that all this history simply boils down to the meeting of
two cultures: on the sands of Guahani Columbus and his crews were astonished
at the stiff hair of the Indians and, upon seeing them nude, pitied their
'poverty'. The Indians, for their part, were intrigued by the beards of the
Spanish and cut their fingers on their swords.
Five hundred years later, the cultures of Spain and America still throw up
remarkable encounters; a few months ago the foremost conservative leader in
Spain, Manuel Fraga Iribarne, was in Cuba, where he embraced Fidel Castro,
the last and most recalcitrant exponent of Marxist Leninism in the
Caribbean.
Five centuries after the Discovery, I fully endorse the judgment of the
historian Arnold Toynbee:
'I admire the work done by the Spanish Crown and by the Catholic Church in
this vast region. I admire the Crown for having kept the conquistadores
under control. The conquistadores were greedy, cruel and revolting. They
were also brave.
'They were, therefore, formidable. And I admire both, the Crown and the
Church, for having treated the natives as human beings and for trying to
protect them.'
The writer is a senior editor at Expansion in Madrid
