FT  20 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Plaid calls for Welsh self-rule within EC
PLAID Cymru, the Welsh Nationalist party, yesterday launched its manifesto,
urging self-government for Wales within the European Community.
The party - which has three MPs - said that as the UK became increasingly
integrated into the EC it was essential that Wales should be a fully
self-governing nation.
Mr Dafydd Wigley, Plaid president, said full self-government was no longer a
distant aim but an urgent necessity and essential for democracy.
'Massive increases' in the EC's regional and social funds must at the same
time be introduced to balance the centralising role of the community and
offer poorer countries like Wales the prospect of 'intermediate prosperity'.
The manifesto, titled Towards 2000, says any funding from Europe must be
handled within Wales by a Welsh parliament, and must be in addition to money
from the UK government.
Plaid's economic policy includes more help for small businesses and
high-technology industry. It also calls for a 10-year plan to restore
closed-down rail links and development of harbours.
The party is to contest all 38 seats in Wales, though it will fight three
Gwent seats - Newport East, Torfaen and Monmouth - jointly with the Green
party.
This alliance with the Greens was first tried in the Monmouth by-election
last May. The joint candidate won 277 votes out of the 45,195 cast in a 76
per cent turnout.
The manifesto has a particular emphasis on environmental issues. The party
calls for recognition of the employment potential of energy conservation and
the use of renewable sources. At the same time, agriculture 'must remain a
bedrock industry, with a commitment to the family farm'.
It claims the failure of successive Welsh secretaries to attend crucial EC
meetings has meant the interests of Welsh farmers have never been properly
represented.
The party also calls for a 'massive drive' to improve housing conditions -
with support for first-time buyers and people on low incomes - and a
comprehensive act to promote the Welsh language.
 ----------------------------------
Plaid Cymru
1987
 ----------------------------------
Votes                123,599
% of total votes         0.4
Seats                      3
Candidates for 1992       35
 ----------------------------------
