FT  18 JUN 92 / World Trade News: Big Three look with glee down Mexico way -
The motor industry's enthusiasm for the free trade pact / NAFTA
General Motors, Ford and Chrysler - view the prospect of free trade in the
North American car industry with barely concealed glee.
For the proposed North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta) will let them
sell more cars to the fast-growing Mexican market, allow them to integrate
their low-cost Mexican operations with those at home, and should give them a
much needed competitive edge over Japanese rivals, at least in the
short-to-medium term.
However, Detroit is keeping its enthusiasm in check for fear of further
antagonising the United Auto Workers union, which opposes a Nafta agreement
in the belief that it will mean a large loss of jobs to Mexico.
Mexican car workers are paid between Dollars 4-Dollars 5 an hour - about a
fifth of wage levels in the US - and are as productive, if not more so. The
Mexicans have proved themselves adept at adopting the quality manufacturing
methods pioneered by Japanese car companies. Ford's plant in the northern
town of Hermosillo was singled out for its efficiency in a recent
Massachusetts Institute of Technology study of the motor industry worldwide.
Although final details of the Nafta vehicle agreement still have to be
worked out, the accord is shaping up as generally favourable to the US
industry. That is hardly surprising, since Detroit's huge existing
investments in the US, Canada and Mexico mean the governments of the three
countries have to weigh its demands carefully.
The governments also know that any Nafta agreement is going to face tough
opposition in the US Congress. One that lacked the support of the car
companies would stand little chance of passage.
One of Detroit's main aims has been to ensure a high level of regional
content in a vehicle for it to qualify for duty-free shipment within the
Nafta area. The aim is to prevent third countries, in particular Japan, from
using Mexico as a cheap-labour export base in their assault on the US
market.
Under the existing US-Canadian free trade agreement, 50 per cent of a
vehicle has to be manufactured in North America. The US government, with the
backing of the Big Three, is proposing that this be raised to 65 per cent
under the Nafta accord.
The Mexicans and Canadians have resisted such a sharp increase, knowing that
existing Japanese manufacturers would find it costly to reach these levels,
while new entrants, which they do not want to scare away, would not be able
do so quickly.
A compromise seems likely to be reached at around 60 per cent. However, just
as important as this raw number will be the method used in the accord to
calculate local content.
This is a contentious issue, underlined by recent claims from the US customs
department that the Canadian subsidiary of Honda, the Japanese car company,
failed to meet the 50 per cent requirement in vehicles it has been shipping
from Canada to the US. In particular, the pact is expected to produce
tighter rules on so-called 'roll-up' - the ability of a company to count a
part as 100 per cent locally made, so long as it contains no more than 49
per cent of imported components.
The only Japanese car company manufacturing in Mexico now is Nissan, which
has 20 per cent of the domestic market. Its local head last year warned that
a 60-70 per cent local content rule was 'totally out of the question' and
would lead to lower Japanese investment in Mexico.
The other significant foreign manufacturer, Volkswagen Mexico, aims to beat
the Americans at their own game, and is pushing for 70 per cent Mexican (and
thus North American) regional content, according to the company's Mexican
sales director.
Volkswagen, which closed its US operations some years ago, is thus bringing
more and more of its European suppliers to Mexico and the company plans to
increase its exports of cars from Mexico to the US and Central and South
America.
Besides defending their flanks against the Japanese, the American car
companies want to use Nafta to grab a larger part of the Mexican domestic
market through exports from their under-utilised US plants. This market is
growing rapidly, with sales in 1995 likely to reach about 1m vehicles, from
an expected 740,000 this year.
The Nafta agreement will liberalise Mexico's 1989 vehicle decree, which sets
local content requirements for vehicles sold in the country, restricts the
number of vehicles a foreign manufacturer may import, and insists that each
manufacturer must export more cars from Mexico than it imports.
The accord sets a 10-year timetable for this liberalisation process.
This will help the Big Three because during this period a company which does
not export from Mexico will not be allowed to import vehicles into the
country.
Most analysts expect that in the long run Mexico will become a leading base
for manufacturing small cars for the US market, many of which are now made
in Asia.
To help the small car trade take off, the Nafta accord would treat Mexico as
'North American' for purposes of the Corporate Average Fuel Economy Act
(Cafe), which dates from the fuel crisis of the 1970s and discourages US
manufacturers from importing small cars.
Mr Victor Barreiro, head of Ford Mexico, says: 'We will have to pick the
place (between the US, Canada and Mexico) where it makes sense to produce a
car.'
The net effect on American jobs is difficult to gauge. The loss of smaller
car manufacturing in the US may be offset by increased exports of vehicles
to Mexico, which is starved of choice.
Furthermore, almost half the parts used by the Big Three in their Mexican
plants originate in the US, so an increase in Mexican output may help the US
components industry.
On the other hand, many of the components manufacturers in the US are known
to be planning expansions in Mexico. 'We see good opportunities there,' says
Mr Larry Bossidy, chairman of Allied-Signal.
