FT  01 JUL 92 / Personal View: How Britain can resolve the Danish dilemma
The British presidency of the European Community begins today. Six months
ago, when it was being planned, the agenda was clear: completion of the
single market, ratification of the Maastricht treaty, working towards the
first enlargement negotiations and with luck, a budget deal too.
That remains the agenda, but the Danish referendum has transformed the
political context. It should have come as no surprise that last week's
European Council concluded that formal negotiations with applicants for
membership could only start after Maastricht had been ratified. That may
mean a delay. It need not be a long one and important preparatory work can
proceed meanwhile. More significantly, the commitment to enlargement by
Britain's partners was new and genuine. It provides a sound base for
advancing this vital presidency objective.
As for the budget deal, there was never any real prospect of agreement at
Lisbon last week. It was always clear that such a deal could only be reached
during the course of the UK presidency. The sharpness of the argument on
this issue at Lisbon shows how hard this will be. Yet it is very much in the
interests of the UK presidency to secure a deal, and to avoid annual
wrangles weakening the EC for the next five years, so as to help clear the
way for enlargement negotiations.
But the main new item on Britain's agenda must, of course, be to help
resolve the problem caused by the Danish vote. The strategy is clear: for
all the other countries to proceed with ratification, whether by referendum
or by the parliamentary route. In the autumn, when it is evident that the
rest of the Community wants to go ahead with Maastricht, the Danish
government will be asked for ideas on clarifications, amplifications or
protocols which would enable it to ask its voters to think again.
What those ideas will be, it is difficult to say. It is likely that what
will be needed is a way to reassure the Danes that the Community is not a
centralising juggernaut. If that can be done, a service will be done to the
Community as a whole.
Governments may value the Community as it has developed since the mid-1980s.
And the many applicants clamouring for membership may share their
enthusiasm. But the Danish referendum demonstrated the fragility of popular
support in some member states.
Strengthening that essential support can best be done by giving effect to
subsidiarity. Both the Commission and the member states under the British
presidency will have to work out a practical programme for determining the
best level for taking decisions.
What is the best level of control? Who should decide? Is too much attempted
at a European level? All of these questions will need specific answers. The
debate is not new.
'Subsidiarity should not be seen as something for the theologians of
Community law, but as something intensely practical: where to draw the line
between what is best done by the Community, and what is best done by
national governments. Even if the Community has the legal right to
legislate, it should exercise a self-denying ordinance unless the problem
can only be resolved by action at a Community level.'
That is not a quotation from Mr Delors last week, though he has for some
time held this view. It is something I said myself in a lecture in 1989.
Some examples where power can be handed back come readily to mind. There is
no need for the EC to continue to set or police standards of drinking water.
National ministers could take back responsibility in this area.
Other sorts of 'interference' may seem pettifogging, yet they are
indispensable if a single market is to be created and maintained. Should
Germany, for example, be free to decide unilaterally, in the name of the
environment, on packaging laws which operate in practice to restrict trade
from other member states?
Again, we can all have a laugh at the Commission's expense when the EC
produces a regulation of biblical proportions defining, say, the acceptable
levels of asbestos in a billiard-cue tip. But UK billiard-cue tip makers
would be less amused if their product was excluded from France as a fire
hazard.
A further problem is that in certain key areas the national governments are
divided about the limits of Community action. Social policy is an obvious
example.
In listing some of the more obvious difficulties with the concept of
subsidiarity, I do not mean to say that the problems are insuperable. In the
competition field, for example, I think we are already establishing a good
balance between what should properly be decided and controlled at European
level, and what is better handled nationally.
Take state aids. Those who resent the Commission's increasing temerity in
controlling national subsidies are quick to argue that such powers should be
returned to national level in the name of subsidiarity. Yet that would be
wholly inconsistent with the Treaty of Rome and the Common Market itself. It
would be a return to the law of the jungle in which rich, nationally
cosseted companies were free to trample upon less privileged competitors at
huge cost to European productivity and jobs. The Commission has a duty to
act as a referee and will not betray that obligation. What we should do, and
indeed have recently decided to do, is to introduce a de minimis rule: a
level of aid below which the Commission no longer requires member states to
notify their subsidies because aid below that level does not harm
competitors. Unnecessary bureaucracy can in this way be avoided. That
decision must now be implemented.
On the mergers side, it may be that more can be done to reduce bureaucracy,
for example, by developing a common form for filing notifications either
with the Commission or member states.
More radically, some suggest there is no need for the Commission to retain
its sole right to grant exclusions from the general prohibition on concerted
practices between companies in the Treaty of Rome. That deserves
examination, but the potential benefits must be balanced against the
possibility that such an innovation could introduce market distortions
resulting from different interpretations of Community law, varying quality
of member states' anti-trust legislation and the rigour with which national
laws are applied.
These may seem technical issues, dwarfed by the more glamorous objectives of
the British presidency. Yet subsidiarity is crucial. The concept is
introduced into Community law for the first time in the Maastricht treaty.
Getting its application right, interpreting it and explaining it properly
could do a great deal to build public confidence in the next phase of the
EC's development. And it is on its ability to enhance public confidence
throughout the Community that Britain's presidency may ultimately come to be
judged.
The author is EC competition commissioner.
