FT  26 NOV 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Rubber prices stretch growers'
patience - Producer pressure for stronger market support
LIFE IS changing on the Malaysian rubber estates. Trees are being chopped
down and the land is being planted with the more profitable oil palm;
plantations near towns are being sold for real estate development. Where
there were once forests of rubber trees there are now golf courses, and
rubber tappers have found new jobs as caddies.
The country's rubber production is expected to decline in 1992 - for the
fourth year in succession - by 2.6 per cent to 1.22m tonnes.
The estates, though highly efficient producers, are turning away from rubber
and now account for less than 30 per cent of Malaysia's total output.
Thousands of smallholders have become the mainstay of the country's
production.
Malaysia, for many years the world's premier rubber producer, has dropped in
output terms behind both Thailand and Indonesia, which between them now
account for more than 70 per cent of world natural rubber production.
One reason for Malaysian rubber's decline is the country's fast economic
growth in the past five years. Rubber is a labour intensive crop and the
country is now experiencing acute labour shortages in many areas.
But declining prices are the most important factor. Over the past five years
prices of natural rubber have gone down by about a third. Leading producing
and consuming countries are now gathering in Kuala Lumpur, the Malaysian
capital, for what is seen as a crucial meeting to decide whether or not to
work out new pricing arrangements under a revamped International Natural
Rubber Agreement, Inra III. Inra I, agreed by Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia,
Sri Lanka and Ivory Coast and a number of consumer countries, was unveiled
in the late 1970s; Inra II expires at the end of 1993.
After countless earlier meetings, however, there seems little common ground
between the two sides.
The basic aim of Inra has been to offer on one hand fair prices to producers
and on the other security of supply to consumers. A central figure in this
policy is the buffer stock manager, empowered to buy and sell stocks when
prices reach certain levels.
Consumers say Inra has generally worked well and see no need for a new
agreement (under existing rules INRA II can be extended for an extra two
years). 'The question of whether there is a need for a new agreement or to
extend the present one is premature' said a US official last week. 'The
record has shown that Inra II is one of the most successful commodity
agreements in place.'
Producing countries angrily reject such views. They have warned that unless
progress towards the negotiation of a new pact can be achieved by next
March, Inra may collapse and they could be forced into introducing their own
pricing mechanisms.
'The only thing we want to see now is a decision by importing countries that
a successor agreement with economic provision is useful,' says Mr Ahmad
Farouk, chairman of the Malaysian Rubber Research and Development Board and
one of the producer countries' main negotiators at the meeting. 'We are
willing to wait till March and we know what to do if they don't agree by
then.'
Differences between supply and demand have had a serious impact on pricing.
Although the world rubber surplus is forecast to fall to 150,000 tonnes this
year from 180,000 tonnes in 1991, demand is still weak in many key
recession-hit markets. There has also been a dramatic plunge in demand in
recent years in eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. Meanwhile some
non Inra signatories, like India, China and Vietnam, are raising production.
'One cannot run away from the fact that it is the overall supply and demand
situation which determines the health of the rubber market,' says Mr Lim
Keng Yaik, Malaysia's primary industries minister. But Mr Lim and others
also accuse consumers of refusing to recognise the need for changes in the
rubber marketing system.
Over the past 15 years the rubber market has become more concentrated. Where
before there was a multitude of buyers, now five large tyre manufacturers
consume more than 50 per cent of global natural rubber production; where
once there were legions of rubber traders, now there are very few.
So the big consumers can exert considerable pressure on the market. At
present more than 70 per cent of the world natural rubber trade is carried
out through direct, private deals. Producers want a more transparent, open
trading system, with a central rubber exchange based in the producing
region.
For their part the consumers say that the producing countries have failed to
agree among themselves on an appropriate marketing system or to make any
real efforts to improve quality in line with requested price increases.
Self interest might eventually bring about some compromises. Both sides
agree that in the long term the prospects for natural rubber are good.
Millions of farmers still depend on rubber for their livelihoods and the
commodity, particularly in the lower-cost countries like Indonesia and
Thailand, will not simply be abandoned as a cash crop. Producer countries
are also gaining more marketing clout; in future years the countries of Asia
are likely to become the biggest rubber consumers as well as producers.
For all their financial power, the big consumers need security of supply.
Inra has guaranteed that. It has also simplified the buying process. Mr Hoyt
Wells, Goodyear's chief operating officer, says that if the agreement is
abandoned his company will have to negotiate separate contracts with 26 or
27 different countries and '50 million' farmers.
'All we would have is a lot of paperwork and no rubber' says Mr Wells.
