FT  10 SEP 92 / New Lloyd's chief vows to restore market's good name
MR Peter Middleton, formally appointed yesterday as chief executive officer
of Lloyd's of London, denied that he had been handed a 'poisoned chalice'.
'Lloyd's is a great institution and a fabulous brand name. Although it may
be a bit tarnished, it will not take long to restore,' said Mr Middleton, a
businessman and former diplomat who is joining Lloyd's after a year of
turmoil unprecedented in the insurance market's 300-year history.
Record losses of Pounds 2.06bn were announced by Lloyd's in June when the
market reported its results for 1989. Further losses are likely in the next
two years when results are reported for 1990 and 1991. Hundreds of the
22,300 individual Names, whose assets support the market's capital, are
already facing financial ruin.
Now 52, Mr Middleton spent 16 years in the diplomatic service before joining
Midland Bank International in 1985. He later led the expansion of travel,
leisure and foreign exchange activities at the bank's subsidiary, Thomas
Cook, before negotiating the group's sale to German interests earlier this
year.
Mr Middleton, who will receive a pay package worth Pounds 250,000, including
pension contributions, said his lack of experience of insurance was
'probably a bonus'.
'My job is to pull together a vision of the future of Lloyd's and how it
will develop over the next three to five years.'
Although Mr Middleton's combination of diplomatic and business experience
may help him to administer the highly complex market, his background and
interests will set him apart from establishment figures at Lloyd's.
A former monk, Mr Middleton studied philosophy at the Sorbonne, speaks
fluent French and professes abiding passions for motorcycles and
Middlesbrough FC, his home-town football club.
He will be the first chief executive of a new market board, being formed to
spearhead efforts to reduce costs, improve the market's professionalism and
reverse the decline in Lloyd's share of international specialised commercial
insurance and reinsurance business.
Observer, Page 17
