FT  16 JUL 92 / Technology: Driven back to basics - As Japanese car makers
strive to cut costs, priorities on the production line have changed
Yoshifumi Tsuji, Nissan Motor's new president, has a straightforward message
to his staff: build it simple.
Tsuji wants to cut down by half the multiple varieties of parts - such as
optional steering wheels - that can go into a Nissan car. He wants to use
more common parts among different car models, and is even looking to bring
down costs by sourcing major components jointly with rival car makers.
If the 1980s was the decade when the Japanese automobile companies dazzled
the world with rapid expansion and a seemingly endless proliferation of new
models, the 1990s is forcing the industry back to its engineering basics in
an effort to improve profits.
Following last year's dismal financial performance, the industry has come
under real pressure for the first time since 1986, when the rapid
appreciation of the yen forced the companies into a round of severe cost
cutting. Operating margins at Nissan Motor's parent company in Japan last
year fell to 0.8 per cent, while Mazda was at 0.9 per cent and Honda at 1.8
per cent. Toyota has yet to report for the year ending in June, but is
unlikely to match Honda.
The cause of poor profitability is not inefficient manufacturing per se.
Indeed Japan's car makers are probably the most efficient in the world. Yet
the weak state of automobile markets leaves the companies with little choice
but to cut costs, and some companies believe that considerable scope for
improvement remains.
'Efficiency was number two or three in our priorities, after reducing lead
times and improving quality,' says Ryuichi Tsukamoto, executive vice
president at Honda Engineering, Honda's production engineering subsidiary.
'Now we cannot deny the importance of efficiency, because the business is
facing tough times.'
An engineering solution to the car makers' problems, however, is a tall
order because the companies face conflicting pressures that suggest opposite
solutions. The Japanese industry must cope, for example, with a severe
labour shortage, which suggests automation may be the answer. Yet automation
is expensive. And increased use of industrial robots reduces flexibility on
production lines at a time when rapidly changing consumer tastes require
increased flexibility.
In an attempt to resolve these conflicting pressures, the companies are
focusing on two related areas of the manufacturing process: final assembly
and design.
The most recent trend in final assembly technology dates to a small-scale,
experimental factory that Honda ran for two years at its 1980s. At the plant
Honda introduced what it called General Assembly Trucks (Gat) to replace the
traditional assembly line.
In the traditional conveyor line, pioneered by Henry Ford, vehicle chassis
rode on a platform of fixed height. The platforms were spaced evenly and
were linked together and pulled along by a chain. The line moved at a
uniform speed, ideally never stopping, while workers installed parts and
components as the vehicle moved slowly by.
Yet the old-fashioned conveyor has proved too inflexible. Cars move along at
the same speed, spaced evenly regardless of how difficult they are to
assemble. If one car has to be stopped because of a problem, they all stop,
bringing work to a halt on the whole line. Because planned stops for the
cars are impractical, automation using stationery robots is impossible.
Honda's innovation was to dispense with the link between the platforms.
Instead of being pulled along by a noisy chain, Honda put the chassis on a
dolly which moves under the power of its own electric motor. The motor draws
power by induction from a cable beneath the floor and can also raise and
lower the vehicle chassis so that workers never have to bend to install
parts.
Honda's Gat also supplies a key that opens the door automation: the dollies
can move at different speeds, stop precisely to allow robot installation of
components, and accelerate and decelerate quickly to keep an expensive robot
used to the maximum. And the entire process can be controlled by central
computer, which monitors progress of each vehicle by means of an electronic
sensor system on the dolly and tells the robots what is coming.
The result is a production line much more pleasant to work on and one which
is much more amenable to automation. Honda concluded it was technically
possible to raise the automation rate on final assembly to 30 per cent,
compared with 5 per cent standard in the industry.
Honda installed the technology on one line at the Suzuka plant, on lines at
East Liberty in Ohio, and will open a plant later this year in Swindon using
an advanced version of the system. Honda Engineering also licensed the basic
technology to Daifuku, the Japanese specialist in factory equipment. Daifuku
has sold the system to both Toyota and Nissan, which have opened separate
plants in the past year.
The lines are beautiful to watch, when compared with the traditional noisy
and disorderly line. Nissan believes it will result in smoother operation on
the final assembly line, since cars that are complex to assemble can be
spaced further apart. And if a problem arises, only one car need be stopped,
allowing it to catch up later.
Yet whether the technology offers a true solution for the industry's
problems is another question. For one, the line costs between two and three
times as much to install as a traditional conveyor system, yet by itself
does not contribute anything to raising productivity.
The improvement in productivity only comes after additional spending on
robots. When Honda installed its Suzuka line in 1989, it lifted the level of
automation to 18 per cent. Tsukamoto says this raised labour productivity on
the line by between 15 to 17 per cent. But Honda has shelved a plan to
install more robots on the line to raise the automation ratio to 30 per
cent. It is too expensive.
Tsukamoto says that to replace one worker with machinery can cost between
Y10m (Pounds 42,000) and Y80m, depending on the process. Honda is willing to
spend the money when it relieves a particularly onerous manual task, or when
the investment results in a large improvement in quality.
One area where Honda has not skimped is on machinery for automated,
simultaneous installation of car suspension and engines. By mounting and
fastening all bolts simultaneously, Tsukamoto says, a more precise fit is
obtained, allowing for improved handling and ride. Simultaneous bolt
fastening prevents the accumulation of minor alignment errors.
The robots also provide rapid feedback. If a single bolt hole is misaligned,
the machines quit. On a traditional line, a slightly misaligned bolt hole
will rarely slow down a worker, who will put the thing together anyway. The
worker will still have to intervene on Honda's automated line when holes do
not match, but because the robots detect quality problems instantly, the
source can be traced immediately and corrected.
Honda's Gat system offers the potential to save labour, improve quality and
increase flexibility. Whether this potential can be exploited to the
financial benefit of the car makers, however, depends very much on other
links in the engineering chain.
A further article on engineering for flexibility will appear shortly.
