FT  21 MAR 92 / Men who won the Falklands peace: Ten years after Margaret
Thatcher toppled Galtieri, Jimmy Burns asks: who gained what?
GENERAL MARTIN Balza, Malvinas veteran and Argentina's army chief, sits in
his panelled military headquarters in Buenos Aires, fingering four British
Pounds 1 notes as we talk about the Falklands War ten years ago.
The money represents half his pay as a prisoner of war after he surrendered
his artillery position outside Port Stanley to the British forces. The
general smiles at the memory of those days when, as a lieutenant colonel, he
was short- changed by an English soldier for a tube of toothpaste and a
Coca-Cola. But he is not bitter. Argentina, he concedes, was destined to
lose because of the incompetence of her former rulers.
Back in March 1982, when I was in Buenos Aires covering the war for the FT,
Argentina's then army chief and President, General Leopoldo Galtieri was not
a person I wanted to meet unprotected. His regime's way of dealing with
opponents was similar to that of Nazi Germany. More than 8,000 people, some
foreigners, had 'disappeared' since the coup which brought him to power in
1976.
I will never forget, just a few days before the Falklands war, watching an
old woman, with shopping bag and walking stick, being surrounded and beaten
senseless by heavily armed police. By chance, she had strayed into the first
big demonstration against the regime. Galtieri had ordered it to be
repressed with sabres, gas canisters, long truncheons and live bullets. Yet
when Argentina invaded the Falklands, Galtieri became a national hero.
Now ten years later, after the expenditure of 1,000 lives and enough cash to
make each islander very rich, history has pushed aside both Galtieri and the
woman who defeated him. Margaret Thatcher, whose defiance rang across the
world, and helped to deliver a resounding victory to the Conservative party
in 1983, walks sadly from the main political arena next month, almost at the
anniversary of her military triumph.
She also was rejected from the leadership of her country, as heroic memories
of the struggle began to fade. Yet the questions remain, was it necessary
and was it worth the cost? From Balza's office, at least, it seems the
greatest benefit was reaped by Argentina, which escaped a vicious tyranny
and brought its generals under political control. Did Britain also deliver a
lesson which Argentina (if not the world) will never forget?
Even now, a monument outside the army headquarters in Buenos Aires states
that the Malvinas were, are, and always will be Argentine. But Balza
declares: 'I don't see that there is any possibility of another armed
conflict with Britain. We are living in a different world.'
It seemed, when I stood in the Falklands a few days later under the union
flag by 15 military graves at San Carlos, that the British Government
believes him. All was as quiet as if there had never been a landing of
troops, or a frenzied air attack on transports and frigates in that famous
sound at the north west of the main island. Now only low-flying upland geese
and seagulls disturb the stillness. The nearby military camp lies abandoned
 -a few empty cabins and a couple of jerry cans. Linda Anderson, owner of
the recently opened Blue Beach Lodge nearby, complains that the Ministry of
Defence can no longer afford to transport many soldiers to rest in her bed
and breakfast.
British officials say the forces still stationed on the islands are enough
to defend them. Even so, the UK now spends only Pounds 69m a year on the
defence of the islands, less than 7 per cent of the rate of spending in the
three years after the war. (Even the present sum, however, could provide
each islander with a Pounds 30,000 per year pension). Although the Falklands
now boasts a large and fully-equipped military airport and three highly
sensitive radar stations, the combined military presence has been reduced to
half a squadron of Phantom aircraft (the Harriers have long since departed),
some half a dozen aerial transport units, a company of less than 200
infantry, a frigate and a naval patrol vessel.
One former British marine on the islands said that if it wanted to,
Argentina could recapture the Falklands in 24 hours, for example by landing
special forces from a submarine at night and taking out the radars and the
phantoms on the ground. But nobody in Buenos Aires seems even to be thinking
of such a plan. One reason is that British intelligence has greatly
improved. Ten years ago this week, the UK was apparently unaware of a series
of key meetings between General Galtieri and an officer attached to the
Chiefs of Staff, General Mario Benjamin Menendez.
At one such meeting, while an Argentine foreign minister was still going
through the motions of diplomacy, Menendez was informed that a secret
decision had been taken by the military junta to invade the islands.
According to Menendez, Galtieri dismissed any suggestion that this would
provoke a big international reaction. 'Menendez', Galtieri said, 'that is
none of your business . . . it's the junta's problem and no one else's. I
just want you to think about being a military governor.'
Two weeks later the Argentines overran the token force of marines on the
islands. In Buenos Aires, civilians, including some whose relatives had been
tortured and killed, poured through the streets waving flags and bringing
Galtieri to the balcony of the presidential palace to rapturous applause.
Thatcher responded by sending a taskforce of 30,000 men and scores of ships,
the biggest UK naval operation since the Second World War. Within two
months, on the May 21, the first British troops were wading ashore on the
rocky gravel beach that lies just below Linda Anderson's Blue Beach lodge.
On June 14, Argentine troops surrendered at Port Stanley.
The battle for the Falklands has been described by some military experts as
a small colonial war. But the images that linger are those of high human
drama which for a while gripped the attention of the world: they include the
sinking of the battleship cruiser Belgrano with the loss of more than 400
lives in freezing South Atlantic seas, aerial dogfights of extraordinary
skill and daring, the burning hulks of British battleships, and the dejected
faces of the wounded and the defeated.
Of the 1000 men killed in the campaign more than 800 were Argentines. But in
Argentina, as the tenth anniversary approaches, the fallen are remembered
with muted emotions. Jorge Lanata, the 31-year-old editor of Pagina 12, one
of the country's most popular newspapers, says: 'Three years ago we ran a
series on the war. It was treated with total indifference by our readers.
Many of them supported the invasion, but they are now silenced by a sense of
guilt. They look at the veterans as if they were ghosts.' Yet some Malvinas
veterans who, like Balza, survived the postwar purge are now in positions of
command in a radically altered armed force. Comodoro Gustavo Justo, for
example, a former Mirage 5 fighter pilot in the attack on San Carlos Bay, is
today Chief of Operational Planning under a civilian ministry of defence.
On May 21, 1982 Justo led the first big attack on the British beachhead,
flying low over the waters of the South Atlantic to avoid radar detection
and leaving himself with the minimum fuel necessary to return to base. Justo
narrowly escaped with his life, ejecting from his aircraft at 950 kms per
hour, after being shot down by a British Harrier jet, equipped with the most
modern air-to-air missiles provided by the US. He was only 1 1/2 miles short
of his target. A fellow pilot and best friend was killed.
Badly injured and suffering from concussion, Justo lay in a shepherd's hut
for several days. He was eventually found by an Argentine helicopter team
and shared a field hospital tent with a wounded RAF pilot. 'The Englishman
said 'what a shit of a war. My parents are old and I was going to get
married.' But I thought to myself: not only am I married but I know what I'm
fighting for.'
Ten years on, Justo is much less sure.
'I have known how horrific war can be . . .There are peaceful options. That
is what I am telling my children. It is a lesson that was not passed on to
me by my superiors when we fought.'
Justo, Balza and the new men at the top have presided over a sharp
contraction of the Argentine armed force, squeezed by budgetary cuts and
public indifference. They also perceive that after the Gulf War, a coup in
Buenos Aires - let alone an attack on the Falklands - could no longer be
sure to escape an international response. Indeed, the Argentine military
that defied UN resolutions, today takes part in the UN's global peacekeeping
exercises. More remarkably, it also exchanges information with British
forces on movements in the South Atlantic.
These big changes in Argentina seem, however, to have escaped the notice of
most of the 2,100 islanders. As military spending declines, their improved
prosperity depends, partly at least, on Argentina's new policies of fishery
conservation and non-belligerence. But for many islanders the traumas of the
war have not healed, perhaps understandably in view of the large areas near
Port Stanley still made deadly by Argentine mines.
Stuart Wallace, for example, who studied in Argentina and lives with his
Argentine wife in Port Stanley, says that while Buenos Aires claims the
islands: 'The price of dealing with Argentina is potentially enormous.
Renewed links would politically destabilise us. It would be different if we
were still a disintegrating society with no revenue of our own.'
The islanders may have some reason to remain anxious. Although Argentina's
President Menem today speaks eloquently about his commitment to the new
international order, the same Menem was elected President after labelling
the British the 'pirates of the world'. He said then: 'No matter how much
time passes, or how much blood we have to shed, that territory will be ours
again.'
If he changed his mind once, might he not change it again? Rumours that a
lunatic fringe of military officers might have helped this week's bomb
attack on the Israeli embassy in Buenos Aires, are of just the kind to
rekindle the islanders' general unease. Yet hostility is softening. Some
island officials agree at least to attend talks between Britain and
Argentina on issues such as fishing and oil exploration.
Meanwhile, Argentine school children are still being taught that the
Malvinas belong to them; but they are learning about democracy too. So the
question returns: was it worth the fight? Living in Buenos Aires through the
war I never doubted that it was, if only because Britain's response promised
the destruction of a vicious military regime. On my return to Buenos Aires
ten years later, I found a country deepening its determination to put
history behind it.
This change, and the restoration of commercial and diplomatic links, make a
far more fitting tribute to those, from both sides, who died in 1982, than
the islanders' present intransigence.
Jimmy Burns was the FT's Buenos Aires correspondent during the Falklands
War. His book The Land that Lost its heroes: Argentina, the Falklands and
Alfonsin is being republished by Bloomsbury (London) to coincide with the
tenth anniversary.
