FT  01 DEC 92 / South Africa drafts a plan for post-apartheid trade: Radical
proposals for tariff reform and a move to developing country status
THE bland title conceals a radical blueprint. Yet a document entitled
'Integrated Normative Economic Model' may help shape the economic future of
South Africa.
It contains what is effectively the government's draft structural adjustment
programme, and in a recent speech Mr Stef Naude, the director general of the
Department of Trade and Industry, gave a glimpse of what the government
envisages will be the main components of a post-apartheid trade policy.
Aside from the most detailed account to date of how the government proposes
to tackle tariff reform, Mr Naude touched on two matters likely to evince
considerable discussion: the proposal that South Africa should seek
developing country status, and the first public notification of government
dissatisfaction with the functioning of the Southern African Customs Union
(SACU).
Mr Naude stressed he was putting forward proposals, not making unilateral
policy announcements. He noted: 'We've got to manage restructuring very
carefully because of the political changes taking place. Because of the
unemployment, we have to be careful with how much blood we spill on the
floor.'
The idea that South Africa should seek developing country status is not new.
Earlier this year the Overseas Development Institute in London published a
document, 'Trading with South Africa', which considered six future trading
regimes for South Africa, five of which assumed developing country status.
Gatt obliges developed countries to grant trade preferences to developing
countries.
As South Africa can reclassify unilaterally, the issue is more whether its
main trade partners, such as the EC and US, would recognise it as a
developing country.
The evidence is mixed. World Bank figures suggest that with a GNP per capita
in 1990 of Dollars 2,530 and a share of industry in GDP of 44 per cent South
Africa is an 'upper middle income' country.
As the ODI report notes, however, it is a much poorer developing economy by
various trade and development criteria. Its exports are still heavily
oriented towards commodities and the five principal exports account for 46
per cent of the total compared to 30-35 per cent for developing countries.
In terms of UNDP's Human Development Index, South Africa ranks well below
countries such as Brazil and Venezuela which have similar per capital GDPs.
How much South Africa would benefit from preferential trade regimes is a
moot point. Dr Erich Leistner of the Africa Institute in Pretoria argues
that to take developing country status is to accept a lowering of status.
'We are more likely to get sympathy and support if we show that we are
efficiently run and not just one more country begging for western support.'
The ODI study also concludes that, for example, less than 20 per cent of the
country's exports to the EC would benefit from standard trade preferences
because barriers to metals and minerals exports, South Africa's main exports
to the EC, are already low.
Dissatisfaction with SACU has long been evident in government circles, but
Mr Naude is the first senior government official to broach the subject
publicly. He said it had two main problems which effectively crippled its
potential to serve as a vehicle for regional integration. First, 'on the
present formula (of revenue sharing) the massive and rapidly growing
payments to our partners are becoming unaffordably high to us.' He said
South Africa would be paying R3.06bn to the other members - Botswana,
Lesotho, Swaziland and Namibia - in the 1992-93 financial year. 'Ultimately
South Africa retained 43 per cent of the pool to which it contributes more
than 90 per cent.'
He also suggested that diverging industrial policies regarding protection
levels, and different degrees of development, would 'increasingly strain the
relations within SACU'. South Africa has already given notice that the
structure of SACU will have to be re-examined.
On tariff reform, the accent, Mr Naude stresses, is on combating inflation
and promoting competitiveness - the government is not interested in
subsidising industries which don't have the potential to succeed
independently. Nor does it intend throwing industries to the wolves where
careful nurturing could see them through to health.
Other principles enunciated include: tariffs will not be used as a fiscal
instrument; tariff increases to promote specific increases will generally be
for limited periods only; formula duties will be phased out; regular tariff
adjustments will be avoided; tariff reductions in terms of South Africa's
offer to Gatt - currently being revised - will be phased in over five to 10
years.
The rationale underlying these reforms is simple. The sanctions years, which
placed a premium on import substitution and self-sufficiency, are largely
over. Now, says Mr Naude, 'future wealth increasingly will have to be
derived from penetration into export markets. Trade and industrial policy
thus needs to focus on the improvement of competitiveness in support of
export-driven growth . . . '
