FT  22 DEC 92 / Personal View: Tax the speculators
Since the breakdown of the Bretton Woods agreement in 1973, exchange rates
among leading national currencies have fluctuated, often violently. Much of
their volatility reflects short-term speculation, distorting signals the
markets give for trade and long-range investment. Most experts agree that
the ups and downs have greatly exceeded variations in rational estimates of
currencies' fundamental values.
The travails of the world economy since 1973 inspire nostalgic longings for
Bretton Woods, or even for a single world currency. Other proposals would
keep the floating rate regime while setting limits on fluctuations and
formalising the responsibilities of nations to keep exchange rates within
agreed bands. In Europe, the recent troubles of the exchange rate mechanism
have dramatised such issues.
Here I shall argue for a different proposal, which I first advanced in 1978.
An international uniform tax should be levied on spot transactions in
foreign exchange (including deliveries on futures contracts and options).
The proposal has two basic motivations. One is to increase the weight that
market participants give to long-range fundamentals relative to immediate
speculative opportunities. The second is to allow greater autonomy to
national monetary policies, by making possible greater differences between
short-term interest rates in different currencies.
At the time, I anticipated that the proposed tax would be superimposed on a
regime of market-determined exchange rates with minimal official
interventions. But the tax could also be helpful to systems involving
interventions, from agreements on target bands to full restoration of
Bretton Woods. It could also be useful as an adjunct to the ERM.
My proposal is a realistic, second-best option. A common currency works to
great advantage when sustained by common institutions: free movements of
goods, people, and financial capital; laws, courts, taxes, regulations, and
customs; a uniform system of social security and other entitlements;
assistance to regions and individuals suffering economic reverses. But a
common currency is not viable without those institutions; even in Europe it
may take a decade or two.
Fixed rates of exchange among national currencies, which central banks are
committed to maintain by market interventions, are by no means an
approximation of a single international currency. As long as parity changes
are possible - and often they are inevitable - private agents will speculate
on such changes. In this respect, a system of adjustable pegs of national
currencies - for example, pegs to dollars or to gold - differs very little
from a floating rate regime. The only difference is that adjustments of pegs
occur in discrete and traumatic jumps. Anyone who believes that the shocks
to the world economy since 1973 would have been less disturbing under a
regime of adjustable pegs has a short memory.
Although a true worldwide common currency is decades premature, vast private
funds are prepared to arbitrage away differences in national interest rates
and to speculate on movements of exchange rates. My transactions tax is
designed to make international money markets compatible with modest national
autonomy in monetary and macro-economic policy.
A  1/2 per cent tax on currency transactions is equivalent to a 4 percentage
point difference in annual interest rates on three-month bills, a
considerable deterrent to those contemplating a quick round trip to another
currency. The intent is to slow down speculative capital movements; it would
be too small to deter commodity trade or serious international capital
commitments.
In 1936, Keynes pointed out that a transactions tax could strengthen the
weight of long-range fundamentals in stock market pricing, as against
speculators' guesses of the short-rage behaviours of other speculators. The
same is true for the foreign exchange markets. Vast resources of
intelligence and enterprise are wasted in financial speculation, essentially
in playing zero-sum games. A transaction tax might reallocate some of the
resources. To the extent that it does not, it would at least produce needed
government revenues without bad side-effects. It is estimated that more than
Dollars 1,000bn in gross foreign exchange transactions occur every business
day.
It is obviously necessary to have an international agreement on the tax. My
suggestion is that the proceeds go to the World Bank, but other
dispositions, including less altruistic ones, could be considered.
While the proposed tax would give national macro-economic authorities
somewhat greater autonomy, it would certainly not permit them to ignore the
international repercussions of their policies. The leading economies would
still need to co-ordinate policies. In particular, they must agree a general
level of world interest rates, while allowing for differences among
countries appropriate to their national circumstances.
The author is Sterling professor emeritus of economics at Yale University
