FT  02 OCT 92 / Arts: Heady world of Matisse - Marina Vaizey reviews a once
in a lifetime exhibition in New York
Henri Matisse and America have had a long love affair, culminating now in
the largest exhibition accorded his art, at the Museum of Modern Art, New
York, until January 12. This compilation, three years in the making and a
decade in the thinking, has cost more than Dollars 4m and is sponsored by
Philip Morris. The show brings together well over 400 paintings, sculptures,
drawings, printed books and the fabled paper cut-outs of his last years,
drawn from the collections, public and private, of western Europe, America
and - notably - Russia.
MOMA itself has the largest collection of work in both breadth and depth by
Matisse owned by a single museum. With this exhibition, more than a fifth of
his known paintings are on view, with an even higher proportion of
masterpieces. So far so huge. MOMA first held a major exhibition of Matisse
in 1931 and in the past three decades there has been show after show.
Matisse opened the Hayward in 1968; his centenary was celebrated in Paris at
the Grand Palais; and there have been shows devoted to Matisse in Morocco
and in Nice. The cut-outs, the illustrated books, the drawings, the prints,
the sculpture: Matisse was staggeringly prolific in a variety of media. In
France there are two Musees Matisse, not to mention a masterpiece of living
art, the chapel of the Rosary at Vence.
This exhibition is guided by a compelling chronology and a sense of subtle
drama which highlights the exuberance of its subject. The scene is set by
his first markedly undistinguished paintings, dogged and determined student
work, copies and exercises, dour and even sour still lifes, and very rare,
unpeopled empty seascapes, almost expressionist: all very northern European.
The emergence of colour, glorious colour, banishes the sludge forever,
travelling towards the 'kind of paradise' he declared as his intended
destination, and during the journey borrowing from whatever artist had
something to show and teach: Cezanne, Seurat, the impressionists, the post
impressionists - not to mention the old masters, as far back as the frescoes
of Giotto, and his own peers. Moreover, the graceful decorative devices of
Islamic art, absorbed in his visit to the great Islamic show in Munich in
1910 and his trips to North Africa, also infused and enthused his art.
In the process Matisse transformed traditional notions of pictorial space,
flattening perspective, ignoring proportions and creating a heady
imaginative world in which odalisques floated in rooms filled with hectic
patterns which are nevertheless oddly serene; gigantic nudes appear as
dancing figures in endless vistas of land and sky , or gigantic hieratic
totems in vast forests. Nudes and portraits are distorted, even grotesque,
stylised and refined: a face is distilled into a coloured oval with lines
for eyes and mouth. Colour is unmodulated: cool pink, sizzling orange,
light-filled blue, bright green and deep red are flung together in
incandescent combinations.
Some of the famous photographs of the bearded Matisse in his white painting
coat, like a surgeon, surrounded by the most opulent of objects, the most
desirable of patterns, the most glorious of women, are used to introduce the
exhibition. These photographs tell us that the painter of pleasure was a
difficult and complex character, his passionate art achieved almost with
dispassion. The show rightly provides just enough information to tell us
where we are in Matisse's career, in terms of the geographical and
chronological setting, and his preoccupations; we are asked to look afresh
at the familiar and the unfamiliar.
Thus, MOMA's own large-scale masterpieces, such as 'The Red Studio' (1911)
and 'The Moroccans', (1915-1916) are amplified by 'Harmony in Red' (1908)
from the Hermitage. 'Luxe, calme et volupte' (1904-5) both study and final
painting, and the oil sketch for le 'Bonheur de Vivre', (1905-6), transform
the pastoral into compositions of shimmering colour like a series of beaded
curtains, semi-translucent.
From there to the sophisticated, intensely decorative, and profoundly
euphoric set pieces like 'La Danse' and the other enigmatic figure pieces,
is apparently an enormous change. But what the exhibition perhaps makes
clearer than ever before is that all is theme and variation. However visibly
different, the subject matter is consistent, and the formal preoccupations
and innovations are too: the flattening of space, which paradoxically makes
for a sense of limitless space, as well as inducing, particularly in
domestic interiors, a sense of claustrophobia that is at times almost
stifling, is as apparent in the late cut-outs as in 'Tea in the Garden'
(1919); 'La Danse' (1909) prefigures 'The Swimming Pool' (1952), room sized
cut outs in which the white spaces between are as significant as the
swooping, flying blue figures of the swimmers. The scale of the exhibition
lets us see, in a once-in-a-lifetime show, the narrative of his achievement
as fully as possible.
It is the alliance between visual wit and sensuality that makes Matisse so
captivating. He created his art, so lush, even over the top, with an
uncompromising severity and gravity. Dignity is everywhere, as is a sense,
often, of an unbridled joy. Matisse said he wanted 'to reach that state of
condensation of sensation which constitutes a picture'; but finally, he
simply pointed out that 'a painter's best spokesman is his work'. So far so
great.
The exhibition continues at the Museum of Modern Art, New York until January
12 1993. (Next spring the Pompidou in Paris will have a more precisely
focussed exhibition of works between 1904-1917.) 'Henri Matisse: A
Retrospective' by John Elderfield (Thames &amp; Hudson, Pounds 48) is an
outstanding contribution to the study of the artist and his period and
reproduces everything in the exhibition, as well as complementary
illustrations.
