FT  15 JUN 92 / Arts: Guns N' Roses - Pop
There was a massive congregation at Wembley on Saturday for a day of ritual
and preaching. 'Let's talk about saving someone,' said the Holy-roller.
'Let's get this straight - you can't save anyone. You can't even save
yourself.'
Oh, all right. This wasn't John Selwyn Gummer cracking up while addressing
the 7,000 Anglicans rallying against women priests at Wembley Arena; it was
Axl Rose, the less than Holy rock-and-roller getting 70 odd thousand stirred
up at Wembley Stadium. 'Save your own ass' was his anti-Calvinist cry, as he
led his band into 'Live and let die'.
It made for a good show, getting two groups of committed believers packing
the two ends of Wembley. The Church of England won hands down for style,
lots of colourful vestments and banners. The Guns N' Roses fans actually
wore very little. (Indeed before the band appeared, a happy hour was spent
with the exhibitionists in the crowd trying to attract the eye of the video
cameraman servicing the giant screens - girls baring breasts scored over
guys baring bottoms.)
But when it came to enthusiasm the rockers won hands up. Axl, the man who
could do little right in his youth, can do little wrong now he is the
official bad boy of pop, and Wembley has scarcely ever been more roused.
Axl's reputation is not entirely PR puff. His criminal record is longer than
his list of hits, and he was unlucky enough to be on stage at Donnington
when two fans were crushed to death. The money and the fame have mellowed
him although he still foulmouths obstreperous fans at the front.
The band mixes heavy metal with punk with old-fashioned rock, which means
that the guitarist goes bare chested and long haired; the drummer gets his
15 minute solo; there are fireworks and giant inflatables of monsters; and
Axl dashes around the stage liked a beheaded chicken.
As a hate figure Axl is a dead loss. There is something mesmerising about
the man, with his stringy ginger beard, his bandanna over long wild hair,
his shorts and high black boots - he looks just like the madman who shouts
at crowds. But his voice, like his energy, never waivers, and his best
songs, like 'Sweet child of mine', are deliberately as catchy as traditional
rock anthems. He embraces rather than alienates, and ends with a standard
that could have been picked up by the faithful in the Arena - 'Knocking on
Heaven's door'. Give it a year or two and Axl will be taking tea with the
Archbishop of Canterbury.
