FT  03 NOV 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Europe aims to seize
initiative / A look at the effectiveness of schemes which support small and
medium-size enterprises
How will Europe's small and medium-sized businesses fare over the next few
years as the single market becomes established and if the provisions of the
Maastricht Treaty come into force?
Ultimately the fortunes of business depend on the ability of entrepreneurs
and managers to respond to change but governments and the European Community
have an important role to play. The 12 community member governments operate
no fewer than 420 national initiatives for their smaller businesses while
the European Commission has a further 70 EC-wide programmes, according to a
new study* by the Dutch Research Institute for Small and Medium-sized
Businesses.
Just how well attuned these programmes are to the needs of smaller firms and
how effective they are in achieving their objectives was revealed at a
two-day conference, Gateways to Growth, in Birmingham last week as part of
the British presidency of the EC.
That special attention needs to be paid to the interests of the small and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) - businesses employing up to 500 people -
seems in little doubt. Of the 11.6m enterprises in the EC, 92 per cent
employ fewer than 10 people (and of these, 52 per cent employ no-one but the
owner) while a further 7.8 per cent have between 10 and 500 employees.
Apart from their sheer numbers, smaller firms deserve support because they
are far more important than large ones in creating employment - they already
account for 71 per cent of jobs.
Despite the importance of their SMEs, governments in the EC have not all
established clear policies and have not made sure that small firms' policies
fit in with their broader social and economic policies, Joop Vianen of the
Dutch small business institute told the conference.
This failure means that policies often do not achieve the desired results.
Other government ministries involved in areas such as physical planning,
education and finance are unable to take the specific needs of SMEs into
account.
While national governments, particularly in the less prosperous EC
countries, are ready to intervene directly by providing loans, loan
guarantees or grants, the Community takes a less interventionist approach.
It concentrates on helping in areas such as information, counselling and
cross-border co-operation.
Much of the EC small firms policy is carried out by its directorate general
for enterprise, DG23. Small business groups throughout Europe have become
concerned in recent months that DG23 may lose its independence and its
activities will be absorbed by the directorate general for industry, DG3, as
part of a streamlining of the Commission.
Antonio Cardoso e Cunha, commissioner in charge of enterprise policies,
announced plans for a four-year extension of the enterprise programme when
the current programme expires in December 1993. Cardoso e Cunha also
promised an independent annual review of the state of small businesses in
the Community.
Whether future SME programmes are run by an independent DG23 or by DG3,
small firms policies need to be given a tougher edge. They should give small
businesses greater access to existing large-scale EC programmes. These were
among the conclusions of the the first detailed study of the effectiveness
of the Community's small firms activities, carried out by Deloitte Touche
Tohmatsu, consultants.
DG23 sometimes found it difficult to obtain the co-operation of other
directorates because they regarded DG23's activities as constraining their
own freedom of action, the consultants reported. DG23's response was to
avoid conflicts and adapt its ambitions so as not to damage its links with
the other directorates.
'This pragmatic position may be effective but it tends to introduce a gap
between the expectations of SMEs and the reality of policy represented by
DG23,' the report said.
In a detailed study of existing small firms programmes, the consultants
called for a review of DG23's network of Euro-Info Centres, which absorb 40
per cent of its budget. The centres should stop providing general
information on the EC and hand over detailed advice activities to the
private sector so that they can concentrate on practical information on
individual markets and the single market as a whole, the consultants said.
One of DG23's most controversial activities is its assessment of the impact
of new legislation on small businesses. This often causes friction with
other directorates but has been criticised by small business groups as being
ineffective.
The Commission will later this month ask EC industry ministers to approve
plans to publish at the start of each year a list of measures which will be
assessed. This will allow small business organisations to object or to
suggest additions to the list. The Commission also wants the impact
assessments to be published in the EC's official journal, alongside details
of the proposed legislation to which it relates.
Many of these changes have long been sought by small business lobbyists. But
small business organisations themselves must become better organised if they
are to make their voice heard. With the Brussels bureaucracy heavily staffed
by technical experts, specialist trade organisations representing industry
sectors such as chemicals or packaging have often proved more effective
lobbyists than the more broadly-based small business organisations.
*Small and Medium-sized Enterprise Policy in the European Community.
Research Institute for Small and Medium-sized Business. PO Box 7001, 2701 AA
Zoetermeer, The Netherlands. Tel 31 79 413634.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
NUMBER OF ENTERPRISES AND EMPLOYMENT PROVIDED IN THE EC, 1988
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Size class               Share of number       Employment
(employees)              of enterprises          share
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Micro (fewer than 10)        92.1%               29.8%
Small &amp; medium (10-500)       7.8%               41.3%
Large (more than 500)         0.1%               28.9%
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Enterprises in Europe; Eurostat, DG 23
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
