FT  01 OCT 92 / The Labour Party at Blackpool: Block vote for unions cut to
70%
LABOUR yesterday agreed the first significant cut for 70 years in the trade
unions' ability to control conference, reducing the controversial block vote
from nearly 90 per cent to 70 per cent of the total.
The chief beneficiaries of the change are individual party members in the
constituency parties, who will see their voting power next year rise from 12
per cent to 30 per cent.
But the hopes of a reformist faction to push through a one-member, one-vote
system for the selection of MPs and the election of the party leader will
have to await a review.
After a rare outbreak of passionate debate, which also saw the first
heckling of the week, the conference voted by an overwhelming majority to
let a national executive committee working party draw up its own proposals.
Speaking for the NEC, Mr Richard Rosser made clear that the leadership's
policy continued to favour the one-member, one-vote system for parliamentary
selections and an end to the process being obligatory.
However, opposition in the hall suggested that some unions will continue to
resist the change, which would end their rights to participate through
electoral colleges.
In a lengthy and often confused debate, which included pressure for
all-women selection lists to raise the number of female MPs, delegate after
delegate reaffirmed their faith in the links between the unions and the
party they formed nearly a century ago.
There were also clear differences between those who wish to see no
significant reforms and those who would like to make the relationship with
the unions informal, with their powers replaced in the organisation by a
party controlled by individual members.
Mr Larry Whitty, the party's general secretary, steered a delicate path
between the two camps by drumming up support for the review group.
He said the working party would 'modernise' the relationship, legitimise the
union role in the minds of the public at large, remove abuses and help to
win the statutory political fund ballots.
He argued that the unions, both through funding and as a force for
stability, tempering extremism, had kept Labour 'in touch with reality'.
Traditionalists were more vocal, with one delegate warning that the
consequences of a party based purely on individual membership would be to
turn Labour into 'a middle-class pressure group'.
Mr Bill Morris, leader of the TGWU transport union, argued for the working
party, but made clear that he believed reforms should be limited, insisting
that there was no evidence the issue had any bearing on Labour's election
defeat.
The modernisers disagreed, saying the public display of union influence in
Mr John Smith's election as leader had damaged the party's image. One, Mr
Mohammed Afzal, once involved in a fierce dispute with the electricians'
union over his attempt to become a party candidate, claimed that he would be
appearing as an MP had the unions not intervened.
A series of card votes meant that final decisions on the motions will not be
known until conference resumes today. However, there are few doubts that,
with the help of the union block vote, the NEC's positions will be upheld.
