FT  31 JUL 92 / Ogata to discuss refugee 'safe zones'
MRS SADAKO OGATA, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, said
yesterday she would discuss the creation of 'safe zones' for victims of
conflict in Bosnia-Hercegovina with Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN
secretary-general.
Although the UNHCR has serious reservations about the idea, Mrs Ogata came
under pressure to pursue it at Wednesday's conference in Geneva on the
refugee crisis in former Yugoslavia.
How the zones would be protected and by whom, given the UN's overstretched
resources, is one key issue. The UNHCR also fears that moving people into
'safe zones' could encourage 'ethnic cleansing' - the forced expulsion of
ethnic minorities from their homes.
However, there appears to be growing support for the idea of 'preventive
protection' of existing mixed areas where the presence of international aid
workers and monitors could deter expulsions, now running at up to 10,000 a
day.
A meeting of the 'follow-up committee' to Wednesday's conference, involving
38 countries directly concerned, also commissioned the UNHCR to study the
legal implications of according temporary asylum to those fleeing the former
Yugoslavia. Baroness Chalker, UK overseas development minister, has said she
opposes creating a special refugee category for this group alone.
However, other governments think 'temporary protected status', as applied in
the US, which would not grant permanent resettlement rights, would make it
easier to keep their borders open.
The meeting also discussed the aid needs of countries buckling under the
pressure of refugees, such as Croatia, Slovenia and Hungary.
Defence and foreign ministry officials from the Western European Union met
in Rome yesterday to draw up contingency plans for military protection for
humanitarian convoys, Reuter reports.
The meeting began among growing signs that the US and its European allies
were moving towards the idea of a limited use of force in the Yugoslav
conflict, at least to guarantee the safe-passage of relief supplies to
crisis areas.
In London, now Lord Owen has urged Mr John Major, the prime minister, 'not
to accept the conventional wisdom that nothing can be done militarily. . .
.' Nato had powers 'to stop by threat of force' use or movement of military
aircraft, tanks, armoured vehicles ot artillery in former Yugoslav
territory.
Canada yesterday said it will grant residence to 26,000 refugees from former
Yugoslavia, Reuter reports.
Editorial comment, Page 14
