FT  08 MAY 92 / Thais defy military with more pressure on PM to quit
THAILAND'S most serious political unrest in more than 15 years deepened
yesterday as more than 100,000 people defied military orders to end protests
calling for the resignation of the new prime minister, former army commander
General Suchinda Kraprayoon.
After a day of high tension, confusion and apparent miscalculation by the
military, the protesters moved from a narrow street in front of parliament
to a much larger square in the centre of Bangkok.
One reason for the move was to give more room for Major General Chamlong
Srimuang, former governor of Bangkok, who has now completed three sweltering
days of his hunger strike and was clearly suffering when the crowd at the
round-the-clock vigil peaked each evening.
Gen Chamlong, the simple-living former soldier known as the Mr Clean of
Thailand has vowed to fast until he dies or forces the resignation of Gen
Suchinda, who engineered a military coup 15 months ago and took over as
prime minister last month.
Mr Suriyant Oonnarkka, a member of Gen Chamlong's party, said the
demonstrators would stay all night in defiance of the military.
His aides said the four main opposition parties had written to King Bhumibol
Adulyadej asking him to intervene.
Students, workers, young professionals and old folk joined the protest, the
largest since a student uprising toppled a military dictatorship in 1973.
They are accusing the military of manipulating the electoral process to
perpetuate its domination of Thai politics.
An attempt by the prime minister to discredit Gen Chamlong clearly misfired,
at least as far as public opinion in the capital was concerned.
Gen Suchinda spoke briefly to parliament less than an hour into the second
day of a debate on his new government's policy statement. He accused Gen
Chamlong of being a religious deviant and implied that another opposition
leader, Gen Chavalit Yongchaiyudh, wanted to impose a communistic
leadership.
The crowd outside parliament booed angrily when they heard what Gen Suchinda
had said about Gen Chamlong, and speculators, watching the debate on
television, dumped their shares. In the 10 minutes that he spoke the stock
market index lost 30 points although it later recovered to close only 6.9
points down, the lowest level this year.
The opposition booed the prime minister inside the parliament too and the
debate was abruptly closed.
Later in the day the military replayed tapes of the speech on television,
editing out the booing. They also showed clips of some of the more
aggressive gestures of the largely peaceful crowd before they started
issuing orders for the demonstrators to disperse. They claimed the
protesters were out to overthrow the legal government and to stir up unrest.
All this has apparently only increased the numbers willing to join the
demonstration. A sympathy rally was held in the northern city of Chiang Mai.
Late last night more petitions were submitted to the king asking him to
persuade Gen Suchinda to dissolve parliament and call another election.
At least one member of one of the five coalition parties backing Gen
Suchinda was reported last night to be defecting. Protest organisers predict
more will follow.
