FT  24 JUN 92 / Closure of up to 15 London hospitals urged
UP TO 15 big London hospitals should close with resources shifted to
improvements in family doctor and community services, a report on the
capital's healthcare recommended yesterday.
The report did not nominate hospitals for closure, but implementation of its
recommendations would certainly mean the loss of famous teaching hospitals.
Medical staffing levels in the city's hospital service would be cut by 30
per cent.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, described the report from the
King's Fund health policy centre as a radical vision of healthcare which
would be 'extremely valuable in pointing the way ahead'.
She has asked Sir Bernard Tomlinson, who is advising the government on
future health provision in the capital, to take full account of the King's
Fund proposals. Sir Bernard is due to report in the autumn, and the
government will then face sensitive decisions on closures.
London is relatively over-provided with hospital beds, particularly in
high-cost inner-city teaching hospitals. The problem has been brought to a
head by the new funding system of the government's health reforms -
inner-London districts with falling populations are losing money and health
authorities in the home counties have greater incentives to treat patients
locally.
'In many important respects London's health services appear stuck in a time
warp, having been shaped a century ago,' said the report. 'To date, forces
for change have been largely negative and budgetary.'
There had been a decline in hospital beds since 1980, but almost no
redistribution of medical manpower from central London and little
concentration of specialist resources in fewer, stronger centres, the report
added. The capital's hospitals had faced unrelenting financial pressures
during the 1980s. If a drop in patients from outer areas led to further
across-the-board service reductions the position would 'quickly become
unsustainable'. In 1989-90 hospital and community health services in London
cost Pounds 2.9bn - 20 per cent of English expenditure even though the
capital contains only 15 per cent of the population. Healthcare costs in
London were 20 per cent above the English average, with those in inner
London 45 per cent higher.
London nonetheless received a 'poor deal' from health services, the report
stated. Compared with the rest of England it had many more general
practitioners with list sizes above 2,500 and more GPs running surgeries
single-handedly, while the proportion of GPs aged over 65 was 130 per cent
above the English average.
The report calls for a strategic task force, accountable to the government,
to develop services in conjunction with health authorities. It envisages a
25 per cent reduction in London hospital beds over the next 18 years, and
predicts the closure of about 15 major acute (general) and specialist
post-graduate hospitals by 2010. London has 41 acute hospitals each with
more than 250 beds.
The report said Pounds 1.2bn would be needed to achieve proposed service
changes, plus Pounds 220m to develop community healthcare premises. An
estimated Pounds 1.5bn would be available under the NHS's capital programme
for London hospital developments during the next 20 years. If that was added
to projected savings arising from the proposed restructuring, said the
report, the proposals were realistically based.
London trains a third of Britain's doctors, and the report envisaged a
reduction in the annual number of medical students in the capital from 1,350
to 960.
Management, Page 14 Editorial Comment, Page 18
