FT  16 APR 92 / International Company News: Hong Kong banking sector
revalues
IN THE wake of the disclosure of Hongkong and Shanghai Bank's true financial
position, after Tuesday's bid for Midland Bank, the colony's banking sector
was yesterday substantially revalued.
The finance sub-index of the Heng Seng index climbed 3.5 per cent, supported
by substantial gains from HSBC Holdings and its listed subsidiary Hang Seng
Bank, both of which started the trend toward full disclosure of their
financial position on Tuesday.
The overall market index rose 55.22 points, or 1.22 per cent, in the initial
five minutes of trading yesterday. The index ended the day 102.58 points, or
2.1 per cent, higher at 4,986.11, supported by a strong rise in Tokyo share
prices as well as the banks' rerating.
The remaining listed Hong Kong banks are all expected to announce inner
reserves in the short term, to avoid what would effectively be a false
market in their shares. Of these, only Bank of East Asia and Wing Lung are
expected to have reserves of any significance.
A spokesman for Bank of East Asia, Hong Kong's third largest banking group,
said: 'At the moment our board is not considering any plan to proceed with
disclosure of its inner reserves.' But the bank has in the past indicated it
would be unlikely to buck any trend on disclosure set by its competitors.
Inner reserves were introduced to enable the colony's banks to smooth out
earnings during times of trouble, in recognition of the important role banks
play in ensuring public confidence in the financial sector.
Hong Kong is prone to runs on banks for far less significant reasons than
the announcement of losses.
However, the international trend towards greater disclosure, combined with
the one-off positive effect of announcing higher earnings figures, seems
likely to win the day over a general tendency towards corporate secrecy in
Hong Kong.
'I think the smaller banks will follow suit soon. But I think the
declaration of inner reserves marks the high point for the banking sector,'
said Mr Ruary Neill, managing director of Schroder Securities (Hong Kong).
Hongkong Bank defied some pundits who had forecast a sharp fall in its share
price by closing up Dollars HK1 at HKDollars 40.25.
The bank's true profit in 1991 was HKDollars 8.46bn compared with the
reported profit of HKDollars 5.66bn after it had transferred an unspecified
amount to inner reserves.
That amount was HKDollars 2.8bn (USDollars 362m).
Hang Seng Bank on Tuesday said its results for 1991 were 60 per cent higher
than the profit figures disclosed in February, as a result of a HKDollars
1.7bn transfer to inner reserves.
Its shares rose HKDollars 2.50 to HKDollars 39, as investors reacted to the
higher-than-known figures.
Hong Kong's banks have had a remarkable 12 months, buoyed by their widest
mortgage lending margins since early 1985, enabling the banks to transfer
significant amounts to inner reserves while still disclosing substantial
earnings growth.
Analysts believe lending margins will widen further but there is no
indication of a contraction in the short term.
