FT  15 JAN 92 / Midlands capital spending expected to be maintained
THE LEVEL of capital expenditure among companies in the west Midlands is
likely to stabilise in the next six months after falling since 1990,
according to a survey of business opinion in the region published today.
There is no indication of a surge in investment spending in the region,
which is seen as a barometer of UK manufacturing. Rather, the survey's
analysts conclude that companies are no longer cutting expenditure plans
'but are maintaining them at current levels'.
The survey was conducted by Wolverhampton Business School, Warwick Business
School and Price Waterhouse, the consultants, at the end of last year. It
covered more than 1,200 companies in the counties of West Midlands, Hereford
and Worcester, Shropshire, Staffordshire and Warwickshire.
The predictions about investment come against the background of general
business stagnation. They show 22 per cent of companies questioned expecting
to raise spending, 46 per cent expecting to maintain spending at the same
level and 32 per cent expecting to spend less.
Price Waterhouse and the business schools said responses to the survey
suggested: 'The second half of 1991 has proven to be very little worse than
the first half of the year.' That tallied with other business surveys in the
region. 'We can say that the economy has hit the bottom.'
There were few expectations that conditions were likely to improve markedly.
'Overall, the survey leads us to conclude that the first six months of 1992
will show at best faltering recovery compared with the last six months of
1991.'
Government forecasts of 2.25 per cent growth in gross domestic product were
too high, short of 'an unexpected boom' in the second half.
The expressed intentions on capital expenditure were used by the survey
analysts as a sign of a change for the better in the economy, although they
had to be treated cautiously. Previous surveys have shown that companies
have consistently tended to underestimate the severity of the recession.
Falling investment spending since 1990 has led to fears that the regional
engineering industry is likely to lose its competitive edge in international
markets and that the recession, far from being just another cyclical twist
in the economy, may lead to further erosion of the manufacturing base.
West Midlands Business Survey. Price Waterhouse, 169 Edmund Street,
Birmingham B3 2JB. Summary free, full report Pounds 75.
