FT  05 SEP 92 / World slow reacting to Somali crisis, says Hurd
MR Douglas Hurd, the British foreign secretary, yesterday said the world had
been slow reacting to the crisis in Somalia, and criticised United Nations
agencies which have not yet established a presence in the country to help
save up to 1.5m starving people.
Mr Hurd, who led an EC troika of ministers on a one-day visit to Somalia,
said the crisis was worsening outside the capital and promised the European
Community would increase humanitarian aid; concentrate on turning relief
into long-term recovery; and help with efforts to re-establish a government
in the war-ravaged country.
Although he refrained from naming the UN agencies, Mr Hurd was thought to be
referring to the World Health Organisation and the Food and Agriculture
Organisation.
Mr Hurd made the comments after four hours in the shell-blasted capital,
Mogadishu. The EC troika experienced the chaos and danger of Somalia at
first-hand as gunmen in 'Mad Max' customised vehicles zoomed past their UN
flagged convoy and an occasional shot was fired in the distance.
At a Save the Children Fund feeding centre for severely malnourished
children and nursing mothers, Mr David Shearer, SCF director, told the
ministers that the EC should concentrate on expanding emergency relief in
rural areas and should plan for the long-term, after the 'crisis falls off
the world stage'.
Mr Mohamed Ahmed Noor, the secretary for relief and rehabilitation of the
faction that controls south Mogadishu, told Mr Hurd: 'A political settlement
must go side-by-side with relief. Everybody is fed up and ready to throw
away their guns and what we need is for a country like Britain to call us
together to talk.'
The same point was stressed later after the EC convoy crossed the front line
to enter the north of the city, controlled by clan forces loyal to Mr Ali
Mahdi Mohamed.
Mr Mohamed, who arrived in the looted Range Rover which used to belong to
the former British ambassador, said: 'Britain, as president of the EC,
should help Somalia by giving more aid, by playing a role in peacekeeping
operations and by giving us a hand with political reconciliation.'
Mr Hurd later highlighted the need for a long-term recovery programme by the
urgent provision of seeds and tools. 'The international community should
sustain relief after the television cameras have gone,' he said.
However, Mr Hurd steered clear of making any commitments on a British or EC
role in mediating a political dialogue between the warring factions.
Asked earlier if he was in favour of a UN trusteeship for Somalia, Mr Hurd
said he was in favour of an expanded UN presence and administration of
Somalia, where the government and civil society have disintegrated. But, he
said, trusteeship would not be the right name, since the UN was bound by the
sovereignty of states.
Mr Hurd said the 3,500 UN troops expected in Somalia should be deployed with
careful consultation with the Somali authorities. 'There are risks,' he
said, 'but the troops are needed to make sure the relief effort works.'
Britain would not contribute any soldiers to the UN force, the foreign
secretary said.
Mr Jan Eliasson, UN undersecretary-general for humanitarian affairs,
yesterday said he would lead a team of UN officials on a visit to Somalia,
to meet Gen Mohamed Farah Aideed, one of the warlords who has hampered UN
efforts to guard relief supplies.
