FT  07 MAR 92 / The FT Schools 500 (6): A mission beyond grades
CALL AT the wrong number for your Harley Street doctor, and you might
stumble on a few hundred boisterous schoolgirls by mistake. They are the
pupils at Queen's College, London, packed into a terrace of 18th-century
houses slap in the middle of the prestigious lane of doctors and dentists.
It is an unusual school from the inside, too. Elegant plaster mouldings
adorn modernised science labs. The decor seems to pass most of the pupils
by. But the day school's 400 girls relish the location ('just off to Oxford
Street shopping', blurted one sixth former), and the higgledy-piggledy lay
out seems to work. Regent's Park, around the corner, is the school playing
field.
Founded in 1848 by F D Maurice, founder of the Christian Socialist movement,
Queen's was one of the first schools with an avowed mission to to provide
'higher' education for girls. 'We were ahead of our time, and in some ways
still are', says Lady Celia Goodhart, the college's principal.
Queen's marries high standards with a degree of informality unusual for an
independent school. There is no uniform ('perish the thought', says one
teacher), few rules besides those requiring attendance and participation,
and very easy relations between the staff and the 420 pupils.
Lady Goodhart has no thought of going co-ed. 'The demand for girls' schools
is strong, there is plenty of evidence that girls - particularly those
aiming for higher education - perform better in single-sex schools, and
anyway admitting boys would do little to advance our mission.'
Lady Goodhart's unusual career path typifies the school. She taught there in
the 1960s, and returned two years ago after bringing up a family and
spending a decade in the higher reaches of the now-defunct SDP. 'I am just
getting into my stride,' she says, 'and have plenty of ideas for putting us
firmly on the map.'
Judged by A level performance, Queen's ranks towards the bottom of the FT
table. It is also fairly expensive (Pounds 4,500 a year). That is a feature,
perhaps, of its comparatively low pupil-teacher ratio (9.3:1) - a problem
bedeviling small schools in the day as much as the boarding sector.
Even so, most pupils go on to higher education, and the school is confident
that, given its intake, it would perform well in any 'value added' test. The
deputy head's use of tables comparing A levels with GCSEs and entrance-exam
scores are inconclusive, but persuasive.
As in most girls' schools, the bias against straight science is marked. But
Queen's tries to encourage girls to keep maths and/or one science going
after GCSE. With some success: more than half do so, 'and I hope to see that
number rise further', says Lady Goodhart.
The school gives every impression of life and vitality: its common room
appears easily the match of its more prestigious counterparts, and it
maintains a steady entry into Oxbridge.
The school therefore serves as a warning: life, purpose and real achievement
are certainly not lacking at 323 in the FT 500.
