FT  27 FEB 92 / Survey of Dominican Republic (7): Less fickle, less
profitable - The tourist industry
THE EUROPEANS are still arriving in the Dominican Republic, 500 years after
they first set foot on Hispaniola, the island of which it now forms part.
More than half the country's visitors are now from Europe, led by Italians,
Germans and the British. The Spanish are beginning to arrive too on the 14
flights a week to Santo Domingo from Madrid.
This is in sharp contrast with the early 1980s when 80-85 per cent of all
tourist visitors were from the US and Puerto Rico. Now the figure is closer
to 25 per cent, with Canadians accounting for 20-25 per cent of arrivals.
That has allowed the republic, unlike other tourist destinations in the
Caribbean more dependent on the American market, a cushion against the
impact of recession in the US.
The American tourist has become highly cost-conscious, and many of the
destinations in the DR (as they call it) are pricey. Casa de Campo, one of
the country's oldest resorts at La Romana along the coast from the capital,
for example, provides highly-ranked sporting facilities - three golf
courses, shooting, riding, tennis, deep-sea fishing - in a glamorous
setting, with prices to match. With every round of gold or game of tennis
costing extra, many Americans prefer destinations with all-in prices.
The reduced dependence on the US has made the country's tourism business
somewhat less fickle. Europeans appear less sensitive to upward flickers in
the price of aviation fuel that used to kill the American market stone dead.
There are, however, some drawbacks of higher dependence on Europe. Its
tourists, for example, do not spend as much as Americans once they arrive.
Italians tend to spend freely, and the Germans (like the Canadians)
moderately, while the British tend to be penny-pinching.
But all visitors are sensitive to the kind of negative publicity that
enveloped the island in late 1990. As the government shifted economic
policies to try to rein in 100 per cent inflation, the strain on the
Dominican economy showed. There were petrol shortages and a scarcity of
basic goods; water was cut off to many hotels and tourists were left
stranded without power for most of the day.
The worst of the crisis lasted for two or three months, but the effect of
the bad publicity lasted for more. Combined with the sharp drop in tourism
brought about by the invasion of Kuwait and war in the Gulf, the first half
of last year did not appear promising for the country's tourist industry.
According to Mr Ellis Perez, president of the Tourist Promotion Council, a
private sector body set up to fill the gap left by the government's baleful
promotion efforts: '1991 was a year of survival for our tourism industry.'
None the less, according to official figures from the Ministry of Tourism,
the number of arrivals in the year as a whole increased significantly. There
were 1.32m visitors, against 1.05m in 1990, and 1.1m in 1989.
Meanwhile, the number of hotel rooms rose to 21,500 at the end of last year,
from 19,000 a year earlier and 6,100 at the end of 1981. Current plans
envisage that number rising to 28,000 over the next two years. Average hotel
occupancy rates for 1991 stood at 65 per cent.
However, Mr Perez admits more has to be done to bring all tourists the kind
of security of services they expect. Some resorts, particularly the newer
ones, are protected against power shortages by their own generating capacity
but a full solution to the problems awaits confrontation of the country's
big infrastructure problems and a shift toward the proper maintenance of the
infrastructure already in place. The importance of tackling these problems
is heightened by the possible re-emergence in the next few years of Cuba as
an important tourist destination.
Mr Perez, a former tourism minister, is optimistic about 1992. The expensive
upgrading of the airport at Santo Domingo and its use as a Latin American
hub both by the Spanish state airline, Iberia, and American Airlines,
encourages that view.
However, plans to sell off all or part of the state-owned Dominicana airline
appear to have stalled. Talks with Iberia have broken down, to the evident
relief of some in the industry who believed that Iberia was not an ideal
partner and who would have preferred to see Dominicana being used creatively
to aid tourism in the country, rather as Jamaica has used its national
airline.
Mr Perez sees his country as offering a wide variety of tourist destinations
which should reduce the volatility of the market. A third of its coastline
consists of beaches, but he also points to the tourist enclaves on the north
coast, sporting facilities in the south; and the historic city of Santo
Domingo, where the old colonial town has been renovated in preparation for
the celebrations to mark the first visit of Columbus to the 'new world'.
In contrast with the equivocal attitude in other Caribbean countries to the
quincentennial, most Dominicans appear unaware of the debate about the issue
that rages elsewhere in the region.
The expectations are that the celebrations will benefit an industry whose
important to the economy cannot be denied. Twenty-one years after the first
law was passed to encourage tourism, the sector employs an estimated 50,000
people. It is now the country's biggest foreign exchange earner, yielding
around Dollars 800m a year in gross earnings and over 10 per cent of gross
domestic product.
