FT  14 JUL 92 / Survey of Bahrain (1): Quest for greater economic diversity
 -Bahrain has only modest oil reserves, but it has become an important
financial and trading centre in the Gulf. Now the island-state is seeking an
even more diversified economic future
LAST year's great escape by the Arab nations of the Gulf from the predatory
grasp of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq is not providing the long-term
relief that seemed probable at the time. Official optimism abounds, but
there is also a growing appreciation that the American-led military victory
has done little to resolve the economic, financial and political tensions of
the region. Bahrain has more reason than most to regret the failure.
With a population of 518,000 - 35 per cent of whom are expatriates - and
limited natural resources, it relies heavily on international confidence,
relative regional stability and a measure of neighbourly co-operation.
Bahrain's economy is underpinned by a modest 112,000 barrels of oil a day;
just 42,000 barrels of this produced onshore, the rest coming from an
offshore sharing arrangement with Saudi Arabia.
Since independence in 1971, the most obvious of Bahrain's economic
characteristics has been that it will be the first Gulf nation to face a
future substantially without oil. At current rates of extraction, its
onshore field will cease pumping early in the next century.
That mattered less before the Gulf war. Now that its wealthiest neighbours
have used most of their financial reserves to fund the international war
effort, Bahrain has less of a safety net and an even greater need to plan a
more diversified economic future.
That imperative goes some way to explain the apparent contradiction of
Bahrain simultaneously providing base facilities for the US Navy, while
urging better relations with Iraq. The paramount need for military security
is dealt with by the US, but Iraq and Iran (neither noted, in the past, for
kindly intentions towards Bahrain) are inescapably part of the Gulf's
economic future.
Those most involved in planning Bahrain's future talk most about Singapore:
'a model for small, island nations,' as one senior official put it. Bahrain
would like to see itself fulfilling, within the Gulf Co-operation Council
(which includes Saudi Arabia, Oman, Kuwait, United Arab Emirates, Qatar and
Bahrain), several of the roles which Singapore has developed within the
Association of South East Asian Nations (Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand,
Philippines, Brunei and Singapore).
For example, Bahrain wants to expand further as an offshore banking centre
offering an increasingly sophisticated range of services. It wants to become
the principal tourism destination in the region, serving local markets,
especially Saudi Arabia, while forming part of multi-destination
international tours.
It also aims to attract more international companies to establish their
regional headquarters and supply centres; to dominate the local conference
and exhibition market and, by offering 100 per cent foreign ownership, to
persuade more private investors to look at opportunities for longer-term
industrial development.
THESE aims are a not a fanciful strategy, even if, on closer examination,
several of its concepts appear difficult to develop. Those difficulties are
exacerbated by the unco-operative aspects of the GCC.
Formed in 1981, in direct response to the war between Iraq and Iran, the six
GCC members initially denied any military or defensive purpose. It was, they
insisted, primarily a trading and economic organisation. In 1990 its
military role was forced into the open by Iraq but, to Bahrain's great
disappointment, this has still not been matched by greater enthusiasm for
regional economic agreements.
The dilemma for Bahrain is acute. It has been running a budget deficit for
more than six years; projected last year at 9 per cent of gross domestic
product.
On present revenue estimates it will need to borrow or (better) to be given
most of the capital for the development projects required both for
diversification and to create new jobs.
But Bahrain's capacity to borrow is limited, and support from other Gulf
countries is running at only a third of promised levels. Of the annual total
of Dollars 150m pledged to Bahrain, no payment has been received from Abu
Dhabi since 1982, and Kuwait stopped paying in 1990.
'We are grateful to Saudi Arabia for being the one country to meet all its
commitments,' says Mr Ibrahim Abd al-Karim, the minister of finance and
national economy.
Sheikh Khalifa bin Sulman al-Khalifa, the prime minister, emphasised in an
interview that Bahrain had not sought compensation from its wealthier Gulf
partners for the serious losses it had suffered during the crisis; neither
had any been offered. What was more important for Bahrain, he stressed, was
long-term economic regional agreements, especially those which aimed at
preventing duplication of effort.
In the absence of such agreements, Bahrain hesitates to embark on projects;
their viability could be undermined by its neighbours. The prime minister,
choosing his words with care, says that business tends to go where there is
most liquidity. (In other words, to countries with more money than Bahrain.)
To offset this tendency, Bahrain would like a commitment from its GCC
partners not to compete in specific areas.
Its chances do not look good. While international military intervention has
blunted the aggression of Saddam Hussein, it has done nothing to defuse
other, lesser, regional sensitivities.
In the wake of the Gulf war a rash of border disputes has resurfaced,
including Qatar's claim to sovereignty over the Hawar islands, an area close
to one-sixth of Bahrain's total land area.
Bahraini officials were dismayed by Qatar's unilateral approach to the
International Court of Justice and by its declaration of territorial waters
stretching close to Bahrain's beaches. (Why Qatar chose this path is not
understood in Bahrain, but the possible interpretations of Doha's motives
make fertile ground for conspiracy theorists.)
The resurgence of Iranian influence in the Gulf, under what is supposed to
be an emphatically more pragmatic leadership, has created economic
opportunities and political anxieties. Bahrain's bankers travel hopefully to
Tehran; in the meantime its internal security forces keep wary eyes on
hundreds of Iranians attending the biggest trade fair in Manama since the
overthrow of the Shah.
SHEIKH KHALIFA, while stirring up regional sensitivities by discussing
relations with Iraq, also includes in his long-term vision the possibility,
one day, of Iraq and Iran joining a GCC which has sorted out its present
internal difficulties. Bahrain wants a continued American military presence
in the Gulf, but it does not want Syrian and Egyptian forces to be deployed
in its defence; it protests at what it sees as western attempts to divide
Iraq into three.
Having to face in different directions simultaneously may be the fate of
small nations in conflict-prone parts of the world. But it also provides a
convenient shield for deflecting other unappealing suggestions. One idea
taken from Singapore is round-the-clock broadcasting by the British
Broadcasting Corporation. The uncensored provision of international news
helps to promote Bahrain's image as an information centre, but the official
who, memorably, saw 'the breath of fresh air blowing through our antenna,'
did not suggest that this would have domestic political repercussions. On
the contrary, the prime minister is emphatic that Bahrain, once the standard
bearer of democratic institutions in the Gulf, will not try again to set the
pace for political liberalisation. Sheik Khalifa praised Saudi Arabia's
announcement of a consultative council (its members have still to be named),
and said that anything which helped to form opinion was useful.
On the other hand, security was a life and death issue for Bahrain. It was
difficult to be a good democrat if that meant sacrificing security, he said.
Recent events in Algeria will have reinforced that view.
The absence of greater public accountability, however, does limit the
effectiveness of Bahrain's search for a more broadly based economic future.
Studies of Singapore will have revealed other, perhaps more pertinent,
reasons for that country's economic achievements. Singapore has a
functioning if rather regimented parliament. Singapore ministers and senior
civil servants are well paid, but face severe penalties if found guilty of
any financial impropriety. Singapore's working population accepts taxation;
enforced savings are deducted at source; there is a national acceptance that
the state provides nothing for free.
Few of those items are likely to figure on the agenda of either government
or governed in Bahrain. On the contrary, the traditional, family-oriented,
paternalistic style of national management shows every sign of persisting.
After the successive Gulf wars of the past decade, it can be argued that
Sheikh Isa bin Sulman al-Khalifa, the Emir of Bahrain, has guided his
country with admirable steadiness and that there is little demand for
change. Neither, perhaps, will there be, while the national exchequer is
sufficiently well funded to maintain popular expectations.
With over 60 per cent of government revenue coming from oil, limited
opportunities for reducing recurrent expenditure and the population
increasing at about 3.4 per cent annually, the Bahrain government is aware
that something will have to be done.
Its strategy for facing a future without oil may not appear entirely
convincing, but perhaps it need not be, given the relatively small
contributions required to put the national finances on a more even keel. No
country in the Gulf sees a greater need for regional stability, prospering
local economies and - critically - open-handed friends.
