FT  01 AUG 92 / Finance &amp; The Family: Keen to study the student market / A
look at the carrots banks will offer to win the business of school leavers
THE NEW academic year approaches and the banks are homing in on students.
Bank customers are deeply reluctant to move their accounts, so signing up a
student can be the key, for the bank, to a long-standing lucrative
relationship.
However, banks are now much more sophisticated in the way they target
students and school leavers. Students themselves are more conservative and
sensible in their approach to finance than they were ten years ago.
According to research conducted by Barclays and the National Union of
Students, they are acutely conscious of debt, dislike it, and are not as
confident as they used to be of a high starting salary when they graduate,
to pay off the overdraft.
Barclays' research paints a picture of a 'carefree fresher' spending money
happily at first. The 'end of the honeymoon' sets in when they first have to
borrow, which usually happens in the first year. This deteriorates into
'final year blues', possibly even followed by a disillusioned graduation.
The research suggests that a third of students are in debt at any one time,
while Barclays according to students, graduate owing on average Pounds
1,100. Only 25 per cent of student debt by value is with banks. The most, 31
per cent, is with the government's Student Loan Company and 21 per cent
comes from parents. Credit cards take up 6.5 per cent.
These figures show why banks have decided to withdraw some of the 'freebies'
with which they entice students. Free overdraft facilities have now been put
to the fore.
Students can now expect an interest-free overdraft of Pounds 400, for the
full term of their study. Last year some banks, including Barclays, only
offered free overdrafts for the first year, but it is now usually extended.
Students can also expect charge-free banking and some degree of interest,
while in credit, and at least one plastic card. Policies over issuing credit
cards still vary, as the chances of serious bad debts in this area are
obviously considerable.
However, students off on a rail trip around Europe during the vacation can
expect preferential rates on foreign exchange.
School leavers who go straight into work tend to take an even more
conservative approach, and are deeply averse to borrowing. Consequently they
can expect more in the way of 'goodies', but much less in the way of cheap
borrowing facilities. School leavers will ideally be going into full-time
employment, so cheap credit should be less important to them. Also, banks
are reluctant to encourage borrowing in such young consumers.
The main offers are as follows:
Abbey National aims at youngsters in general and makes no special offers for
students, beyond a preferential rate of interest on overdrafts - the APR is
14.5 per cent for students, compared with normal rates of 24.4 per cent for
authorised overdrafts and 34.4 per cent for unauthorised.
Its package for youngsters in general is more competitive. Abbey offers Visa
Delta debit cards, and access to Link machines, along with Saturday opening
in 95 per cent of branches (useful for 16-year-olds in their first job). The
goodies are a free driving lesson and 25 per cent off the next five lessons,
for those who do not already have a driving licence, and Pounds 15 in BP
petrol vouchers for those who do.
Barclays has an interest-free overdraft of Pounds 300, less than the other
clearers, which will be available throughout the course of study. It also
offers free banking, and the opportunity to apply for a free Barclays
Connect debit card, and a free Student Barclaycard. Successful applicants
for the latter receive a Pounds 250 credit limit with eight weeks'
interest-free credit, and a choice of the following goodies: a clock radio,
a travel bag, or a Pounds 5 Our Price voucher. Barclays' chief 'treat', for
all students opening an account, is a Pounds 10 voucher for Our Price
records. The bank has also set up a system of student business officers, and
a free interview for financial planning advice during the first year is part
of the package.
Lloyds is offering a Pounds 400 agreed overdraft for the full term of study,
with a reduced interest rate (15.3 per cent APR) on larger advances. Banking
is free whether in credit or overdrawn. Gross interest of 5 per cent monthly
is payable on credit balances.
Goodies include a free Young Persons Railcard, commission-free currency and
travellers' cheques, and a free Eurocheque card. There is no cash gift.
Midland is offering an interest-free overdraft of Pounds 400 for the full
period of study, along with a Pounds 50 cheque guarantee card, which also
works for cash machines and as a debit card. Banking is free while in credit
and free 'financial counselling' is also available.
Goodies include Pounds 15 in cash, commission-free Thomas Cook travellers'
cheques and currency transactions, and eligibility for charge-free Access
and Visa cards up to a maximum credit limit of Pounds 250.
National Westminster announces its package next week. It is likely to match
the standard Pounds 400 interest-free overdraft for the full term of study.
Last year's cash gift was Pounds 30 and it is unlikely to be increased.
Royal Bank of Scotland offers a Pounds 400 interest-free overdraft for only
the first year of study, and a 'Highline' card which works as a cheque
guarantee and cash-point card. Tiered interest is payable on accounts while
they are in credit. Goodies include a Pounds 20 cash gift, a free Eurocheque
card and commission-free travellers' cheques and foreign currency.
TSB maintains more of a 'goodies' policy than its rivals, and is also keen
to stress the 7.5 per cent gross savings rate it offers on current accounts,
which it claims is currently the market leader. Students get their Pounds
400 interest-free overdraft facility, which is available until the September
of their final year of study. They also get a Speedbank multi-function card.
The goodies include a Pounds 15 voucher and six 10 per cent discount
vouchers for Olympus Sport, plus a free driving lesson when booked as part
of a course of ten with a participating member of the Motors Schools
Association.
All of these, apart from the overdraft, apply to school leavers aged between
16 and 20. Eleven to 15-year-olds receive the TSB FirstSave account (current
interest 7.25 per cent), along with six 10 per cent discount vouchers for
Olympus Sport and six 10 per cent discount vouchers for the Fosters clothes
store. Similar pass-book based accounts are available for under-10s.
