FT  18 MAR 92 / Election '92: Economy queries dog PM's steps
QUESTIONS ABOUT the recession dogged Mr John Major yesterday as he visited
two schools in his first day on the campaign trail, following an itinerary
designed to reinforce the party's education policy launch.
At his first stop, a primary school in the constituency of Grantham - Mrs
Margaret Thatcher's home town - the prime minister emphasised once more that
only electoral uncertainty was hindering the recovery.
'The impediment that lies between us and the people beginning to reinvest
and lift out of recession is the general election,' he said, after ruffing
the hair of some children waving at the press cameras outside the school.
'Once that is over, once we are back with a clear majority, I think people
will begin their reinvestment.'
Party aides said the All Saints County Primary School was a model of its
kind. But in spite of the Conservatives' emphasis on traditional teaching,
Mr Major saw children doing movement to music and modelling with Plasticine.
The prime minister then made a lightning stop at Nottingham's Djanogly
College, the first of the country's 13 city technology colleges. Though the
tour of the library, a language laboratory and the music room was brief, it
served its purpose of underlining Tory commitment to choice and diversity in
education.
Then it was time for the second of the 'Meet John Major' sessions with an
audience of hand-picked Nottingham Tories and some friends.
The city is made up of three constituencies - two marginal Tory and one
marginal Labour - and though the audience was selected the mood was less
relaxed than at the first session in Huntingdon on Sunday.
There was still applause for traditional Tory themes, particularly Mr
Major's suggestion of a need to be more severe in the condemnation of petty
crime, but four of the 12 questions were about the economy.
Though most were phrased loyally, they still dealt with difficult themes,
including the decline of manufacturing industry, the high level of VAT, and
the mistakes of the 1980s which had led to the spiral in house prices. Mr
Major dealt with the questions competently, and received routine standing
ovations at the start and the end. This time, in contrast to Huntingdon, his
jacket stayed on.
