FT  24 APR 92 / Arts: Satyajit Ray - Obituary
Satyajit Ray, whose death was announced yesterday, was Indian cinema's
greatest ambassador to the west. Tomorrow has been declared a public holiday
in West Bengal in his honour.
He was born on May 2 1921, to a culturally prominent Bengali family. His
father, a writer, painter and photographer, sent him to Calcutta university,
after which Ray spent two years studying painting with Rabindranath Tagore.
A brief career in advertising took him to London, where he saw and was
influenced by the De Sica movie, Bicycle Thieves. That experience, followed
by a friendship in India with Jean Renoir, for whom Ray worked as a location
scout on The River, helped shape his style as a film-maker.
Before Ray's Apu Trilogy appeared - Pather Panchali (1955), followed by
Aparajito (1956) and The World Of Apu (1959) - India was a country known to
foreign filmgoers for its prolific and impenetrable popular cinema.
The tender, diligently-composed naturalism of Pather Panchali, based on an
Indian book Ray had illustrated during his years as an artist, was a
synthesis of European cinema's neo-realism with Indian miniature-painting.
It was a style which remained throughout Ray's career, subtly inflected to
suit the differing moods of his films. It could take on a fantastical-poetic
timbre in The Music Room. It could be darkened for his portraits of
oppressed or freedom-seeking women: Devi; Three Daughters; Mahanagar. Or
again his style could be coloured with fairy-tale make-believe in The
Adventures of Goopy and Bagha, or The Golden Fortress.
As Ray's career progressed, he never quite overcame the charge levelled by
some Indian critics, that he was unable to make convincing films outside his
own class. The accusation was that when Ray made films set among educated
people, or witty talk-pieces like Days And Nights In The Forest, he was on
home ground; when he depicted peasant life, however, as in Distant Thunder
or the Apu films, he made his characters behave and sound like refugees from
the leisured classes, mysteriously slumming it in the countryside.
If Ray's success abroad owes as much to a hypothetical blind spot as to the
film's visible virtues, at least the virtues include a superbly
unostentatious sense of composition, and an ability to coax subtle shadings
from performers.
His best films, like The Music Room and Charulata, dwell on the human face
and voice, flickering with tiny fires of expression.
The films made during Ray's late career declined somewhat in quality. The
Chess Players was a static parable of colonialism, shot in the gaudy colours
Ray had long eschewed. Home And The World was a tale of family tensions.
Enemy Of The People was a disappointingly wooden Ibsen adaptation.
However, Ray was ill for many years during this period, and a film-making
style already notable for its understatement could hardly take a further
depletion of energy. Even at their best, Ray's films were so gently paced
that they defeated viewers who might have been natural soulmates. Francois
Truffaut walked out of Pather Panchali because 'nothing was happening.' To
present-day tastes, The Adversary, Company Limited and The Middle Man, Ray's
caustic trilogy of morality tales about the business world, takes a long,
portentous breath to blow out a few tiny fires of fraudulence.
Modern film-makers, have been deeply influenced by Ray. James Ivory (whose
Shakespeare Wallah was homage to Ray) brought Ray's humane and delicate
precision to his best work, including his adaptations of EM Forster's
novels. In the 1960s, Ray's bleakly lyrical realism influenced British New
Wave film-makers such as Lindsay Anderson and Karel Reisz.
Realism is currently out of fashion. So, perhaps, is Ray himself. But his
best work spoke up for an important cinematic tradition: the one which comes
down to us from the Lumiere brothers, the one which believes that the
enhanced representation of real life is worth more than all the fast action
and trick photography that movies in other moods can give us.
