FT  10 JAN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Action threatened on
overfishing
MR JOHN Crosbie, Canada's minister of fisheries and oceans, has launched a
bitter attack on Spanish and Portuguese fishing vessels operating outside
Canadian waters, accusing them of 'raping' the fish stocks of the north-west
Atlantic.
Canada would be intensifying its efforts to win European Community backing
on the overfishing issue this year, Mr Crosbie said this week. But if that
failed, Canada might be forced to extend unilaterally its 200-mile fishing
zone, introduced in 1977.
'Ultimately unilateral action is a possibility, although we would not adopt
it without being pressed into it. But we are not going to sit by and see the
stocks plundered,' he said.
Canada is also seeking changes in the United Nation's Convention on the Law
of the Sea, adopted in 1982, to take account of the problem of 'straddling
stocks'. Canada claims it is unique in the extent to which important fish
stocks straddle its 200-mile limit, due to the configuration of the
continental shelf, leaving the domestic fishing industry prey to the
depredations of foreign vessels. Canada does not have distant water fleets.
Mr Crosbie will be raising the law of the sea issue at a conference on
international boundaries sponsored by the Royal Institute of International
Affairs in London today.
Canada has been at loggerheads over fishing with the EC, particularly Spain
and Portugal, since the late 1980s. In 1990 the EC agreed to accept quotas
set by the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation, of which both the EC
and Canada are members, for eight of the key species in the area beyond the
200-mile limit. However, the EC refused to accept the Nafo moratorium on
northern cod, a mainstay of the fishing industry in Canada's maritime
provinces.
Canada also maintains that although EC quotas came down, catches did not. It
was therefore seeking a firm commitment by the EC to observe all the Nafo
quotas, backed by an effective international system of surveillance and
control beyond the 200-mile limit, Mr Crosbie said. Such a system would also
help tackle overfishing by non-Nafo vessels, which often operate under flags
of convenience, and the misreporting of catches.
In the past the EC has challenged the Nafo quotas on scientific grounds,
questioning the degree to which stocks have been depleted.
In addition Canada was embarking on an international information campaign to
alert the public to the overfishing problem and emphasise the importance of
sustainable development.
'Its not going to be easy,' he admitted. 'Cod aren't exactly cuddly
creatures like seals. You can't show the public some Brigitte Bardot-type
figure cuddling cod to her bosom'.
Spanish and Portuguese representatives would be invited to Canada to see the
problems for themselves, he said.
Despite his avowed intention to win hearts and minds to the Canadian
viewpoint, Mr Crosbie was scathing about his Spanish and Portuguese
counterparts. He said: 'The Spanish and Portuguese fisheries ministers make
magnificent speeches. I can enthusiastically support everything they say,
but its not carried out in practice. It's all hypocrisy.'
