FT  22 DEC 92 / France casts shadow over Gatt deal hopes: US accused of
backtracking at trade talks
FRANCE yesterday cast a new shadow over prospects for an early Gatt accord,
accusing the US of across-the-board backtracking in the multilateral Geneva
trade talks on market access and services.
Mr Roland Dumas, French foreign minister, told his EC counterparts at a
meeting in Brussels that the US had shifted position on industrial tariffs,
anti-dumping, intellectual property, and standards. He also issued what has
become a ritual denunciation of the US-EC accord on reducing farm export
subsidies.
The French warning that the trade talks could be heading for a stormy period
was echoed by Mr Jacques Delors, European Commission president, and Mr Uffe
Ellemann-Jensen, Danish foreign minister.
Mr Douglas Hurd, UK foreign secretary, who chaired yesterday's meeting,
conceded there was 'some stiffening on the US side'. But provided the US
showed flexibility and the EC showed solidarity, the goal of an agreement by
mid-January was still possible.
In Geneva, trade negotiators said yesterday that the commitment by the US
and the EC to complete a Gatt deal had failed to take note of the time
needed to win agreement from the other 106 countries negotiating in the
round.
At yesterday's meeting, EC foreign ministers agreed to open formal
enlargement negotiations with Sweden, Austria and Finland in Brussels on
Feburary 1 1993. Denmark, which takes over the six-monthly rotating EC
presidency from the UK on January 1, will handle the talks.
The ministers failed to agree, however, on European Commission proposals to
strengthen its arsenal of trade weapons, including anti-dumping measures and
quotas, in time for the launch of the single market in the new year.
Britain and Germany led a free trade bloc against a Commission plan to
reverse long-standing policy by requiring that new duties should be blocked
by a qualified majority. At present, a blocking minority suffices.
The impasse on anti-dumping measures killed hopes of progress on proposals
to scrap or 'harmonise' national quotas on non-EC goods, once the single
market comes into effect on January 1. The Commission would like to
introduce EC-wide quotas in sensitive areas such as textiles, footwear and
toys to replace national quotas.
Failure to reach a deal means the Commission will probably have to introduce
provisional rules to cover imports in these sensitive areas for large
third-country exporters such as China.
Lex, Page 12; Commodities, Page 20
