FT  17 NOV 92 / Trade imbalance strains Mercosur pact: The motives behind
Argentina's tax on Brazilian imports
BRAZIL'S economic and political problems, coupled with Argentina's trade
deficit, are straining the foundations of the Mercosur trade agreement.
Under the 1991 treaty creating Mercosur, the trade bloc linking Argentina,
Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay, trade barriers must fall by the end of 1994.
But in October, alarmed by the growth of Brazilian imports, Argentina
trebled to 10 per cent a tax on nearly all imports. The tax was targeted at
imports from Brazil, which were rising by between 5 and 6 per cent a month.
Argentina forecasts a trade deficit of Dollars 1.2bn-Dollars 1.4bn this
year, its first since 1981, and blames most of the troubles on artificially
cheap Brazilian goods.
Under the Mercosur treaty, tariffs should fall by 7 percentage points every
six months until they disappear by 1995. Argentina insists its tax does not
count as a tariff and thus can be applied to imports from Mercosur
countries. Mr Domingo Cavallo, Argentina's economy minister, insists that
the tax is only a temporary measure.
However, his claim that Brazilian imports constituted an 'external shock'
sound disingenuous. Although Brazilian imports have almost doubled from
Dollars 1.52bn in 1991, Argentina's exports to Brazil remain largely
unchanged from Dollars 1.49bn last year. The resulting deficit is equivalent
to less than one percentage point of GDP.
Furthermore, half the deficit is due to car imports. Under bilateral
protocols, trade in cars should be balanced. But Argentina's three
manufacturers cannot meet strong local demand, let alone extra cars for the
Brazilian market.
It is true that recession-bound Brazilian companies are selling at almost
any price. But Argentina's overheated economy and overvalued exchange rate
are sucking in imports from all over the world. An Argentine foreign
ministry official pointed out: 'Argentina's trade deficit with the US this
year will be about Dollars 1.3bn - roughly the same as with Brazil, but
nobody is getting upset about imports from the US. In fact, imports from
Brazil began slowing in August and September.'
Privately, officials say they had to take action to avoid domestic political
fall-out over the deficit, hinting that discrimination against Brazil was an
obvious solution.
Still, Argentine companies say the Brazilians have already absorbed the
effect of the 10 per cent import tax and imports are growing unabated. Those
trying to export to Brazil complain that inflation of over 25 per cent a
month makes it difficult to price their goods.
The spirit of the Mercosur treaty encourages countries to both expand and
balance trade. Brazil's foreign minister, Mr Fernando Henrique Cardoso, has
promised to increase purchases of oil, wheat and flour, Argentina's main
export products, to reduce the gap.
Bickering over trade is a sideshow compared to more serious objections to
Mercosur. Many Argentines say they should not have to wait, possibly for
years, for Brazil to stabilise and should seek trade alliances elsewhere.
Furthermore, opponents argue that integration between inherently unstable
developing countries is conceptually flawed, and suggest Argentina should
join the North American Free Trade Agreement as quickly as possible.
Perhaps the most convincing objection is that Brazil's crises could
destabilise Argentina's fragile economy. Mr Cavallo says he has not lost his
'political enthusiasm' for integration, but has warned that he will only
wait another year before deciding what action to take over Mercosur.
However, supporters of integration say it is wrong to sacrifice Mercosur -
which is also a political and strategic alliance between former rivals -
because of short term trade difficulties.
Mr Felix Pena, a former Argentine Mercosur negotiator, accepts that Brazil's
problems may prompt a review of the timetable. But he says Argentina cannot
ignore Brazil's market of 150m potential consumers or forgo access to a
resilient economy that has historically grown very fast.
In fact, Mr Pena, believes that once Brazil returns to growth, Argentina
will not be able to satisfy Brazilian demand for food and agricultural
products.
Furthermore, it would be difficult to undo the links between companies which
have been multiplying rapidly in sectors ranging from beer to insurance and
services. Last month, Argentina sold Somisa, a state-owned steel mill to a
consortium including two Brazilian companies. And without access to Brazil,
many multinationals would either close affiliates in Argentina or freeze
expansion. The Brazilian connection is vital for several proposed
infrastructure projects. These include a Dollars 8bn gas pipeline linking
Argentina and Brazil, which could be vital to develop Argentina's huge
natural gas reserves.
A Argentine steel executive summed up the spirit of Mercosur: 'You can count
on the fingers of one hand the days when Brazil and Argentina have
stabilised simultaneously. That's how we trade - one day we export to them
and one day they export to us."
