FT  16 MAR 92 / Survey of Nigeria (22): Not yet out of the woods - Julian
Ozanne ventures through a protected rain forest
AFRICA'S blazing sun rarely penetrates the thick evergreen canopy of the
Okumu rain forest, one of the last protected areas of primeval rain forest
in Nigeria's southern equatorial belt.
Amid huge mahoganies, irokos and other tropical hardwoods which stretch up
to the light through dense green foliage, it is possible to imagine what it
was like before man walked the earth.
As you slash your way through matted vegetation, which appears to have
rioted in a frenzy of anarchy, the stillness of the forest is suddenly
broken by cracking branches. Baboons and monkeys, including the rare
white-throated monkey found only in Nigeria, scatter quickly at the sound of
human approach, swinging through the trees, some of which are over 150
metres tall.
Other animals - including buffalo, elephant, duiker and genet  - are equally
cautious of human encroachment. Insects, snakes and birds, including many
varieties of African parrot, are abundant and locals swear by the medicinal
properties of many trees.
Six years ago, logging was banned within 112 sqaure kilometres of the
forest, and the government and the Nigerian Conservation Foundation
established a sanctuary in the Okumu forest, in Edo state. The sanctuary
policy may be one of the last hopes for preserving an invaluable gene pool
of flora and fauna in the face of the ravages of timber merchants, farmers
and hunters.
Nigeria's southern states were once covered by rain forest. Fifty years of
uncontrolled exploitation, rapid population growth and land pressure have
taken a devastating toll on thousands of square kilometres of primary
forest. According to estimates, only 5 per cent of the original rain forest
cover is left today. The last 15 per cent disappeared in the past 15 years.
Many species of flora and fauna, perhaps vital to medical research, were
destroyed before they could be discovered.
About 150km south of the Okumu forest, in the timber town of Sapele, the
evidence of continued wanton destruction is starkly apparent. Along the lush
banks of the Jemeson river, hundreds of small saw millers, who account for
an estimated 90 per cent of total timber products, have set up operations in
corrugated tin shacks. In the water, hundreds of tropical hardwood logs,
tied together by rope and chains, have been floated down river.
According to a senior executive of African Timber and Plywood Company, a
division of United Africa Company (UAC), at least 40-50 per cent of the
small saw millers' throughput is illegally logged.
'We only take trees with a girth of more than 1.3 metres,' said the
executive. 'This gives the forest a chance to partially regenerate. But the
illegal loggers come in after us and cut down trees with much smaller
girths.'
A further problem is that government concessions are granted on a maximum
period of between five and 10 years - too short to encourage the operators
to have a sustainable logging strategy which would allow the forest to
recover. Many concessions were also granted, under the regime of former
President Shehu Shagari, to little-known operators without a proper analysis
of their economic impact.
Reports from Sapele and Warri also suggest that, in spite of a government
ban on timber exports, logs and sawn timber continue to leave the country
illegally.
Efforts by the big timber companies, such as A T &amp; P and Piedmont Timber, to
switch their raw material source to plantation forests such as Gmalina have
little impact on deforestation. Plans to start regeneration projects are
costly and unlikely to come into effect without significant funds from
foreign donors.
'The real problem is the massive, seemingly unstoppable population explosion
and the complete inability of the government to police the controls it has
established,' says one environmentalist. 'Its a very bleak picture for the
future of the environment.'
The continuing destruction of the rain forests of southern Nigeria has
already had serious effects on severe soil erosion - common in the southern
states of Edo, Anambra, Imo and Abia - and to the silting of rivers, which
threatens Nigeria's unique mangrove swamps with their rich ecosystem and
fish-breeding potential. The deforestation has also had unquantifiable
effects on the threat to the ozone layer and on biological diversity.
'In Nigeria now, the situation with rain forests is a stop-gap
backs-against-the-wall conservation effort,' says Mr Philip Hall of the
Nigerian Conservation Foundation. 'We have to realise that there is no such
thing as successful sustainable managed forestry. It has not yet been
demonstrated anywhere.'
Mr Hall believes the remedy lies in conservation efforts which compensate
farmers in the surrounding areas, in return for denying them the
exploitation of the rain forest. In Okumu and Oban Hills, in eastern
Nigeria's Cross River state, the NCF is pioneering agricultural projects
such as bee-keeping and fish-farming for the local residents, as
alternatives to logging and hunting.
Destruction of the rain forests is one of the many severe environmental
problems facing Nigeria and its population of 110m, which almost tripled
between 1963 and 1991 and is still growing at an estimated 3.4 per cent a
year. In the arid savannahs of the north and middle-belt zones, rapid
deforestation for firewood and overgrazing is already causing
desertification, and could lead to an energy crisis.
A recent World Bank report said Nigeria was losing Dollars 5bn a year as a
result of environmental degradation caused by soil damage, water
contamination, deforestation, desertification, flooding, gully and coastal
erosion, inefficient sewerage, water hyacinth and fishery and wildlife
destruction.
The recent establishment of a Federal Environmental Protection Agency and a
National Resources Conservation Council are steps in the right direction.
But time is running out.
'The government must take more radical and politically difficult decisions
fast and enforce them rigidly,' said Mr Hall. 'Otherwise a major,
irreversible environmental crisis is just around the corner.'
