FT  18 SEP 92 / Survey of Pakistan (2): Time for drastic surgery - Finance
minister Aziz faces cruel choices
MR SARTAJ AZIZ, Pakistan's finance minister, finds himself in a dilemma. The
most serious problem he faces is the budget deficit, which ballooned last
year to 8.8 per cent of gross domestic product.
He is committed to reducing it, but is fearful of choking off the rapid
economic growth which is necessary for the success of the government's
radical reform programme. Consequently, he is uncertain whether to seek a
new agreement with the International Monetary Fund to replace a Structural
Adjustment Facility which expires this year.
A sharp drop in the deficit to below 5 per cent would risk a vicious circle
of lower economic growth, lower tax revenues and worsening budgetary
problems, Mr Aziz feels. Rather, he wants a benign circle of more
investment, faster growth and higher tax revenues.
Though the government had forecast a fall to 5 per cent of GDP in the
financial year which ended in June 1992, Mr Aziz says it has so far fallen
to slightly below 7 per cent and that the immediate target is between 6 and
6.5 per cent. For the most recent shortfall, he blames low cotton prices,
higher than expected oil prices, the world recession and the government's
own economy-opening reforms, including cuts in tariffs and rises in interest
rates paid by the government on domestic debt to banks.
The budget deficit is, however, a chronic problem attributable to grossly
inefficient tax authorities, a bloated public sector and a lack of political
will among governments to tax the private sector where it hurts.
Most of the agricultural sector, as well as large parts of industry, pay
virtually no direct tax. Customs duties make up a hefty 43 per cent of
federal tax revenues, excise duties 22 per cent, sales tax 17 per cent and
income taxes only 18 per cent. The entire tax system is plagued by evasion
and corruption.
The deficit has been financed by external borrowing, putting a strain on
Pakistan's external payments position, and by monetary creation. Inflation
more than doubled to 12.7 per cent in the year to end June 1991, though it
has moderated since.
This has been accompanied by a chronically low domestic savings rate, which
has contributed to weak investment in infrastructure.
The recent worsening in the budget deficit was partly beyond the present
government's control, resulting from lax spending controls before it took
office, higher oil prices during the Gulf crisis, and delays in implementing
new taxes.
A significant part of government spending is difficult for a finance
minister to address: 35 per cent of current expenditure goes on defence and
27 per cent on debt service. As a result, what cuts there have been in
recent years have tended to be in development spending - reductions which
Pakistan can ill afford. However, there is scope to reduce spending on
subsidies, on administration, and on financing the public sector as it
shrinks through privatisation.
The most obvious answer to the deficit problem is to generate more revenue.
Mr Aziz's goal is to do this by widening the tax base, increasing the
efficiency of collection, and lowering tax rates to reduce the incentives
for evasion.
Mr Aziz says direct income taxes on farmers would not bring in very much
revenue, and that they are subject to indirect taxation. Meanwhile, he has
resorted to some unusual taxes in order to bring companies into the tax net.
Companies which were paying no tax are now being charged a  1/2 per cent
turnover tax. All companies must now pay a tax based on their electricity
bills. 'It is presumed that your income is proportionate to the electricity
you consume,' says Mr Aziz.
Bank loans, though liberalised, are also subject to a new tax and this
year's budget included new duties on exports - measures hardly designed to
encourage new investment in export capacity.
Mr Aziz believes tax evasion will become less prevalent as the economy
becomes more open. High tariff rates and import and foreign exchange
restrictions have fostered heavy smuggling and a massive underground
economy.
It is not yet clear whether Mr Aziz's efforts so far will address the
structural budget problem. While battling the deficit, Mr Aziz can never
forget the country's external payments position which, while it does not
threaten to become critical, is certainly not secure.
Pakistan, which has a foreign debt of Dollars 22bn, depends on aid flows to
finance its balance of payments deficit. Aid flows depend heavily on
assessments of the progress of reform by the IMF and other institutions.
The balance of payments worsened to a deficit of about Dollars 2.8bn in the
year ended June 1992, due to weak commodity prices and import
liberalisation.
However, cotton-based exports have been showing good growth, and the reform
programme has begun to attract foreign exchange into Pakistan from abroad.
In coming years, development of new export capacity will require substantial
imports of capital goods. Remittances from Pakistanis abroad provide a
cushion. But foreign exchange reserves of Dollars 1bn, though stable, are
not a very sound bulwark against any unexpected crisis of confidence.
Mr Aziz can take comfort from the relative stability of the Pakistani
economy, which has shown healthy growth rates for many years and is likely
to continue to do so, with GDP growing around 6 per cent annually, provided
there is the necessary investment in new capacity, technology and
infrastructure.
This is despite weak demand from export markets and moves to tighten credit,
aimed to lower inflation, which have hurt industry. Inflation, after its
jump last year, has fallen somewhat and shows no sign of running out of
control. Agriculture has produced good growth in output and value added.
The economy is diversified, with an already large and dynamic private sector
industrial base now growing rapidly as a result of privatisation. But the
industrialists will need a consistent, effective tax structure and better
infrastructure - including a better-educated workforce - if they are to
drive Pakistan towards its goal of a modernised, open, export-driven
economy.
