FT  18 APR 92 / Arts: Off The Wall - Welcome to the House of Fun
DAVID MELLOR, the new Minister for Fun, has quickly got into the spirit of
his new job by disappearing on holiday. He has left behind hundreds of
miserable civil servants who might or might not be drafted into his Ministry
for the National Heritage, and an arts world wracked with uncertainty.
One nice problem - apart from where the 350 staff will be housed - is the
status of poor Charles Henderson, who currently heads the arts bureaucracy
but who is not high enough up the Civil Service hierarchy to rate Permanent
Secretary status. And Mellor's job demands a PS. For years the Office of
Arts and Libraries has been a pleasant backwater, no place to forge a great
career. Quickly changing this state of affairs could be a vital, but
unglamorous, task confronting Mellor.
One thing seems certain: most of the decisions - on arts funding, on the
future of broadcasting, on sport, on what national treasures should be be
exported, on whether the British film industry has a future, on the nature
and scope of the national lottery, and on the gigantic celebrations for the
millennium, will be taken directly by Mellor.
He might in theory be a supporter of the arm's length principle of arts
funding but his temperament will make him a hands-on Minister. His love of
publicity, and inclination to stir things up, will be given full rein. He
will always be popping up in the media, the UK's fleshy answer to France's
urbane Jack Lang, who achieved national notoriety as a high profile Minister
of Culture.
To general amazement there will be no specialist junior ministers looking
after the arts, or sport, just Robert Key, enthusiastic chorister and lover
of Queen, the band rather than the Monarch, who in theory shares the
decision making. But in those whirlwind few weeks in 1990, when Mellor was
Arts Minister, what was most striking was his insistence on getting involved
in the minutiae of the job, on how much money was destined for what theatre
group, or orchestra (especially if the orchestra was the LPO on which he had
been a board member). His attitude was clear cut - I'm supplying the money
and I want a say in where it is going.
And supply the money he did. In a sharp elbowed dig at the outgoing Arts
Minister Tim Renton this week, the chairman of the Arts Council, Lord
Palumbo, thanked Mellor, rather than Renton, for forcing the Treasury to
give the Council a generous grant increase for 1992-93. Mellor also found
the Pounds 10m the Government gave towards the ENO's purchase of its
freehold at the Coliseum.
So at last the arts has a powerful voice, sitting in the cabinet alongside a
Prime Minister who also believes that the spiritual well being of the people
is as important as the material. It was John Major who dreamed up the
European Festival, to be announced later this month. This should be a good
decade for the cultural life of the country.
But there are bound to be rows. Mellor is basically sympathetic to the BBC
so it might secure its new charter for the loss of Radios One and Two to
commercial advertising. It seems likely that the film industry's plea for
tax concessions will be accepted at last.
For the arts generally, the Arts Council's pet project, a 'National Arts
Strategy', will be allowed to emerge this summer before any dramatic
decisions are taken. Mellor was not totally committed to local arts funding
when Minister - and he may well jib at the LPO being delegated from Arts
Council funding to the care of the London Arts Board, as is planned. This
could influence his approach to the whole devolution bandwagon: the Arts
Council may now survive with only slightly diminished authority. Mellor, who
gets along well with Palumbo, seems to have bought the idea of a millennium
binge in the year 2000, with all Britain's museums, cathedrals, opera
houses, made ship shape for the new century.
And where is the money to come from to pay for all this fun? All eyes turn
to the national lottery which could prove to be the most contentious and
disillusioning experience of the decade. Estimates of the money it will
produce - from Pounds 400m to over Pounds 1bn - range almost as wildly as
the causes it may help. The arts, heritage, and sport have always been the
front runners but the temptation to divert money to health and education
will be difficult to stop. Even if the arts receive Pounds 200m this will
scarcely be enough to repair every museum, keep every Pounds 10m Canaletto
in the UK, and purchase such necessaries as a national dance house.
Oddly enough the Foundation for Sport and the Arts, another of John Major's
ideas, which was promoted, and part financed, by the football pool companies
in a vain bid to stave off competition from a lottery, is quickly proving
itself a cheap, British, alternative that seems to work.
The Pounds 20m plus the Foundation gives to the arts each year is patching
up the arts fabric of the nation: Pounds 2m for the Coliseum; Pounds 300,000
for Blackheath Concert Hall; Pounds 3m to save the old Ealing Studios. The
RSC could be the next beneficiary. Mellor will have to fix very firm
guidelines for the Lottery if it is to match the work of the Foundation.
