FT  01 SEP 92 / End abuses in Bosnia, says UN: International action urged to
curb Serb human rights violations
IMMEDIATE and concerted international action is needed to curb 'massive and
grave violations of human rights' in Bosnia-Hercegovina and elsewhere in the
region, according to the United Nations' human rights investigator for the
former Yugoslavia.
In a report released yesterday, Mr Tadeusz Mazowiecki, a former Polish prime
minister, says such violations are principally the result of the 'ethnic
cleansing' policy operated by Serbs in areas of Bosnia and Croatia which are
under their control.
Harassment, discrimination, the destruction of homes and mosques, and
detention, torture and killings are used to enforce the policy, the report
says. Moslems are the main victims.
The shelling of population centres and the shooting of civilians in besieged
Bosnian towns - Sarajevo, being the best-known example - were the 'greatest
threat to life' at the moment. But, the report warns, if the sieges are not
lifted before winter, 'massive numbers' could die from malnutrition, illness
and exposure.
Mr Mazowiecki says there is no evidence that Serbia, or the rump Yugoslav
federation which links Serbia and Montenegro, has tried to stop 'ethnic
cleansing' in Bosnia, where they 'clearly exercise very great influence'.
On the contrary, he warns that the 'most violent forms' of 'ethnic
cleansing' may be imminent in the Serbian provinces of Kosovo, Sandzac and
Vojvodina where there are large communities of ethnic Albanians, Moslems and
Hungarians respectively.
The report, circulated to the 53-member UN Human Rights Commission at the
weekend, says the 'multiplicity' of international activities in former
Yugoslavia has limited their effectiveness in helping victims of human
rights violations. Its main recommend-ations include:
An extended mandate for Unprofor, the UN protective force now confined to
Sarajevo and Serb-controlled areas of Croatia, to report on, stop and assist
victims of human rights abuses throughout Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The establishment of an international war crimes tribunal to investigate
'mass and flagrant' human rights violations; the stationing of human rights
monitors throughout the former Yugoslavia, and a guarantee that victims of
'ethnic cleansing' will have the right to return home under international
supervision.
Mr Mazowiecki, who was appointed in mid-August, has gone further than any UN
official in blaming Serbs for most of the atrocities. During his first visit
to the region last week, he says he found no evidence to back Serbian claims
of 'ethnic cleansing' by Moslems. Discrimination, harassment and
maltreatment of ethnic Serbs in Croatia - 'however repugnant' - cannot be
compared with the 'systematic use of violence employed against ethnic
Croatians and Moslems in Bosnia and Hercegovina'.
Other recommendations include the implementation of accords adopted at last
week's London conference on former Yugoslavia to neutralise heavy weaponry
and dismantle camps.
Yugoslav prime minister faces confidence vote, Page 4
Editorial Comment, Page 12
