FT  11 APR 92 / Golf: The art of an old master
IN ITS own country, the US Masters is more than just the first of golf's
four annual major championships. It is a rite of spring, like the opening of
the baseball season, and there are many pleasures to be derived from
attending it.
One of the greatest is watching Sam Snead limbering up on the practice
ground, and then performing the duties of honorary starter on Thursday
morning. Snead is undoubtedly the best golfer of his age in the world. He
was born in the mountains of west Virginia. 'The sides of the valleys were
so steep the dogs wagged their tails up and down', Snead wrote in his
autobiography. He went on to win 84 tournaments on the US tour and nearly
150 worldwide, including the 1946 Open at St Andrews.
He is known for owning more straw hats than a Bond Street milliner and
making more money than the gross national product of some Third World
countries, much of it from betting. 'Keep a close count of your nickels and
dimes, stay away from whiskey, and never concede a putt', is a maxim of his.
Legend has it that he stores his money in tomato cans buried in his garden.
Snead was blessed with a golf swing that is the envy of the world of golf -
long and powerful, the Swiss watch of golf swings for its smoothness and
faultless rhythm.
It all stems from his remarkable suppleness. No matter that he is 80 next
month, Snead can still place the palms of his hands on his shoes and bend
the thumbs of his hands back to touch his forearms. When he was well past
60, he could swing a leg and touch the ceiling.
To what does he attribute his longevity, not to mention his elasticity?
'I've never smoked and I've never been a drinker', he says. 'Two out of
three ain't bad.'
Snead, who won the Masters in 1949, 1952 and 1954, and Gene Sarazen, the
1935 champion, are the tournament's honorary starters. They tee off at 8.30
on the first morning and play nine holes in front of an admiring and
appreciative gaggle of spectators. There is good interplay between the two
old codgers. Sarazen is unable to bend to tee-up his ball, so Snead does it
for him.
After Sarazen has clipped a drive down the fairway, he smiles. Then Snead
smashes his ball 270 yards down the fairway. 'He should hit it a long way',
jokes the 90-year-old Sarazen. 'He is only a kid. When I was his age I hit
it that far, too.'
I usually watch this journey down memory lane with Robert Macdonald, a
publisher of golf books in New York, and, sometimes, Herbert Warren Wind,
the doyen of American golf journalists.
Macdonald, a good golfer and better squash player, is the organiser of the
sweep we have on the outcome of the tournament. Four of us participate and
the stake is Dollars 1. Last July, after he had completed the arduous fiscal
task of working out the winnings, Macdonald sent me a note. 'Robert won the
Dollars 3 dollars because he picked Woosnam', it read. 'I am not going to
pay it to him. So much money will go to his head.'
After paying homage to Snead and Sarazen last year we returned to the old
wooden clubhouse for breakfast of scrambled eggs, bacon, orange juice,
coffee and wholewheat toast. 'Did you see Snead tied for the lead in the
par-three contest?' asked Macdonald.
This contest is held the afternoon before the first round on the club's
nine-hole course, which is laid out over small lakes, down avenues of
azaleas, rhododendron bushes and dogwood. No hole is longer than 160 yards,
none shorter than 80. It is as demanding as it is beautiful.
'Snead shot 24 and tied with Rocco Mediate, Billy Ray Brown and Kenny Knox'
said Macdonald. 'That is amazing. Snead is 78. These guys are 28.'
The merit of Snead's performance can hardly be exaggerated. At his best
Snead was imperious from tee to green, hitting the ball huge distances. He
was a streaky putter, much like Ian Woosnam is now. More than 20 years ago
Snead's putting was affected by the yips and he began to putt side-saddle.
It looked ridiculous but it worked.
That a man of his age and with that putting style could match many of the
world's best golfers over nine holes almost beggared belief. I rank it as
one of the great sporting achievements of 1991.
Sadly, Snead was not able to try and repeat the feat this year. Driving to
Augusta on Tuesday he was involved in a car crash and dislocated a shoulder.
I hope he will be able to resume duties at next year's Masters. He and his
straw hat are as much a part of the scene as the azaleas and the dogwood.
The Masters may be an institution. Snead is a legend.
