FT  07 NOV 92 / Finance and the Family: The week ahead
BAA, the privatised UK airport operator, is expected to report higher
first-half pre-tax profits on Monday of Pounds 200m to Pounds 220m. However,
last year's Pounds 151m followed hefty provisions of Pounds 55m for property
write-offs and staff cuts.
Although traffic at BAA airports has recovered from the effects of the Gulf
War on air travel, the economic recession in the UK and other industrialised
countries has slowed the upturn.
Composite insurers General Accident and Royal Insurance, which report
nine-month results on Tuesday and Thursday respectively, are expected to
show improvements but still be in the red. GA is tipped to reduce losses to
Pounds 20m (Pounds 133m), thanks to higher premiums and the abating of
rising claims costs. Depending on claims over Hurricane Andrew, the third
quarter could even be profitable. Royal should cut its losses from Pounds
214m to about Pounds 106m, though it is still being hit by mortgage
indemnity losses. Water company results are skewed towards the first half.
Northumbrian, the smallest of the 10 privatised bodies by market
capitalisation, is expected to show a 25 per cent rise in pre-tax profit to
Pounds 39m in the six months to September 30 when it reports on Tuesday. The
interim dividend is forecast to go up by 9 per cent to 7.4p (6.8p).
At Anglian, the forecast profit rise is from Pounds 91.2m to Pounds 101m,
with dividend growth of about 8 per cent to 6.8p.
Dunhill, the luxury goods group which reports on Wednesday, is marked down
for flat to slightly lower interim pre-tax profits, compared with last
year's Pounds 31m. A cushioning effect will be higher interest receivable on
healthy cash balances of about Pounds 180m.
Boots, the retailing and pharmaceuticals group which has weathered the
recession better than most, is likely to report resilient interim profits on
Thursday. Analysts believe pre-tax profits may edge ahead to around Pounds
180m as the strength of the Boots the Chemists chain and the pharmaceuticals
division again shine through. However, the businesses acquired through Ward
White will probably continue to look pretty sickly.
BT is expected to show a 40 per cent fall in pre-tax profits, from Pounds
1.6bn to Pounds 990m for the half year to September 30 when it announces its
results on Thursday. The main reason for the fall is exceptional charges for
the sale of its interest in Mitel Corporation, the troubled Canadian
telephone equipment maker, and for the voluntary retirement of 29,000
people.
Royal Dutch/Shell, the Anglo-Dutch oil group, reports its third-quarter
figures on Thursday. Most analysts are forecasting a Pounds 550m to Pounds
750m profit on a replacement cost basis, compared with Pounds 523m in the
same quarter last year. The results are expected to be boosted by foreign
currency gains and an accounting adjustment at a subsidiary, forecast to net
Pounds 50m.
