FT  01 JUL 92 / International Company News: BMW goes to America to find the
smarter buyer - Andrew Fisher on the background to the German manufacturer's
plan to build cars in South Carolina
WHEN US-built BMWs start rolling off the South Carolina production line in a
few years, it will not only be Americans kicking the tyres, feeling the
paint and testing the quality. Since some of the cars will be exported,
choosy German buyers will also give the models their close scrutiny.
Quality, for drivers on both sides of the Atlantic and elsewhere, will be a
crucial test for the new plant. So will profitability. In the mid-1990s, it
should be apparent whether BMW's investment of Dollars 400m in the tough US
market, where European imports have lost much of their cachet, has proved a
costly risk or a valuable opportunity.
Some experts think the German company, which announced its US plant last
week, had no choice but to go ahead. Mr John Hammond, managing partner of J.
D. Power, the US car market research firm, says: 'It's not a risk. I think
it's absolutely mandatory. The risk is if they don't do it. The risk is
trying to stay a worldwide player within the confines of national
boundaries.'
For the harsh truth is that conditions in the US car market, the world's
biggest with 8.2m cars sold last year - down from 10.5m in 1988 - have
changed dramatically since the heyday of the mid-1980s when German car
companies had a 4.5 per cent share. Today, they have only 2.7 per cent,
although they are better represented at the upper end of the market.
There are four main reasons for the plight of German car manufacturers in
the US:
The decline in the dollar from a peak of DM3.47 in February 1985 to under
DM1.60. This has hit US consumers' ability to buy European cars and put
their makers under extreme pricing pressures;
The rise of competition from the Japanese, with efficient 'transplant'
production facilities in the US and snazzy models (built in Japan) which hit
at the luxury and sports segments of the market where the German companies
had their strongest penetration;
The severe impact of the US recession and the subsequent concentration on
value for money rather than the prestige of high-priced European imports;
Germany's costs. Mr Eberhard von Kuenheim, BMW's chief executive, says
production costs in the US are one-third lower. Also, the approval process
for new sites is quicker than in bureaucratic Germany. The start next year
of the 36-hour week will exacerbate the industry's problems. Last year,
hourly labour costs - including generous social welfare benefits - were DM44
(Dollars 27.80) for German vehicle makers against DM35 in the US and DM34 in
Japan.
Mr John Lawson, research director at DRI Automotive Group, the London-based
consultancy, says: 'Life's got tougher. It's really hard at these continuing
cost levels for German companies to make money at present exchange rates.
The pricing umbrella they had is gone as the Japanese have come in and
priced well underneath.'
Moreover, 'there is a new, more abstemious mood in the US'. Hence the
increased market penetration of lower-cost Japanese vehicles, aided by
aggressive pricing. For example, the up-market Lexus car, made by Toyota in
Japan, costs Dollars 44,000 in the US against DM95,000 (Dollars 60,000) in
Germany.
So although the demographic profile of the US shows a greater potential
market for more expensive cars, with the population forecast to include more
affluent people aged 45 to 55, that may not be translated into a surging
luxury or near-luxury car sector.
Mr Hammond says: 'Demographics is only half the story. People moving into
these demographic categories are not buying luxury cars to the extent they
did in the past.' More important these days is quality at a favourable price
 -'there's more emphasis on the smart buy'.
To many American consumers, that means Japanese cars, which have some 30 per
cent of the total market, or a US model now that domestic companies have
been forced by Japanese competition to improve quality and styling. Against
this sombre background, sales of German cars have recovered encouragingly.
BMW added 24 per cent in the first five months and Audi, the Volkswagen
subsidiary also looking at possible North American production, gained 19 per
cent.
VW, however, saw US sales drop 20 per cent in the first six months. This
reflected that production of its new Golf and Jetta family models was still
in the start-up phase. These are built in VW's Mexican plant, where DM1.5bn
is being spent on expansion.
Mercedes-Benz had a rise of 18 per cent. As with other up-market
manufacturers, it benefited from the comparison with the low level of last
year, affected by recession, the Gulf war, and the new luxury goods tax.
Mercedes has no plans for a US plant, though it will start small-scale
assembly in Mexico for local buyers.
Since Mercedes has a profitable truck operation in the US, it is more immune
to dollar gyrations. BMW buys Dollars 400m worth of components a year in the
US, but needs to raise this sharply to take advantage of the low US
currency.
BMW is coy about the type of car that will be built in the US, although it
will probably be initially a two-seat, soft-top roadster, based on the
3-series and priced at less than the Dollars 30,000 luxury tax threshold.
Mr von Kuenheim emphasised that the plant, with a capacity of up to 70,000
cars a year, would be capable of building all BMW models. Buyers on both
sides of the Atlantic will be keen to see how well the quality of BMWs made
in the US compares with the Bavarian originals.
