FT  27 OCT 92 / Survey of Sri Lanka (11): Reassuring safeguards / Profile of
John Keels Group
THE John Keels Group is among Sri Lanka's largest. It has expanded rapidly
over the past three years.
With its interests ranging from financial services and tourism to fresh
mushrooms and processed meat, the pre-tax profits of John Keels Holding, the
parent company, have risen from SLRs27m in 1989-90 to SLRs90m in 1991-92.
The group, which had a market capitalisation of SLRs6.25bn at the end of
March, has nearly 50 subsidiary companies. The holding company is listed on
the Colombo Stock Exchange, as are several of its subsidiaries, with 20 per
cent of its shares actively traded.
The company stresses that its corporate rules and structure protect public
shareholders' interests.
No private shareholder or any of their immediate family holds more than a 10
per cent stake in the holding company. All employees must retire at the age
of 60 and no member of management 'shall bring their children into the
company. It is an employee-driven company,' explains Mr K. Balendra,
chairman of John Keels Holding.
In addition, all the unlisted subsidiaries are owned in the name of the
parent company and not by individual shareholders.
'There can be no criticism that money is being moved to unlisted companies
in the group in which an individual holds a stake,' explains Mr Balendra.
Such safeguards are reassuring in Asia, where listed companies have
sometimes been used by private majority shareholders as a way of entering
the capital market, in order to raise finance for personal business
interests.
Critics of John Keels say the group has grown primarily through acquisition
and has yet to show it has the available expertise to manage its range of
business.
Its last big acquisition was in April 1991 when the group purchased the
Whittalls group of companies for SLRs330m, which included two hotels, an
insurance company, a printing press, and food and beverage factories.
John Keels says, however, the acquisition has not yet given the returns it
was expecting. Instead, the sharp rise in profitability has come from
sectors such as tourism which have picked up markedly since 1989 and in
which the group has a large exposure.
Over the past three years the pre-tax earnings of the holding company have
risen 256 per cent, 88 per cent and 97 per cent. Mr Balendra accepts these
were 'exceptional figures.'
'We're not going to sustain these rates of increase', he says. Instead, he
predicts a rise in pre-tax earnings this year of 40 per cent.
