FT  21 JAN 92 / Leading Article: Continental hostile bids
THE CONTESTED cross-border takeover bid has arrived in continental Europe;
as witness yesterday's attempt by Nestle and Suez to carry off Perrier in
the teeth of Agnelli family rivalry. It is not the first such attempt: the
contest between Suez and Mr Carlo De Benedetti at the height of the 1980s
takeover boom for control of Societe Generale de Belgique probably has that
honour. But continental companies must now treat the possibility of
unwelcome overtures as a fact of life.
These may not be officially described as hostile takeover bids; they may be
attempts to coerce the victim into an ostensibly 'friendly' merger, as in
Pirelli's pass at the Continental tyre group and Krupp's moves on Hoesch.
However described, they indicate that a new process of corporate control is
at work.
It would be wrong to see this mainly as a triumph of the practices of the UK
and the US. Instead, it is more accurate to see the emerging way of business
as combining Anglo-Saxon opportunism with the complex capital structures,
relaxed regulation, and intimate relationships traditional in continental
economies.
On the face of it, this new mix looks more 'modern' than the old, more in
tune with the doctrine of economic liberalism encouraged by the European
Community's single market programme. As such, there are aspects of the new
approach that deserve a whole-hearted welcome; but there are also dangers in
attempting to combine takeover habits derived from one industrial culture
with the structures and attitudes inherited from another.
Equitable treatment
One good thing about the new era of contested takeovers is a greater
attention paid to equitable treatment of shareholders. France's takeover
rules, introduced two years ago, have made the Agnellis' attempt to control
Perrier a more visible, less effortless one; they may yet lead to a
transaction that treats all Perrier's shareholders equally, something that
would previously have been regarded as a laughable Anglo-Saxon eccentricity.
There is further to go in this direction, and many markets lag behind. But
in France at least, the first, vital steps have been taken.
The new era also brings market discipline to bear on companies that have
previously proved impervious - because of size or significance  - to the
traditional bank or government systems of corporate control. Societe
Generale de Belgique is reforming itself more briskly under Suez's guidance
than it ever would if left to its own devices - even if Mr De Benedetti
might have proved a yet more exacting task-master.
Existing powers
So much for the benefits of the new approach. The dangers stem from the fact
that though finance ministers and bourse authorities increasingly speak the
language of economic liberalism, other participants - rival ministers, top
bankers, captains of industry - often wish to preserve the dominance of the
existing powers, including, in some countries, the state. The risk is that
the new, more open takeover mechanisms may simply become a tool to defend
the privileged position of the banks in Germany, the state in France, or the
politician-family nexus in Italy.
Thus, Continental's defence against Pirelli combined the trappings of an
Anglo-Saxon takeover battle with old-fashioned appeals to the loyalty of
German industry. Krupp is trying to take over Hoesch at least in part
because it fears that otherwise British Steel might gain a foothold in the
German market. French state-owned banks and insurance companies are taking
ever-wider stakes in private industry, and play the takeover game as avidly
as their private-sector rivals.
Unfriendly bids must therefore be judged not just by the nature of the
battle, but by the extent to which they avoid all types of abusive
behaviour, whether towards shareholders, competitors or consumers. More open
contests for corporate control require that equitable takeover rules go hand
in hand with strong European and national competition policy. The Perrier
case provides an opportunity to demonstrate both.
