FT  25 NOV 92 / Russia's free market policies in question: IMF expected to
approve greater intervention by Moscow in reviving the country's ailing
economy
THE International Monetary Fund is likely to be persuaded to back a
stronger, more interventionist economic strategy for Russia, officials close
to negotiations for a new coalition government said yesterday.
They believe the IMF will realise the free market policies it initially
supported were necessary to jolt the economy out of its torpor, but are no
longer appropriate as companies fail to respond to price and other market
stimulus.
The more sympathetic response follows informal contacts between fund
officials and the Civic Union bloc centrist parties and movements, and
near-agreement on a new economic strategy under which the government will
take an active role in creating a new class of managers. It will also
subsidise - from the budget - leading enterprises seen as capable of
restructuring and producing efficiently.
There will be temporary price control, and privatisation through the
distribution of vouchers - dismissed by the Civic Union to fail in its
present form - will be allowed to continue but is expected to flounder. The
key is the choice and promotion of the successful companies.
The IMF and government have postponed until next year any attempt to
conclude a standby agreement - privately seen as impossible as inflation
rises above 30 per cent and the government has no effective control of the
financial levers, particularly the Central Bank.
However, the joint government-Civic Union strategy now under discussion is
viewed as supportable, providing it recognises inflation must be curbed and
the budget deficit kept within reasonable bounds.
Mr Boris Yeltsin, the Russian president and Mr Arkady Volsky, the Civic
Union leader, have merged in their thinking in the past two weeks, after a
period marked by insults. The two men travelled together to South Korea last
week - saying their airborne conversation was critical in reaching
understanding.
As well as the IMF, the leading industrialised countries are likely to
support a government-Civic Union coalition - especially if it offers, as it
promises, a support base to the Russian president. Work remains to be done
within the Russian government in striking agreement on a deal which goes
against much of the free-market purity of the initial programme and also
within the IMF and other western institutions, where the accent is on
fighting inflation and containing the budget deficit.
The World Bank approved a Dollars 70m loan yesterday to help Russia tackle
rising unemployment during transition to a market economy, Reuter reports
from Washington. Among other purposes the loan is intended to develop
employment offices and programmes to deal with mass layoffs, improve labour
monitoring and retrain workers.
