FT  27 OCT 92 / Parliament and Politics: Press adds to confusion as PM walks
treaty tightrope
AS IF Mr John Major did not have enough troubles. Engulfed by unrest over
the economy and Europe, the prime minister found himself caught yesterday in
yet another crisis - this time over a fumbled attempt at news management.
The rash of reports that Mr Major was ready to call a general election if he
was defeated over the Maastricht treaty left his party, ministers and the
Whitehall information machine engaged in a desperate but
less-than-successful exercise in damage limitation.
Amid confusion and dismay even among pro-Maastricht Tory MPs, the exercise
left unanswered who in the government and why had decided to raise the
stakes so dramatically in the Conservatives' private war over Europe.
At the heart of the row were weekend press reports that Mr Major would
respond to a defeat during the Maastricht 'paving' debate on November 4 by
calling a general election. The debate is designed to allow the government
to bring back next month the legislation to ratify the treaty.
No one at Westminster doubts that the prime minister feels strongly about
the issue. He believes passionately that if the government and the
Conservative party were to turn their back now on the treaty, Britain would
be marginalised within the European Community. Mr Major has signalled more
than once that he would not want to lead the Tories in such circumstances.
But suggestions that a defeat on the timing rather than the substance of
ratification would send him hotfoot to Buckingham Palace to ask for the
dissolution of parliament were received by cabinet colleagues with
open-mouthed surprise.
The reports simultaneously outraged Conservative Euro-sceptics and persuaded
the Labour leadership that it had found an excuse to abandon its European
credentials to vote against the government.
The story first surfaced in reports from journalists accompanying Mr Major's
weekend trip to Egypt. It is common knowledge at Westminster that prime
ministers use such trips for informal briefing of the accompanying press
corps.
So when Sunday's front pages carried identical headlines about the election
threat, cabinet ministers were among those who drew the conclusion that Mr
Major was the source.
The prime minister reinforced that view by insisting during on-the-record
interviews that others could draw their own conclusions from his strong
support for the treaty. He seemed perfectly happy that Tory MPs would deduce
he was threatening them with a Labour government.
But as ministers and Tory MPs yesterday expressed horror at what one called
a threat of 'mass hara-kiri' another version of events was circulating at
Westminster - pointing to cock-up rather than conspiracy.
Some ministers were suggesting that Mr Major's officials - and in particular
Mr Gus O'Donnell, his press secretary - had stretched too far the logic of a
deal agreed at last week's cabinet meeting.
At that meeting, the cabinet agreed that the government needed to
demonstrate to its European partners that it was serious about ratifying the
treaty by bringing the legislation back to the House of Commons before the
Edinburgh summit in December. All signed up to the idea of a substantial
motion to that effect on November 4.
The suspicion was that Mr Major's officials had taken the accord a step
further by suggesting that the defeat in the Commons of such a decision
would lead to a general election.
The trouble is that it was impossible yesterday to find a Tory MP or
minister willing to agree with that logic. For its part, Downing Street
retreated into the argument that Mr Major was confident of winning on
November 4 so the issue did not arise. But officials refused pointblank to
withdraw the threat.
It may well turn out that Mr Major has judged the mood correctly and that
enough Tory MPs will be cowed to give him a majority, even against the
combination of Labour and the Euro-sceptics. But he has raised the stakes
dangerously and the judgment of his peers yesterday was that if the vote is
lost, the prime minister will be also.
