FT  29 JAN 92 / FT Law Report: British court cannot stop suspension of
Channel tunnel work
CHANNEL TUNNEL GROUP LTD AND ANOTHER v BALFOUR BEATTY CONSTRUCTION LTD AND
OTHERS
Court of Appeal (Lord Justice Neill, Lord Justice Woolf and Lord Justice
Staughton): January 22 1992
THE HIGH Court has no power under the Arbitration Acts to grant an interim
injunction in relation to a non-domestic arbitration, and will stay
proceedings though preliminary steps towards arbitration have not yet been
taken.  Accordingly, Channel tunnel employers seeking to restrain
contractors from suspending work, cannot obtain an injunction in the UK, but
must apply in Brussels which, as the agreed place of arbitration, is the
place with which the arbitration has its closest connection.
The Court of Appeal so held when allowing an appeal by the defendant
contractors, Balfour Beatty Construction and others (TML), from Mr Justice
Evans's decision that on their undertaking that they would not suspend work
without giving the plaintiff employers, Channel Tunnel Group Ltd and France
Manche SA (Eurotunnel), 14 days' notice, he would not make an interim order
restraining them from doing so; and allowing an appeal from his decision not
to stay the action in favour of arbitration.
LORD JUSTICE STAUGHTON said that Eurotunnel was the employer under a
contract to build the Channel tunnel. A consortium known as Trans Manche
Link or TML, was the contractor.
On October 3 1991, TML wrote to Eurotunnel stating that unless certain
conditions were met by October 7, it would suspend work on the tunnel
cooling system.
Eurotunnel issued a writ against TML claiming an injunction restraining it
from suspending work.
Mr Justice Evans decided that, on TML's undertaking that it would not
suspend work without 14 days' notice, he would make no order.
TML appealed. It complained that the judge was prepared to grant a mandatory
injunction requiring it to continue work, and only refrained from doing so
because an undertaking was offered.
The judge also dismissed an application by TML that the action be stayed in
favour of arbitration. TML appealed.
Clause 67 of the contract provided that any dispute should first be referred
to a panel of independent experts. The parties agreed to give effect to the
panel's unanimous decisions until revised by arbitration under International
Chamber of Commerce rules.
It was agreed that 'the seat of such arbitration shall be Brussels'.
Under clause 68 the contract was to be governed by principles common to both
English law and French law, and in the absence of common principles, by
general principles of international trade law.
Since both Eurotunnel and TML were partly French and partly English, his
Lordship wondered why they did not choose either English or French law - and
why they chose Brussels as the seat of arbitration. He suspected the hybrid
system would lead to a long and expensive dispute.
There was a dispute as to the proper price to be paid by Eurotunnel for the
cooling system. TML proposed Pounds 133.84m. Eurotunnel proposed Pounds
86.93m.
Also, TML said Eurotunnel was in breach of contract by abandoning the agreed
basis for interim funding of work. It maintained it was entitled to suspend
work (although it had not yet done so) by reason of those breaches.
There was no English law doctrine that if one party to a contract was in
serious breach the other might suspend performance, keeping the contract
alive.
In the hybrid system of law governing the contract, however, it was not
disputed that some such doctrine existed. It was called l'exception
d'inexecution or exceptio non adimpleti contractus.
The judge accepted there were matters in dispute which it would be the
arbitrators' task to decide if and when they were asked to do so.
He held that a stay should be refused because the time for arbitration had
not arrived: there had not yet been a reference to the panel.
Many types of contract provided for some preliminary step to be taken before
arbitration. That did not entitle a party to disregard arbitration procedure
and start an action at law just because the preliminary step had not been
taken.
TML was entitled to a stay if there was a dispute 'with regard to the matter
agreed to be heard'. It was not shown readily and beyond doubt that TML had
no right to suspend work or that Eurotunnel was right in its contentions.
Accordingly, the action would be stayed.
But that did not conclude the question whether there should be an
injunction.
By section 12(6) of the Arbitration Act 1950, the High Court had 'for the
purpose of and in relation to a reference, the same power of making orders
in respect of . . . (h) interim injunctions . . . as it has for the purpose
of and in relation to an action or matter in the High Court'.
That power could be exercised before there had been any request for
arbitration or appointment of arbitrators, provided the applicant intended
to take the dispute to arbitration in due course. The court's power in such
a case would be exercised 'for the purpose of and in relation to a
reference'.
Some of the parties were not English but French, and they had all agreed to
arbitrate in Brussels. The court was therefore not concerned with a domestic
arbitration agreement (see section 1(4) Arbitration Act 1975).
The crucial point on the jurisdiction issue was whether an English court had
power to grant an injunction where arbitration was to take place abroad, and
if so whether the power should be exercised.
It was often said that UK statutes had no application to things which
happened abroad.
One had to ascertain the connecting factor prescribed by Conflict of Laws
rules, in order to find which country's laws were to be applied.
The connecting factor for application of section 12(6)(h) to a case
containing a foreign element was the place the parties had chosen as the
seat of arbitration. If that was in England or Wales, English courts had
jurisdiction; if not, they had none.
It followed that the English court had no jurisdiction under section
12(6)(h) in the present case, since the seat of arbitration was Brussels.
Express choice of English law as the curial law did not confer jurisdiction
under section 12(6)(h) if the arbitration had a foreign seat; nor would a
choice of foreign law have taken away jurisdiction if the seat of the
arbitration was in England.
Non-availability of section 12(6)(h) was the first of three reasons why an
injunction should not be granted under the more general power to grant an
injunction conferred by section 37 of the Supreme Court Act 1981.
The second reason lay in section 25 of the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments
Act 1982, under which the High Court's power to grant interim relief might
be extended by Order in Council to arbitration proceedings held abroad.
No such Order in Council had yet been made. It would not be appropriate to
grant relief.
Third, there were dicta which supported the view that an English court had
no jurisdiction to grant an interim injunction when a stay was mandatory
under section 1 of the 1975 Act (see Nissan (UK) v Nissan Motor Co, CA July
31 1991).
Whether or not there was jurisdiction, an interim injunction should not be
granted under section 37 when the parties had agreed to arbitration in some
place outside England and Wales and there was an arbitrable dispute.
Mr Justice Evans would have been wrong to grant an injunction if TLM had not
offered the undertaking. It was to Brussels courts that application must be
made, if it was their practice to grant an injunction in such a case.
The application for a stay was granted, and TML would be released from its
undertaking if it asked to be released. An injunction would not be granted.
Their Lordships agreed.
For Eurotunnel: John Dyson QC, Mark Howard and Vivian Ramsey (Freshfields).
For TML: Bernard Rix QC and Andrew White (Masons).
