FT  11 MAY 92 / Leading Article: Earth Summit gets earthy
THE IMMINENCE of the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, now only three weeks
away, is beginning to focus political minds, though as in all gatherings of
this kind, the preparatory process is degenerating into last-minute
horse-trading rather than promoting well-considered harmony. The question is
whether the resulting compromises will damage Rio's prospects, or save it
from the shambles which many people fear it could become.
Recent days have brought some progress on two important fronts. The
conclusion over the weekend of a draft treaty on measures to protect the
world climate should pave the way for action on greenhouse gases, one of the
most serious environmental threats now facing the world. Similarly, the
agreement by members of the World Bank to beef up the Global Environmental
Facility (GEF) - a special fund to help developing countries protect the
environment - provides the basis for the financial commitments which should
be one of the key results of Rio.
There is an unmistakable air of political compromise over the climate
treaty. The original intention to bind the signatories to reducing their
greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000 has been watered
down to a statement that such an aim would represent 'an appropriate
signal'. This is a disappointing retreat for a document that will be central
to the Rio agenda. It also marks the failure of the industrial countries to
persuade the US to drop its opposition to specific emission reduction
deadlines, and thereby their inability to put up a united front at the
summit. This will tarnish the example they hoped to set there to win the
support of the rest of the world for action to clean up the environment.
However, the alternative - risking a boycott by President Bush - would have
been even more damaging.
Full representation
It is essential to the success of the already fragile Rio agenda that the
world's largest polluter, and its largest provider of financial resources,
should be fully represented there.
There will be widespread disappointment, particularly in the Third World,
over the decision to revamp the GEF as a Rio vehicle because of its link
with the rich country-dominated World Bank. But other options, notably the
new Green Fund proposed by many developing countries, would merely add to
the proliferation of international agencies and waste the experience
acquired by the GEF. The accusation of exclusivity frequently levelled at
the GEF is to be countered by throwing it open to universal membership.
Unrealistic expectations
Yet to be resolved is the question of how much money should be committed to
the GEF at Rio. Unfortunately, the Rio secretariat has raised expectations
to unrealistic levels by referring to the Dollars 100bn and more that will
be needed each year to fund a Third World clean-up. Actual commitments are
likely to be only a tiny fraction of that sum. Moreover, it is important
that the various agreements that do come out of Rio ensure that green aid is
properly targeted and not swallowed up by an ineffective aid machine.
The task of the Rio organisers in the few weeks that remain is to ensure
that the world develops realistic expectations for the event. Although there
is undoubtedly mounting global concern for the environment, the preparatory
process has exposed deep divisions about the nature of the threat and the
remedies required - between rich and poor countries, green lobbies and
industry, and even among the industrial countries. It would be wrong to
expect Rio to produce hard and fast solutions; positions among participants
are too far apart for that. It may not even produce large sums of money. But
it is beginning to acquire some momentum. Its success may have to be
measured principally in terms of the political commitments which are made
there and the strength of the machinery which it creates to hold
participants to their pledges.
Only a week ago, there was a danger that Rio would convene with nothing on
the table. That will not now be the case; the next fortnight may even
produce a second treaty. The task ahead is huge, and at least this is a
start.
