FT  20 JUL 92 / The Lex Column: Equitable Life
From a European perspective, at least, last week's pricing of shares in the
newly demutualised US insurance company Equitable Life represented more than
just the conclusion of another initial public offering. The sale of 43.5m
shares at a lower than expected Dollars 9 each had an immediate impact on
Axa, the French insurer which came to Equitable's rescue last year with a
controversial Dollars 1bn cash injection. Axa's shares tumbled 7 per cent on
Thursday and Friday as investors calculated that the odds on chairman Claude
Bebear pulling off his great transatlantic gamble may now have lengthened.
The Equitable issue was clearly a difficult one: the final price should be
set against earlier hopes of getting it away at Dollars 11-Dollars 14 a
share. But the lower price means that Axa's convertible bond - on which
incidentally it has been earning a tidy 22 per cent over the last 10 months
 -translates under the original deal into the maximum 49 per cent equity
stake, while the French company can take this to around 60 per cent by the
end of next year. The enthusiasts point out that Axa has won control without
a bid premium. The sceptics wonder whether Mr Bebear should have got
involved at all.
Equitable's shares look cheap in relation to net assets. The non-insurance
activities alone are valued by one analyst at more than Dollars 11 per
share. But there is good reason for that. New management is in place, but
the US company has yet to convince the market that it has mended its old
inefficient and reckless ways. Insurance and annuity surrenders, meanwhile,
are said to be back to normal levels after two dreadful quarters last year.
It remains to be seen whether the improvement will last.
The bigger anxiety is Equitable's mortgage and real estate book. Last week's
pricing leaves scope for further provisions on the Dollars 2.65bn of
potential problem mortgage loans already identified, which so far have been
written down by 25 per cent. The worry is whether the company's professedly
conservative valuations are sufficient protection against a further downward
twist in the US economy. The risks for Mr Bebear have always been great. But
at least they have not markedly worsened in the last few days.
