FT  15 APR 92 / Survey of Monaco (7): Furs, follies and glitterati - Out on
the town
KATHERINE MANSFIELD, the 1920s writer, was known for her tart tongue and
waspish ways, but when it came to Monte Carlo, she was especially acerbic.
'It's real hell,' she said, 'the cleanest, most polished place I've ever
seen.'
The cleanliness and polish that so infuriated Ms Mansfield are probably the
very attributes that attract Monaco's residents and visitors today. Monaco,
with its hefty proportion of policemen per capita and plethora of litter
bins, is one of the few places where people can - and do  - walk around
wearing the furs and jewels they would be too frightened to flaunt in
Manhattan or Milan.
Over the years, Monaco has opened a stream of new attractions to entertain
its visitors. There is the Musee de l'Oceanographie, a highly-regarded
academic centre for marine research; or the 'Monte Carlo Story', an
English-language film on the principality's history which doubles as a
sanitised soap opera of the lives the royal family. And there is also the
rusty tug-boat sunk in the harbour last autumn to entertain the voyagers on
the new Seabus submarine.
Nearly everywhere you go in Monaco there are views of the luxury yachts and
cruisers moored in the harbour and of the sun glistening on the sea. But for
most visitors, Monaco polarises between the hills on either side of the
harbour - Monaco-Ville to the west, and Monte Carlo to the east.
Monaco-Ville is the home of the old town, the vieille ville, with its narrow
alleyways and the Prince's Palace. The streets are littered with souvenir
shops and pizza parlours. But even the clutter of Princess Grace plates and
the posters for her daughter, Stephanie's latest perfume, cannot completely
disguise the charm of the candy-coloured houses with their curves, cupolas
and the wrought-iron twists on their belle epoque balconies.
The Place de Palais is packed with Italian day-trippers, prancing
precariously on the ornamental cannon-balls or snapping up Monaco matelot
T-shirts from the souvenir stalls. Other visitors, presumably less
enthusiastic about devoting an entire day to the vain hope of spotting the
wayward Princess Stephanie, or one of her siblings, speeding away from the
palace, repair to the Jardins St Antoine that straggle along the cliffs
where Guillaume Apollinaire, the poet, once walked each day to seek
inspiration.
On the opposite side of the harbour, Monte Carlo, named in deference to
Prince Charles III, the 19th century monarch who transformed the
principality's finances by opening the casino, is the stamping ground for
the glitterati.
Here the visitor can join the gaggle of grandes dames who turn up day after
day - swathed in fur, whatever the weather  - to take tea, or something
stronger, and hound the waiters in the American Bar of the Hotel de Paris.
Or they can saunter around the shops. Cartier, Christian Dior, Chanel, Louis
Vuitton, Hermes and Valentino are all a stone's throw away from the Place du
Casino. The merchandise is the same as in Milan or Paris, but the shops are
quieter and the Monegasque assistants far friendlier than their famously
frosty Parisian counterparts.
Then there is the casino, the folly built by Charles Garnier, architect of
the Paris Opera, with its heart-shaped stucco mouldings and sensational
views out to sea.
This is the place where Mata Hari shot a German spy, where an Englishman,
Charles Deville Wells, won FFr10,000 one night to become 'the man who broke
the bank at Monte Carlo', and where Richard Burton gave Elizabeth Taylor
(yet another) knuckle duster of a diamond ring.
Nowadays there are slot machines in the casino's foyer and the Salle
Americaine opens every afternoon for games of craps or roulette at minimum
FFr25 bets. The serious players, the grands joueurs who will risk winning or
losing tens of thousands of francs at a sitting, arrive later in the evening
 -long after the casual visitors to the 'clean and polished' principality
have disappeared.
