FT  18 JUN 92 / Telecommunications In Business (23): Milestone for
integrated services - ISDN / After twelve years of promises and many missed
deadlines, it looks as if ISDN, the Integrated Services Digital Network,
really will be 100 per cent deliverable throughout the UK by the end of
1992, as a full national dial-up, integrated voice and data service
THE important milestone for ISDN in Britain will be reached when all BT
switching centres are digitised and the so-called C7 signalling programme
has been completed, with Mercury and BT ISDN networks fully interconnected.
Another milestone will be reached in 1993 when the Normes Europeennes des
Telecommunications (Net) ISDN standard is implemented, creating one common
European ISDN network with all systems operating to the same set of
regulations. This will enabled companies to use the same ISDN equipment
throughout Europe.
ISDN is available to all businesses in France, Germany, Japan and Singapore.
In the UK, it is available to 86 per cent of businesses and 78 per cent of
homes, with users currently able to connect to 24 networks in 16 countries.
In the US, according to Bellcore, availability now is 40 per cent of all
phone lines, with 60 per cent not expected to be reached until 1994.
But while some say ISDN is one of the most important developments in
telecommunications since Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone,
sceptics say it is a solution looking for a problem and will take up to 10
years before it is accepted by the wider community, if ever.
Take-up has been slow to date but, without the all-important infrastructure,
that was to be expected. Many potential suppliers argue, however, that the
problem is a deeper one.
As Don Winston, general manager and vice president of modem manufacturers,
Microcom UK points out: 'Take-up of ISDN will not happen until it can offer
customers benefits they do not already have, or something they have but for
less money.
At the moment, it does neither. As a result, the dial-up modem business is
still growing by 25 per cent a year, with modems capable of transmitting
data at 57.6kbps (kilobits per second), not far off ISDN's 64kbps.
'When the CCITT (the Comite Consultatif International Telephone et
Telegraphe) has finalised the V Fast standard, transmission times will be
pushing close to 100kbps. If ISDN is the way to the future, why are such
techniques even being considered?'
Reid Meintzer, director of sales and marketing at dealerboard suppliers, IPC
Information Systems, believes lack of enthusiasm for ISDN among
communications managers in the City of London is largely the fault of
manufacturers who rushed into the marketplace with products that were not
ready.
His point is echoed by Peter Edmondson, product development manager of fax
suppliers, Canon UK, who also lays the blame partly at the door of the
media: 'Over the past 4-5 years, expectations have been raised too high. It
is almost here now and it is a useful practical tool, if there is an
application for it. The point about ISDN is not that it can be used for data
communications without the need for a modem, but that it provides the
infrastructure to support a whole new generation of integrated computer and
communications applications, enabling us to communicate in ways we have not
even dreamt about yet.'
The ISDN connection
An ISDN connection is made up of two types of communication channel: bearer
channels (called B-channels), each offering 64Kbps capacity transmission
rates to carry information from terminal to terminal; and 16kbps signalling
channels (called D-channels) that carry the messages that establish and
control the call.
Primary Rate ISDN30, also called 30B+D in Europe (23B+D in the US), is used
mainly for voice calls by large companies with advanced telephone systems
(ISPBXs) and provides a 2mbps (megabits per second) interface to the digital
network.
Facilities and applications
ISDN2 and ISDN30 both offer certain facilities that are not possible on the
conventional PSTN (public switched telephone network). They include calling
line ID; sub-addressing for routing calls to a particular terminal; call
diversion; and three-way calling.
However, before making an investment in either service, businesses would
need to justify the application. For the true benefit of ISDN is not simply
that it offers improved features, higher quality speech and more
sophisticated routing and connections; or even that it offers higher speed,
error-free file transfer with high speed call setup.
Its advantage is that one network can support multiple applications, with
users able to transmit speech, data, graphics and video communications over
a single line and to plug any type of terminal into one type of socket.
Up to eight terminals can be connected to each ISDN2 line, with two items
able to communicate simultaneously. Also because one network can be used for
multimedia applications, rather than two or three different networks, time
and cost spent on network management and maintenance is reduced.
ISDN, together with intelligent switch software, also enables the creation
of sophisticated services such as virtual private networks (VPNs).
New equipment
A range of equipment is now being made available by equipment suppliers,
often with assistance from BT on issues such as standards, approvals and
marketing.
On the BT list of companies which can supply Terminal Adapters (TAs) with
full BABT approval are Craycom, Dataflex, Fivemere, Gandalf, Gravacom, IBM,
Jaguar and Newbridge Networks.
Slot-in line cards which transform personal computers into ISDN terminals
are available from Fujitsu, Maxim Networks and Network Designers. Group 4
fax machines are available from BT, HCS Infotec and Ricoh.
Video-conferencing is available from BT, GPT and PictureTel.
There are a number of collaborative ventures under way to supply
multifunction and multimedia ISDN-compatible terminals. Olivetti and BT, for
example, have signed a joint development agreement which will address the
needs of banks and financial institutions, with trials starting this summer
in the UK and other European countries.
Telecoms system manufacturer GPT has worked with modem manufacturer Hayes
Microcomputer Products to produce the Connect ISDN terminal which offers
plug-in connection for personal computers.
This makes it possible for any machine with a serial port to transmit down
an ISDN 2 line at 38kbps; with an optional X21 interface making possible PC
transmission at full 64kbps, as well as Group 4 fax or videophone
transmissions.
Modem manufacturer Dataflex Design and Symicron have collaborated to provide
an ISDN TA that offers X25 connection to ISDN 2 service from a standard PC
card. Not content just to announce an ISDN product, Dataflex Design ran
tests at a public exhibition to compare the times taken to transfer a
50,000-byte data file desktop to desktop over the two main networks.
Using various modems for connection to the PSTN, it took between 26 seconds
and four minutes to transfer the data plus up to one minute to establish a
satisfactory link. With V24 TAs over a BT ISDN2 link, it took 15 seconds
plus one second to establish a constant error-free link.
For users sending data files on a regular basis, the transmission cost
savings could be substantial, despite the premium paid for the ISDN
connection. Keen to encourage more business users to move over to ISDN, BT
has just launched a range of low-cost TAs manufactured by Northern Telecom,
priced at around Pounds 1,395.
Aimed at small businesses, telecommuters, retail outlets and educational
establishments, they will allow users to connect personal computers,
point-of-sale terminals, LAN servers, multiplexers, fax and
video-conferencing equipment to the ISDN network without having to re-invest
in new equipment.
Power computer users
Sun Microsystems is targeting the power computer users in the fields of
engineering and design with their new SPARCstation 10. While it is not the
first-ever integrated data/voice workstation, it is said to be the first of
a new generation of desktop systems with built-in ISDN capabilities.
The reason for the development is that Sun believes ISDN will become as
prevalent as Ethernet is today and is, thus, the logical choice for
integrating computers and telephones into a global, standardised digital
network. By adding telephony control to the desktop computer equipped with a
graphical user-interface, ease of use by all is assured.
The costs of ISDN
While ISDN gives users flexibility in the type of terminals that can be used
and the type of communications traffic that can be transmitted, the costs of
the service in terms of connection charges and rental costs will be critical
to widespread acceptance.
There will, for example, be a break-even calculation to be made to determine
whether the digital public switch network or private circuits would be
better for corporate users. A rough guide is that, if the lines between two
points are in constant use throughout the day, it makes sense to have a
dedicated link, because calls are free of charge.
However, if the links are only in operation part of the day, a fixed link is
an expensive option. BT makes a connection charge of Pounds 400 for ISDN2
(for 2 channels) with a quarterly rental charge of Pounds 84. ISDN30 is
charged at Pounds 152.75 connection and Pounds 32.12 per quarter per channel
(minimum 30), with extra charges for each facility required. Call charges
per channel are at the normal voice rate for inland calls and higher for
international data calls. A private link between, say, London and Aberdeen
would cost Pounds 8,692, including the Pounds 920 connection charge in the
first year; Pounds 7,772 for rental only in year two. To reach that cost
level using ISDN, you would need to make 121 standard rate (91 peak rate)
three-minute ISDN2 calls a day in the first year and 1,114 standard (86
peak) in year two. Assuming a 5-day week and a 52-week year, it would cost
Pounds 1,310 a year for 20 average 4-unit duration ISDN calls per day at
standard rate, Pounds 3,932 a year for 60 and Pounds 10,486 for 160 a day.
Mercury's offer
Many product suppliers have voiced their disappointment at BT's charges,
perhaps hoping that there would be concessions to kick-start take-up. By the
end of 1992, greater competition from Mercury may be the spur. While BT
offers either ISDN2 or ISDN30, Mercury is about to offer a lower entry point
for medium-sized business. Charges will be Pounds 1,380 for installation and
Pounds 1,710 annual rental, with each line thereafter costing Pounds 92 to
install and Pounds 114 annual rental.
When you get to 30 lines, the cost is Pounds 2,760 for installation (a
saving of Pounds 405 on the BT charge) and Pounds 3,420 per year rental (an
11 per cent annual saving).
