FT  29 AUG 92 / On a wing and a prayer: Experts seem divided about the
meaning of the turmoil and stresses in the global financial system
TURMOIL ON the foreign exchanges, wild gyrations in the capital markets,
riots in Germany, French doubts about Maastricht - this is no mere silly
season crisis. Yet at the end of a week in which sterling wavered, currency
realignments were rumoured and calm temporarily reasserted itself, financial
experts seem curiously divided about what is going on.
According to one line of thought, it is the collapse of the US currency that
is chiefly responsible for chaos in the markets. Yet few in the US seem
aware of it, least of all the country's financial establishment. Much of the
Federal Reserve Board and more of Wall Street is spending this weekend at a
jolly symposium in the mountains at Jackson Hole, Wyoming. The name says it
all. Clearly their heart is not in this so-called crisis.
Others take the view that the strength of the D-mark is the problem. Yet a
maverick member of the Bundesbank council hinted earlier this week that the
real snag was the reluctance of other members of the European exchange rate
mechanism (ERM) to devalue - whoops, realign - against the mark.
The French electorate, if the opinion polls are to be believed, appears to
be developing a wholly different agenda for the European Community than the
one cooked up by the French political establishment in the run-up to the
treaty of Maastricht. This is a source of joy to the Bundesbank, which would
happily wave goodbye to monetary union; also to those Tory ministers who
would dearly love to come out of the Euro-closet singing Rule Britannia. But
it does nothing for short-run currency stability.
The British, meantime, are threatened by a rise in interest rates, which
might be necessary to prevent sterling from falling through its ERM floor.
Yet sterling is strong against everything that matters apart from the
D-mark, while the economy remains flat on its back. Increasingly the
decision by prime minister John Major to take Britain into the ERM is being
compared with Winston Churchill's catastrophic return of sterling to the
gold standard in 1925.
For his part the UK chancellor of the exchequer, Norman Lamont, wrapped in
his ERM bands and stranded before the cameras on the Treasury steps in
London, risks being compared with Philip Snowden, the hapless Labour
chancellor who presided over the devastation of the British economy before
the decision to go off gold in 1931.
In the face of this seemingly paradoxical set of circumstances, the layman,
conscious of uncomfortable echoes of the 1930s, might ask the significance
of this week's battle royal on the exchanges. Is it a harbinger of nastier
political and economic trouble to come?
The worries are arguably overdone. True, the fluctuations on the exchanges
are disturbing for investors since exchange rate movements exercise an
important influence, through their impact on competitiveness, on the
distribution of growth and industrial profits around the global economy.
Yet, for reasons that will become clear, currency fluctuations are best
regarded as part of the solution, not the problem. They are no more than a
symptom of large countries pursuing mutually inconsistent economic policies
and of past failures of international monetary coordination.
The story really starts in the 1980s with Reaganomics, that euphoric
economic upheaval which combined loose fiscal policy with tight money,
together with a plethora of financial and tax reforms. The internal
consequences for the US economy included a decline in savings and a huge
accumulation of debt. The chief external results of US overspending were an
overvalued dollar and a huge balance of payments deficit.
This was sustainable just as long as other countries were prepared to mop up
the dollars that Americans were pumping on to international markets. And for
most of the 1980s, Japan and Germany were happy to do that. The Japanese did
the lion's share of the work, buying a growing share of US Treasury bonds.
They also bought a significant slice of the Californian banking and film
industries, together with great chunks of real estate across the union. The
appetite for foreign assets spilled over into other countries, including
Britain, where Japanese banks pumped money into office blocks in the City,
Docklands and elsewhere.
While it lasted, this flow of capital across the exchanges meant that debtor
countries, of which the US was by far the most important, enjoyed lower
interest rates, cheaper mortgages and ready access to high-quality Japanese
consumer durables and German capital goods. Creditor countries were thereby
spared from the contractionary impact of excessive savings on their domestic
economies.
But the party went on too long. From the mid-1980s, egged on by central
bankers after the famous Plaza Accord, the dollar fell relentlessly, leaving
foreign investors with huge currency losses. At the Louvre Accord in 1987
the central bankers agreed to put a floor under the dollar to prevent a free
fall.
For the Japanese, who led the supporters' club, the consequences were
catastrophic. Just as the US decision in 1927 to reduce dollar interest
rates partly in response to Europe's monetary problems helped fuel the stock
market boom that ended in the 1929 Crash, so Japan's recent decision to keep
yen interest rates low to support the dollar fuelled a domestic stock market
and property bubble, followed by a Tokyo crash to rival 1929 on Wall Street.
Currency fluctuations in the 1990s are largely to do with the hangover after
this American-Japanese binge, together with the economic shock arising from
the unification of Germany. In response to a sluggish US economy, the
Federal Reserve has repeatedly cut the discount rate, which now stands at 3
per cent, a 29-year low. Yet the economy has failed to respond more than
fitfully, chiefly because of the reluctance of a shell-shocked banking
system to lend.
Keynes, in the 1930s, described attempts to revive the economy through
stimulatory monetary policy as 'pushing on a piece of string.' That would
serve equally well for the US economy today. With a system of deposit
insurance in place, there is no banking panic to compare with the aftermath
of 1929. But in the wake of excessive lending for real estate, energy and
financial engineering, individuals and companies are seeking to pay down
their debts and risk-averse bankers are reluctant to lend. With short-term
interest rates low and government bond yields high, US banks have invested
more than half their assets in US government bonds, leaving the small
business sector, the chief generator of employment, high and dry.
Germany, meantime, has gone from a current account surplus of 4.8 per cent
in 1989 to a deficit of 1.3 per cent last year, as it switches resources
into the former German Democratic Republic. And it is conducting its own
version of Reaganomics in which the federal government puts its foot on the
fiscal accelerator - deemed necessary to bribe the inhabitants of the former
GDR to stay in the east - while the Bundesbank keeps all four feet on the
monetary brake to dampen the inflationary consequences. The result is high
rates of interest, rising unemployment in the D-mark bloc and a huge inflow
of foreign capital.
This is where the conflict in the currency markets is at its fiercest. With
money market rates in New York at around 3 1/2 per cent and comparable rates
in Frankfurt at nearly 10 per cent, the temptation for speculators to hold
dollars for the short term is minimal. But neither the Americans nor Germans
are unduly worried about the resulting flight of capital across the
Atlantic. The inflationary impact of the collapsing dollar scares no one at
Jackson Hole, because US imports are less than 10 per cent of gnp and the
economy benefits from the boost to exports. And the Bundesbank welcomes the
appreciation of the D-mark because it puts an additional brake on inflation.
In short, currency fluctuations can be an escape valve and an adjustment
mechanism. And there lies the conundrum for sterling and other weaker ERM
currencies. By tying themselves to a strong currency, the D-mark, which is
subject to the pull of great tidal flows of capital on the global markets,
they ensure that the burden of adjustment falls not on the exchange rate but
on domestic demand. Instead of sterling collapsing like the dollar, and
monetary policy continuing to loosen in response to the huge debt left from
the late 1980s boom, the squeeze is felt in the real economy as real
interest rates rise and inflation falls.
The drama within the ERM does indeed bear striking similarities to the
1930s. Then, France was the lynchpin of the gold bloc - a defensive
arrangement, according to Charles Kindleberger, the economic historian,
rather than an optimum currency area, which is the economist's definition of
a group of countries that stand to benefit from joining a monetary union.
The French paid a high price, in deflation and constantly changing
governments, for their politicians' commitment to gold, until the Tripartite
Monetary Agreement of 1936 took the franc off the hook. In contrast, the
British enjoyed one of their highest growth rates of the century after
Britain went off the gold standard in 1931, although unemployment remained
high and growth was unevenly distributed between regions and industries.
Today, the French are again spearheading plans for a monetary union. Optimum
currency area considerations have been less important than political
imperatives: worries about how to manage relations with an enlarged and more
confident Germany. Much of Europe is importing deflation from Germany as the
D-mark - a modern equivalent of the gold standard - rockets upwards. And a
British chancellor finds himself in the extraordinary position of
confronting a sterling crisis in which the troubled currency walks tall at
nearly Dollars 2 to Pounds 1. The question is whether there will be a
similar resolution to the 1930s, with sterling and the lira pursuing a
different path from the franc.
This week's signals from the French polls could turn out to be of greater
long-term importance than the currency fluctuations. For if the French, of
all people in Europe, offer at best a lukewarm endorsement of the Maastricht
treaty, following the Danish 'No', the European political establishment may
be forced to acknowledge an inadequate mandate to pursue its ambitious plans
for political and monetary union. ERM turmoil will increase. And some form
of realignment, perhaps even the fragmentation of the ERM, might follow,
with Italy precipitating the rot.
For investors in British equities, the prospects could be similar to those
after the devaluation against gold in 1931. Initial turbulence in the
markets was followed by a five-year bull market. According to BZW's annual
survey of equity and gilt returns since 1918, the real return on equities in
1931 was 40.2 per cent; in 1932, 30.4 per cent; in 1933, 24.4 per cent; in
1934, 11.2 per cent, and in 1935, 16.1 per cent. Surprisingly, since
devaluation usually means more inflation, gilts did well, too, with a return
of more than 45 per cent in 1931. Falling gilt yields and rising prices
reflected the new government policy of cheap money.
Whether UK gilts would benefit from devaluation this time, after the
unprecedented post-war inflation, seems more questionable. Much would depend
on whether the government implemented other institutional changes, such as
independence for the Bank of England, to stabilise prices. But some time
over the next few months equities could be back in fashion with a vengeance.
And in due course the dollar will bounce back.
