FT  23 JAN 92 / Arts: A licence to incriminate - Cinema
JFK (15) Empire, MGM Trocadero
COUPE DE VILLE (12) Cannon Trocadero
BLAME IT ON THE BELLBOY (12) Odeon West End
The question used to be 'Who shot John F Kennedy?' The question left in
one's head after 3 1/4 hours of Oliver Stone's JFK is 'Who didn't shoot John
F Kennedy?'
Writer-director Stone, along with Kevin Costner as his truth-based hero Jim
Garrison, the one-time New Orleans District Attorney who became the only man
to bring criminal charges in the case of Kennedy's murder and who wrote a
book about his detective work (On The Trail Of The Assassins), thinks that,
broadly speaking, everyone did it. The CIA was involved. So was the US
military. So were the arms industry, the FBI, the Mafia, Lyndon Johnson and
the anti-Castro Cuban community. This last, according to the film, consisted
of assorted crazies with Spanish accents teamed up with a group of
white-Anglo homosexuals specialising in wacky wigs (Joe Pesci, Tommy Lee
Jones).
Ever since America lost its hero-President to an assassin's bullet in
November 1963, Dealey Plaza in Dallas, Texas, has been combed in public by
more amateur sleuths than any spot on earth. We know the grassy knoll better
than our own back garden. We are asked to see masked gunmen in every shadow
of every blown-up photograph. We are told to sense the country's scheming
power brokers behind the horror of a sunlit day. And we see over and over,
not least in Stone's film, that amateur footage of Kennedy's head pitched
forward and then rocked back by bullets that seem to come from opposite
directions.
But a licence to reject the Warren Report, with its implausible conclusion
that Lee Harvey Oswald was the lone assassin and lone plotter, is no licence
to incriminate almost everyone else who wielded power in America during the
early 1960s. As in Born On The Fourth Of July, Oliver Stone treats the
riddles of history not as a jigsaw to be pieced together in a spirit of
honest inquiry but as a rag-bag of surmises to be forced into rhetorical
harmony.
The real Jim Garrison, here played by Kevin Costner with the homespun,
dogged decency of a Capra hero, was an excitable conspiracy theorist who was
once diagnosed as being in need of long-term psychotherapy. He was also
accused of using bribery, hypnosis and truth serums in dealing with
witnesses. And the man he put on trial for conspiracy in Kennedy's murder,
the wealthy businessman and alleged CIA agent Clay Shaw, was found not
guilty after less than an hour of jury deliberation.
But this acquittal becomes the I-told-you-so climax to Stone's film. After
190 minutes of battering us with the unproven iniquities of America's ruling
class, Stone holds up the legal travesty of Shaw's 'innocence' as proof that
we are all guilty. Mr Costner dries his eyes long enough at the end of his
I-love-America summing-up to stare straight at the camera and tell us 'It's
up to you'.
If it is up to us, how is it we have felt so helpless in the movie to this
point? We have been dragged through cataracts of dialogue, swamps of
exposition and thickets of guest appearances from stars like Jack Lemmon,
Walter Matthau and John Candy. Even Jim Garrison pops up, mischievously cast
as Earl Warren. The movie, aided by gymnastic editing, never stops moving.
Stone and co-screenwriter Zachary Sklar travel so fast to cover their
factual - or factitious - territory that Costner barely has time to dash
home each half-hour to allow Sissy Spacek to do her domestic-reproach
routine.' I think you care more about John Kennedy than your own family]',
'I want my life back' etc.
The film's speed is awesome, but still it never catches up with the required
work-load of information. We know what the 'Y' side of Oliver Stone's X=Y
equation will be: All people in power are guilty. But the facts and figures
of the 'X' side, culled from both Garrison's book and Jim Marr's Crossfire,
cannot be gathered together in the time required.
Realising this, Stone eventually brings in a composite figure called, aptly,
Mr X. This is Donald Sutherland looking mysterious by the Potomac. His job
is to run very fast through all the high-level conspiracy data, based mainly
on revelations about top-brass hostility to Kennedy's decision to
de-escalate the Vietnam War: revelations vouchsafed by L. Fletcher Prouty, a
one time aide to the Joint Chiefs of Staff who became technical adviser on
JFK.
After implicating LBJ, the arms industry and everyone else you can think of,
Sutherland allows himself a few moments of post-assassination musing - 'I
never thought things were the same after that' - and this sudden down-change
into conversational ordinariness makes us giggle. It is too much of a shock:
too much like the human reality that has been missing from every frame so
far.
The film quickly, embarrassedly picks itself up and returns to its normal
speed, which is that of an epic edition of the radio programme Just A
Minute. One moment of hesitation or deviation and one feels that a buzzer
will sound announcing the collapse of logical momentum.
JFK tries to demonstrate that 'They' killed Kennedy and that 'We' are the
only ones who can fight back. But all it demonstrates is that them-and-us
moral generalities now seem as distant and obsolete as the 1960s themselves.
By blaming virtually everyone who held office back then, the film allows
JFK's assassin to escape once more into the crowd: as safe in the sanctuary
of numbers as he had ever been when shielded by the 'lone assassin' theory
Stone so virulently derides.
*
Since making Coupe De Ville, a 1960s-set tale of three quarrelsome brothers
driving a blue Cadillac to Florida to hand it to Mum as a birthday present
from Dad, Joe Roth has become chairman of 20th Century Fox. But the two
events are unconnected. Coupe De Ville, a subtle and delightful comedy of
character, picked up a few dollars at the American box office and Roth won
his ticket to power by founding Morgan Creek Productions, which became the
career home of Kevin Costner.
Today Roth says he doubts that he would give a film like Coupe De Ville the
go-ahead at Fox since it has no stars, no 'high-concept' storyline and no
previous success on page or on stage. You see the world we live in? Even
studio bosses cannot follow the quality.
Coupe De Ville is too good to be made except with the tiny budget Roth
required two years ago to assemble Daniel Stern, Patrick Dempsey and Arye
Gross as the brothers - the long, the short and the barrel-shaped  - and to
escort them across America in the blue-finned gas-guzzler of the title,
occasionally cutting to Alan Arkin as Dad fishing in Florida.
The script by Mike Binder is a gem. Sibling rivalry wreaks chaos on the road
and roadside, as old grudges fly up like pebbles from the tarmac and new
quarrels rain down from a clear Southern sky. Meanwhile the car, which Dad
has demanded be delivered without a scratch, develops the inevitable habit
of crashing into anything that stands still.
Once in Florida the happy ending arrives: but even this has a surprise twist
and a power to tug the heart. I floated out of the Cannon Fulham Road
mopping my eyes and wondering how 20th Century Fox under Joe Roth became the
most successful studio in Hollywood last year without producing a single
film as good as this.
It certainly beats Blame It On The Bellboy, a writing-directing debut by
British National Film School graduate Mark Herman. This Venice-set comedy
sinks slowly into its own lagoon. When three English-speaking tourists
called Orton, Horton and Lawton - alias office clerk Dudley Moore,
sex-seeking businessman Richard Griffiths and Mafia hit man Bryan Brown -
get their messages mixed up at their hotel, you can imagine the chaos that
results.
Indeed you should imagine it. Your own scenario is bound to be funnier than
Herman's. Dudley is tortured by the mob who think he is Brown, Brown bumps
into the Miss Right intended for Griffiths and Griffiths - well, you get the
idea. The filmgoer's comic nerve needs to be pinched hard and early in a
film like this, but we are still waiting for happy pain at the end of the
movie's modest 73 minutes.
