FT  05 NOV 92 / US Election (World reaction): Clinton puts paid to
Reagan-Thatcher era
THE Reagan-Thatcher era is over at last, writes Edward Mortimer.
That was the instinctive reaction of many Europeans yesterday to President
George Bush's defeat by Governor Bill Clinton. The evidence is mixed, but
belief in global political currents, flowing across frontiers and oceans, is
widespread.
Sir Ralf Dahrendorf, Warden of St Antony's College, Oxford, thinks Mr
Clinton's victory will be both a symbol and, by its example, an agent of
change.
He sees the change as partly one of generations, but also one of policies,
'towards a greater emphasis on things social'.
The 1990s, he says, will not be deliberately redistributive of wealth, as
the 1960s were. The supply side will not be taken for granted, but the
emphasis will be on 'entitlement', and more attention will be given to the
employment consequences of economic decisions. The economy will no longer be
seen as 'a programme in itself'.
In the 1980s - the Reagan-Thatcher decade - the emphasis was on the supply
side. It was the age of tax-cuts, privatisation and deregulation; of the
leveraged buy-out and the real-estate boom.
In the early 1990s, those chickens have come home to roost. Right across the
industrialised world, rapid debt deflation has choked off growth, bringing a
rise in unemployment.
Such changes almost inevitably have their effects in the realm of politics.
'In the late 1970s,' says Sir Ralf,'nobody could get themselves re-elected.
In the late 1980s, it seemed no one could get themselves de-elected. I have
long expected that we should see massive change in the early 1990s.'
Professor David Calleo of Johns Hopkins University, Washington, also sees
the idea of 'a more efficient and active public sector' as being at the
heart of Mr Clinton's appeal.
'The flood tide of neo-liberalism, the idea that the market will decide
everything, is over,' Mr Calleo says. 'But the old antithesis of big state
versus little state is in a way beside the point. The argument is for a more
efficient state, politically stronger but administratively less intrusive,
not growing in all directions automatically. That's the theory. We don't
know how it will work in practice.'
For the British Labour party these analyses have two possible implications:
either it has failed to articulate the new trend, being still infected with
old-style 1960s interventionism, or last April's UK election came just too
soon for it to benefit.
But changes in policy are not always reflected in party labels.
In France and Spain Socialist parties were in power throughout the
'Reagan-Thatcher decade', and, mutatis mutandis, applied Reagan-Thatcher
policies with vigour, to the dismay and discomfiture of many of their
grass-roots supporters, notably in the trade union movement.
Sir Ralf Dahrendorf says he had thought 'Mr Major and his generation' would
implement the new 1990s thinking in Britain, while retaining the
Conservative label, and admits to being disappointed that this is not the
case.
In Germany, where he was himself a Liberal (FDP) politician in the 1960s and
1970s, Sir Ralf points out that in the 1980s the ruling Christian Democrats,
hitherto proponents of a 'social market economy', became much more
Thatcherite; and he expects them to move back under any of Chancellor Helmut
Kohl's possible successors.
The country that will have most difficulty in adjusting, he thinks, is
France, which is approaching elections next spring 'with all the old
characters'. He quotes a French friend as saying France will experience the
change 'in the new millennium and not before', but he himself thinks 'things
may slide more rapidly, in the next few months'.
In any case, Sir Ralf predicts that 'we are in for a decade of gigantic
redistribution struggles,' in which most people's real incomes will fall and
there will be intense pressure for the pain to be equitably shared.
In the short term fiscal deficits will widen further and, 'though I shudder
to say it', the result will almost certainly be a return to high inflation.
Mr Calleo too sees a potential conflict between two types of demand for
change: Mr Clinton's emphasis on government spending, on infrastructure,
schools etc on the one hand, and the demand for balanced budgets and
financial stringency expressed by Mr Ross Perot on the other.
