FT  15 MAY 92 / Arts: 'Coriolanus' at Chichester - Theatre
The Chichester Festival has begun its 30th anniversary season with a
thoroughly enjoyable Renaissance Theatre production of Coriolanus in which
some of the minor parts outshine the stars.
Quite the most memorable aspect is the crowd scenes where the theatre has
had the bright idea of drawing on the local population. The result is a
goodly crew of about 70 extras, playing alternately the people of Rome and
the supporters of Tullus Aufidius. They do not look like a Roman mob or even
remotely urban. They tend to be armed with pitchforks and hoes and are
perhaps more convincing when playing the Volsces who come from the more
rural community.
Nevertheless, to have a cast of 70 enthusiastic volunteers at your disposal
is a considerable asset. They have been marshalled well in Tim Supple's
production. The effect, which is crucial to Coriolanus, is to show that the
power of the people matters, if only because there are so many of them. The
populace may make the wrong decisions and be demonstrably fickle in its
judgments, but without the people there would be no power struggle and no
play.
The other outstanding achievement is the role of the two tribunes, played by
Jimmy Yuill and Gerrard Horan. They are the men who manipulate the people of
Rome. Supple's production scores again in underlining their pivotal
position. They may be working-class politicians with an eye for the main
chance, but they are not wholly self-interested. The Roman patricians
respect their power, even if they dislike their origins and aspirations.
Coriolanus himself, remember, is neither patrician nor lower class. He looks
down on the plebs with a contempt that the patricians would never express in
public. This delicate balance of political forces is beautifully caught.
Coriolanus observes when he enters the land of the Volsces 'A goodly city is
this Antium', and so it turns out to be. Certainly it is far more relaxed,
and possibly more civilised, than Rome. The problem is that it is
overshadowed by Roman power, just as Tullus Aufidius is overshadowed as a
warrior by Coriolanus. Yet here again is an example of the smaller parts
rising to the occasion. Iain Glen's Tullus has just the right touch of an
inferiority complex and even the faint sound of a West country accent.
Coriolanus is played by Kenneth Branagh. He does nothing wrong, except
perhaps that he should look more attractive. The tight-fitting leather
trousers are a mistake. On the whole, one admires the way he lets the
production and the play speak for themselves without trying to steal the
show. Equally, Richard Briers does everything he should as Menenius without
being obtrusive.
There is a caveat about Judi Dench as Volumnia. She is in danger of becoming
a bit of a gorgon. In this production she is a frightful badgerer. Indeed
one is inclined to think that the last person Coriolanus would want to give
way to is a mother like this. Supple should tell her to calm down: a bit
more Roman dignity and less of the militant female.
Chichester Festival Theatre In repertory. 0234 781312
