FT  31 JUL 92 / Business chiefs join call for devaluation of sterling
THE TREASURY yesterday rejected demands for the government to change its
economic policies as two senior business leaders joined calls for a
realignment of the European exchange rate mechanism.
Outspoken comments from Mr Brian Pearse, Midland Bank chief executive, and
Sir Denys Henderson, ICI chairman, indicated the growing willingness of
businessmen to speak out about the problems caused by sterling's high value
within the ERM.
Professor Douglas McWilliams, economic adviser to the Confederation of
British Industry, said businessmen were increasingly worried that the
government was not doing enough to influence the economy. 'They are not
marching on Downing Street yet,' he said. 'But they are very restive.'
Treasury officials insisted a realignment of currencies in the ERM was 'not
on the agenda' and that the government was determined to stick by its policy
of no devaluation of sterling in the European Monetary System - a position
strongly emphasised by Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, in an interview in
today's Daily Express.
As long as France refuses to allow the D-Mark to revalue against the franc,
the Treasury sees no prospect of a change in ERM relationships. British
officials have in any case made clear that the UK will not devalue sterling
against the D-Mark.
Mr Pearse told Reuters newsagency in an interview, however: 'It's no good
slavishly sticking to the ERM only to find that we have no business left at
the end of it all. It does mean doing something so that the currencies are
realigned.'
He warned that Midland did not foresee any growth in the UK until there was
'quite a substantial cut in interest rates'. Speaking on ITV News at Ten, he
quantified this as a cut of about 3 percentage points. A rise in rates would
be 'absolutely disastrous'.
Sir Denys told the BBC that Mr Lamont and his European counterparts 'should
look very hard at some kind of general realignment . . .because there is no
doubt that those of us who are big exporters are finding sterling at a
pretty high level against the D-Mark and, even more importantly, against the
dollar'.
Speaking on Channel 4 News, he was also sharply critical of government
economic policy, saying: 'If the price for zero inflation is zero growth,
then for me that's too high a price to pay.'
While German reunification had made it 'very difficult', he said, Britain
had entered the ERM at too high a rate and it 'had to face up to that'.
While the Labour party ruled out support for a cheaper pound, Mr David Kern,
chief economist of National Westminster Bank, said sterling's rate against
the dollar was a serious problem, although it was only slightly overvalued
against the D-Mark.
He saw Dollars 1.40 to the pound as appropriate against yesterday's London
close of just under Dollars 1.92.
Midland warning, Page 17
