FT  31 DEC 92 / 'We are confused . . . everybody is afraid of history': Judy
Dempsey hears the people of central Europe ask: who am I, where is my home
and who is my neighbour?
THE DEAD PIG had been hanging in the cellar for five days. It was time to
take it down and divide it among the families. The six men - Slovak
peasants, foresters and a local government inspector - were in a good mood.
After a round of vodkas, they set to work.
One of them had brought a sausage-making machine into which he fed chunks of
meat. He turned the wooden handle. Sausages slowly poured out and dropped
into a plastic bucket. The European Community would never approve.
'It's warmer upstairs. You can talk to the womenfolk,' said one of the men
in rubber boots.
Outside, a thick blanket of snow covered the small Slovak hamlet of Lednicke
Rovne, a few miles from Europe's newest international frontier.
***
Earlier that day, the middle-aged porter at the small hotel tucked behind
Prague's Wenceslas Square had been far from sentimental about the break-up
of his country.
'Tell the Slovaks good riddance from us Czechs. We have had enough of their
whingeing. We are better off with our own Czech Republic.' He paused.
'I still think it's the fault of the Germans. They wanted this split-up so
that they can set up another Reich, here in the Czech Lands.' The cashier
sighed, and rolled her eyes, as if to say, Here he goes again.
'And wait until the new year,' the porter continued. 'There will be more
price rises. And then we will be importing food - from the Germans - which
will be dumped on us. They will soon colonise us - just like the second
world war. Pah]'
***
In Lednicke Rovne, it was indeed much warmer upstairs, high above the
cellar. The large, parquet-floored living room was filled with mothers,
children, toys and a Christmas tree.
Marta Rusanakova, who works in one of the forestries across the border in
Moravia, one of the Czech Lands, dipped a large ladle into a barrel full of
sauerkraut and filled my plate, already laden with pork.
'The truth is that those Czechs have been exploiting us since 1918. They
stole everything from us,' she argued.
'I thought the Czechs had built up Slovak industry after 1945,' I said.
'For themselves. Everything was ruled by Prague.'
'Was the relationship that unequal? Slovaks could lobby for your interests
in Prague. Your language and culture were not threatened.'
'The Czechs held the purse strings. They looked down on us as if we were
second-class citizens. Now we are free. Life will be much better. We will
become part of Europe. Slovakia will be for the Slovaks.'
'The 600,000 Hungarians living here will want to feel secure in an
independent Slovakia.'
'The Hungarians have all the rights they deserve. They are always
complaining. What more rights should they have when our Slovaks in Hungary
do not have many rights?'
Ewa, the sister-in-law, interrupted. 'I worry about the break-up. I also
work in the forestry in Moravia. Anton, my husband, who works for the
federal army, has Czech relatives. He will have to choose his ethnic
background once we take out separate citizenship papers. I don't know if I
can keep my job once we become separate countries. It's all right now. But
you never know about the future. We will be commuting to a foreign country.'
Marta said the Slovaks would cope very well without the Czechs. 'They are
even now discrediting our new republic. Prague, and all those intellectuals
who keep travelling abroad, are spreading lies about how we collaborated
with the Germans during the War. You know, the Germans were not that bad.
After all they paid their bills on time.'
'Do you want more sauerkraut?' asked Ewa.
***
The elderly lady wanted some bread. The small shop in Dzienkowice in
southern Poland was still open, even though it was Sunday evening.
She asked for it in Polish, then broke into German. Her request was drowned
by the man behind the counter who was shouting in German.
'Why are you stirring up trouble in Dzienkowice? You journalists are all the
same. Why don't you go to Germany and write about how all those foreigners
and refugees are ruining the country. Get out of here]' he said.
I thought about the brightly-coloured shield, sited near the church in the
centre of the village: 'Frauenfeld O/S Grusst Alle Gaste' (Frauenfeld - the
German for Dzienkowice - Upper Silesia, welcomes all visitors).
'Why did the German National Offensive (a neo-Nazi group from Germany) come
here and try to organise a cell?'
'None of your business,' said the man, storming out of the shop into the
dimly-lit street.
The lady with the bread began to speak. 'Ignore him. He's a bit tense.
Dzienkowice is like a ghetto. There are only 1,600 of us ethnic Germans in
the village. We are confused. Everything has changed since the Wall came
down. The Poles never allowed us to read, learn, or speak German since 1945.
Now we are free again to be German, in Poland. The Poles are upset because
they think we want to be part of Germany again. Everybody is afraid of
history'.
She explained that she saw nothing wrong with the locals of Dzienkowice
putting up war memorials for those German soldiers who had died during the
First and Second World Wars.
'The Poles are getting upset about it. Our sons died too.' She walked out
into the dark evening. 'Be careful driving to Opole. There's a thaw. But
there's black ice.'
Janusz didn't care about the weather, the Poles, history, or the Germans.
'Thieves. That's the problem now,' he complained.
Janusz is the night watchman for the guests' cars at the main hotel in
Opole, one of the main cities in Upper Silesia, which was part of Germany
before 1945.
Each evening, he sets up guard from a tiny caravan which is parked on front
of the hotel.
He unlocked a heavy, U-shaped metal security device, parked my car between
the pavement and the contraption, and locked it again. '10,000 zlotys (about
ten cents) please'.
A Polish businessman, clearly acquainted with the east European attraction
to expensive cars, had taken no chances. He had brought his own yellow steel
clamp for his brand new BMW.
'All the politics is down the road and across the bridge in the Vojvod
(provincial) headquarters,' said Janusz, in a mixture of Polish and German.
The drab, former communist party building had some redeeming qualities. The
paternoster - an open lift like a dumbwaiter in continuous motion - was
still functioning, even if it creaked.
Stanislaw Skakuj, a former member of the Solidarity independent trade union,
now head of the Vojvod's Department for Problems of Citizenship, said:
'Officially, there are no problems with the ethnic Germans. They just have
to stick to the law. They did not ask if they could put up memorials to the
second world war. It's a very sensitive issue'.
'Why did you decide to expel Gunther Boschutz, the neo-Nazi, last week, and
not a year ago, when he first came to Dzienkowice?'
'It was Warsaw which made the decision, not us'.
'Are you afraid about the growing German influence in Poland?'
'Officially, no'.
'What will happen now? Do you think the ethnic Germans will seek, or should
have more autonomy, especially if some of the 180,000 ethnic Germans in
Opole represent a majority in some of the villages."
'Autonomy? Do you know what that word means? It means separatism. Then where
would we be? Look at Yugoslavia. Look at Czechoslovakia. Look at Russia.
Countries all around us are breaking up.'
Henyrk Kroll, the 43-year-old head of the ethnic Germans in Opole, was
standing outside Skakuj's office, engulfed in cigarette smoke.
'The problem, if one exists, is both simple and complex. It is about Poles
coming to terms with the ethnic Germans rediscovering their culture. After
the war, all our rights were taken away,' he explained, chain-smoking his
way through the history of identity.
'Our language and culture practically disappeared,' he explained in
excellent German. 'We are Germans, but Polish citizens. We don't want to
emigrate to Germany. Our home is here, in Upper Silesia. It would be good if
those Germans who emigrated after 1945 came back. We need them to invest. We
need new schools. More teachers. For our identity.'
***
'When I was much younger, my parents never questioned our identity. We never
spoke about the past. We never observed the Sabbath'.
Tamas Lozsy stood outside the Sasz Chevra Orthodox Synagogue on Wesselenyi
street in Budapest. It was a damp and cold Saturday morning. Aged 22, he is
a teacher in a Jewish school. 'The sense of being different started when I
was 14. I wanted to know: What does it mean to be a Jew in Hungary today'.
'Do your parents feel assimilated?"
'If I say they are assimilated to the extent that they think and act like
Hungarians, then they are assimilated. But they are not assimilated from
this point of view; they are afraid.'
'Why are they afraid? Do they worry about the far-right who are grouped
around Istvan Csurka (who recently wrote that Hungary was being taken over
by foreign Jewish financiers)?"
'In the 1920s and 1930s, when the name of Hitler was mentioned in elegant
homes, everyone laughed madly. They said he was a stupid guy. A house
painter. And you know what happened? I hope that history will not repeat
itself. I hope that it will not happen with Csurka.'
Sandor Haraszti interrupted his prayers. 'My parents never spoke about the
past. They wanted to assimilate because of the war. In any case, the system
did not allow us to be Jewish, and not be afraid,' he said.
'I am 17 years old. When I was much younger, I wanted to discover what I
was. I began to read the Talmud. Today, I am insulted on the streets. I
ignore it. I have not yet been attacked, yet. Excuse me. I must go back
inside'.
Young and old Ashkenazi Jews in traditional orthodox dress prayed with the
cantor. Outside, a solitary police car kept watch.
***
They remained silent from Wittenberg Platzto Stadtmitte. They emerged from
the underground into the bitter Berlin air, carrying all they owned in a few
plastic bags.
'We arrived two days ago. From Bosnia,' said Jelena, the mother of four
small children. 'Our country no longer exists.'
***
The guards at the White House, home of Russia's parliament, didn't bother to
check if I had an appointment, even though I had no pass. The name of
Vladimir Isakov carried enough weight to admit me.
As one of the leaders of the National Salvation Front, a loose but
influential parliamentary caucus which groups former communists,
nationalists, and 'national patriots', Isakov vows to defend what he
believes Boris Yeltsin has destroyed.
'Ideals? We have none left. Communism was an ideal to which the people
related. When it evaporated, society disintegrated. We are relying too much
on foreign influences. All your advisers want to shape our government and
legislature. There are no results. No order. No discipline. No authority.'
'Do you want Russia to be integrated with Europe?"
'Western values cannot be transplanted to Russia. Foreign intelligence
services are destroying our industrial base. I want Russia to defend its
interests'.
'What are those interests?'
'Many things. The defence of our Russian minorities living outside Russia.
Especially in the Baltic States. Yeltsin is not defending them. The West is
promoting ethnically-based national states, and new borders, right here, in
the former Soviet Union. We cannot create one hundred nation states in
Russia. Look at what has happened in Yugoslavia. In Czechoslovakia. All this
disintegration is madness. We must protect the Russian soul.'
'How'?
'By relying on our own traditions.'
***
It had started to snow. The onion-shaped dome of St Basil's was barely
visible. The icy, white snow flakes tumbled silently down on Red Square. An
old lady trudged across the slippery cobblestones.
'Where are you going?"
'I want to go home."
'Where is your home?"
'Now, it is with my son, and his family in Moscow.'
'Where was your home?"
'Near Baku. In Azerbaijan. But the fighting never stops. I can't go home. I
have no home.'
