FT  03 OCT 92 / Books: The lightness of being
MY GOLDEN TRADES by Ivan Klima Granta Pounds 13.99, 284 pages
SPRING STREET SUMMER by Christopher Hudson Viking Pounds 16.99, 260 pages
GREAT MEADOW by Dirk Bogarde Viking Pounds 15.99, 207 pages
HILAIRE Belloc once quipped: 'Just as there is nothing between the admirable
omelette and the intolerable, so with autobiographies.' These three books
prove him right.
Each is a memoir of a few years in a life, each evokes a specific place and
its cultural landscape precisely when that landscape was being swept away
for ever, and each successfully re-creates a vanished world: the last
communist days in Prague; the hippie hangover in 1970s California; and
childhood in pre-war Sussex. But what tells the men from the boys is not the
recall of tangible reality but the authentic portrayal of the self. How does
the writer tick, respond to his times, find meaning? When addressed with
curiosity, detachment and wit, the reader is compelled to share in the quest
and a life story can be the stuff of art.
My Golden Trades tells of the unlikely jobs Ivan Klima did when prevented
from writing. The proverb 'a trade is a handful of gold' suggests a worker
will never be poor; as surveyor and archaeologist, Klima ironically gained
access to the secret life of 1980s Czechoslovakia, from Semtex factories to
toxic forests, that enriches his writing. The result is stories which move
seamlessly from the immediate to the profound, imagination packed into every
paragraph: devastating truths about the regime, thoughts on love, history
and Kafka, slip out as simply as an account of buying a schnitzel.
In his novel Love and Garbage, writer turns Prague roadsweeper; here too,
double persona yields a mix of mundane and sublime, trivial and doomed. In
'The Engine Driver's Story', Klima drives a friend, beaten up by police to
hospital, then is himself followed. Fear eats through every cobbled alley,
yet the story turns absurd; he must find his driver's licence, which perhaps
is valid, from people who may help or menace, in one of millions of
bureaucratic files across Prague. As in Kafka, terror lies in
meaninglessness; individual confusion, humiliation versus state power,
control.
Part autobiography, part fiction, part reflection, all the strands of the
stories are enmeshed in subtle parallels. Klima lived in Prague's jewish
ghetto under Nazi occupation and repudiates all regimes which strip away
humanity: 'My experience of life so far led me to two simple, if
contradictory, conclusions. The first one was: everything evil a person can
imagine can in fact happen. The second derives from the first: nothing that
will happen to me in life can be worse than what has already happened to
me.'
Klima echoes the lightness of being of his compatriot Milan Kundera; also
the unquenchable curiosity of another victim of oppression, Primo Levi.
Here, the joy in everyday lives, the laughter in the dark which marks his
novels, are enhanced by a personal sense of the writer as he struggles
through the dying fall of communist Europe.
By contrast Hudson and Bogarde write elegies for a lost paradise. Hudson's
problem is that he is so obtrusively the centre of his own Eden. In 1976 a
young man - 'let's call him C' - on a fellowship to research the history of
paradise in western culture, visits the University of California at Santa
Cruz as the nearest approximation to pre-lapsarian bliss in 1970s America.
Now our author H retraces C's steps to find the 'missing person' who spent a
season high on drugs, sex and California sunshine in the communal house of
Spring Street Summer. Cliche by cliche Arcadia returns: naked girls drape
themselves in a snake while digging vegetables; C and girl friend Laura
'made love on floors, on rugs, on the grass - pretty much everywhere except
in bed.'
What this book most recalls is not free love and orange juice but a heavy
session with a friend: it has a ghoulish compulsion until, half a bottle of
whisky later, you wonder how much more kiss and tell you can take. C was
'the youngest commissioning publisher in London: now he was the youngest
literary editor, and for a weekly journal internationally famous.' Beautiful
girls nibble his ear while he listens to George Steiner lecture, but he is
of course just complexed enough to worry about the conquests he notches up.
Presumably to explain this, his research - Christian guilt via Augustine and
Aquinas - is dribbled through his story. It is as shallow and predictable as
the third strand of recollection: the re-acquaintance with the Spring Street
drop-outs who have grown up into 1980s lawyers and technologists.
Back before the Fall, Dirk Bogarde spent his childhood from 1927 to 1934 in
a cottage in Sussex which is appealingly recalled in Great Meadow. There are
summer rambles, harvest mice, Christmas puddings and arguments with nanny,
while father, a Times journalist, rings London on Christmas Day from a pay
phone in the village and meets Jewish refugees off the boat at Newhaven.
Bogarde sometimes sounds like Winnie the Pooh and seems unsure whether he is
writing for adults or children. But he has a fine ear for period dialogue
and sensitively sets the rumble of realpolitik against a quintessential
evocation of the English pastoral dream.
