FT  06 JUN 92 / Hawks &amp; Handsaws: Lost in gloom again
I HAD NO time to go to the Derby this week, for I was too busy processing
the great chunks of news bombarding us from all directions, like rogue
asteroids. Ross Perot. The Earth summit in Rio. Those giggling Danes, who
probably shouldn't be in the European Community anyway but whose frivolous
vote against closer European unity is being allowed to impede the sacred
cause of Euro-federalism. In my view the Danes should be booted out, and
only readmitted on payment of a fine equivalent to Dollars 100,000-per-Dane.
With all this big stuff going on, you needed to be a connoisseur of inside
news-pages to spot Tuesday's reports from Columbus, Ohio, of a development
that many of us have been waiting 30 or 40 years for - a long-life light
bulb.
It is called the E-lamp, and has been invented by Intersource Technologies,
a California company, which likens the significance of the E-lamp to that of
the CD or fax machine or cellular telephone.
According to The Times: 'The new bulb . . . uses high-frequency radio
signals instead of a filament to produce light more efficiently and more
cheaply; but what makes it special is its lifetime. Instead of the
nine-month life expectancy of an ordinary household bulb, the E-lamp is said
to last about 14 years if used an average of four hours a day.'
At first, I was cheered by news of the E-lamp, for light bulbs devour a
significant fraction of my salary. I own a Notting Hill duplex. The duplex
has six rooms. Those six rooms are lit by 46 light bulbs of one sort or
another. A few last a year or so; most about 12 minutes. So round to the
shop I run, as mad as a twirling dervish, to lay-in another stock of
unreliable light-bulbs. They are the bane of my life.
'The bulb will initially cost several pounds,' said the news-story, 'but it
uses only a quarter of the electricity of a traditional bulb and prices are
expected to come down soon after it reaches the market early next year.'
If at first I was euphoric, I was soon lost in gloom again, for I have spent
most of a lifetime waiting for a 14-year light bulb and have long been
convinced that the manufacturers' failure to produce one was the result of
industrial conspiracy and incompetence. In short, I won't believe in the
reality of 14-year light bulbs until all 46 light fittings in my flat are
ablaze with them.
Increasingly, I am losing my faith in the future. I used to read a lot of
futurology. The future seemed a nice place to be. I spent most of my time
there. But the older I get, the more I realise that the future only arrives
in absurd fits and starts. We get pieces of it here, bits of it there. And
they still haven't cured the common cold.
Much of the trouble has to do with technological extrapolation. As
scientists acknowledge, short-range forecasts tend to be over-optimistic.
One of the results of this is that simple folk like me can easily be fooled
into believing that the future will be uniformly and unquestionably better
than the present; that the pace of scientific and economic advance will be
constant and dramatic; that instead of taking one step forward and
two-and-a-half steps back, mankind is advancing on all possible fronts. But
it's not.
Take transportation. In his book about the future, July 20 2019: Life In The
21st Century, Arthur C Clarke, the famous science fiction writer, paints a
fluorescently optimistic and one-sided picture of transportation in 2019.
Maglevs (magnetically levitated railroads). Supersonic aircraft carrying 600
passengers. Hypersonic aircraft. Journeys to the stars.
He should try visiting London. We are now closer to 2019 than to 1964, but
does anyone think we're making progress? What we seem to be getting is
niftier hardware but worse and slower transport.
If you have been reading a fraction of the material coming out of Rio, you
will have realised that we have lost control of the planet. Bio-diversity
and pollution control? Don't make me laugh. We have turned the planet into a
sewer, just as the SF writers predicted we would.
But do not feel downcast. Before too long we will be jetting to the stars.
We will find new worlds to populate with creatures. Life will be good. There
will be no acid rain. We will not cut down the forests. Back on Earth -
Planet Sewer - our descendants will read about these worlds, and wonder, and
weep. I hope their light bulbs last longer than mine.
