FT  03 OCT 92 / Maktoum stable cut refuels racing debate
REPORTS that the Maktoum family is considering reducing the number of horses
it owns in the UK does not herald the imminent collapse of horseracing in
Britain, according to industry experts.
But it has refuelled the continuing debate about the future of the UK's
sixth-largest industry as it grapples with recession and the conflicting
interests of some of the parties involved.
Mana Al Maktoum, the spokesman for the oil-rich Dubai family that owns 12
per cent of all bloodstock in training in the UK, said: 'As a policy, I
would say there will be a reduction of our horses in Britain . . . How much
of a reduction depends on the situation here.'
The Maktoum family is not alone in lobbying for increased prize money and
more generous tax incentives to help boost its return on investment in an
industry that has suffered in the economic downturn.
Mr David Pipe of the Jockey Club agreed that prize money in the UK was
'unacceptably low' and hinted that the bookmakers still remained partly to
blame for not putting enough money back into the sport.
He said the industry remained a long way from disaster. 'Attendances are not
bad and we are doing better than one would expect from a leisure industry in
the present circumstances.'
Ladbroke Racing, the UK's largest bookmaker, said that its profit margins on
racing were much smaller than its critics suggested and urged an end to
'squabbling' within the industry.
The bookmakers want greater consultation between all parties concerned and
'continued progress in the timing and quality of racing fixtures' to
increase revenue.
The Horseracing Advisory Council, which groups breeders and owners but not
bookmakers, says the government is failing in its commitment to provide a
VAT 'level playing field' for the UK breeding industry.
The industry stands to gain from a quarter of a percentage point cut in
betting duty announced in the last budget, but it is pressing the government
for further cuts in the duty and a reduced rate of VAT on bloodstock.
Buyers in Britain pay 17.5 per cent VAT, compared with 5.5 per cent in
France and 2.7 per cent in the Irish Republic.
Government officials have indicated that while such reductions are legally
available they are 'politically unacceptable'.
Mr Philip Potts, secretary of Tattersalls, the oldest and largest UK
bloodstock agency, warned yesterday that official reluctance to provide
further tax assistance may both hurt the industry and backfire on the
government.
'If the industry is reduced, then tax revenues will decline,' he said.
