FT  02 JUN 92 / Chaos obscures casualties of Serbian sanctions:
Energy-dependent industry and tobacco exports are likely to be quickly
affected
TRACTORS for Algeria and construction contracts in Russia will be casualties
of UN trade sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro which came into force
yesterday.
Inside Serbia, mile-long lines of cars formed in front of petrol stations as
motorists reacted to fears of early fuel shortages. But there was no
panic-buying in Belgrade's still well-stocked supermarkets and grocery
stores. Most people appeared confident that the sanctions would not make
much difference to food supplies.
Initial assessments of the impact of the ban, which covers all trade, an oil
embargo and the cutting of air links, have been confused:
Trade with Serbia and Montenegro has been badly disrupted since August last
year, when violence first flared between Serbia and Croatia.
Serbia's second most important market (after Germany) was the former Soviet
Union, where trade has in any case been disrupted by a shortage of foreign
exchange and upheavals in central Europe.
Serbia has had many months to anticipate the ban, perhaps stockpiling
critical imports like oil and gas. It is unclear how easily countries might
circumvent the ban - say by exporting to Macedonia, and freighting goods
overland into Serbia from there.
Trade statistics are a mess, since no Yugoslavia-wide data have been
compiled since August. Also purchases between the six republics have been
transformed from internal to foreign trade. According to the Economist
Intelligence Unit, about 40 per cent of Serbia's GNP is accounted for by
trade with Croatia and Slovenia. It is arguable that the decimation of this
trade is as damaging to Serbia as foreign sanctions.
An early casualty inside Serbia will be Yugocars and other vehicles made at
the Crvena Zastava enterprise in Belgrade.
Various components and upholstery, traditionally supplied from Slovenia and
Croatia, have already been disrupted by military conflict. Efforts to find
new sources inside Serbia have met with only partial success.
Important export markets, like Greece where Yugocars enjoyed preferential
tariff access, will now be lost. A Dollars 50m (Pounds 27.7m) contract to
sell tractors to Algeria, where Crvena Zastava first entered the market a
decade ago, will also be frozen.
Yugoslavia's textiles and clothing industry has already been disrupted. In
1990, it accounted for almost Dollars 1bn of Yugoslavia's exports. In
Germany, an important market for Serbian textile products, the effect of
sanctions would be 'certainly painful' for some sectors and some individual
companies, the Gesamttextil industry group said.
Among its main farm exports, tobacco will be badly hit. One of Serbia's main
tobacco enterprises, Duvanska Industrija, was planning to build a Dollars
110m facility to be supplied by Komas of Italy - a deal which must be in
abeyance.
All energy-dependent industry is likely to be quickly affected - including
chemicals and iron and steel. Mr Mirolem Dzindo, manager of a fertiliser
factory, said: 'We used to get get gas from Russia. Our whole production
will stop. The state will not have enough artificial fertiliser. That means
that there will be no food. There will be hunger . . . '
Serbia depends on imports for about 40 per cent of its energy, and is no
longer able to import oil and gas through the Adriatic pipeline. Almost a
quarter of Serbia's oil came last year from China, with a similar amount
from Russia, while Iran supplied 16 per cent and Romania a further 13 per
cent.
China was among the most reluctant to impose sanctions on Serbia, but is
thought likely to abide by the UN directive, if only because delivery to
Serbia is so difficult. Russia's response will be pivotal. Progres, the
Belgrade-based foreign trade company, recently announced a Dollars 3.5bn
agreement under which Russia would supply energy and raw materials in
exchange for Serbian farm and consumer products, and construction work.
Mr Vyacheslav Dmitriev, deputy director of the trade department of the
Russian Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations said last night that
negotiations between Russia and Serbia on trade contracts would continue, in
spite of Russia's announced intention to apply embargoes against the
Yugoslav republic.
He regarded an embargo as temporary and had received no instructions to
break off negotiations.
However, he said there had been very few recent trade contracts with Serbia
because of lack of hard currency on both sides.
The CIS countries were Serbia's second most important trading partner,
behind Germany, and ahead of Italy and France. The impact of sanctions on
trading partners will vary more in terms of their geographic location than
in terms of the importance to them of the Serbian market in its own right.
For example, despite Germany's importance to the former Yugoslavia as a
trading partner, its annual imports of Dollars 1.1bn and exports of Dollars
1.9bn in 1990 accounted for less than one per cent of all German foreign
trade. Serbia traditionally accounts for around a quarter of total
Yugoslav-German trade.
The direct effects of the war and measures taken by government and
individual companies had anyway sharply reduced German trade with Yugoslavia
even before UN sanctions were imposed.
Italy accounted for 14 per cent of the former Yugoslavia's total foreign
trade. However, almost 60 per cent of this was accounted for by the two
republics of Croatia and Slovenia with which Italy has long held close ties.
Indeed, the independence of these two republics has accelerated Italian
trade, mainly made up of food products and light industrial goods.
By contrast, Hungary will be more affected than most by sanctions.
Hungarians are particularly worried that Serbia will respond to Hungarian
sanctions by blocking river traffic down the Danube, Hungary's only waterway
route to the open sea.
Hungary is the mainland transit route for Serbian trade since conflict made
transporting goods through Yugoslavia difficult. Truck and rail traffic
continues as normal at present, pending a government decision later this
week.
Greece and Turkey are similarly compromised, since Serbia sits across their
main land bridge to the EC market. Goods travelling to Europe could easily
be 'diverted' in Serbia, local observers claim.
Contributions from FT correspondents in Europe.
