FT  13 FEB 92 / Privatisation free-for-all worries Czechoslovaks
CZECHOSLOVAK bankers are becoming increasingly worried that lack of
regulation is threatening the country's mass privatisation programme,
launched last month.
Last autumn, government officials reckoned only 4m citizens would be
interested in the privatisation scheme - which involves distributing
state-owned enterprises to the public through equity vouchers. However, the
number of participants soared to nearly 8m after private investment funds
offered tenfold cash guarantees in a year's time to those prepared to assign
their vouchers to them.
These investment funds, unregulated by any investment law, have prompted
worries that failure to live up to such promises will endanger the workings
of the future private economy. The pressure to sell assets to meet
guaranteed returns as well as operational costs could lead to a liquidity
crisis and a capital market collapse, say bankers.
Reacting to such criticism, the federal government is drafting a law which
would force investment funds to diversify their portfolios. But officials
are not tackling the problem of guarantees.
The need for regulation is all the more urgent because of the political
wrangles dominating the federal parliament. For months, Czech and Slovak
deputies have been debating the future of the political structure which
binds them in one country. Slovak deputies, in particular, have regularly
opposed the passage of federal laws. Many politicians, also, do not want to
push through legislation before next June's general election.
At the moment, investment funds are regulated only by a few paragraphs on
joint-stock companies in the business code. Czechoslovakia also does not yet
have an investment companies law or a securities trading law. The stock
exchange law is in the making and should allow for the creation of a trading
floor this autumn when the first tranche of vouchers are expected to become
shares.
Under the privatisation programme, an estimated Kcs200bn (Pounds 4bn)-worth
of equity from state-owned enterprises will be distributed next month to the
public in the form of vouchers.
