FT  17 AUG 92 / Arts: An enchanted voyage - Glasgow International Early
Music Festival
THE highlight of this year's Glasgow International Early Music Festival was
La comica del cielo, ovvero La Baltasara a 1668 Roman 'music-drama' given
two performances in the vast and wonderful spaces of the Tramway Theatre.
The music was by a noted Roman church musician, Antonio Maria Abbatini, the
text by a play-writing cardinal, Giulio Rospigliosi, at the time near the
end of his short period of office as Pope Clement IX.
In case any of this suggests a dusty research-exercise, I must immediately
insist that this revival of La Baltasara - claimed as the first-ever -
afforded an experience of rarest delight, a enchanted voyage across
historical time and space to what for most people in the Glasgow audience
will have proved a new world of opera. Seventeenth century Roman opera, not
possessing a musical figure of Monteverdi dominance or Cavalli stature, is a
territory relatively little excavated; these festive Glasgow re-discoveries
 -two years ago it was Marazzoli's 1656 Vita humana, still talked of with
excitement - are changing all that, to illuminating effect.
The titular heroine stepped into theatrical and then operatic re-creation
from real life: she was Francesca Baltasara de los Reyes, a leading Valencia
actress, who experienced religious revelation in mid-performance and took up
the life of a hermit. A Spanish play on the subject preceded Rospigliosi's
treatment; the character of Spanish theatre, of Lope de Vega and Calderon
(both of whom the cardinal passionately admired), feeds one source of
influence into the libretto.
Act 1 is a backstage comedy-drama. Acts 2 and 3, set in a desert, mingles
events supernatural (Baltasara's new-found faith tested by the devil) and
picaresque, of main and subordinate characters serious and comic. The
morally uplifting ending - Baltasara's triumphant arrival in Paradise to the
strains of a celestial chorus and a dance of the seven virtues - is entirely
in keeping with the distinct tenor of Roman opera.
Ears habituated to the mould-breaking genius of Monteverdi and the indelible
melodic and rhythmic appeal of Cavalli may at first have found Abbatini's
succession of recitative and short numbers small-scale, and lacking in
individuality.
As Baltasara's own stature grows, however, so does the force of the drama;
in this reading, with two small groups of 'period' instruments, either side
of a thrust stage, the dignity of the later scenes infused the whole theatre
with a glow of lyrical radiance.
Kate Brown (producer) and Warwick Edwards (musical director and editor), the
team responsible for La vita humana at the Tramway in 1990, have mastered
the art of spreading the focus of a music-drama across a whole auditorium
(and, in the intervals, the foyers) without ever diluting it. The charm and
fluency of the production, the brisk wit and keen intelligence of its
stagecraft, the deft manipulation of cohorts of dancers and singers ' all
this kept the show tautly unfolding, and kept me captivated. A pity no
English translation was available for even closer contact with the audience
(but the standard of Italian enunciation was higher than usual, and a
libretto was on sale).
In the title role Janis Kelly showed herself once again - as she had in the
Opera Factory poppea earlier this year - an artist of the highest eloquence,
verbal and vocal conviction, distinction of bearing. She was the opera's
vital centre; around her such admirably stylish singing-actors as Tinuke
Olafimihan (a fast-developing young soprano of lustrous tone and presence),
Alan Watt, Eleanor Bennett, Stuart Patterson and Francesc Garrigosa were
aptly and impressively displayed.
