FT  28 MAY 92 / International Capital Markets: S&amp;P rating aids Turkey's plan
to restructure debt
TURKEY reached an important milestone in its efforts to restructure its
external debt of about Dollars 49bn when it secured a triple BBB credit
rating from Standard and Poor's.
The rating is a chief component in a debt strategy aimed at reducing
Turkey's dependence on bank loans. It will smooth the process of tapping
international bond markets.
In the long run, the move should curb the volatility in debt servicing, and
improve both the maturity and term structure of its national debt.
Turkey launched a Dollars 150m Eurobond in March. That was the country's
first public bond issue since August 1990. More recently, the Turkish
Treasury issued its first Ecu-denominated Eurobond, a three-year paper worth
Dollars 150m. The rating from S&amp;P now paves the way for the Treasury to
float Dollars 200m of Yankee bonds in US markets this summer. The Treasury
has also mandated a Y30bn Samurai bond issue in Tokyo.
Turkey's outstanding foreign debt, public and private, stood at Dollars
49.2bn at the end of 1991. The public sector is still the largest debtor,
although 1990 saw a sharp rise in private-sector borrowing offshore.
Medium and long-term debt accounts for Dollars 40.1bn. The remaining Dollars
9.1bn represents short-term commercial credits, mostly by the private
sector. About 40 per cent of Turkish borrowing is at variable rates, the
rest at fixed rates.
Official reserves at the end of April stood at Dollars 3.3bn, excluding
gold. That represents less than two months of imports, and compares with
Dollars 4.9bn at the end of 1991, which was already the lowest reserve
figure for three years. However, total international reserves, which include
the commercial banks, appear to have stabilised at about Dollars 11bn.
Mrs Tansu Ciller, economics minister, says that Turkey will need about
Dollars 1bn in total new credit this year.
For the moment, Turkey's foreign exchange position is considered stable.
Tourism revenues, down last year as a result of the Gulf War, are expected
to rebound in 1992 to about Dollars 4bn. Workers remittances, worth about
Dollars 2bn during the year, will pick up in the next few months as Turkish
workers in Germany return for the seasonal Bayram holiday in June.
Difficulties will arise only if Turkey fails to tackle fiscal deterioration.
As the lira is now fully convertible, this could result in a renewed current
account deficit and capital outflows, which would impair Turkey's capacity
to rebuild reserves.
In the first four months of 1992, Turkey has seen a 5 to 6 per cent real
depreciation of the lira against the dollar.
The Treasury's immediate headache is an awkward bunching of repayments.
According to balance of payments figures, Turkey will have to find Dollars
6.89bn in 1992 to service medium and long-term debt, including principal and
interest repayments.
Total debt repayments, including short-term borrowings, are estimated at
about Dollars 7.7bn or 30 per cent of Turkey's exports of goods and
services. The ratio is not projected to decline significantly until 1996.
