FT  03 JUL 92 / Court overturns ruling on ex-MEP
MR LESLIE HUCKFIELD, the former MEP for Merseyside East accused of fiddling
his parliamentary expenses, can be tried in the English courts, the High
Court ruled yesterday.
The court reversed a ruling by Mr Justice Morland at Manchester Crown Court
last September quashing the charges against Mr Huckfield and two
co-defendants on the ground that the case would infringe the sovereignty of
the European parliament.
Lord Justice Leggatt said member states were entitled to prosecute an MEP
for dishonestly obtaining expenses from the Strasbourg parliament. The issue
involved was dishonesty which was capable of being tried in a national
court.
The court refused to refer the matter to the European Court of Justice in
Luxembourg for a definitive ruling. Mr Huckfield said he would seek leave to
appeal to the House of Lords.
The High Court's decision will bring it into conflict with the president of
the European parliament, Mr Egon Klepsch.
Mr Klepsch claims that questions relating to MEPs' expenses are a matter for
the 'internal functioning' of the parliament and that any review by the
criminal courts of a member country conducted without the parliament's
consent would 'constitute an interference'.
But the High Court rejected this argument. Lord Justice Leggatt said he had
great difficulty understanding how prosecution by a national authority could
be said to be unwarranted or improper when there was no provision in
community law which exempted an MEP from criminal liability and there was no
way in which the parliament itself could take criminal proceedings against
him.
Mr Huckfield, a former Labour junior industry minister who served as MEP
from 1984 until he was deselected in 1989, was accused on one count of
obtaining by deception a cheque for Pounds 1,522 relating to a pensioners'
conference on Merseyside in 1987 and with obtaining Pounds 1,007 allegedly
relating to poster and advertising costs, by deception in 1986.
The director of public prosecutions' office said it would now consider
whether to launch a new prosecution.
