FT  12 NOV 92 / The Matrix Churchill Scandal: Henderson given immunity in US
 -Machine tool company pinpointed as part of Iraqi 'procurement network'
MR PAUL HENDERSON, the businessman at the centre of the uproar over the
government's involvement in the sale of defence-related equipment to Iraq,
was secretly granted immunity from prosecution in the US by the Bush
administration.
Immunity was granted in January 1991, in spite of the fact that the White
House had, 14 months earlier, received a detailed Central Intelligence
Agency report identifying Mr Henderson's machine tools company, Matrix
Churchill, as part of an extensive Iraqi arms procurement network.
The CIA report, a copy of which has been obtained by the Financial Times,
was sent on November 6 1989 to the White House and the State Department.
The report pinpointed Matrix Churchill as part of Iraq's 'complex
procurement networks of holding companies in western Europe to acquire
technology for its chemical, biological, nuclear and ballistic missile
development programmes'.
The CIA report outlined how Iraq had used the Atlanta branch of Italy's
Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL) to finance the purchase of arms.
Entitled 'Iraq-Italy: Repercussions of the BNL-Atlanta Scandal', the report
said Matrix Churchill was acquired in 1987 by a Baghdad-based network that
controlled TMG Engineering of London, a company that had among its
affiliates a partner of Space Research Corporation, the Brussels-based
company run by the late Dr Gerald Bull, who worked on Iraq's 'supergun'
project.
Matrix Churchill was identified by the CIA as 'the United Kingdom's leading
producer of computer-controlled machine tools that can be used in the
production of sophisticated armaments'.
The immunity granted to Mr Henderson concerned 'violations, if any, arising
from association with the Iraqi procurement network' run through Matrix
Churchill's US and British operations as well as TMG and other companies.
According to a letter to Mr Henderson's Atlanta-based lawyer, the former
Matrix Churchill chief obtained immunity from prosecution on January 22
1991.
In exchange for his being debriefed by US prosecutors and other
investigators Mr Henderson would also be immune from prosecution in
connection with the scheme by which Matrix Churchill obtained BNL-Atlanta
financing for the network.
Mr Kenneth Millwood, the Atlanta lawyer who represented Mr Henderson, said
yesterday he negotiated the immunity deal with Ms Gale McKenzie, the chief
US prosecutor on the BNL case.
The granting of immunity to Mr Henderson has until now effectively blocked
any Atlanta trial involving Matrix Churchill.
US Customs officials are still investigating Matrix-Churchill in Ohio.
Yesterday in Atlanta, Judge Marvin Shoob - the federal judge who presided
over BNL Atlanta hearings and claimed last month that senior officials of
the Bush administration helped to shape the case - yesterday said he was not
aware until last week of the immunity agreements.
Judge Shoob demanded repeatedly in the BNL hearings to know why why no one
from Matrix-Churchill was prosecuted.
In Washington, the Department of Justice could not be reached for comment
yesterday because it was closed in observance of the federal Veterans Day
holiday.
