FT  18 AUG 92 / Hungary's spies turn to free enterprise
HUNGARY'S SECRET service, casting around for a role after the collapse of
communism, believes it has found a growth industry in investigating western
businesses in the country.
The secret police, which only three years ago spied on opponents of the
communist regime, will gain powers to confirm the credentials of foreign
capitalists entering partnerships with Hungarian businesses, the government
says.
'The National Security Office would like to prevent swindlers entering
Hungarian commercial life disguised as businessmen,' said Mr Tibor Fuzessy,
minister for the security services, explaining the thinking behind
forthcoming national security legislation.
The government's proposals follow a number of privatisation scandals as
inexperienced Hungarian managers and officials, desperate for money to save
faltering companies, prove easy targets for western conmen and speculators.
In one case, executives at a state-owned canning factory gave money, office
space and credence to a western investor who turned out to be a fraudster
with a criminal record.
The Hungarians are not always the victims, however. At the lobby of the
Forum, Budapest's premier business hotel, carpetbagging western property
developers met their match.
'There were people sitting there selling things they did not own to people
who could not afford to buy them,' according to Mr Neil Gillon, who works
with Mr Mel Simon, the US property developer.
The case for the security services checking out investors' credentials is
that western banks charge too much to do so. The minister denied, however,
that the secret service was undercutting the banks to gain business.
Nevertheless, economic intelligence gathering is a logical activity for
Hungary's reformed security service.
The National Security Office was formed from the wreckage of III/II, the
department of the old communist secret police which dealt with economic
counter-espionage.
But in one of those delicious post-communist ironies, many former secret
policemen are on the staff of new private security companies, which have
grown along with the western joint ventures they protect.
