FT  03 JAN 92 / Japan 1992 Forecast: The bubble has burst - Japan is facing
a difficult readjustment
The Japanese economy, a powerhouse of growth in the industrialised world in
the 1980s, is slowing down fast, curbed by recessionary forces similar to
those which have hit much of the globe.
After the longest period of unbroken expansion since the Second World War,
Japan faces a difficult period of readjustment. High interest rates have
ended a boom fuelled by the financial 'bubble' of the late 1980s in which
the prices of investment assets soared to unsustainable levels. Consumers
are cutting purchases of luxury goods. Companies, which made use of cheap
money in the 1980s to invest in plant and equipment, are being forced to
reduce their capital expenditure growth sharply. Meanwhile, export demand is
weak in north America, Japan's largest market.
Real economic growth is likely to fall from 3.5 per cent in the year to
March, to about 3 per cent in the following financial year.
Even though interest rates are expected to fall further as the economy
slows, their current high level will be a drag on the economy. So will the
impact of a fall in property prices, which has been particularly severe in
Tokyo and in Osaka. Land prices are expected to fall further this year (even
so, they are some 30 per cent above 1985 levels, when the price explosion
began). The decline will continue for about a year.
The amount of property for sale will continue to increase because companies
which invested heavily in land, as well as banks and finance companies that
lent them money, will try to unload property to stave off financial crises.
As land prices fall, so investment in property will remain sluggish.
Potential buyers are unlikely to move until they feel prices have bottomed
and interest rates have come down. Housing starts have already fallen
heavily, from 1.8m in 1990 to about 1.3m last year.
Meanwhile, the sharp decline in the stock market, which has affected both
equity prices and trading volumes in the past two years, continues to act as
a restraint on companies wanting to invest in plant and equipment. As soon
as the market shows any sign of recovering, industrial companies and banks
will probably try to raise equity funds by issuing stock - thereby pushing
the market down once more. Banks need equity funds in order to meet
international standards on capital adequacy laid down by the Bank for
International Settlements. Under BIS rules, Japanese banks must have, by
March 1993, capital equivalent to 8 per cent of their assets.
Under these circumstances, it is natural that companies are cutting capital
investment. Investment growth will fall from about 4 per cent in 1991 to
zero next year.
This is a sharp contrast to the three years to 1990 when capital investment
expanded at a rate of about 15 per cent a year. Companies invested in
labour-saving equipment to cope with shortages of workers, in information
technology and in the construction of new factories and offices.
By issuing convertible bonds, bonds with warrants and equity finance,
corporations could raise funds at an effective rate of as low as 0.3 per
cent. Medium-sized and small companies could also borrow at low rates of
interest.
Now the actual cost of capital for big groups has risen to more than 7 per
cent. Also, companies feel less pressure to invest because capacity has
reached satisfactory levels in almost every industry and depreciation costs
are rising because a growing proportion of the plant is new.
Nevertheless, the remarkable development of microelectronics technology is
driving considerable changes in industry and society. Labour shortages will
become more severe. The centralisation of economic power in Tokyo and Osaka
and other big cities has been dramatic and has stimulated demand for
investment. So the underlying reasons for investment will remain strong.
Also, even though spending on luxuries has fallen, overall consumer
expenditure in Japan is still strong, fuelled by considerable increases in
wages. Certainly, the mood has changed since the bubble burst - women's
fashions are more conservative and there are more serious shows on
television. But consumers still have increasing amounts of money in their
hands. Even though the economy is slowing, employers are having to pay
higher wages because of the shortage of workers.
Nevertheless specific sectors are suffering quite severe downturns in
demand. Housing is one example. So is the car industry, where demand for new
vehicles has fallen from 5.1m in 1990 to 4.8m in 1991 due to the increase in
interest rates and changes in parking rules. Would-be car owners in Japan
have to prove that they have a registered parking space before they are
allowed to buy.
The capital goods industries, including steel, chemicals and electricals,
are feeling the impact of the decline in investment growth. Even the
high-growth electronics industry is suffering because financial companies -
big investors in computer systems - have cut orders. The effect on the
cyclical semiconductor industry is particularly severe.
In response to the slowdown in growth, the Bank of Japan has steadily eased
interest rates. This week Mr Yasushi Mieno, the governor of the Bank of
Japan, cut the Official Discount Rate from 5 per cent to 4.5 per cent - the
second reduction in less than six weeks and the third in 1991. The purpose
was to boost business confidence. Mr Mieno said the cut had been timed to
precede the last quarter of the Japanese financial year when most companies
would be drafting their investment plans for the year starting in April.
Mr Mieno denied that the timing of the cut had anything to do with the visit
to Japan of Mr George Bush, the US president, next week. He has serious
economic grievances on his agenda, caused by Japan's persistent trade
surplus with the US. However, Mr Tsutomu Hata, the Japanese finance
minister, praised the timing of the ODR cut, saying it would meet US
expectations.
The Japanese government will this year implement some measures to boost the
economy, including increasing public investment. Such investments will begin
in the autumn, but they will have only a marginal effect on the economy as a
whole.
The author is chairman of the board of counsellors of the LTCB Institute of
Research and Consulting, and the former chief economist of the Long Term
Credit Bank.
 ------------------------------------------------------------------
JAPANESE ECONOMY
 ------------------------------------------------------------------
Percentage changes from previous year,
seasonally adjusted at annual rates,
volume (1985 prices)                   1990      1991      1992
Private consumption                     4.0       2.9       3.6
Government consumption                  1.4       2.1       1.5
Gross fixed investment                 10.9       4.0       1.8
Exports of goods &amp; services            10.9       5.3       3.0
Imports of goods &amp; services            11.9      -1.6       5.7
GNP at market prices                    5.6       4.5       2.4
Consumer prices ?                       2.4       2.7       2.0
Industrial production                   4.6       2.3       2.4
Unemployment rate ??                    2.1       2.2       2.3
 ------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: OECD
 ------------------------------------------------------------------
? Private comsumption deflator
?? Period average
 ------------------------------------------------------------------
