FT  14 OCT 92 / Personal View: Europe at many speeds
References to a two-speed Europe as a threat are misleading in at least
three respects. First, it is parochial to speak of the Community as Europe,
when the Continent also includes not only the Efta countries of Scandinavia,
Switzerland and Austria, with which the EC has negotiated an Economic Area
Agreement, but also the countries of central and eastern Europe. The
Community has signed association agreements with some of them.
Second, the idea that a diversity of arrangements within the Community would
be novel is also false. Quite apart from the Schengen agreement - still to
be implemented - on removing all border controls between eight of the 12
members, there were, even before recent events, no fewer than five monetary
relationships among the 12.
The prospect of a multi-speed Europe has been stirred by uncertainty about
the ratification of the Maastricht treaty. However, Britain's failure to
endorse the social chapter and its option on European monetary union, as
well as the implications of incomplete fulfilment of the convergence
conditions for monetary union, mean that the treaty itself envisages complex
geometry and dynamics.
Indeed, this kind of explicit conditionality might be an appropriate way of
meeting the aspirations of the countries of central and eastern Europe.
Without ratification of Maastricht, however, these aspirations will turn to
frustration, adding to current tensions and the risks of instability in
Europe as a whole. Even with ratification, the risks may remain unless the
EC takes a more enlightened longer-term view of the economic interests of
eastern and central Europe.
Finally, the language of fast and slow lanes is very misleading. While some
European countries have made rapid economic progress in the past, it is
those currently lagging which are likely to move faster on average over the
period to ultimate convergence and completion of European unity, in whatever
form it may take.
But it is right to be concerned about the form. Some form or common space is
necessary as a counter-weight against the current trends towards tribalism,
which at their most terrifying turn into the horrors of ethnic cleansing.
The challenge is how to achieve that common space while preserving cultural
diversity. How should relations between all the countries of the Continent
develop, particularly in their relations with the Community?
In fact, of course there are already three communities, not one (the EC,
European Coal and Steel Community, European Atomic Energy Authority), and
one can readily imagine the proliferation of different groupings if the 12
agree a monetary union (of about six members), free movement (the Schengen
agreement of eight) and a Social Community (of 11). In this situation, new
entrants to the European family of communities would face a choice as to
which groupings to apply to; they might find it easier or more desirable to
achieve entry to some than others.
For example, Iceland might choose to stay in the European Economic Area
rather than accept the 'communitisation' of the fisheries in its territorial
waters. Central European countries might find this limited status easier to
achieve than full membership of the pre-Maastricht arrangements, with their
implications for possible migration and the cost, to existing members, of
intra-community income equalisation. This form of step-by-step integration
is likely to prove more acceptable than an all-or-nothing decision to both
the prospective entrant and existing members.
Moreover, it may be appropriate for some eastern European countries to
maintain relatively high tariffs to protect their industries while enjoying
favoured access, under the Gatt generalised system of preferences, to the
markets of those farther down the road to transition. Nor can one exclude
the possibility of a country such as the Czech Republic (or even Estonia)
joining the monetary hard core of Europe, even before some of the EC member
states are ready to do so.
European countries have always moved at different speeds. For the past 40
years this process in the western half of the continent has been within the
framework of the shifting structures of the EC and Efta. It is crucial for
this process to continue and to expand, allowing the countries of eastern
and central Europe to move at different speeds within a common space - what
I call a Continental Common Market - at this time of profound change.
As the nature of these relationships deepens, irrespective of the healthy
assertion of the doctrine of subsidiarity (I prefer the notion of 'cultural
diversity'), the range of possible relationships is enriched. Europe a la
carte would offer the diner an embarras de richesse. Over the next 40 years
or more, the mutual nature of such decisions may reduce the real choices,
but not the richness of the resulting configuration.
The author is president of The European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development.
