FT  14 OCT 92 / Down the fast track to a pot of gold: Dublin will defend the
punt strongly within the ERM
THE Irish government has felt shocked and helpless over the past month as it
has watched sterling plunge to unprecedented levels against the punt and the
UK stumble forward in search of a new economic policy to replace the one
left in tatters when sterling abandoned the ERM.
The economic tidal wave from across the Irish Sea has forced Dublin to spend
about half its currency reserves in defending the punt. It has also obliged
it to renew borrowing overseas, has pushed up interest rates by three
percentage points and has placed an estimated 30,000 jobs at risk, in a
country with 300,000 unemployed - 21 per cent of the labour force.
When the Irish delegation arrives in Birmingham for the EC summit this
Friday, they will doubtless acknowledge and welcome assurances from Prime
Minister John Major that in due course sterling will be back inside the ERM
and that his government will keep Britain, Ireland's main trading partner,
firmly at the heart of Europe.
But they will not be making any plans on the basis of those assurances.
Instead, their voices will be among those arguing that the ERM crisis has
demonstrated the urgency of moving even faster towards monetary union and a
single EC currency. That point has been made many times by Mr Albert
Reynolds, the prime minister, since the ERM crisis began, and he is likely
to restate it in Birmingham.
Mr Reynolds, told the Dail (parliament) last week that government policy
'is, and will continue to be, the maintenance of a firm exchange rate within
the narrow band of the Exchange Rate Mechanism'.
He said: 'Beyond the single market beckons the prospect of economic and
monetary union which, through its co-ordination of economic and monetary
policies, a single central bank and ultimately a single currency, will
enable us in a market devoid of currency and interest rate fluctuations, to
gain for our people a much higher standard of living.'
That pot of gold lying at the foot of the EC rainbow has convinced the
government that the cost of defending the currency over the coming months
will be worth bearing.
Those costs have been spelt out by independent sources in the past week.
Goodbody stockbrokers in Dublin estimate that at an exchange rate of Pounds
1.05 to the punt, IPounds 250m will be lost by Irish manufacturers to UK
competitors over one year. The 3 per cent interest rate increase will
meanwhile reduce investment by IPounds 200m, and personal consumption by
IPounds 100m.
Indeed, it is the high interest rates rather than the exchange rate itself,
which are seen by most analysts as potentially more damaging. Mr Jim Lacey,
chief executive of the National Irish Bank, said last week that high
interest rates would reduce growth this year and impact adversely next year.
'Real interest rates in Ireland now stand at 14 per cent. This is a heavy
burden to bear and is the price of our link with the D-Mark.'
He and most Irish economists conclude, however, that there is no viable
alternative and that interest rates can best be brought down by defending
the punt. 'Interest rates will remain high over coming months and will only
decline once German investors decide to put their money into this country
again,' he said.
In his speech to the Dail, Mr Reynolds said: 'Our position is based on the
conviction of the markets that government finances are firmly under control.
Nothing can be done to shake that conviction. This is not the time to start
thinking that we have leeway to increase the level of government borrowing.'
He noted that economic stability and low inflation 'was brought about by the
consensus approach we adopted of forming an alliance between the government,
employers, trade unions and farmers.'
A continuation of the consensus through the difficulties ahead is vital if
the government is to succeed in maintaining the current exchange rate
policy. So far it has held.
To reinforce it, the government will be looking for reassurance in
Birmingham that the proposed Delors II package of substantial increases in
structural and cohesion funds, of which Ireland will be a major beneficiary,
has not been discarded in the wake of the ERM crisis.
Mr Maurice Doyle, central bank governor, sounded a warning this week saying:
'Realistically, these (funds) are likely to fall short of what is required,
and must in any case be regarded as a second-best alternative to fiscal
federalism. While European integration provides opportunities for less
prosperous regions, it does not in any way guarantee an adequate narrowing
of differences in real living standards between countries.'
If such reassurance is not forthcoming, then it should not be surprising to
hear a growing number of Irish voices being raised to question whether being
in the fast track to monetary union is indeed worth the cost of
ever-lengthening dole queues.
