FT  08 JUL 92 / Survey: FT Traveller, Dubai (15) - Key facts for the
business visitor
Population: Dubai is the second-largest of the seven emirates which make up
the United Arab Emirates. It has a population estimated at about 600,000 -
some 80 per cent of whom are expatriate workers predominantly from Asia and
the Indian sub-continent but also from Britain, elsewhere in Europe and the
US. The UAE's population overall is some 2m. Figures are estimates, given
that the last census was in 1985.
Geography: Dubai lies in the southern Gulf, some 160km north of Abu Dhabi,
around a natural creek. Sharjah, the UAE's third-largest emirate, is just
12km away up the coast to the north. Dubai is also within about four hours
drive of Muscat, capital of Oman. The emirate sits in flat desert along a
curving coastline, but within a half-hour's drive eastwards to hills and
Fujairah, the emirate on the Gulf of Oman, 1 1/2 hours away.
Political system: The emirate's ruler is Sheikh Maktoum bin Rashid, who is
the vice-president and prime minister. However, the Sheikh runs the country
closely with his brothers, Sheikh Mohammed, Sheikh Hamdan, and Sheikh Ahmed.
Dubai's ruler, along with those of the other emirates, is a member of the
Supreme Council, the overall authority in the UAE, which was formed after
the British withdrawal from the Trucial Coast in 1971.
Climate: The emirate is arid and sub-tropical, with hot summers averaging
38-40 deg C and winters 23-25 deg C. January is the coolest month, July the
hottest. Clothing should therefore be light and cool and sleeves, if
possible, short.
Language: Arabic is the official tongue, although Urdu and Farsi are spoken
widely among the expatriate workers. But English is almost universally
spoken, both in business dealings and by government officials.
Time: The UAE is four hours ahead of GMT.
Business hours: In winter, government offices are open from 8am to 2pm from
Saturday to Wednesday but close at noon on Thursday, the first day of the
Islamic weekend. All offices close on Friday. Government departments tend to
work from 7am to 1pm in the summer. Business hours vary, but generally
offices open at 8am and close at about 1pm for lunch, before reopening at
3pm or 4pm until 6pm or 7pm.
Currency: The UAE Dirham is tied to the US dollar at a rate of about 3.67.
Hotels offer fast and efficient foreign exchange services although rates
vary slightly. Changing money in banks can prove a bureaucratic and
painfully slow process.
Media: Dubai has two English-language newspapers, the Kaleej Times and Gulf
News, which carry both local and a wide range of international news often
with a focus on Asia and the sub-continent. Both also have fairly
comprehensive news of business affecting the region. Most British newspapers
are available in hotels and newsagents the day after publication. Time,
Newsweek and The Economist are also widely available.
Dubai TV also offers an English-language channel while most five-star hotels
also have satellite TV English services, often including the BBC. Most also
have the Reuter wire service in their business centres. Dubai Radio also
broadcasts in English on 92Mhz FM.
Telecommunications: The code to reach the UAE is 971, to which 2 is added to
dial Abu Dhabi and 4 to reach Dubai. Dialling within the emirates also
requires the prefix 2 for Abu Dhabi when dialling from Dubai, and 84 to
reach Jebel Ali. The telephone system is of high standards and offers no
problems for most computer modems. Hotels will generally, if asked, rig up
appropriate plugs for modem access. All main hotels offer both telex and fax
services. Local phone calls are free, though payphones need Dh1 or 50 fils
for a connection.
Roads and driving: Dubai's main city roads are busy but generally efficient
and traffic police are tolerant of a newcomer's mistakes. Drivers new to the
Gulf should be wary of sometimes erratic local driving habits, particularly
on roads out of the city. The Dubai-Abu Dhabi road is among the UAE's
busiest, most worn and prone to the most accidents. At night, camels can be
a hazard.
Taxis and car hire: Dubai abounds in taxis, both outside the main hotels, at
ranks in the city and generally prowling the streets. An average journey
across the creek will cost about Dh20, but many drivers leave the price up
to the passenger - within reasonable limits. Car hire deals vary and it is
best to check first with one of the main hire companies, most of which are
represented in Dubai, before setting out. In Dubai, the average hire charge
is some Dh200 daily, before insurance charges. It is also worth comparing
hire rates with those in Sharjah where they can often be cheaper
Visas: Britons with right of abode in the UK do not require visas, but most
other nationals do. Most business visitors will also require a nominal
sponsor to enter the country. However, hotels can arrange one easily, as can
the Dubai Commerce and Tourism Promotion Board, which has offices in London,
Philadelphia, Paris, Frankfurt, Milan, Hong Kong and Tokyo.
Generally, it is faster and simpler to arrange visas and sponsorship either
through the board, the hotel or a business contact in Dubai itself rather
than through a UAE embassy. Israeli passport holders or those with Israeli
visas in their passports will not be allowed entry. There are two sorts of
visa, transit visas which allow a stay of 14 days inclusive of arrival and
departure days, and visit visas, which allow a stay of 30 days renewable
twice to a maximum of 100 days, including a 10-day grace period.
Arriving at the airport: The airport is efficient and, for most western
business visitors, fairly swiftly negotiated. Unlike its more conservative
neighbours, Customs regulations permit the import of 2 litres of spirits and
2 litres of wine, 2,000 cigarettes, 400 cigars or 2kg of tobacco. Taxis are
the best bet for reaching the town centre, some 10-15 minutes' drive, though
most big hotels also offer courtesy buses - including the International
Hotel which, although only a stone's throw from the airport itself, is best
reached by vehicle to save negotiating a busy road in the heat.
Alcohol: Hotels alone are licensed to sell alcohol, which is partly why
hotel restaurants and night-clubs are the centre of Dubai's night-life.
Post and courier service: The post is remarkably fast for the region, but
this is not surprising given that Dubai is an important airline hub. It has
also made the emirate a convenient centre for many large courier companies,
all the big names of which are represented.
Social and night-life: Hotels will publicise any special events but where to
shop, where to go and what to see are also set out in Dubai Visitor, which
most hotels make available, and in What's On, a monthly guide to society and
events in the UAE and Oman. The latter also publishes a directory of
special-interest clubs and societies.
Useful telephone numbers: The two most important telephone numbers in Dubai
at present are 100 for the operator and 180 for directory inquiries. In
June, the emirate began changing all numbers to accommodate growth in demand
for lines and faxes. If you have an old number, the operator or directory
inquiries will provide you with the new one.
Rather than provide a list of outdated numbers, therefore, we have decided
simply to list the main hotels and relevant organisations.
Hotels: Ambassador, Astoria, Carlton Towers, Chicago Beach, Dubai Marine
Hilton, International Hyatt Regency, Intercontinental, Jebel Ali
Metropolitan, Ramada, and Sheraton.
Airlines: Virtually all leading airlines are represented in Dubai. The Dubai
National Air Travel Agency (DNATA) represents almost half of the 55 airlines
using the airport.
Trade representations: Most foreign embassies are in Abu Dhabi. However,
many countries have consular representation in Dubai. Countries which do not
are Algeria, Austria, Canada, Denmark, Indonesia, Japan, Morocco,
Philippines, Spain, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Turkey and Yemen.
Many have trade offices in Dubai, including: American Business Council,
Australian Trade Centre, Bulgarian Trade Centre, Cyprus Trade Centre, Danish
Trade Centre, Egyptian Trade Centre, Far East Trade Services, Hong Kong
Trade Development Council, Hungarian Trade Centre, Engineering Export
Promotion Council (India), Italian Trade Centre, Japan External Trade
Organisation (Jetro), Korea Trade Centre, Netherlands Trade Representative,
Norway Export Promotions Council, Singapore Trade Centre, and Thailand Trade
Centre.
Other useful contacts: The Dubai Commerce and Tourism Promotion Board which
offers a range of information services and literature. The British Business
Group which acts as a forum for UK businessmen and women in the area and
publishes a useful contact brochure. The British Bank of the Middle East
which also publishes a guide to British and US businessmen and women in the
UAE.
The Dubai Ports Authority which oversees both Port Rashid and Jebel Ali
where its headquarters are based.
