FT  23 JUL 92 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals (3): Emphasis shifts to elderly -
Alan Archer assesses threats to profitability
AT a time when most of the world's industry has been undergoing a
restructuring phase brought about by the recession, the pharmaceuticals
industry worldwide (not accounting for the former communist bloc for which
reliable sources are not yet available) has been putting forward its
defensive qualities and has lived up to its description: 'almost
recession-proof.'
Industry executives are asking themselves, with increasing nervousness, how
much longer the good times can last. Drug sales are hardly affected by the
ups and downs of the economy, but how long can the drug companies continue
to announce earnings growth of 15 per cent per year?
According to Mr Sam Isaly, of Mehta and Isaly, New York, the world market
grew 10 per cent with total sales of Dollars 165bn in 1991. The industry's
annual growth rate has slowed a little over recent years but continues to
exceed the rate of growth of the world economy as a whole.
The past few decades have proved to be a golden era for the pharmaceutical
industry but despite the rise in sales the industry is still in a transition
period highlighted by the amount of consolidation taking place in the past
few years.
On the positive front, many in the industry feel that the underlying demand
for innovative drugs to meet and satisfy medical needs will be boosted by
the shift of focus towards the elderly. This is a continuing campaign run by
the UK pharmaceutical industry, according to Mr Ben Hayes, spokesman for the
Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry (ABPI). The impact on
pharmaceuticals demand will be considerable.
Using the UK as an example, drug expenditure per head in the over-65 age
group is four times the level of the rest of the population. Companies which
will benefit most from the changing demographic pattern will be those that
provide for the chronic diseases of old age; arthritis, coronary disease,
hypertension and central nervous system-related illness.
Many companies are investing heavily in this latter area, particularly in
research into Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease.
The company which comes out first with a product that treats these ailments
would be guaranteed spectacular sales, as Wellcome has had with its Aids
treatment, Retrovir (Zidovudine).
Another important issue is that of demographic changes and their impact on
demand. The world population is growing rapidly - by some 17 per cent a year
 -with the poorest countries growing the fastest. The less-developed regions
of the world account for 76 per cent of the population and at present less
than 15 per cent of pharmaceutical consumption. But many industry observers
believe that this will rapidly change over the next two decades.
It is thought that this demand will be satisfied by the launch of new
products resulting from new technology such as molecular biology which is
now producing a large quantity of new drug products based on the rational
drug design.
On the negative side, there are many cries from the industry forecasting
reduced profitability in the next decade. There are several forces affecting
this profitability:
Pricing pressures from governments worldwide and also private buying
organisations. Drugs are a tempting target for governments wishing to
restrain soaring healthcare costs, although they represent only about 10 per
cent of health spending and can save money if used sensibly.
The increasing trend in generic prescribing and generic substitution means
that products will lose their market share rapidly after patent expiry. This
will be further highlighted by the fact that tried and tested branded
products such as Tagament, Capoten and Tenormin will be included in the new
generics being offered in the near future.
Increasing regulatory requirements are delaying product launches and causing
an erosion of patent life. In many countries, regulatory departments have a
backlog of filings awaiting review.
Escalating research and development costs. According to the US
Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, the most recent estimate of cost
involved in developing a new drug has risen from Dollars 125m in 1987 to
Dollars 245m in 1991.
For several years, many drug companies had no clear policy on what
therapeutic product groups and geographical areas they wanted to trade in,
taking a somewhat haphazard approach. But the current consolidation process
has changed all that.
Pressure is building and only companies with a clear strategy on what areas
they want to compete in will be successful.
'Most companies have decided where they want to be by the year 2000,' says
Mr Robin Gilbert, analyst at James Capel. 'Certainly Merck and Glaxo have
clearly defined their role, but others like Upjohn, Warner-Lambert, Pfizer
and Syntex are not completely clear what their position is.'
The 1990s have brought about the need for a much greater awareness of the
drugs available and the world's drug market. GPs now have a much better
choice of medications for prescribing and are increasingly using computer
data bases, not only for information sourcing but also the ordering of
pharmaceuticals.
The greater concern taken by the general public (action and lobby groups)
and media to investigate wherever possible the cost benefits and safety of
the drugs they are prescribed.
An increasing collaboration world-wide by regulatory bodies. The
globalisation of industry in the 1990s will be assisted by the
standardisation of regulatory approval procedures for new drugs. As European
regulations are unified after 1992, they will gradually come together with
those of the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
The use by the FDA of European data for the investigation of Glaxo's filing
of its new migraine drug, Imigran (sumatriptan), is a very good example.
Launched in the UK in October 1991, the drug has been fast-tracked in the US
and approval by the FDA may be imminent.
The growing knowledge by competing companies of each other's R&amp;D programmes
and general strategies. Professor Horst Meyer, head of Bayer Pharmaceuticals
thinks further concentration of the world's pharmaceutical industry is
inevitable. The need for substantial investment in research and development
required to discover 'block-buster' drugs with sales of more than Dollars
500m a year was beyond the means of all but the largest companies.
Prof Meyer said the top 10 companies were spending 35 per cent of all money
dedicated to pharmaceutical R&amp;D and the proportion was likely to increase.
In addition, smaller companies were handicapped by their inability to market
drugs in the three largest markets - the US, Europe and Japan. The top
pharmaceutical groups were able to recover their ever-larger investments by
selling the drugs in all three areas, added Prof Meyer.
The author is the editor of Financial Times Pharmaceutical Business News.
