FT  19 MAR 92 / Court speeds up processing of Names' cases
THE HIGH Court yesterday moved to accelerate litigation affecting the
Lloyd's insurance market by allocating all cases involving Names  - the
individuals whose assets back the market  - to one judge, Mr Justice
Saville.
The new approach should result in substantial time and cost savings,
according to Mr Justice Evans, who made the announcement yesterday. The move
was welcomed by Mr Michael Freeman, the solicitor acting on behalf of Names
who are seeking injunctions to prevent drawdowns on their deposits by
Lloyd's.
The decision means that a single judge will consider the writs seeking
injunctions issued by Mr Freeman so far on behalf of 791 Names when they
reach the courts at the end of this month.
The Oakeley Vaughan case, in which Mr Justice Gatehouse is presiding, is not
affected. A total of 33 Names are suing Lloyd's for negligence in the case,
which came to court last April. Cases involving three other groups of Names
 - on syndicates managed by the Pulbrook and Poland managing agencies  -
would also be heard by Mr Justice Saville if they came to court.
Mr Justice Saville presided in the Outhwaite case, which was settled out of
court last month with Names winning a Pounds 116m deal.
The move resembles arrangements made last year for the treatment of more
than 170 interest swaps cases.
Meanwhile, two brokers seeking stop-loss insurance for Names announced
yesterday that they had won support from underwriters for a scheme that
could reinsure as many as 2,000 of the market's 22,400 Names.
Fraser Group and Fenchurch Group will offer stop-loss policies providing
coverage of Pounds 100,000 to Names in excess of an amount equivalent to 10
per cent of Names' premium income (the amount of premiums Lloyd's Names are
allowed to receive). It is understood that average rates for the policies
are about 25 per cent higher than last year.
It emerged this week that many underwriters were refusing to lend support to
a separate facility being handled by two other brokers, Holman Wade and
Harrison Stuart.
Brokers say that many Names could leave Lloyd's if they were unable to
obtain stop-loss insurance. This could seriously erode the market's capital
base.
