FT  28 MAY 92 / Guilty plea may lead to BNL trial cancellation: Bush
administration likely to welcome move
THE long-awaited Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL) trial is likely to be
cancelled next week following an expected guilty plea by Mr Christopher
Drogoul, the former manager of the bank's Atlanta branch. Mr Drogoul is the
last remaining defendant facing trial.
The cancellation of the trial, which was recently postponed until June 22,
is likely to be greeted with relief by the Bush administration, which has
come under fire in recent weeks from congressional Democrats. They have
accused the government of covering up its alleged knowledge of the more than
Dollars 4bn (Pounds 2.2bn) of clandestine loans made by BNL Atlanta to Iraq.
More than half of the unauthorised loans from BNL were used by Iraq's
President Saddam Hussein to fund development of nuclear, chemical and
ballistic missile projects.
Ms Sheila Tyler, the lawyer acting for Mr Drogoul, said last night the
former BNL manager would enter a guilty plea next Tuesday morning, in a
hearing before Judge Marvin Shoob in Atlanta. An aide to Judge Shoob
confirmed that Mr Drogoul would enter the plea.
As Mr Drogoul makes his statement next Tuesday, a hearing of the House
judiciary committee in Washington will discuss the merits of seeking a
special prosecutor to investigate whether there has been a cover-up of US
involvement in the BNL affair and other aspects of the arming of Iraq.
Ms Tyler is expected to make use of Mr Drogoul's eventual sentencing hearing
to argue that he was a minor player in a banking operation that had covert
US government approval. Whether this will sway the judge to reduce Mr
Drogoul's prison sentence - which could be as high as 30 years - is
uncertain.
'It is clear to me that my client was merely a small fish in a larger
operation. It is unfair for Mr Drogoul to take all the blame,' Ms Tyler said
yesterday.
Judge Shoob's only public comment on the BNL affair was in remarks he made
at a pre-trial hearing on April 27. 'In reviewing all the documents that
have been made available to me, there is nothing that remotely indicates
that he (Mr Drogoul) is the sole moving party in this transaction,' the
judge said.
'I don't see how Mr Drogoul could have handled this whole thing without some
type of assistance.'
Mr Drogoul was indicted 15 months ago along with 10 others on charges
ranging from conspiracy and fraud to money laundering and tax evasion. The
US has no hope of securing four top Iraqi government officials who were
among those indicted, while the other defendants have pleaded guilty.
