FT  22 SEP 92 / Major moves to regain initiative over Euro-sceptics: Cabinet
strains emerge after French vote - Pounds falls to new low against D-Mark
MR JOHN MAJOR sought yester-day to recover a grip on his party by signalling
to Tory Euro-sceptics that economic recovery in Britain would now take
precedence over European integration.
As a still-falling pound reduced the scope for lower interest rates, there
were signs that French approval of the Maastricht treaty was creating new
strains within the cabinet over its approach to Europe.
Mr Major did little to dispel the impression of disarray in Whitehall after
sterling's enforced departure from the ERM and the narrow French vote.
The discordant notes sounded in recent days by Tory Euro-sceptics were
matched yesterday by alarm on the pro-European wing that policy is lurching
towards narrow nationalism.
The anxiety that Britain risks being stranded on the fringes of the
Community was heightened by the announcement that German chancellor Helmut
Kohl and French president Francois Mitterrand will meet for a bilateral
summit later today.
Writing in the London Evening Standard, Mr Major stated bluntly that
sterling would not return to the exchange rate mechanism 'until it (the
mechanism) has been reformed'. He underlined that there was no question of
Britain ratifying Maastricht until after next month's emergency summit and
following Denmark's clarification of its position.
Downing Street signalled that the issues of ERM re-entry and Maastricht
ratification may now have become inextricably entangled, with little
prospect of the treaty gaining parliamentary approval while the pound is
floating.
Mr Major said the battle against inflation would remain the priority of
economic policy. But, in an apparent softening of his previous absolute
commitment to stable prices, he referred to the goal of 'low inflation and a
prosperous economy'.
As Whitehall officials acknowledged that a lower pound would eventually lead
to higher price rises, Mr Major encouraged speculation about possible
reductions in interest rates. He said if the government kept a firm grip on
public spending it would be able 'to bring down interest rates without
risking our success against inflation'.
Strong hopes of a rate cut fuelled a rise of 44.2 points in the FT-SE 100
share index early yesterday, although prices fell back once it became clear
that the Bank of England did not intend to cut rates immediately. Shares
ended the day 6.9 points lower at 2,560.1.
While there is no prospect of the rapid and sharp reduction in borrowing
costs demanded by some on the Tory right, Mr Major may judge it impossible
to restore party unity over Europe unless he delivers the long-promised end
to recession.
The prime minister said that other EC leaders should reflect on the concerns
of their electorates before pushing ahead with integration: 'All of Europe's
governments need to reflect hard on the lessons of the last weeks and months
and on the future direction of the Community.'
That sentiment was echoed by Mr Kenneth Clarke, the home secretary, and Mr
Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, who are both staunchly pro-European.
But the tenor of the two ministers' assessment appeared markedly less
hostile than that of Mr Major.
Mr Clarke, speaking on BBC Radio's World At One, underlined the government's
commitment to Maastricht. Other ministers are dismayed at the much more
sceptical stance adopted by Mr Major and Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor.
Mr Michael Heseltine, the president of the board of trade, last night denied
that the cabinet was split over Europe. But in an interview with Channel 4
news he acknowledged that there were differences of view among his
colleagues.
One suggestion at Westminster last night was that the prime minister was
engaged in a 'tactical retreat' with the aim of restoring Tory party unity
and then moving on to reassert an essentially pro-European policy.
Sir Edward Heath, the former prime minister, added to the tension last night
with a demand that Mr Major demonstrate 'leadership' in steering the
Conservatives back to a pro-European stance. He called for the prime
minister to push ahead immediately with ratification of Maastricht.
Lord Tebbit, a leading Euro-sceptic, warned last night that any attempt by
Mr Major to bring the bill back could lead to the party tearing itself
apart.
EUROPE AFTER THE VOTE
Pages 2 to 4
Mixed feelings in Bonn
IMF in Washington
Questions facing EMS
Crisis in UK Page 6
Editorial Comment Page 18
UK after debacle Page 18
Joe Rogaly Page 19
Lex Page 20
Bonds Page 29
Currencies Page 35
World stocks Page 41
London stocks Page 44
