FT  12 NOV 92 / Rules switch on Iraq arms sales kept secret
BRITISH government ministers agreed in 1989 to withhold from parliament
details of a decision to reinterpret the rules banning the sale of
defence-related equipment to Iraq.
The agreement, revealed in previously-classified Whitehall documents, is
likely to add fuel to the political furore over the illicit defence trade
with Iraq.
The documents were made available to the court during the unsuccessful
prosecution of three former directors of Matrix Churchill, the
Midlands-based machine tool company.
The 500 pages of documents reveal consistent efforts by ministers at the
Department of Trade and Industry to weaken or remove the official
guidelines.
The policy was opposed, with only limited success, by Mr William Waldegrave,
then a Foreign Office minister and now a member of Mr Major's cabinet.
The papers include several specific references to a decision in 1989 to
withhold from MPs details of the relaxation in interpretation of the rules
which had been set out in 1985 by Sir Geoffrey Howe, then foreign secretary.
They show that while the government was committed publicly to an even-handed
approach as regards defence-related exports to Iran and Iraq, in practice
the regime applied to Baghdad was significantly more liberal than that
imposed on Tehran.
The relaxation for exports to Iraq was agreed in December 1988 - some 5
months after a ceasefire agreement had ended the Iran-Iraq war. The shift in
policy was subsequently used by the DTI to justify its backing for the
export of the machine tools at the heart of the failed prosecution of Matrix
Churchill.
In April 1989, ministers decided on a form of words to be used in parliament
which was broad enough to encompass the shift but would not signal to MPs
that their approach had changed.
The phrasing was settled on in a meeting between Mr Waldegrave, Lord
Trefgarne, then defence procurement minister, and Mr Alan Clark, the then
trade minister.
Mr Waldegrave successfully resisted pressure from his colleagues for
abolition of the Howe guidelines. But his private secretary's summary of the
meeting's conclusions, set out in a letter to Mr Clark dated April 27 1989,
recorded: 'We agreed that we should continue to interpret the guidelines
more flexibly in respect of Iraq, as we have done in practice since the end
of last year; but that we should revert to a stricter interpretation for
Iran, along the lines which operated before the ceasefire.'
The document adds: 'It was preferable not to have to announce publicly any
change in them (the guidelines).' The form of words to be used if ministers
were 'pressed' on the issue in parliament was: 'The guidelines on the export
of defence equipment to Iran and Iraq are kept under constant review, and
are applied in the light of prevailing circumstances, including the
ceasefire and developments in the peace negotiations.'
It is understood that the ministers decided that as the guidelines were
being re-interpreted rather than abolished, there was no formal obligation
to tell MPs.
A few days earlier Mrs Margaret Thatcher, the then prime minister, had told
the House of Commons: 'The government have not changed their policy on
defence sales to Iraq.'
Other documents reveal Whitehall's sensitivity over the new formulation
agreed for use in parliament. The minute of a meeting of officials belonging
to the Interdepartmental Committee on defence sales to Iraq and Iran says
because of the different treatment of the two countries it was 'essential'
that departments 'consulted closely' before answering questions from MPs.
