FT  03 JUN 92 / Rescue moves seen to ease mortgage crisis
THE NUMBER of house reposses-sions is expected to fall sharply this year as
a result of lenders' initiatives introduced six months ago, but the
suspension on stamp duty will not be extended, the government said
yesterday.
At a meeting with representatives of the Council of Mortgage Lenders, Mr
Norman Lamont, the chancellor, said he was encouraged by the progress
lenders had made in reducing the level of house repossessions.
After the meeting - called to review the housing rescue scheme set up to try
to ease the problem of repossessions - Mr Mark Boleat, director-general of
the council, said the underlying position regarding rents and arrears had
not improved.
'However, lenders are confident that the measures they have taken, in
particular greater counselling of borrowers and restructuring of loan
arrangements, will lead to a significant reduction in possessions compared
with the peak figures recorded in the middle of last year,' said Mr Boleat.
The chancellor rejected calls from the building societies to extend the
suspension of stamp duty on house purchases, due to expire on August 19.
Under the initiatives, the building societies pledged more than Pounds 800m
for mortgage-rescue schemes, intended to save at least 16,000 borrowers from
eviction. The schemes included a less aggressive approach to repossession
and a mortgage-to-rent scheme whereby housing associations would buy homes
about to be repossessed and rent them back to their former owners.
In return the government agreed to pay social security benefits to cover
mortgage interest direct to the lenders.
Most societies have achieved a significant reduction in the number of
evictions by improved debt counselling and similar services. But the council
said yesterday that mortgage-to-rent schemes had proved very complicated and
that most homeowners in difficulties were not interested in such schemes,
preferring to remain in their homes as owner-occupiers with loan terms.
During the meeting the council told Mr Lamont that, on previous trends, the
number of repossessions would have risen by 120,000 this year, but the
combination of lenders' initiatives and the direct payment of DSS benefits
to the lenders would reduce the number to about 65,000.
Treasury officials said the government had ruled out an extension to the
stamp duty 'holiday' well in advance of yesterday's meeting. They said such
a move would undermine the purpose of the original decision, which was to
encourage prospective buyers to bring forward their purchases.
