FT  15 OCT 92 / Survey of The Nuclear Industry (4): Underground plans hit
snags - Chris Tighe discusses Nirex and the Sellafield repository proposal
YOU DO not have to be an optimist to work for UK Nirex but it must help.
After more than a decade of presentations to hostile communities, the
nuclear industry's waste consortium announced in July last year it had
selected Sellafield as the preferred site for its proposed Pounds 2.5bn
repository half a mile underground for low and intermediate level nuclear
waste.
The decision to focus on the West Cumbrian community which has co-operated
with, and defended, the nuclear industry for 40 years came as no surprise,
even though Nirex preferred to stress the area's geological potential and
the fact that proximity to the Sellafield nuclear waste reprocessing site,
source of 60 per cent of the waste to be stored, makes logistical sense.
But local opinion, although supportive of British Nuclear Fuels, has proved
less willing to embrace Nirex.
In the 15 months since Nirex selected a site next to BNFL's Sellafield
plant, the project has hit planning problems over test boreholes in the
nearby Lake District National Park, been through an above-ground redesign to
make the plans more visually acceptable to local people, and undergone a
rejigging which has now led to the decision to build an underground rock
laboratory.
Nirex had planned to file a planning application this autumn for the
repository, in the hope of beginning underground investigations in 1995 and
getting the repository operative in 2005.
It is intended to operate for 50 years, taking up to 2m cubic metres of
waste. In April, however, the Radioactive Waste Management Advisory
Committee said more geological study was needed for the long-term safety
case, and in June Nirex announced a year's delay because knowledge of the
site's hydrogeology was 'not sufficiently firm'.
The general picture, said Nirex, was 'so far, so good' but independent
consultants Environmental Resources, in a report for Cumbria County Council,
said their interpretation of early borehole results suggested the proposed
site was in a mixing zone between incoming saline water and groundwater,
which was being forced up through the basement rock towards the aquifer
sandstone above.
Now Nirex has said it will seek permission next year for a rock laboratory.
Managing director Mr Michael Folger says 2006 or 2007 is now the target date
for repository operation but adds: 'We're very conscious there's a lot
outside our control.'
Given that the rock lab itself could go to public inquiry, 2007 looks
optimistic.
The lab has been seen by some locals as a 'trojan horse'; others, who have
feared Nirex wanted to press on too fast at Sellafield, welcome it but
wonder if it will yield the anticipated results. 'I think in five years it
will be a large puddle of water,' predicts Copeland conservative councillor
Norman Murphy, a retired colonel living in Gosforth, the community most
affected.
Nirex insists it will not press ahead with the repository if it has serious
concern about the site.
High level waste is not destined for the repository; it is being vitrified
and stored at Sellafield for the next 50 years. At present, low level waste
is being disposed of in trenches at nearby Drigg, which has space into the
next century. Intermediate waste is a more immediate problem; BNFL has said
it will need to build a number of additional stores at Sellafield over the
next decade to house it.
Many countries are now investigating deep disposal of radioactive wastes;
some indeed have already created repositories, though not for the long-lived
intermediate waste which reprocessors like the UK and France must deal with.
Sweden was the first country to develop a deep underground nuclear waste
repository, at Forsmark, 50 metres under the Baltic seabed. Finland has just
opened its 100-metre deep repository at Olkiluoto and France is operating
two sites for disposal of low-level and short-lived intermediate waste, La
Manche, at Cap la Hague, and l'Aube, 200km south-east of Paris. Both are
near-surface, burial mound structures.
Considerable research is going on into possible underground disposal of high
level waste (HLW) and long-lived intermediate waste and a number of
countries, as well as carrying out research in existing mines, have
developed dedicated underground rock laboratories, or plan to do so.
The Swiss, who intend to have a 1,200-metre deep HLW repository ready by
2020, have even been carrying out underground experiments 1km inside an
Alpine mountain.
Although community response internationally to HLW disposal studies is not
uniform - two remote Swedish communities, attracted by job and planning gain
potential, have even volunteered their areas - the research has frequently
aroused fierce controversy. Examples include Nevada, where federal authority
proposals to construct a 500-metre deep underground rock laboratory (URL)
beneath Yucca Mountain, paving the way for an HLW repository, have met with
stiff opposition.
The search for a solution to the waste disposal problem has engendered
international co-operation, too. The EC has financed some research at
Belgium's URL at the Mol-Dessel nuclear site.
Operative since 1980, the URL is one of the world's first. Its object is to
demonstrate the site's technical feasibility and long-term safety.
Officially, it is called a High Activity Disposal Experimental Site - Hades
for short.
