FT  11 JUN 92 / Stoy agrees to merge with Finnie: Enlarged accountancy firm
will have 176 partners and directors
STOY HAYWARD, the UK's 11th-largest accountancy firm by fee income, is to
merge with Finnie &amp; Co, the 20th-largest firm, and auditors to the Body
Shop.
The new firm - to be called Stoy Hayward - will have 176 partners and
directors, 1,300 professional staff and an annual fee income of more than
Pounds 82m, making it the 10th-largest firm under present rankings.
Mr Adrian Martin, managing partner at Stoy Hayward, said the merger was
agreed for strategic reasons and did not reflect any financial weaknesses in
either firm.
He said Stoy Hayward had been considering ways to strengthen its network in
the south-east since the mid 1980s as part of its expansion of its London
office. No professional staff and only a handful of support staff would lose
their jobs as a result, he said. But - in common with other practices -
neither firm had been re-placing staff who have left in recent months, said
Mr Martin.
Mr Geoff Warren, senior partner of Finnie, will become the seventh member of
Stoy's management executive, and four of Finnie's partners will join the
seven Stoy partners on its partnership council, which sets general
principles for the firm.
Mr Warren said Finnie's partners decided to begin looking for a merger
partner late last summer to strengthen the firm's presence outside the
south-east and to provide additional expertise in some practice areas.
Stoy Hayward was the only firm in which he was seriously interested, he
added, because the two firms had complementary needs and cultures.
Finnie's nine existing offices in the south-east will become Stoy Hayward
offices 'in association with Finnie &amp; Co' while its central London head
office will move into Stoy's headquarters. Its Glasgow office will merge
with Stoy's office there, while its other branches in the Isle of Man and
Sheffield will become associate offices of Stoy Hayward. Only its small
branch in Beverley, Humberside, will remain an independent firm.
No money will change hands as part of the deal, and negotiations over the
past few months have centred on how to structure profit-sharing between the
two sets of partners.
Profit-sharing will continue to reflect the different contributions of the
two firms until a new partnership remuneration agreement is drafted in two
years.
