FT  02 JUN 92 / Survey of The Earth Summit (6): Concern for earth's living
wealth - Loss of species is wiping out a medicine chest of potential cures
to serious disease / Dozens of species may be disappearing each day
EVERY DAY 'we are losing species we don't even know exist and in one of
which could lie the cure for diseases, such as AIDS,' says Ms Maria de
Lourdes, director of the international department of the Brazilian
environment ministry.
The realisation that destruction of forests was wiping out whole slices of
potentially valuable species has made biodiversity an important issue in
recent years and a crucial part of earth summit discussions.
Biodiversity refers to all the species of animals, plants and microorganisms
in the world as well as their genetic variety and the ecosystems - water,
land or air - in which they live. Known as 'the earth's living wealth,' it
provides an essential supply of food needs and many of our medicines.
Our knowledge of biodiversity is still very incomplete. Around 1.4m species
have been listed of which 751,000 are insects, 41,000 vertebrates and
250,000 plants. Biologists estimate that there at least between five to ten
million species in existence and maybe as many as 100m. Despite today's
concern, biodiversity is continuing to diminish and recent studies suggest
that the world will lose between two and seven per cent of its species over
the next 25 years. If ten million species exist, this means losing a
staggering 20-75 per day.
The Amazon rainforest is the planet's greatest stock of biodiversity.
Although the casual visitor may be disappointed not to see flocks of
colourful parrots, monkeys swinging from tree to tree, and wild animals
jumping out from the bushes, it is home to 20 per cent of all higher plant
species and birds and ten per cent of the world's mammals. In one tree alone
between 100 and 300 species of butterfly can be found and one hectare of the
jungle contains between 100 and 300 species of bird. Popularly thought of as
a homogenous forest, in fact it has 12 distinct ecosystems.
The Amazon River holds 20 per cent of the planet's fresh water and 2,000
species of fish (compared to an average 20 species in European rivers).
Many Amazonian species are being lost or are under threat from human
activities such as logging, flooding for hydroelectric projects,
forest-cutting and burning for cattle pasture, and gold mining, which is
choking rivers with sediment and polluting aquasystems with the mercury used
for gold extraction. Although ranching is the most destructive activity, Mr
Chris Uhl, a biologist from Pennsylvania University says 40 of the 350
timber species currently being harvested by loggers are under threat of
extinction.
Green extremists are in favour of complete conservation, arguing that we
should not destroy anything because we do not know what is there, and are
constantly finding new ways in which biodiversity can contribute to
development such as in new foods and medicines.
But Mr Alfredo Homa, a scientist at the Agricultural Research Institute in
the Amazonian town of Belem, says: 'People say the biggest richness of the
Amazon is its biodiversity and thus all activities such as ranching should
be stopped but while people have not identified species this makes little
sense. It is an untouchable wealth.'
Scientists are now hard at work mapping the biodiversity of the Amazon, but
our precarious knowledge of species and the difficulties of assigning real
values remain a problem.
Mr Marcos Azambuja, Brazil's chief negotiator for the Earth Summit,
describes biodiversity as the most complex issue on the summit agenda: 'We
used to think of the world as divided between useful things, and things that
God created for his pleasure. Now we see that everything may have a purpose
and thus everything must be sacred.'
The major difficulty in agreeing a convention on biodiversity is that most
of the planet's species are concentrated in poor countries while the
technology and knowhow to benefit from them through development of products
are in the hands of developed countries. As naturally-occurring species
currently have no real value, poor countries have no incentive to conserve
them.
In order to maintain their biodiversity, under-developed or developing
countries, such as Brazil, are asking for a transfer of technology and funds
and suggesting that communities where important plants are found should be
given a share of the royalties of the final product.
Mr Azambuja says: 'The idea is to introduce a minimum of order into the
forest - the jungle should not be treated by the law of the jungle.'
Defenders of forest people argue that they should receive royalties because
these people are in fact informal environmental scientists who have
developed a wealth of knowledge of the medicinal properties of plants over
centuries.
But Mr Jose Goldemberg, Brazil's Environment Minister, a nuclear physicist,
argues against this: 'You might find an important cure in a tree - or you
might not. What's important is establishing the link between plants and
cures, and for that we need science, an enormous amount of training and
equipment - and money.
'Finding the herb is a very small part of process which leads to the final
product on sale in the drugstore.'
