FT  02 JUL 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Ghanaian cocoa on road to
reform - Plans to liberalise the internal market
AFTER YEARS of cautious reform the Ghanaian government is poised to take big
steps towards privatisation of the cocoa trade and curbing the stranglehold
of the powerful, inefficient and costly Ghana Cocoa Board.
In the face of falling world prices for cocoa and marginal returns to
Ghana's farmers, it is increasingly recognised that considerable savings
must be made in the financing and operating costs of the board, which should
be passed on to smallholder producers in the form of better incentives if
cocoa production is to be maintained at its present level. In a critical
first step, privatisation of domestic marketing is due to be introduced for
the 1992-93 crop.
The 1991-92 crop is estimated at about 240,000 tonnes, a decrease of 16 per
cent from the 286,000 tonnes produced last year. The fall in production
resulted partly from adverse weather conditions but was exacerbated by
farmers turning their attention to other crops.
Last year the government decided to sell forward 80 per cent of the 1991-92
crop, thereby insulating itself from the drop in world prices. In the first
four months of 1992 about 75,000 tonnes of Ghanaian cocoa was delivered to
the world market. While that amount was on target, maintaining deliveries
presented more problems in May and June.
According to the local representative of ED &amp; F. Man, the London trade
house, sales by Ghana to date are no more that 90,000 tonnes. This means
that priced sales to the world market are probably no more than 50,000
tonnes, he says, a historically poor sales position in a depressed market
that weakens the case for the board continuing to market the crop.
He blames the depressed level of world cocoa prices - recently at 16-year
lows - partly on the poor forward sales positions of Ghana and the Ivory
Coast.
The longer the producers stay out of market, the safer the buyers feel, he
explains, secure in the knowledge that sooner or later origins will have to
sell and push the market down.
In Ghana, the crucial contribution of cocoa to tax revenues and foreign
exchange earnings and the powerful position of the board has made cocoa a
highly charged political issue. Rigid price setting and market controls have
dominated the trade. According to the World Bank, inefficiencies in the
marketing system and high levels of taxation have characterised the sector
and resulted in low producer prices, disinvestment and declining yields and
output.
Substantial devaluation combined with limited reforms over the past six
years including the elimination of input subsidies, continuing divestment of
plantations owned by the board, streamlining of operations and a reduction
of at least 12,000 in the board's staff, have already had an impact on
producer prices, which have risen from about 20 per cent of the world market
price in 1983 to about 51 per cent for this crop year. Producers are still
worse off, however, as the world price has fallen by two-thirds over that
period.
Much deeper reforms are necessary to stimulate production by giving farmers
a much higher percentage of the world market price. To do this the
politically powerful vested interests in the cocoa board have to be tackled
and its functions considerably reduced. With a staff of 42,000 and a budget
that consumes a third of total cocoa export revenue, the board, with its
monopoly on domestic trade and external marketing, will have to be broken if
higher producer prices are going to be awarded to farmers.
Last December on farmer's day, Flight-Lt Jerry Rawlings, the country's
ruler, announced that the government would introduce private competition in
domestic cocoa marketing. Hopes are high that competitive internal buying
will increase marketing efficiency and raise producer prices as buyers
compete for cocoa.
The huge financing costs of the board, which at present purchases the entire
crop, will also be reduced and spread among several private traders. The
government has already published regulations governing the entry of private
operators into the cocoa market and is due to approve applications for
licences within the next two to three months.
The technical committee of the producer price review committee has also made
recommendations for the board's prices for the 1992-93 crop to be paid both
directly to the farmer and to private licensed buying agents. It recommends
a 2.7 per cent increase in the minimum producer price from C251,000 (Pounds
330) to C258,000 a tonne and that 'takeover prices', at which the board will
buy from the licensed agents at three designated take-over points, be set at
between C307,000 to C319,000 a tonne, depending on the point of take-over
and the origin of the cocoa. The difference between the producer price and
the take-over price represents buyers' operating costs, haulage costs and
profit margins.
The board will then have responsibility for subsequent storage, pre-shipment
handling and final shipment. Several details of the new system have yet to
be worked out but the World Bank is pressing the government to grant the
licences on an annual auction system and only to license buyers who have the
expertise to maintain Ghana's high export quality standards. The bank is
also arguing for private traders to be allowed to operate completely freely
with no reporting, up-country inspection or control procedures exercised by
the board.
Supporters of the system argue that its greatest advantages will be in
higher prices to farmers and considerable staff and financing savings by the
board, which, under the new system, will only have to finance its pre-export
stock.
Other measures like abolishing the government's role in the import and sale
of fertiliser and agrochemicals for the cocoa sector will have to be taken
to boost production further. According to Mr Jim Wilson, managing director
of Valley Farms, the government will also need to consider overhauling its
system of extension services to boost average yields of 250 kg an acre.
Valley Farms, which bought two cocoa plantations from the board, plans to
increase yields to as much as 1.5 tonnes an acre by using new techniques of
vegetative regeneration, clonal seeding, hand pollination and new
insecticides. Most of these techniques are available from the Cocoa Research
Institute of Ghana but are not widely disseminated by the Cocoa Services
Division of the board.
Ultimately, emerging private sector players in the cocoa trade hope the
government will also move to liberalise external marketing. Only if all
these measures are taken, say cocoa experts, will Ghana begin to boost
production to significantly higher levels.
