FT  10 DEC 92 / Survey of Charity Fund Investment (10): Brought up to date -
Alan Pike talks to the Charity Commission head
MR RICHARD FRIES, who took charge of the Charity Commission in June,
disputes the frequently-quoted remark that the organisation is 20 years out
of date.
'Whoever first said that had it wrong,' he says. 'Ten years ago it would
have been more accurate to say the commission was 50 years out of date. Now
it is up to date.'
Record-keeping was at the heart of the commission's old problems. These were
maintained manually and, with 170,000 registered charities in the country,
it sank beneath the impossible task of keeping a valid, accurate register.
Now the register has been computerised, and the commission is equipped to
maintain and update the information on which all its other activities
depend.
The big test in building up the commission's new electronic date base will
be to ensure that charities abide by the requirements of this year's
Charities Act to submit annual reports and accounts to the commission.
Traditionally only about 10 per cent did so, although this has built up to
about 30 per cent during recent publicity about the new requirements.
This year's new Charities Act extends the powers of the Charity
Commissioners to regulate charities, their staff, officers and trustees.
Some of these powers are substantial - the charity commissioners can in
appropriate cases suspend and remove trustees and employees; they can
appoint receivers and managers and apply for winding-up orders.
While the act has made the commission into a stronger regulatory body for
the sector, Fries is anxious that it should not only be seen as fulfilling a
legalistic role. This is, he says, the last resort.
The commission is also responsible for promoting the effective use of
charitable resources and encouraging good administration.
Richard Fries hopes that the greater opportunities for monitoring offered by
computerisation will enable the commission to detect early warnings of
problems and offer support and advice.
He took a knowledge of charities to his new post at the commission. He had
been the Home Office official responsible for the voluntary sector, equal
opportunities and race relations, and was appointed in competition with
candidates from outside the civil service. Contacts made during his previous
responsibilities for race relations will, he hopes, enable him to encourage
more people from Britain's ethnic minority communities, who are
under-represented among charity trustees, to seek office.
The preparation of trustees for their new responsibilities under the act is
another of the commission's immediate concerns.
Fries says he finds the results of a recent survey by the National Council
for Voluntary Organisations, showing that two-thirds of charity management
committee members did not know whether or not they were trustees,
'absolutely plausible.'
Two new publications - a trustees' guide to the new law and a booklet on the
responsibilities of trustees - have been issued by the commission. Some of
the commission's previous publications have certainly been criticised for
looking 20 years out of date and Fries, as part of his attempts to make the
commission into a supportive agency offering advice and assistance to the
voluntary sector, has ensured that the new ones are more attractive and
comprehensible.
'To be a charity trustee is not a position of honour without
responsibility,' warns the commission's trustees booklet. 'It requires time,
understanding and effort.'
The stronger legal controls, together with the loss of the Official
Custodian's services, are likely to prompt some smaller charities into
mergers. Fries says he would not be surprised if the eventual number of
charities on the register came down below the current 170,000, but would not
like to see excessive movement towards charity amalgamations.
'We need charities to be efficient, but they have to be efficient within the
context of the actual needs of the voluntary sector.
'Small local voluntary organisations make an essential contribution across a
wide range of activities. We need to maintain a balance between the small
specialist charities and the big service-delivery organisations. The variety
of the sector, including the variety of size of charities, is one of its
strengths.'
At present the charity commission does not charge for any of its services
except the provision of information from the registers and copies of
documents. Under the new Act, the Home Secretary could by regulation allow
the commission to charge charities for other services it provides.
Fries is determined to approach the subject of charging fees with caution.
It is eventually possible, he suggests, that the commission might offer some
consultancy-type services for which it would be reasonably to charge.
'But I feel that the basic services are likely to remain free. I think it
would cause some concern if the public were donating money to charities and
it was coming back to the government in fees to the charity commission.'
