FT  07 APR 92 / Seeking peace in an Afghan minefield: Farhan Bokhari
examines obstacles to a settlement on the last Cold War battlefront
THE WAR will be brought to an end soon in neighbouring Afghanistan, say
Pakistani officials and diplomats in Islamabad. This has proved hard enough,
they say, but building peace there will be even more difficult.
Spearheading the peace drive on the last battleground of the Cold War is the
UN secretary-general's Afghanistan troubleshooter, Mr Benon Sevan. He has
spent the last few weeks shuttling around the region trying to organise a
meeting of representatives of the warring parties to choose an interim
government.
The first step would be an assembly of 12 to 24 'mutually acceptable'
representatives which would meet in Geneva or Vienna by the end of this
month. An interim administration would then be required to hold elections to
pave the way for a new government in Kabul.
Meanwhile, the futility of the conflict Mr Sevan is trying to bring to an
end is evident in the eastern town of Khost, taken by the Mujahideen rebels
last spring in what was supposedly their most significant victory of the
war. Countless thousands of guerrillas and government troops died during the
two-week battle for this sprawling clutter of tumbledown mud dwellings.
After 'liberating' the town the Mujahideen looted it of virtually everything
that could be carried off.  Even doors and window frames were removed.
A year on, the debris of the battle - rusting tanks, crippled army trucks,
spent artillery casings and clumps of half-buried uniforms - still litters
the streets, many made impassable by huge bomb craters. Apart from the
occasional patrol of Kalashnikov-toting Mujahideen, there is little sign of
life.
Clearing the mines is a vital first step back towards normality. A fifth of
the war's million-plus fatalities were killed by mines; twice as many again
have been maimed by them. At the going rate it will take 40 years to make
the country safe. But a UN-supervised mine clearance programme begun in 1990
is threatened by a dire shortage of funds. Though run on a shoestring
budget, only a third of the Dollars 15.6m needed this year has been secured.
Clearance teams came to Khost last September at the request of the
Mujahideen. Depleted though the area is, half a dozen people are still being
killed or disabled by mines each day.
Two events this year have moved the peace process forward: first, Pakistan
formally ended its support for a military victory by the Mujahideen. That at
last ended the involvement of Islamabad's powerful ISI (Inter-Services
Intelligence) agency, long believed to be the most important channel for
arms and equipment to the Mujahideen.
However, the announcement last monthby Mr Najibullah, the Afghan president,
that he would step down and hand over power to an interim government,
removed the most important objection to peace talks from the Mujahideen.
Hardliners and moderates among them have demanded for long that no
settlement would be acceptable to them as long as the president remained in
power.
The end of the war and formation of a new government in Kabul would still
leave the task of rebuilding a war-torn country. The UN has appealed for at
least 100,000 tonnes of wheat to overcome severe food shortages. That
includes 30,000 tonnes for Kabul alone, where 1m people survive on food
coupons. 'The silos are empty: do we start digging cemeteries?' is how Mr
Sevan described it.
One Pakistani official said: 'The big powers were keen to finance the war
which brought about this catastrophe. Sadly, they are less likely to finance
the peace and rebuilding of Afghanistan, because the east-west power game is
not involved.'
While the chances of a settlement have never been more promising, some
diehard guerrilla leaders, such as Hezbi-i-Islami's Gulbuddin Hekmatyar,
appear to want to continue the fight.
In a statement yesterday the Hezbi said it would 'not accept any (Afghan)
government imposed by foreign forces'. It denied having joined the UN peace
process.
Last week Mr Sevan said: 'We cannot have 100 per cent unanimity. Nobody from
any group should think they can stop the process, because otherwise you'd
never start.'
Additional reporting by Gerald Bourke, recently in Khost
