FT  04 DEC 92 / Ford may cut Euro workforce by 10%: Heavy financial losses
are forcing the company to restructure
FORD, the US car maker, is expected to announce shortly a wave of
redundancies at its European plants with the elimination of several thousand
jobs.
The company, which has fallen heavily into loss in the second half of this
year following a record loss in 1991, is preparing a series of restructuring
measures which could include a cut of around 10 per cent of the workforce of
its European automotive operations which currently totals around 97,400.
In the UK a planned ballot by trade unions at Ford plants for industrial
action against compulsory redundancies and a cut in lay-off pay will
probably be postponed until January to take account of the next wave of job
cuts.
In the UK Ford has already had two rounds of jobs cuts this year with 2,100
redundancies announced in February and 1,550 in September.
Ford said yesterday that it was being forced to cut production at all its
European vehicle assembly plants during December in the face of continuing
weak sales and excess stocks.
The company, which has slipped to fifth place in the west European new car
market, has announced sweeping production cuts at its assembly plants in
Germany, the UK, Belgium and Spain as well as at several of its main
components plants.
At Genk in Belgium, which produces the Sierra, there will be no car output
after December 11 with the elimination of 12 production days, while output
of the Transit van there will stopped on six days.
Output of the Ford Fiesta and Scorpio cars at Cologne, Germany, is to be
halted for four days during December, while production of gearboxes will be
stopped for eight days.
Production of the Escort will be stopped for three days at the Saarlouis
plant in Germany, while output of the Escort at Ford's Halewood plant in the
UK will be stopped for seven days together with the elimination of four
night shifts. The Fiesta car assembly plant at Dagenham will be closed for
five days and the night shift will be cut on four more days.
GM plants to close, Page 27
