FT  21 MAR 92 / Chinese premier backs economic reform: Li Peng tells party
congress lid must be kept on political change and unrest
CHINA'S prime minister, Li Peng, yesterday gave cautious backing to the
economic reform strategy of Deng Xiaoping, the country's paramount leader,
but warned that neither political change nor unrest would be tolerated.
At the opening session of China's rubber-stamp parliament, the National
People's Congress, Li said: 'We must do two types of work at the same time,
attaching equal importance to both. We should promote reform and opening to
the outside world and, at the same time, crack down on criminal activity of
all kinds.'
The annual assembly session comes after reformists, led by Deng, have taken
the initiative in a fierce power struggle against hardline ideologues within
the country's communist government. Li is known to favour a cautious style
of central planning, while the reform lobby wants a more radical approach to
economic development.
Deng's picture has been plastered across southern newspapers in the past
week in a media barrage unprecedented since the days of Chairman Mao
Zedong's personality cult in the mid-1960s. This could be a strategy to
out-flank party hardliners in the north unhappy with the pro-reform push.
In his 'government work report' to the 3,000 delegates, Li substantially
reflected the new economic strategy pushed publicly by Deng in visits to
southern China in January and February.
Repeating remarks made by Deng, Li said in carrying out reform 'we should
emancipate our minds, seek truth from facts and boldly explore new ways'.
The test of reform was whether it raised living standards and boosted
productivity.
The report was half the usual length and relatively free from orthodox
communist slogans.
However, the Chinese premier failed to repeat Deng's claim that the greatest
danger came from the left not the right.
Reflecting fears of party hardliners about a breakdown of law and order and
an end to their grip on power, he said: 'We should not hesitate to take
forceful action against criminal activities and to eliminate social evils.'
Li said: 'We must be on the watch for any ideological trend towards
bourgeois liberalism, checking it the moment it appears and never allowing
it to run rampant.'
The work report declared a formal end to the austerity programme initiated
after the rampant inflation and economic overheating of 1988.
Because 'rectification' had only just ended, Li said the economic growth
target has been set at only 6 per cent over last year's figure, with
inflation to be kept under 6 per cent. He said China suffered from a growing
budget deficit, over-expanded credit, inflationary tendencies and
loss-making state enterprises.
The premier pledged to make state enterprises more responsive to the market,
but he stopped short of recommending large scale privatisation or
bankruptcies.
The controversial Three Gorges hydro-electric dam project should be included
in the 10-year plan that runs until the end of this century, Li said. The
57bn yuan (Pounds 6bn) project was technologically feasible and economically
rational and should be built.
For the first time, the report referred to human rights. China acknowledges
human rights as a proper subject for international discussion but opposes
the use of human rights as a pretext for interfering in other countries'
internal affairs, Li said.
