FT  16 MAY 92 / The olympia &amp; York Insolvency: A giant umbrella against
clouds of debt - Banks have huge exposure but strongest made highest loans /
Filings could threaten confidence in big property markets
MR STEVE Miller, the investment banker in charge of Olympia &amp; York's
negotiations with its 100 bank creditors, is famous-ly laconic. Yesterday he
described O&amp;Y's decision to seek protection from its creditors under
Canadian and US insolvency legislation as 'like going for a walk, noticing
it is raining, putting up an umbrella and keeping walking . . . This (the
creditor protection) is the umbrella that allows us to keep walking'.
On the other hand, investors throughout the world are not viewing O&amp;Y's move
as a little light drizzle. The Canadian dollar weakened yesterday morning as
did stock markets in Europe, the Far East and North America, with bank share
prices particularly vulnerable.
The banks, owed Dollars 12bn by O&amp;Y and now facing substantial writedowns,
have had no doubts about the severity of the property group's problems since
it disclosed two months ago that it had run out of cash.
Bankers view the insolvency filings as a formal public acknowledgement about
the severity of this liquidity or cash crisis, rather than a sign that the
crisis has become much worse. The banks were always going to suffer losses
on their O&amp;Y loans, whether or not the company sought court protection from
creditors.
Although some banks have huge exposure to O&amp;Y, the biggest loans have on the
whole been made by the strongest banks. The two biggest lenders are Canadian
Imperial Bank of Commerce and Royal Bank of Canada, each of which has an
exposure of Dollars 1bn. However, these two banks are so profitable that
even if they wrote off most of their O&amp;Y loans in a single accounting
period, they would probably remain profitable in that period.
The bank with the next biggest exposure to O&amp;Y, totalling around Dollars
800m, is Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation. Once again, it is one of
the world's most robust banks, although its exposure has provided valuable
propaganda for Lloyds Bank about the alleged weakness of Hongkong Bank's
credit controls - with both institutions competing to obtain control of
Midland Bank.
Citicorp, the biggest US bank, is the one financial institutions whose O&amp;Y
exposure, of about Dollars 225m, is troublesome. It has less capital, a key
measure of strength, than many of its peers and can ill-afford losses of any
sort.
This exposure is not life threatening. But it is a particular embarrassment
to Citicorp's top management, led by the chairman Mr John Reed, who have
staked their jobs on rebuilding the bank's capital to acceptable levels by
the end of the year.
There is, however, a separate danger for banks, which at the moment is
unquantifiable. O&amp;Y's filings could damage confidence in the New York,
Toronto and London commercial property markets, where O&amp;Y has the bulk of
its assets and which are already in the grip of a severe recession.
If commercial property prices in general fall further, then other property
companies could fall into difficulties. And banks with loans to those
companies could face further losses.
This was the risk which prompted governments and central banks in the UK,
Canada and the US to consider providing help to O&amp;Y so that it would not
need to make the insolvency filings. The most useful form of help discussed
was a bridging loan to be provided by the Canadian government to O&amp;Y to
facilitate the sale of a Toronto office block, the Exchange Tower.
But in the event, the authorities concluded that the risk of a 'systemic
crisis' in the property market was overshadowed by the political problems of
being seen to help bail out one of the world's richest families. They
thought that commercial property prices had already adjusted to take account
of O&amp;Y's problems before the filings. The prices might not have that much
further to fall so no bridging loan has been forthcoming.
As a result, O&amp;Y concluded that it would not be able to raise enough cash in
the coming few weeks to satisfy the competing demands for immediate
repayment of several groups of creditors. Mr Gerald Greenwald, O&amp;Y's
president, noted yesterday that it was becoming increasingly difficult 'to
be all things to all lenders'. Furthermore, the company was concerned about
the large numbers of cross-guarantee and cross-default provisions on its
Canadian assets.
The threat that creditors would seize O&amp;Y assets is the 'rain' referred to
by Mr Miller. O&amp;Y believed such precipitate actions would undermine its
attempts to organise an orderly reconstruction of its overall debt.
O&amp;Y, led by its self-effacing founder, Mr Paul Reichmann, will now try to
obtain the agreement of all its creditors to this reconstruction plan. The
key elements in the plan, which were put to O&amp;Y's 15 biggest bank creditors
last week, are that principal payments on Dollars 12bn of debt should be
deferred for five years and substantial interest payments on Dollars 4bn of
this should be made in the form of new O&amp;Y shares.
The filing under the Canadian Companies' Creditors Arrangements Act allows
O&amp;Y to halt payments on around CDollars 8.4bn of principal debt, and
CDollars 600-CDollars 700m a year in interest. The company hopes that the
protection will not be required beyond October 21, although other corporate
restructurings - much smaller and less complex - have usually taken
considerably longer than initially expected.
Murmurs of discontent were already evident on Thursday night when O&amp;Y argued
its case in a Toronto court. Lawyers for Bank of Nova Scotia expressed
concern about transfers of assets between those parts of the company which
were protected from creditors, and those which were not.
There was also concern about what the filing might do to the value of shares
and other O&amp;Y assets pledged as collateral for its loans.
The creditors are now likely, however, to get considerably more information
on O&amp;Y than they have in the past. The court order includes the appointment
of a partner of Price Waterhouse in Toronto as an 'information officer'. He
will monitor the company's cashflow and report regularly to the lenders on
O&amp;Y's financial condition.
