FT  17 MAR 92 / World Pharmaceutical Conference: More concentration in drugs
industry seen as inevitable
FURTHER concentration of the world's pharmaceutical industry is inevitable,
according to Professor Horst Meyer, head of pharmaceuticals at Bayer, the
German chemicals group.
The need for substantial investment in research and development required to
discover 'block-buster' drugs with sales of more than Dollars 500m a year
was beyond the means of all but the largest companies, he explained
yesterday at the Financial Times World Pharmaceuticals Conference in London.
The top ten companies were spending 35 per cent of all money dedicated to
pharmaceutical research and development and the proportion was likely to
increase, he said.
In addition, smaller companies were handicapped by their inability to market
drugs in the the three largest markets - the US, Europe and Japan. The top
pharmaceutical groups were able to recover their ever-larger investments by
selling the drugs in all three areas, added Professor Meyer.
However, Mr Bernard Taylor, executive chairman of Medeva, the small UK
pharmaceuticals group, said companies with sales of less than Pounds 1bn a
year only lacked critical mass if they had ambitions to invest substantial
amounts in research and development.
Mr Taylor said there was plenty of room for small and medium-sized companies
willing to market products whose sales were too low for the larger groups.
The smaller companies could invest in higher-margin products such as
vaccines where the barriers to entry remained high.
Alternative products available to such groups included drugs with
complicated delivery systems which were difficult to copy and
pharmaceuticals whose formulations could be enhanced with minimum additional
investment, he said.
Mr William Parfet, president of The Upjohn Company, the US healthcare
company, said winning groups would have to form effective strategic
alliances for access to essential technologies or to broaden their
geographic cover.
According to Dr Hakan Mogren, president and chief executive at Astra, the
Swedish company, pharmaceuticals groups would also have to concentrate their
research efforts in a limited number of fields if they wanted to be
successful.
