FT  26 OCT 92 / International Company News: CBOT to investigate irregular
trades
THE CHICAGO Board of Trade has asked federal investigators to look into a
series of irregular trades that shook its US Treasury bond futures and
options pits, and has acted to ensure the repercussions do not harm exchange
customers.
A small and well-respected CBOT clearing firm, Lee B. Stern, a Chicago-based
brokerage concern which guaranteed the man who made the huge trades last
Thursday, failed to meet a Dollars 9m margin call that evening. Stern is
responsible for the man's debts, even though he was not an employee or an
associate of the firm.
In an effort to collect the debt, the CBOT barred Stern from doing customer
business, transferred existing customer accounts to another member-firm, and
suspended the memberships of the three principals in the firm: Mr Lee Stern,
Mr Daniel Stern, and a former second vice-chairman of the exchange, Mr Les
Mouscher.
The CBOT took steps to guarantee the financial integrity of the exchange, a
spokesman said, and has not accused Stern of any wrongdoing. Mr Lee Stern
was not immediately available for comment. Until his seat was frozen, he was
chairman of the CBOT's floor practices committee.
The size of the trades could represent more than Dollars 30m. Floor members
say it appears the trades were made by an unauthorised, and as yet unnamed,
member.
The trades began shortly before news that the US jobless situation had
improved slightly last week, a negative piece of news for bond prices.
Within a few minutes the put purchases reached about 30,000 contracts, a
huge amount in a market where trades are more usual in quantities of 50 to
100.
They also hit bond prices, which had begun to slide on the jobless report.
The man then ordered pit brokers to sell thousands of bond futures
contracts. The action helped drive Treasury prices down to their lowest
level of the day.
The Chicago office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation confirmed that it
had opened an inquiry on the case at the CBOT's request, as had the US
Attorney's office.
