FT  21 APR 92 / NUT rejects call to boycott teacher appraisal scheme
THE National Union of Teachers pulled back yesterday from becoming the first
union to confront Mr John Major's re-elected government.
Amid bitter and confused scenes, the union's annual conference at Blackpool
rejected by 97,444 to 72,360 a left-wing call to boycott the appraisal of
teachers. The policy is already being implemented across much of the
country.
The union decided instead to seek, jointly with other teacher unions, to
negotiate acceptable schemes with local education authorities.
Under government plans, all teachers are to be appraised by senior members
of school staff by September 1994 and regularly thereafter. Ministers insist
 -to the NUT's dismay - that appraisal ratings should play a part in the
award of performance-related pay. A scheme will be drawn up next year by the
teachers' pay and conditions review body.
The vote on appraisal was one of a series of brinks from which the
182,000-strong NUT - the largest and most militant of Britain's teacher
unions - pulled back at Blackpool. On Saturday, it narrowly rejected a
motion committing the union to boycott the government's national tests for
seven and 14-year-olds.
Mr Doug McAvoy, NUT general secretary, and his embattled executive are
relieved to have avoided commitments to engage in strikes and boycotts.
Motions due for debate today - notably a call for action to limit class
sizes - could still involve conflict with the government.
Whatever the votes, Mr John Patten, the new education secretary, is set to
maintain his Conservative predecessors' stance of studied indifference to
the NUT. Appreciation of that has influenced the conference, with the
union's executive repeatedly urging delegates not to expose individual
teachers to the threat of dismissal or disciplinary action for defying
policies the government is determined to implement.
Yesterday's vote was also motivated by concern not to isolate the NUT from
its more moderate rivals which are steadily gaining members at the NUT's
expense. 'It is crucial that this union sticks with every other teacher
union,' Ms Anne Moran, for the executive, told delegates. Fewer than half of
all teachers now belong to the NUT. The AMMA and NASUWT teacher unions have,
respectively, some 40,000 and 60,000 members fewer than NUT; both have
adopted a pragmatic attitude to appraisal, testing and opting-out.
Mr Maurice Littlewood, president of the NASUWT, told the opening session of
his union's conference at Scarborough yesterday that appraisal was likely to
be a 'crude determinant for performance-related pay'. He called for the
assessment of 'whole-school performance' instead. He said: 'A collegiate
staffing structure is a more appropriate guarantee for the delivery of
improvement.'
