FT  06 FEB 92 / Myersons pressurise Liberty to accept funds plan
THE South African Myerson family is pressing Liberty, the fashion retailer
and wholesaler, to accept its proposals for the strategic development of the
group which would lead to the appointment of a new chief executive and the
injection of capital through a Pounds 20m rights issue.
The Myersons, who own 15.08 per cent of Liberty's ordinary voting shares,
are calling for an extraordinary general meeting to allow shareholders to
consider its suggestions.
The Myersons' investment vehicle, Concerto Capital Corporation, said it
would consider underwriting the proposed rights issue by subscribing Pounds
13m which would result in it increasing its shareholding to 28 per cent. But
Concerto proposed that Liberty's existing shareholders should be able to
exercise their pre-emption rights at the current market price of Pounds
6.50.
Liberty rejected the outline proposals which it claimed lacked 'any
substance'. Its advisers pointed out that Liberty was in no need of a rights
issue as it had minimal borrowings.
The Myersons, through their financial advisers, Hambro Magan, have been
wooing the various members of the founding Liberty family, who own 50 per
cent of the company's shares.
Since the end of last year, several meetings have been held with both the
'inner' Stewart-Liberty family, which controls 35 per cent of the equity,
and the 'wider' family, which controls a further 15 per cent. Earlier this
week, Hambro Magan had a further meeting with Mr Harry Weblin, chairman of
Liberty, and representatives of the Stewart-Liberty family.
Mr Brian Myerson, said Concerto would now write to Liberty's shareholders
explaining its stance and would seek meetings with institutional investors.
'We belive that a rights issue would put Liberty in a position where it
could grow far more aggressively over the next five years,' he said.
The Myersons started buying shares in Liberty last June and bought a further
14.6 per cent stake in October at a cost of Pounds 10.8m. Mr Myerson said at
the time that he had 'no present intention of bidding' and he repeated the
pledge yesterday.
Two years ago Mr Myerson accumulated shares in Aquascutum before the
upmarket fashion house turned and embraced a recommended bid from Renown,
the Japanese clothing group.
