FT  11 JAN 92 / Markets: Dow continues to let the good times roll - Wall
Street
HOW LONG can the good times continue? Will Wall Street crack?
Certainly, there was little sign of any big set-back for much of last week.
The Dow Jones has now closed at record levels on eight of the last ten
trading days - representing a near-10 per cent gain since the discount rate
cut took effect on December 20. Two of these all-time highs were scored last
week, on Tuesday and then again on Thursday.
True, the market turned significantly weaker on Friday morning, in the wake
of some ambiguous jobs data.
An increase in December payroll levels took Wall Street by surprise -
although some rumours to this effect had taken the edge off prices late on
Thursday. However, analysts were quick to dissect the figures; within the
overall improvement, they noted, manufacturing employment fell by 32,000,
and in the retail sector, by 16,000.
The main impact of these better-than-expected statistics, therefore, was to
curtail hopes of another early interest rate easing by the Federal Reserve,
rather than boost optimism about a reviving economy. This, in turn, prompted
some speculators to take profits.
But even if there is no further stimulus from Fed action in the short-term,
pessimists on Wall Street are hard to find.
The current level of interest rates already makes equities look attractive
alongside many alternative investments. According to some traders, moreover,
there are still investors who missed the initial surge in share prices and
who seeking to increase equity exposure.
In an inevitable 'virtuous circle,' this weight of money argument provides
psychological support to the market at these levels, and that in turn
encourages more small investors to join the party. Of course, bursts of
profit-taking are inevitable - this affected transportation stocks on
Thursday, for example - but real doomsters are hard to find.
Inevitably, a search for maximum returns has pushed many punters towards
smaller stocks, provoking a wave of gains in high-tech and biotechnology
issues. The Nasdaq index, which measures New York's over-the-counter market,
smashed through the 600-barrier on Tuesday. By Friday morning, it was still
holding around the 612 level.
Such heady market levels have spurred a flood of new issues. On the one
hand, the extremely low level of interest rates has pushed many corporations
towards the debt markets: on Wednesday, for example, a chunky Dollars
5bn-worth was sold by corporations. But equity offerings are playing their
part, too. Among the leading companies who announced new equity issues last
week were AMR, parent company of American Airlines, and International Paper.
To what extent Wall Street's optimism mirrors any genuine improvement in
economy remains a moot point. The corporate reporting season has yet to get
underway in any meaningful sense, although a handful of financial companies
appeared eager to tell the good news last week.
To no one's surprise, J. P. Morgan, the New York banking group, rolled out a
41 per cent earnings gain for the year - underlining the extent to which
parts of Wall Street have prospered while much of Main Street has suffered.
Even so, a slip in trading profits in third quarter levels and complicating
tax benefits, caused the shares to ease Dollars 2.50 to Dollars 67.50.
But the absence of any major rise in non-performing assets at Chemical Bank,
which merged at the end of last year with Manufacturers Hanover, gained a
more sympathetic reaction - in the form of a Dollars 1 1/4 rise, to Dollars
27 1/2 . Chemical's fourth quarter loss of Dollars 420m was largely
explained by restructuring charges, which totalled Dollars 625m.
Conversely, post-holiday news from the retail sector has been generally
grim. Zale, the largest jewellery retailer, still hovers on the brink of
bankruptcy, and two of the largest general/fashion merchandise groups -
Sears Roebuck and Woolworth - both unveiled restructuring plans last week.
At Sears, some 7,000 jobs may be affected as the company struggles to attack
its cost-base and improve automated procedures.
Such efforts notwithstanding, Moody's, one of the large US rating agencies,
still announced a possible downgrade of Sears debt, and signs of another
bout of shareholder agitation also developed. At Woolworth, some 10,000 jobs
may go as a handful of speciality chains within the retail group are
discontinued and other weak areas pruned back.
In short, if oxygen levels are high on Wall Street, the rest of the country
is still catching up. How quickly it can do so will determine the market's
course ahead.
 ----------------------------
Monday     3200.13 -  1.35
Tuesday    3204.83 +  4.70
Wednesday  3203.94 -  0.89
Thursday   3209.53 +  5.59
Friday     3199.46 - 10.07
 ----------------------------
