FT  21 JAN 92 / Police set to raid Hyundai workers: Fighting feared as
strike talks halted
TALKS TO avert a clash between a huge force of riot police and workers
barricaded at South Korea's largest car-maker ended in discord yesterday and
a police raid seemed imminent, a company spokesman said, Reuter reports from
Seoul.
'The two sides failed to narrow any differences. The chances are growing
that police will enter the company to end the occupation,' a spokesman for
Hyundai Motor Company said by telephone.
It was not clear whether the talks between workers and management would
resume today, the spokesman said.
Police helicopters hovering overhead dropped tens of thousands of leaflets
calling for an end to the occupation of Hyundai's five car plants in the
south-eastern city of Ulsan.
Thousands of masked and hooded car workers armed with metre-long steel pipes
are dug in behind towering barricades of trucks, cars dragged off assembly
lines, tyres, car doors and hijacked fire engines.
Many of the workers staged a 'defensive exercise' yesterday, hurling petrol
bombs and iron bolts in readiness for a police assault, witnesses said.
About 15,000 riot police deployed in the city were standing by to evict the
strikers, news reports said.
In a riverside park in Ulsan, about 30,000 people demonstrated in favour of
a quick end to the labour dispute that they said was threatening to damage
the city's economy.
Ulsan is a leading industrial city and home to 14 companies owned by Hyundai
Group, one of South Korea's biggest conglomerates.
Workers who have occupied car plants since last Wednesday are demanding
better conditions, special bonuses and reinstatement of sacked union
members. The union also wants legal charges against union leaders to be
dropped.
'We asked workers to end the occupation first and discuss their demands
after operations of production lines are normalised,' the Hyundai spokesman
said after tense 90-minute talks at the main company building. 'The union
showed no signs of backing down today. The situation needs police
intervention,' he said.
A union spokesman said: 'We have nothing to give in the way of further
concessions. Now it's management's turn.'
In labour-management talks on Sunday, union leaders offered to temper their
demands for a special annual bonus if the company called off the riot
police, a union spokesman said by telephone yesterday.
The union proposed to work out a compromise over its demand workers be paid
throughout the dispute and offered to make up for production losses through
overtime.
