FT  10 JAN 92 / International Capital Markets: Chemical Banking registers
loss
CHEMICAL BANKING, the big US banking group formed late last year by the
merger of Manufacturers Hanover and Chemical Bank, yesterday reported a loss
of Dollars 420m in the fourth quarter after a restructuring charge of
Dollars 625m.
The charge, which had been expected, was taken to cover the costs of a
merger which created the second biggest banking group in the US. Excluding
the charge, Chemical made an operating profit of Dollars 205m in the last
quarter and Dollars 779m for 1991.
The group's operating earnings in the quarter and the full year were buoyed
by lower short-term domestic interest rates, which helped lift overall net
interest income 28 per cent to Dollars 1.2bn. The steady fall in US interest
rates throughout the year boosted profit margins and reduced funding costs,
while interest payments received from Brazil during the year, but not
included in earnings until the final quarter, contributed Dollars 107m.
Trading revenues were also robust during the quarter, rising slightly to
Dollars 126m. On the costs side, non-interest expenses between October and
December, excluding the restructuring charge, were Dollars 1.16bn, higher
than at the same stage of 1990 but down from the Dollars 1,18bn incurred in
the previous quarter.
Provisions for losses totalled Dollars 450m, of which Dollars 104m was for
an addition to allowances for non-Less Developed Country (LDC) loans, and
Dollars 346m for non-LDC net charge-offs. LDC net charge-offs, including
losses on sales and swaps of debt, reached Dollars 524m.
Wall Street applauded the new bank's quarterly figures, which were better
than analysts' forecasts. On the New York Stock Exchange, Chemical's shares
rose Dollars 1 1/4 to Dollars 27 1/2 close of trading.
Later this month Chemical will sell Dollars 1.25bn of common stock, using
the proceeds to boost its capital base. The group currently has assets of
Dollars 139bn and shareholders equity of Dollars 7.3bn.
