FT  17 JUN 92 / Leading Article: So farewell then Neddy
NOTHING IN the turbulent lifetime of Britain's National Economic Development
Council has surprised so much as the manner and timing of its abolition.
Had Neddy been despatched rather than mutilated by Mrs Thatcher and her
Chancellor Nigel Lawson in 1987, no one would have wondered at the
government's motives. As it is, with a more pragmatic prime minister in
Downing Street and the most interventionist boss at the Department of Trade
and Industry since 1979, there is much speculation about the temperature of
the discussion which led to yesterday's announcement. Mr Michael Heseltine,
after all, is on record as favouring a strengthened Neddy.
Ministers yesterday claimed there had been no disagreement, while some
officials detected Treasury retaliation in advance of Mr Heseltine finding
time to pump up the organisation. Still others observed cunning in the
actions of the president of the Board of Trade in taking industry-government
relations more firmly under his own wing.
There will, however, be few mourners at the passing of an organisation which
has struggled for 30 years to find an apt role in the British scheme of
things.
Neddy began in 1962 as Harold Macmillan's answer to the French Commisariat
du Plan, degenerated under the Wilson government to the slapstick
incompetence of Labour's National Plan, before having its heart burned out
by the failures of Labour's social contract and the attack upon the
principle of even moderate northern European-style tripartism by Mrs
Thatcher.
More vacuous
During the Thatcher years, the full National Economic Development Council
met less frequently and spoke more vacuously. It was for the most part a
true dialogue of the deaf, failing to exercise serious influence upon
critical matters, such as pay-setting procedures, or even microeconomic
concerns, like the crisis in training.
Even in its reduced state, however, the National Economic Development
Office, the organisation's combined secretariat and think tank, continued to
produce reports on supply side matters and on individual industrial sectors.
At their worst, these reports resembled lobbying briefs by trade
associations; at their best, they provided well-researched conclusions which
influenced the industrialists and trade union leaders who had co-operated in
their construction.
Treasury's grasp
It was not clear from Mr Heseltine's words yesterday how he sees the
post-Neddy world. There will be no more regular formal meetings, no comment
on macroeconomic matters now again securely in the Treasury's grasp and
probably, he suggested, not much dialogue with trade unionists. He will,
however, talk to business as he thinks fit and is re-organising his
department along more sectoral lines which may well increase the
effectiveness of this process.
Two main drawbacks are immediately visible. The new arrangements will be
conducted in the privacy of Mr Heseltine's salon and so research will
presumably be carried out by or at the behest of the government machine and
will be published if and when it suits government. This is a small but
noteworthy step away from more open government and pluralistic thinking and
one which will need to be remedied. The case for an independent council of
economic advisers, a German-style panel of 'wise men' and/or an independent
central bank equipped to provide relief from the errors which have
characterised the Treasury's judgment in recent years is stronger than ever
now that Neddy is to die.
Second, by avoiding the involvement of organised labour in his
deliberations, Mr Heseltine's endeavours will be denied the possibility of
that commonality of purpose which Neddy has sometimes fostered. Managers, of
course, bear the main responsibility for communicating with their companies'
employees, but the British economy remains one bedevilled by delusion, not
least in the area of pay.
Neddy may well have been something of a pantomime cart horse in the 30-year
war to establish a British economy capable of low inflation and steady
growth, but the load it was born to pull is still there.
