FT  16 JUL 92 / France 'too dependent on N-energy': Raise electricity
prices, says IEA
FRANCE should reduce its dependence on nuclear energy and bring its low
electricity prices more in line with production costs, the International
Energy Agency (IEA) said yesterday in its first report on the country.
France's nuclear programme, the biggest in western Europe, is highly
efficient and has helped reduce the country's dependence on imported energy,
says the IEA, an influential advisory and co-ordination body which groups
most members of the Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD).
Since the 1973 oil price shock, France has halved its dependence on energy
imports but still buys nearly all its oil from abroad, says the IEA in a
report to mark France's entry to the organisation. France refused to join
the IEA on its formation in 1974 because it feared this would diminish its
energy policy independence, but changed its mind during the Gulf war, in
view of the organisation's success in co-ordinating the west's oil stocks.
The IEA praises France's low carbon dioxide pollution, a side effect of its
nuclear dependence. Emissions of carbon dioxide there have fallen by a
quarter over the past 12 years to 1.9 tonnes per head, among the lowest in
the IEA.
Yet the organisation warns that France should now do more to diversify away
from nuclear energy, which accounts for 75-80 per cent of electricity and 37
per cent of total energy use. 'This is a concern from the point of view of
the flexibility of the system,' said Mrs Helga Steeg, IEA executive
director.
The report stresses that France should maintain and modernise its nuclear
programme, but suggests it should consider supplementing this with more
natural gas and clean coal technology. It also disapproves of exports of
nuclear electricity, a significant source of income for Electricite de
France, which Mrs Steeg argued was 'not a solid policy' for importing
countries. Last year Britain was France's largest export customer, followed
by Switzerland and Italy.
French electricity prices do not always reflect costs, especially in home
central heating, adds the report. Improvement is needed here to encourage
energy saving and to give a fairer chance to other kinds of energy. It does
not question the usefulness of the monopolies held by France's state-owned
electricity and gas utilities, but urges France to promote more competition
in energy supply.
