FT  02 MAR 92 / Management: Over the heads of the politicians - Charles
Leadbeater asks business leaders what contingency plans they are making for
a change in government, and meets with a blank response
As Britain's political leaders, with their teams of strategists, pollsters
and public relations gurus, feverishly finalise their plans for the election
campaign, the captains of the nation's industry look on with an air of
bemused indifference.
Business has grown used to having the Tories in power. It has been the
beneficiary of more than a decade of reform designed to promote a healthier
commercial climate. Yet companies seem unruffled by the prospect of a change
of government.
Robin Biggam, chairman and chief of BICC, the construction, engineering and
cables group, voices a widely held view: 'Political uncertainty really has
had no direct bearing on the way we are managing the business.'
What explains the equanimity with which managers view the election and how
well grounded is their confidence that political turmoil will not have a big
impact on the way they do their jobs?
Big British companies are less vulnerable to political pressures than they
were a decade ago, because the nature of the pressures has changed and so
have the businesses.
Large companies such as GKN, the engineering group, have reduced their
reliance upon the UK economy and thus their vulnerability to changes in
government policy. As Sir David Lees, GKN's chairman, explains: 'Two thirds
of our business is overseas, a decade ago two thirds was in the UK.'
Moreover, there is greater agreement than before over economic policy.
Sterling's membership of the European exchange rate mechanism has provided
an anchor for other policies, while European economic and monetary union
will also impose constraints on budget deficits. Both parties are at least
rhetorically committed to the market economy, sceptical of incomes policies
and pledged to develop Britain's role within a more integrated EC economy.
It is therefore not surprising that industrialists say the policy debate in
the election campaign has had little direct impact on business. A key
indicator of that can be seen in investment intentions. Companies say they
are not delaying investments to wait until the outcome of the election is
clear.
Sir David at GKN says: 'We are planning investment decisions on a two- to
four-year horizon, so short-term political factors cannot have much of a
bearing upon those decisions. The odd company car purchase might have been
deferred. But big decisions do not depend upon politics.'
The main impact is indirect. Industrialists are increasingly concerned that
uncertainty among consumers is delaying recovery. Many companies believe
strong underlying demand in housing and consumer markets is being held back
because consumers are waiting for the outcome of the election. A further
delay to calling the election or a hung parliament would further prolong the
uncertainty and thus the recession.
John Hudson, the chief executive of Wagon Industrial, the Telford based
engineering group, said: 'Political uncertainty is having a most
debilitating effect upon consumer markets.'
Tom O'Connor, deputy chairman of Elta plastics, agrees: 'Consumer markets
need something to create a degree of confidence. Nothing will do that before
the election and a hung parliament could be very serious because that would
mean another election in 12 months.'
According to Sir David: 'The general unease among consumers, about issues
such as the effects of tax plans, is quite harmful. There is a danger that
if the government waits for confidence to pick up before calling an election
it will just compound the unease and delay the recovery.' So companies'
planners may be ready to adjust their projections of the timing of the
recovery to take account of when the election is called and whether it
delivers a clear verdict.
However, managers at three groups of companies will be thinking about the
election with much greater attention to detail than manufacturing industry
in general.
Life could change dramatically for public corporations which could be
privatised if the Tories win - British Rail and British Coal  - and for
privatised companies that could face a threat of renationalisation if Labour
wins - principally the water companies.
The very existence of BR as a corporate entity depends on whether a
Conservative government returns to carry out its rail privatisation plans.
Sir Bob Reid, BR chairman, has sought to protect his managers from the worst
effects of the uncertainty by telling them to get on with their work while a
small policy team at headquarters writes position papers, briefs the board,
and fields requests for information from the Department of Transport.
Defence companies, such as British Aerospace and GEC, stand to lose the most
from changes in government procurement policies. At BAe the appointment of a
new chairman is likely to be delayed until it is clear who will be the
company's political masters. The Saudi Arabian government is thought to be
delaying extending its lucrative arms deal with the company until the
election is decided.
Businesses in Scotland and Wales may have the most to worry about from the
changes which might flow from growing calls for devolution.
Scottish companies are already unsettled. Ron Garrick at Weir group, the
Glasgow-based engineer, said: 'The Scottish scene is very uncertain, the
debate is very confused and shallow. There is strong opinion in favour of
devolution which would come with tax raising powers. That is very concerning
because some people in Scotland would go crazy if they were given the
opportunity to raise funds with other people's money.'
He added: 'That means we are not rushing major investments decisions in
Scotland but we will be going ahead with investments in England. Business
will vote with our feet.'
The political environment for business is in the midst of a significant
change, but the election is only a small part of political shift is from the
values, language and priorities of Thatcherism to those of the post-Thatcher
world whether run by a Tory or Labour government.
The free wheeling, debt funded, entrepreneurial, laisser faire boom of the
1980s is over. In the first half of the 1990s growth will be slower, profits
harder to win and the outlook less stable than in the 1980s.
British managers are coping with after effects of the Thatcher boom,
fighting their way through recession. They are only just beginning to
address how the skills which will be demanded of them in the years to come
will differ from those of the decade just gone.
