FT  30 JAN 92 / Survey of Saudi Arabia (11): Steady growth - The private
sector
THE Saudi private sector will always be something of a tic bird living on
the broad buffalo back of the country's state-run oil industry.
It is a bird the government has eagerly fed to fatten over the past 15 years
with heavy investment in infrastructure, cheap loans, industrial cities, and
other incentives. But, as one Riyadh banker remarks: 'If you add up all the
private sector initiatives in the context of the Dollars 45bn Saudi Arabia
earned with oil last year, it's never going to amount to very much.'
To be strictly accurate, the non-oil sector of the Saudi economy makes up 80
per cent of GDP. However, once the government and the service sector - much
of which itself depends directly on the government - are stripped out, along
with the hugely subsidised agricultural sector, the residual private sector
makes up just over 20 per cent of national income.
And it is this area of the economy - essentially privately run industry -
which the government is most interested in nurturing. The last three
five-year plans have all set as a priority the expansion of the kingdom's
private manufacturing and industrial base, both as a diversification from
oil earnings alone and as an employer for the large cohort of young Saudis
now joining the work force.
To this end, the government has created the now-self-financing Saudi
Industrial Development Fund to offer interest-free lending to industry, and
has built from scratch the two industrial cities of Yanbu and Jubail. It has
also fostered the recent growth of private joint stock industrial investment
companies.
Behind these initiatives lies the government's desire, having done the
ground work by paying for the kingdom's well-developed but highly expensive
infrastructure, to devolve to the private sector the means and
responsibility for its own independent organic growth.
The result so far has been one of steady growth. The kingdom now has more
than 2,000 working factories and is seeing up to 50 new units open annually.
But under the latest five-year plan, which began in 1990, the government
wants to see this rise to up to 80 new factories a year.
If this target can be achieved by sheer enthusiasm alone, it should be
easily attained, given the gung-ho post-war mood among Riyadh's bankers and
businessmen. 'The profits are good, performance is good - people are just
bullish,' says Sheikh Suleiman Olayan, chairman of the large Olayan
industrial group.
There is no question that Saudi Arabia's private sector had a good war. The
influx of more than 800,000 people during the crisis did wonders for
consumer goods, car and property markets last year, particularly in the
Eastern Province. Supplying Kuwait's immediate reconstruction needs also
provided a fillip for Saudi construction companies, which have seen lean
times since the booming early 1980s.
Moreover, seldom has the private sector been more liquid. Banks alone have
some SR200m in liquid assets on their books and money has flowed back into
the kingdom since the war. 'It's a lot to do with sentiment and the feeling
that Saudi Arabia came out of the crisis a more confident and safe place,'
says one diplomat.
However, Saudi Arabia is one of six countries in the limited Gulf market all
pursuing identical policies to encourage manufacturing, all of them heavily
public sector-backed. In each, after nearly 20 years of exploring all
avenues of viable import substitution, the scope for further growth is
becoming tighter.
Moreover Saudi investors generally prefer their money to make fast returns
and stay liquid. The risk and longer-term returns of direct industrial
investment have not traditionally made it the first port of call for most
Saudi investors.
In addition, banks which are still seeing off the painful effects of some
dubious direct investment in the mid-1980s are deeply cautious about making
fresh domestic business lending. Furthermore, given Saudi Arabia's small
population, many bankers reckon that profitable opportunities are in any
case thin on the ground. 'With little more than 7m Saudis, you can only
manufacture so much toothpaste,' says one banker.
To bridge the gap between reluctant Saudi investors and such opportunities
as exist, the government has placed particular emphasis on the growth of
joint stock companies designed specifically to seek and nurture promising
enterprises.
The first such company, National Industrialisation Company, was set up in
1984 and has since invested in 45 companies across a spectrum from aircraft
repair companies, glass manufacturers, canning companies and foundries to
petrochemical groups. Much like a venture-capital company, NIC, which
declared a 1990 profit of Dollars 4.8m and expects Dollars 8m for 1991, in
most cases takes a minority share in a company and appoints a representative
to the board.
According to Mr Khalid al-Thukair, NIC's general manager, the company is
taking a lead the banks should follow. 'You can't blame them for their
caution after the mid-1980s, but now we need more courageous steps from
them,' he says.
Mr al-Thukair is among a growing group of Saudi businessmen who believe the
country can offer not just a broader industrial base but even an expert
springboard for the whole Middle East.
The kingdom's advantages, he argues, are an unmatched infrastructure, cheap
transport and energy, the availability of interest-free loans from the SIDF
for up to 50 per cent of the project and cheap expatriate labour from Asia.
However, these are exactly the same advantages claimed by the kingdom's
neighbours. It is also fair to say that such advantages can be temptingly
sustained only through strong public sector support, which comes down
finally to sustained strong oil revenues.
Nevertheless, as an example of how these factors can combine to make even
the unlikeliest-sounding product a runner in Saudi Arabia, Mr al-Thukair
cites the example of a NIC-sponsored scheme to set up a newsprint factory in
the kingdom. The SR1bn project, due for completion in 1994, will import wood
chips bought on the world market to supply the paper pulp and, he argues,
the plant will supply not only all Saudi Arabia's needs but also export
throughout the Middle East.
NIC's lead in developing manufacturing industry has since been followed by
subsequent joint-stock companies, notably the Saudi Industrial Export
Company, set up in 1989, and the Arabian Industrial Company, a year later.
Allied to these groups are offset contractors, such as British Aerospace,
the lead contractor for the al-Yamamah arms deal, and Hughes Corporation,
which heads up the US Peace Shield arms programme, both of which are
scouring the kingdom for viable industrial joint ventures to fulfil their
reinvestment obligations under their respective arms deals. Since the
BAe-led programme got under way in 1988, 14 projects have been proposed and
11 have won official approval to proceed with full feasibility studies and
business plans.
These projects range from proposals to manufacture drugs, vegetable oils,
military trucks, acrylic products, to the establishment of an aluminium
smelter using locally available bauxite and caustic soda.
No project is yet under way. This is partly because the offset programme has
not yet been able to establish a 'fast track' through the Saudi bureaucracy,
which even well-connected Saudi businessmen often find to be foot-dragging.
But it is also partly, according to some executives in the offset programme,
difficult to find manufacturing opportunities to the scale of the expected
investment.
The British offset deal, for instance, is aimed to see Dollars 1bn invested
in joint projects within 10 years, a sum which will be matched by Saudi
investors. But the total capitalisation of the 140 British-Saudi joint
ventures set up over the past 25 years is only Pounds 328m.
'You often wonder if the Saudis are not trying to develop their
manufacturing too fast,' says an executive in the programme. 'And you also
wonder whether there really are that many opportunities out there in the
first place.'
