FT  04 APR 92 / Chinese congress votes for giant hydro-electric scheme:
Go-ahead for controversial plan for world's biggest reservoir
THE Chinese parliament yesterday voted in favour of the controversial Three
Gorges dam on the Yangtze river, the biggest hydro-electric project in the
world, capable of generating one-eighth of all the power now produced in
China.
Over the last 40 years of communist rule numerous research studies into the
feasibility of the dam, first proposed 70 years ago, have been conducted,
but no decision made.
The giant scheme, costed at 57bn yuan (Pounds 8.2bn), has been criticised
inside and outside China on scientific, economic, environmental, social and
even defence grounds. The 600km-longreservoir backed up behind the dam could
be vulnerable to nuclear attack, opponents say.
The most recent feasibility study, completed in November 1988, recommended
building the dam at the eastern end of the Yangtze's famous Three Gorges,
one of the world's scenic wonders. Ten experts refused to sign the report.
The project was denounced in 1988 by Chinese critics as a Stalinist folly.
The vice-chairman of the China Democratic League, one of the country's eight
non-communist political parties, said China could not afford it. Bankers
warned of ballooning cost over the 18 years it would take to build.
The National People's Congress voted 1,767 to 177 in favour of building the
dam, but 664 abstained, the most in memory on any vote.
The benefits of centrally planned flood control and a huge power generating
capacity outweigh the scheme's defects, China's communist leaders argue. But
even the government acknowledges the magnitude of the problems, including
the displacement of more than 1m Chinese whose homes will be flooded.
All kinds of opinions were still welcome even after the project was approved
by the NPC, chairman Wan Li said early this week, anticipating today's
favourable vote while acknowledging dissent.
Dissenters include NPC deputies from Hong Kong and Taiwan and those seeking
to delay the project because of its cost and complex technical problems,
including sedimentation. The Sichuan port city of Chongqing at the western
end of the reservoir could silt up.
Upriver of the dam, Sichuan province bears the brunt of the project's
environmental damage and has 85 per cent of the people to be moved. The
flood-control and power-generating benefits go primarily to the citizens of
downstream Hubei province.
Widespread flooding in eastern and central China last summer, which killed
hundreds of people and cost billions of yuan, gave impetus to the Three
Gorges scheme. The starting date will depend on China's future financial
situation but trial resettlement of people is already under way.
The congress ended its annual session by approving humiliating changes to
hardline premier Li Peng's state-of-the-nation report, in a clear victory
for reformists.
This year's congress took place amid a power struggle between Marxist
conservatives and economic reformers led by 87-year-old paramount leader
Deng Xiaoping.
