FT  28 SEP 92 / Last dive for nuclear submarines: Options for discarding
ageing British vessels
THE END of the cold war has brought a problem: how to get rid of the
stockpiles of unused weapons and military hardware.
The basins of the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, more than three miles deep,
fissured with canyons that descend for a further seven miles, have often
seemed a tempting way out, particularly for troublesome nuclear waste.
Dumping low-level radioactive waste was common from the end of the Second
World War until 1982 when the London Dumping Convention, a worldwide treaty,
brought in a moratorium.
Rules on using the sea as a rubbish tip have continued to tighten - last
week saw the signing of two new treaties to curb Atlantic and Baltic
pollution. A regional and more strict version of the original London
convention, signed by 12 countries, extended the ban on dumping radioactive
waste by 15 years.
That means that if Britain and France, which must soon decommission nuclear
submarines and power stations, want to resume dumping after 2008 they will
have to convince their co-signatories it is safe.
Four of Britain's ageing nuclear-powered submarines are already out of
service. Conqueror, which sunk the Belgrano in the Falklands war, Warspite
and Courageous are languishing in Devonport dockyard in Plymouth, and the
oldest, Dreadnought, is in Rosyth, Fife. The highly radioactive fuel rods
have been stripped out of the hulks but a surrounding 30ft section still
remains contaminated, making conventional scrapping hazardous and expensive.
If the submarines were filled with concrete and scuttled where the Ministry
of Defence has been tipping conventional munitions, about 400 miles west of
Cornwall, they would sink to the hills of the Porcupine Plain on the seabed,
provided no air was trapped in them. As they are designed to dive only to
around 230 metres, it is likely that they would collapse under the pressure
of nearly three miles of water.
And then? Environmentalists fear radioactivity could gradually leak out. But
some scientists believe that would be unlikely, particularly if the hulks
landed near the mid-Atlantic Ridge. The jagged mountains running the length
of the ocean have been formed by rock pushing upwards, forcing apart the two
plates that make up the seabed, and widening the Atlantic by 2cm to 3cm a
year.
Professor Keith Clayton, head of the Department of Environmental Sciences at
the University of East Anglia, and an adviser on joint defence-environmental
committees, says: 'The Atlantic is by far the best place to put sub-marines.
If they go into the deep trenches it is possible they could be dragged into
the depths of the earth within some tens of thousands of years.'
It is clear that more research is needed on the effects of past dumping
before a permanent decision is made. The Department of the Environment it
has found that 'the effects have been benign'. But a fuller picture will
have to wait until next year, when the London convention will complete a
thorough study of post-war dumping.
Meanwhile, investigation of local horror stories is also starting. Officials
from the former Soviet Union suggested last year that up to 12 nuclear
submarines and three nuclear ice-breakers - possibly containing radioactive
fuel - had been scuttled near Finland.
Last week a joint Norwegian-Russian research ship reported that
radioactivity levels were lower than had been reported 10 years ago,
although it has yet to take samples nearer the coast of the former Soviet
Union. The International Atomic Energy Authority said: 'They have not yet
found anything unusual although this does not mean there will be no trouble
in the future.'
