FT  30 OCT 92 / Baltic troop withdrawal suspended
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin signed an order yesterday suspending the withdrawal
of Russian troops from the Baltic states because of concern for the rights
of Russians living there, Itar-Tass news agency said, Reuter reports from
Moscow.
It said the pullout from the former Soviet republics of Estonia, Latvia and
Lithuania would resume only when agreements had been signed with all three
on its form and on the social rights of soldiers and their families.
'The president's decision is connected with his deep concern at numerous
violations of the rights of the Russian-speaking population in the above
states,' Tass said.
Mr Yeltsin's move was the strongest yet to counter what Moscow regards as
human rights infringements against the large Russian minorities,
particularly in Latvia and Estonia.
Tass said he instructed the Russian Foreign Ministry to draft an appeal to
the United Nations asking the world community to investigate human rights in
the Baltics.
Mr Yeltsin also ordered the Russian government to draft agreements with the
three states to safeguard 'social guarantees' for Russian soldiers on their
soil.
The Russian leader said Moscow would make economic agreements with the
Baltics dependent on observance of the soldiers' rights. All three rely
heavily on Russia for energy and other supplies.
Russia has reserved its heaviest recent criticism for Estonia, where
Russians and other minorities making up some 40 per cent of the population
were excluded from parliamentary and presidential elections last month
because they have no automatic right to Estonian citizenship.
Moscow formally protested to Estonia last week, warning that serious ethnic
conflict could erupt there.
The Russian Defence Ministry said last week the withdrawal of troops would
be temporarily suspended because of problems rehousing the soldiers in
Russia.
Russia's birth rate has fallen by 12 per cent this year, apparently due to
economic hardship and falling living standards, the National Statistics
Committee said yesterday.
With deaths outnumbering births in 41 of Russia's 77 regions, the country's
population fell by 72,000 in the first nine months of the year.
