FT  29 OCT 92 / Danube dam threatens to open floodgates of hostility: An
explosive project
SINCE last weekend wave after wave of Slovak trucks have been lining up on
barges strung out across the Danube river near the village of Cunovo, a few
hundred metres from the border with Hungary. Round the clock they have been
tipping rock and concrete blocks into the swirling waters.
Less deadly than the exchange of tank and artillery fire in Yugoslavia, the
frenzied activity along this Slovak section of the Danube populated mainly
by ethnic Hungarians is nevertheless one of the most serious flashpoints in
the short history of post-communist Europe.
Hungary accuses the Slovak dammers of violating its sovereignty and has
invoked the emergency procedures of the Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe. Acutely aware of the hot breath of reawakened
nationalist passions at home, it has also threatened reprisals against
Slovakia if the damming is not stopped. Only military action has been ruled
out.
Budapest is outraged because the international frontier runs down the middle
of the old course of the river and the Cunovo dam stops the river just short
of the Hungarian frontier. It diverts the main flow into an artificial
channel entirely within Slovak territory, leaving only a relative trickle in
the old channel.
Slovakia has responded to Hungarian protests about territorial violation by
accusing Hungarian nationalists of wanting to stop the dam in order to
damage the Slovak economy and exacerbate tensions between Slovaks and the
republic's 500,000-strong ethnic Hungarian minority.
The Hungarian aim, they add, is to create instability 'to better pursue the
policy of autonomy for Hungarian minorities and later restoration of the
Hungarian empire,' according to Mr Julius Binder, head of Hydrostav, the
Czechoslovak state company building the barrage.
Western politicians appear only now to have woken up to the escalating
dispute just 70km downstream from Vienna. 'The row has sparked a new,
utterly unnecessary crisis in eastern Europe,' said Mr Klaus Kinkel, German
foreign minister, earlier this week while supporting Hungary.
Yesterday, in London, attempts to settle the crisis with EC mediation
continued against the background of the broader talks between central
European leaders and the European Community represented by Mr John Major,
current head of the EC presidency, and Mr Jacques Delors, European
Commission president.
The dam is a time-bomb left by the former Communist regimes who operated
under the rules of 'proletarian internationalism' which turned state borders
into little more than administrative boundaries and historical relics.
The project goes back to 1977, when the two governments signed an agreement
on a complex of dams along the Danube designed as a monument to socialist
engineering and fraternal co-operation.
But when Hungary's democratic movement emerged in the 1980s, it coalesced
around opposition to the dam on environmental grounds. Ecologists argued
that the dam and hydroelectric project at Gabcikovo would destroy the last
remaining inland delta along the Danube and pollute drinking water supplies.
The fear was, and remains, that carcinogenic sediment will build up in the
reservoir and pollute the falling water table.
Hungary's last reformist Communist government pulled out of the
hydroelectric project under popular pressure and the conservative coalition
government headed by Mr Jozsef Antall then unilaterally abrograted the 1977
treaty last year. But Slovakia, anxious to phase out polluting coal-fired
power plants and Soviet-designed nuclear power stations, argues that it
cannot afford to lose electricity from Gabcikovo nor waste the huge
investment already made in construction.
The economic case has become more pressing as Slovakia approaches
independence, increasingly concerned about energy security and about its
economic future without Czech subsidies.
Mr Zdenko Pirek, the deputy foreign minister heading the Czechoslovak
negotiating team, says they have gone out of their way to take Hungarian
sensibilities into account. The Czechoslovak side is not diverting the
waters at this time to start generating electricity from Gabcikovo but to
prevent early flooding sweeping away existing construction work, they say.
There the two sides stand today, each marshalling its own legal and
environmental arguments in a campaign for international support, and
moderates on both sides privately hoping that the EC will help them find an
internationally binding face-saving formula.
See Hungary survey
