FT  17 OCT 92 / Travel: A trip into storybook Amazon territory - One
advantage of eco-tourism is that it gives the locals an incentive to protect
their environment
PIRANHAS are much maligned. I can vouch for that having recently swum
unmolested in a branch of the Amazon. It was a most pleasant experience: the
water was clear and fresh, the shore soft white sand, and the sun shone out
of a clear blue sky. There was nothing sinister about it at all.
But I digress, since the purpose of my trip was neither to dice with death
nor to escape the Costa del Sol. It was to sample the wonders of the
Amazonian rain forest before too much of it falls to the logger's axe.
This year's Rio Earth Summit has quickened interest in that
newly-fashionable form of travel, eco-tourism, so where better to do it than
in the world's best-known ecological asset?
My own excursion took me to the northern part of Mato Grosso, a state in
west central Brazil bordering Bolivia, where the southern tributaries of the
Amazon rise. A party of us flew first to Cuiaba, the state capital which
bakes in the hot cerrado, Brazil's savannah.
From there we took a light aircraft for the two-hour flight to Alta Floresta
in Amazonia. Below us, as the trees multiplied, we could see the first
evidence of man's clash with nature. The ground was a patchwork of forest
and clearings, scarred by tracks in brilliant red earth.
At one point, huge earthworks dotted with pools of unnaturally blue water
appeared: this was the work of garimpeiros, the cowboy gold prospectors who
tear up the ground, wash out the precious ore and leave it bare and
polluted. Their destruction stains rivers for hundreds of miles.
Alta Floresta is a pioneer town: wide, dusty, hot. Founded only 16 years ago
by entrepreneur Ariosto da Riva as a model community, it got trampled by the
gold rush and now looks bruised. Much of the surrounding countryside has
been mown down, a few tall, charred trees a reminder of what once stood
there. But it has a fine hotel, the Amazonica, run by Ariosto's daughter
Vitoria, where a patch of preserved jungle crowds in on the bungalows, and
monkeys peer down at the visitors.
The Amazonica is the jumping-off point for the real adventure: a bumpy
hour-long mini-van drive down to the Teles Pires river, one of the Amazon's
largest southern arms, and then in a flat-bottom power boat for half-an-hour
up a smaller tributary, the Cristalino river. Here, at last, is storybook
Amazon territory: overhanging jungle, dark, fast-flowing water, and the
mystery of the tropical forest.
At a bend in the river overlooking distant rapids, Vitoria has built a
simple but comfortable lodge in a clearing: a place of brilliant coloured
flowers, countless tree species and showers of butterflies.
This was base for our excursions. Our first was an exploratory walk through
the forest - a far friendlier place than I had expected, level underfoot,
light overhead, ranks of tall, slender growths straining for the sunshine.
Hot and midgey, yes, but we were smothered in repellent.
You learn two things very quickly. One is not to expect much wildlife. The
Amazon is not Africa. The largest creature we saw was a capybara, the
world's biggest rodent, which looks like a hog. The sound you hear most is
the whoop of a guard bird which warns all the others that you are coming.
The other thing you learn is that the soil in the Amazon basin is poor and
cannot sustain much plant life, which is why most Amazonian plants obtain
their nutrients from the air with overground root systems or other weird
devices which give the jungle its fantasyland look.
Our second excursion was to view the Brazil nut trees - magnificent 150-ft
giants with vast girths, all protected by law. The tree survives in
symbiosis with a small rodent which opens up its fallen coconuts and buries
the big pips which we know as Brazil nuts. Vitoria is trying to promote
Brazil nuts as a way of encouraging conservation of the rainforest.
On the way back from the nuts, two things happened. Our boat attracted a
swarm of bees. We were unharmed, but I later learnt that bees proliferate in
the jungle, and I tasted some delicious Amazonian honey. Shortly afterwards,
in the slanting evening sunshine which picks out colours with special
brilliance, we saw a flock of bright red macaws fly noisily overhead and
settle high in the tallest tree: a wonderful sight that could have occurred
in no other place.
The following day, Vitoria took us on a three-hour boat excursion up the
Cristalino, over rapids (where I had my swim) to a distant river island
which is home to the hoatzin. This bizarre bird is half reptilian; it has
the remains of a claw on its wings and emits a nasty smell. It can barely
fly, and its young drop into the river when threatened. It is said to form a
link with prehistory. We were fortunate enough to spot one flopping from one
tree to the next, an untidy, wild-looking creature with a tiny head.
Most of the wildlife is where you can't see it - in the river. All the time,
the water plopped with rising fish. Watchful egrets, kingfishers and herons
perched on the overhanging branches. In the evening, we drifted down the
river by moonlight, shining torches under the river banks to catch the
orange glint of crocodiles' eyes.
Is eco-tourism just a way of dressing up old-fashioned travel in a new garb?
Possibly. But my trip up the Amazon was an eye-opener. You can't help
communing with nature at Cristalino. And Alta Floresta is an education in
the stresses caused by man's assault on jungle. Victoria arranged for us to
meet many members of the local community: the priest, the ranger, the
teacher. It is a tough life which makes our homely environmental concerns
seem rather precious.
The forest will be at risk until the loggers and the garimpeiros find
something more lucrative to do. One advantage of eco-tourism is that it
gives the locals an incentive to protect their environment.
Cristalino certainly has much to offer, and it is not bad value: six days
cost under Dollars 500-a-head all in. But the return flight from Rio de
Janeiro to Alta Floresta costs another Dollars 500 and, depending on
connections, could take a day-and-a-half. It is worth doing if you break the
trip at Cuiaba to take in the Pantanal, the vast marsh with its abundance of
aquatic life.
Contact: Floresta Tour, Rua Teodoro Baima 100,11, Sao Paolo 01220, SP,
Brazil; tel: (011)-258-7258.
