FT  24 DEC 92 / Bethlehem Christians have little to celebrate
A LARGE group of Christians from around the world will gather at midnight
tonight in Bethlehem to celebrate the birth of Jesus in the hilltop Judaean
town. But for the Christians for whom Bethlehem is home, there is not much
to celebrate - especially this Christmas.
The Palestinian Christian community is subject, like all local Arabs, to the
harsh strictures of Israel's 25-year control of the West Bank town, and over
recent years, their long-standing majority in the area has been upset by a
fast growing Moslem population.
Bethlehem's Christians - who form the bulk of the 50,000-60,000 Palestinian
Christians still left among the 2m Arabs of the West Bank, Gaza and
Jerusalem - have rarely felt their predicament more sharply than during the
row over Israel's deportation of 415 alleged Islamic fundamentalist
militants to Lebanon.
Publicly, Christian leaders, including long-time Bethlehem mayor, Mr Elias
Freij, declared solidarity with Hamas, the radical Moslem organisation that
is strong locally and which was the main target of Israel's action.
Palestinian Christians have no love for Israel or its repressive occupation.
But privately, many Christians in the area fear Hamas, which is dedicated to
establishing an Islamic state in Palestine in which Christians fear they
would be in jeopardy.
'We are afraid,' said Suha, a young Greek Orthodox woman (the Greek Orthodox
and Roman Catholics form the two biggest churches among Palestinian
Christians). 'The Moslems don't like the Christians and they are stronger.'
It is important not to overstate the case. Mayor Freij points out that,
historically, Christians have played an important part in the Palestinian
nationalist movement. Mrs Hanan Ashrawi, the Palestinian spokeswoman at the
peace talks, is, for example, from the tiny Palestinian Anglican community.
Mayor Freij says he does not fear subjugation by Moslems in an independent
Palestinian state.
But he does not conceal his anxiety about the long-term vitality of the
local Christian community. 'Of all the towns in the world, Bethlehem is the
capital of the Christians. It should always have a Christian character and
influence. How that can be realised, I don't know,' he says.
Until the middle of this century, Bethlehem was little more than a large
village of low stone houses dominated by the bulky Church of the Nativity,
built over the supposed site of Christ's birth.
The predominantly Christian population of those days of 10,000 has been
transformed, however. Waves of Palestinian refugees crowding into the town
since Israel's foundation in 1948 and a steady drain of Christian emigration
have resulted today in Christians making up only 35,000 of the 100,000
population of Bethlehem and its traditionally Christian neighbours, Beit
Sahour and Beit Jalla. Since 1967, much land has also been taken over by a
rash of Jewish settlements.
Mayor Freij says emigration - which began in the last century under the
Ottoman Empire - has led to a population of 300,000 in the Americas whose
roots are in the Bethlehem area - many in South America.
Hannah, a Catholic woman, says frankly that she and her family feel both
squeezed and neglected. Her son was arrested by Israeli soldiers a few weeks
ago from their home at midnight. He was severely beaten and held for a week
before being released. But she is also frightened by what she says is a wave
of violent robberies of Christian households by local - Moslem - thieves.
'Nobody helps the Christians,' she says. 'We are unhappy. We are afraid
because we are very few. I want very much to go to America.'
Mayor Freij says Christians all over the world should respond by giving aid
to the Christians of the town. 'I'm very distressed that we are just a
forgotten people. I think every Christian in the world has a moral
obligation towards Bethlehem.'
