FT  03 NOV 92 / Kohl may seek curbs on asylum
GERMAN Chancellor Helmut Kohl may introduce emergency laws to limit the
influx of asylum-seekers if the governing coalition and the opposition
Social Democratic party (SPD) fail to reach agreement on how to deal with
the problem, according to government officials.
SPD officials accused Mr Kohl of planning a coup from above, saying that any
new measures limiting the right to asylum would be unconstitutional and
would undermine the 1949 Basic Law which says the granting of asylum is a
basic right for those who are persecuted.
A change in the Basic Law requires a constitutional amendment, which must be
approved by a two-thirds majority in parliament, thus needing the support of
the SPD.
The SPD, which yesterday said it might support greater controls on the
borders, is becoming increasingly divided over the issue in the run-up to
its annual conference later this month.
Mr Bjorn Engholm, the party leader, supports an amendment to the
constitution, but grass-roots membersreject this on the grounds that it
amounts to supporting those in the ruling coalition who favour new curbs on
immigration and refugee status.
The measures proposed by the governing Christian Democrat-led coalition
would allow officials the right to reject immediately applicants who cannot
prove they are being repressed or persecuted.
Mr Kohl's proposals coincide with growing pressure on the SPD to take a
stand on the immigration issue, and with the publication of figures which
showed a record monthly influx of 48,985 foreigners seeking political asylum
last month.
The number of asylum-seekers fleeing to Germany swelled to 450,000 for the
first 10 months of this year, compared with 120,000 in the whole of 1990,
and 256,000 in 1991. The greatest number came from Poland and Romania.
Mr Kohl is under pressure from the right wing of the Christian Social Union
in the coalition, and from the nationalist Republican party, which want
greater curbs on those wishing to seek refuge in, or the right to emigrate
to, Germany, even though only 5 per cent of asylum applicants are granted
such status.
