FT  11 JUN 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Japan loses its yen
for Paris - Why Europe's luxury goods makers are having a tough time
There was a time in the late 1980s when Japanese tourists were buying so
many quilted leather bags at the Chanel shop on Rue Cambon in Paris that
Chanel was forced to 'ration' them to three per person. Unabashed, the
Japanese lurked outside, bribing passers-by to buy more bags for them.
Chanel is not the only European company to have benefited from the Japanese
lust for western luxury goods. In the 1980s, Japan emerged as the fastest
growing market for European fashion, perfume and cosmetics, thanks to the
apparently insatiable appetite of Japanese consumers for Hermes scarves,
Louis Vuitton luggage and Gianni Versace clothes.
Japan's recent economic problems - tumbling corporate profits, plunging
share prices and the precarious property market - present a depressing
scenario for Europe's fashion and beauty groups. The economic squeeze has
already affected their sales in Japan itself and to Japanese tourists in
other countries. The Europeans are now anxiously trying to assess the
long-term impact on one of their most important markets.
The catalysts for Japan's emergence as an important source of sales for
European fashion and beauty brands were economic growth and the increasingly
cosmopolitan attitude of Japanese consumers who were travelling more widely
and becoming more receptive to western trends.
These influences were accentuated by the frenetic growth of Japan's property
and stock markets. This created a new group of nouveau riche consumers,
happy to spend their new-found profits on Cartier jewels and Gucci shoes.
The property boom also priced the established middle classes out of the
housing market. Young couples were forced to postpone purchasing their own
homes, leaving them with more to spend on themselves.
Clarins, the French skincare company, sells more each year from a single
counter at the Isetan department store in the Shinjuku area of Tokyo than in
some of the smaller European countries. Paul Smith, the London menswear
designer, depends on Japan for nearly two-thirds of his turnover.
LVMH, the French luxury goods group behind Louis Vuitton, makes more than a
quarter of its sales in Japan. And Japanese tourists account for a fifth of
the sales of some products, such as perfume, at the Printemps department
store in Paris. 'Japan is incredibly important in sales terms,' says
Susannah Hardy, luxury goods analyst at Bacot Allain Warburg in Paris. 'It
is even more important in terms of profits because the margins on products
sold there are so high.'
Times have changed. The boom in the property and stock markets fizzled out
two years ago. The first products to suffer were the most expensive  - the
Impressionist paintings and opulent jewels. Cartier, one of the most
prestigious Paris jewellers, saw its Japanese sales slip by 12 per cent last
year.
Until recently, more mundane luxuries, French perfumes and Italian designer
clothes, were unaffected. But the recent run of Japan's economic problems
has depressed consumer confidence. Sales in department stores, the main
outlets for European fashion and beauty products, fell by 2 per cent in
April compared with the same month last year. The Japanese have also cut
back on international travel, thereby reducing 'souvenir' sales to tourists.
'It is too soon to say what will happen,' says Philippe Vadon, president of
the Japanese subsidiary of L'Oreal, the French cosmetics group. 'So far, all
we have seen is a slowdown in the extraordinary rate of growth, experienced
in the late 1980s. Remember, in Japan last year, our Lancome brand grew by
30 per cent.'
Serge Rosinoer, chief executive of Clarins, agrees. Clarins' Japanese sales
rose by 20 per cent in the first quarter of this year, compared with the 30
per cent Rosinoer would have expected had the economy been healthier.
So far, the slowdown has not been too severe. Moreover, the strength of the
yen in the first quarter has helped to offset any reduction in growth.
However, the Japanese slowdown comes at a time when European fashion and
beauty groups are already under pressure in other markets, notably the US.
There is also concern that the situation in Japan will deteriorate. The
worst scenario would be a repetition of 1974-75 when the economy sank into
recession, savings ratios rose and consumer spending collapsed. 'In the
past, the Japanese have responded to recession by saving more and spending
less,' says Claude Meyer, chief economist at Bank of Tokyo in Paris. 'We
just don't know yet whether that will happen again this time.'
These problems are aggravated by the changes in Japanese consumption
patterns. Even before the economic squeeze, the Japanese were becoming more
discerning in their choice of western goods. The old era, when wealthy
consumers seemed willing to buy just about anything with a glitzy European
label, has ended.
'The Japanese are now more mature, discriminating consumers,' says Peter
Wallis, a specialist in luxury goods at SRU, the London-based management
consultancy. 'They have travelled more widely and are more knowledgeable
about what they are buying. They want a wider choice and they want quality.'
Louis Vuitton's experience bears this out. It began in Japan by selling its
signature luggage with 'LV' initials stamped all over the leather. Its range
has now widened and the fastest-growing line in Japan is the more discreet
cuir epi collection. 'The Japanese are looking for quality and price,' says
Emmanuel Prat, president of LVMH in Japan. 'Image is not enough any more.'
In theory, this may make it more difficult for European companies to sell to
Japan. Wallis suspects it will certainly make life more difficult for less
prestigious brands which may be squeezed out of the market.
Meanwhile the established players are waiting to see whether the Japanese
economy worsens. Their problem is that there is little they can do to
mitigate the situation. Most accept that Japan is a complex market,
demanding long-term commitment. They are reluctant to jeopardise their
investment in research and distribution by adopting the conventional,
counter-recessionary tactics - price-cutting, accelerating product launches
or reducing promotional budgets - they might employ in other countries.
'We are talking about a very, very important market,' says Rosinoer. 'We
cannot run the risk of damaging our position by adopting short-term
strategies. Whatever happens, we will sit it out because we are in Japan for
the long-term.'
