FT  17 JUL 92 / Heat is on in the monetary kitchen: The Bundesbank is simply
doing the job that other European countries joined the ERM for it to do
On Monday, at the meeting of the European Community's finance ministers, Mr
Norman Lamont of the UK and Mr Michel Sapin of France gave the Germans a
lesson in how independent they think a central bank ought to be. The
Bundesbank has replied.
'My deep conviction,' argued Mr Sapin, 'is that the Bundesbank is not
outside reality, and that the reality is that interest rates are too high.'
Where Mr Sapin blustered, Mr Lamont merely hoped. But the behaviour of both
was absurd. The Bundesbank is simply doing the job that other European
countries joined the exchange rate mechanism for it to do.
The Bundesbank has a consolation for its unpopularity. German unification
has given the institution, threatened as it is by extinction before the end
of the decade, an excuse for shaking the European monetary tree to see who
falls off. By raising its floor rate of interest, the discount rate, from 8
per cent to 8.75 per cent, while retaining the 3 1/2 -5 1/2 per cent target
for growth of broad money, the Bundesbank did a little more shaking
yesterday.
The fears of the ministers were understandable. Economic growth in Europe,
excluding Germany, was only half a per cent last year. This year it is
forecast by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) to be a mere 1 1/2 per cent.
Unfortunately, the consequences of German unification cannot be readily
evaded. As the OECD's recent report on Germany notes, 'since unification,
all aspects of economic policy - fiscal, monetary and structural - have been
under increasingly intensive pressure'. The questions to be asked are not
just how the pressure is making itself felt externally, but how long it will
last and what, if anything, can be done to relieve it.
In 1991 west Germany's gross national product per head was DM41,900 (Pounds
13,900), while east German GNP per head in 1991 was only DM12,100, less than
30 per cent of the west German level. Initially, the inequality had not
appeared so huge. East German gross domestic product per head was measured
at some 60 per cent of the west German level in 1989. But eastern Germany
lost 45 per cent of its GDP between 1989 and 1991 (see chart), perhaps the
biggest slump to befall an economy in peacetime. Over the same period west
German GDP rose by 8 per cent.
To those who had it was given. But then an effort had to be made to take
some of it away. East German private consumption alone was as big as its
total GNP in 1991. Total expenditure - public and private consumption plus
investment - was nearly 90 per cent larger than its GNP. The difference was
made up by west Germany, this inflow of resources being equal to 6 1/2 per
cent of west German GNP.
A little over two-thirds of the resources transferred to east Germany have,
in fact, come out of west Germany's external surplus. This shift was at the
expense of the rest of the world, and mainly of western Europe. Given their
complaints about Germany's trade surpluses, however, it is difficult for
these countries also to moan about their disappearance.
Contrary to what one might suspect, there has been no reduction in the
overall west German standard of living. On the contrary, it has risen almost
as fast as west German GNP, as has west German real disposable income, by
6.3 per cent in 1990 and then 2.2 per cent in 1991.
The domestic conduit for the resource transfer from the external account to
east Germany has been the fiscal deficit (see chart). That deficit, in turn,
has helped to generate higher long-term interest rates, which have served as
a floor for European rates. At their peak, German long-term interest rates
were almost 3 percentage points higher than in 1985 and 2 percentage points
higher than in 1989.
Short-term rates of interest are higher still. The unification-induced
expansion of the west German economy, combined with the large fiscal
deficits, has created both inflationary pressure in the labour market -
between 1990 and 1991 wage costs per employee rose by more than 6 per cent -
and rapid monetary expansion (see chart).
The monetary policy stance can best be captured by whether short-term rates
of interest are above, or below, long-term ones. By this criterion, German
monetary policy is tight, as is that of France and the UK. In other leading
industrial countries short-term interest rates are below long-term ones.
Europe is stepping on the monetary brake; the rest of the developed world is
pressing on the accelerator.
The UK government currently pats itself on the back for getting its
short-term rates of interest a quarter of a percentage point above the
German. But Canadian and Australian short-term rates are more than 4
percentage points below. Japanese and US short-term rates are lower still.
If challenged, the Bundesbank will argue that the remaining countries of
western Europe have no right to complain. Combined with the high level of
long-term interest rates, German monetary policy is driving down European
inflation. And so, asserts the Bundesbank, it should. Not a single European
country has, after all, had a rate of consumer price inflation below 2 per
cent over the last year.
Unfortunately, the leading European countries other than Germany have either
managed only modest improvements in inflation performance since the end of
1989, or paid a high price for their gains. In terms of the relationship
between inflation and unemployment, Italy, the UK, Spain and even France are
in a far worse state than the other top industrial countries, including west
Germany. The ERM may work, but it has been no panacea for Europe's economic
ills.
How long might this squeeze last?
German monetary policy will remain tight until German inflation falls back
to what the Bundesbank sees as tolerable levels. Wage increases in 1992 are
likely to be about 5 3/4 per cent, says the OECD. While better than last
year's figure, this is still considerably higher than the 4-5 per cent that
the Bundesbank would want.
Furthermore, the OECD argues that inflation will fall only slowly to the
Bundesbank's desired level. Thus it forecasts consumer price inflation at 3
1/2 per cent in western Germany, even in 1993. The continued buoyancy of the
west German economy, plus the recovery that is slowly beginning in the east
are likely to make the Bundesbank extremely cautious, with the money supply
numbers giving it the excuse to do what it wants anyway. Consequently,
significant reductions in German short-term interest rates may not occur
even in 1993.
Quite apart from its determination to maintain credibility, the Bundesbank
has yet another reason for its caution: fiscal prospects. Continued
substantial fiscal deficits will also ensure that German unification will
play an important role in keeping long-term interest rates high, not only in
Europe, but worldwide.
It is true that the general government deficit last year was only 3 per cent
of all-German GNP. It is true also, that the federal government has put
forward a stringent budget, with nominal outlays rising by a mere 9 1/2 per
cent between 1992 and 1996. But there is less to this stringency than meets
the eye: first, because net borrowing by the west German post office, the
railway, the Treuhandanstalt (the agency charged with east German
privatisation) and social security is very large; and second because the
government is unlikely to meet its targets, in any case.
Deutsche Bank, for example, forecasts the total public sector borrowing
requirement at 6 per cent this year, 5 1/2 per cent in 1993 and 4 1/2 per
cent in 1994. The result would be a ratio of total public sector debt to GNP
of 57.5 per cent by the end of 1994, an increase of 8 percentage points in
three years.
East Germany is, in any case, bound to remain a large drain on the German
capital markets. This will be so whether it be through fiscal forecasts
transfers or through private investment, should growth take off. If east
German growth were to be as much as 8 per cent a year and west Germany's
only 2 per cent, it would still take some 20 years for GDP per head to
converge. For much of that period resources will be transferred, one way or
the other, from the west to the east.
Prospects for the rest of Europe are bleak. High interest rates and slow
growth may help to lower inflation, but they will also tend to raise fiscal
deficits. Convergence on the way to Emu looks a hard road, with no certainty
that Germany will even be there to greet the travellers at the end of their
journey.
Can anything be done beyond travelling on? There are fewer choices than many
hope.
High long-term rates of interest cannot be evaded. If anything, depreciation
is likely to raise the long-term rates of interest of the depreciating
countries.
A German realignment would not lower European short-term rates of interest
unless the Bundesbank takes the opportunity to lower its own rates. Given
the domestic pressures, there can be no guarantee it will.
The D-Mark could float. But this would probably be the end of the march to
Emu, on which the French have put so much store. What is more, there is no
reason for France, which has a far better-adjusted economy than the other
large European countries, to make that choice.
Realignments of weak currencies within the ERM are unlikely to lower either
their short or long-term rates of interest.
What is left is leaving the ERM altogether, a choice that would be seen as a
decisive defeat.
German unification has merely meant that what was already bound to be a
tough journey to Emu has become tougher still. But the Germans would argue,
quite rightly, that all that is now being demanded is the achievement of the
sort of macro-economic performance that they have long taken for granted. If
other countries do not like the heat, they should perhaps get out of the
Bundesbank's kitchen. Unfortunately for them, anywhere else is likely to be
quite as hot.
