FT  12 FEB 92 / Trade and the Environment: Pessimism grows for 'earth
summit'
AS ONE of the world's most protected economies and keeper of the planet's
largest rainforest Brazil will be an interesting setting for the discussion
on the value of free trade for the environment.
The UN Conference for Environment and Development, better known as the
'earth summit', would not justify its grandiose title without such a topic
on the agenda and Rio de Janeiro in June will be the location for what is
expected to be a heated discussion with little substantive results.
Multilateral organisations such as the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade and the World Bank are falling over themselves to produce reports on
the issue which cuts across the areas to be discussed and divides the
developed and developing worlds. Mr Tony Gros of the Global Forum, the
parallel conference of non-governmental organisations, says: 'The whole
question of Gatt and neo-liberal trade policies will be the cornerstone of
the debate both at the official and parallel events.'
At the last preparatory meeting in Geneva for the summit the Group of 77
made clear that it was not prepared to discuss treaties on bio-diversity and
forests unless a commitment to improved terms of trade and transfer of
technology is included. This week the Amazonian pact countries have been
meeting in Brazil with a clear message - there can be no agreement on
conservation without taking into account economic realities. One delegate
said bluntly: 'The first world can't stop us it improves our economic
possibilities and that means ending protectionism in Europe.'
Gatt believes that a multilateral agreement must be reached at the summit to
prevent a kind of green anarchy breaking out, with economic powers such as
the US or Germany setting their own environmental standards and
discriminating in trade terms against those who do not comply. But there is
strong resistance from developing countries to the idea of agreed
international standards or monitoring which is seen as interfering with
sovereignty.
The real talking on this issue takes place before the conference at the last
preparatory meeting in New York next month. One G7 diplomat involved in the
negotiations says: 'They will come up with something for heads of state to
sign in June, but the underlying difficulties are so great and time so short
that chances of a meaningful agreement are diminishing daily.'
