FT  21 SEP 92 / World Economy and Business Review (3): At the crossroads of
reform - Assessing the contribution of a radical Russian economist / Profile
of Yegor Gaidar
IT FELL to Yegor Gaidar to be the first from the ranks of radical Russian
economists to give flesh to his theories. Before him, there were projects,
conceived by (among others) Nikolai Petrakov, Stanislav Shatalin and Grigory
Yavlinsky: none was carried through.
But the collapse of the Soviet Union gave Mr Gaidar his chance. Given the
portfolios of deputy prime minister, economics minister and finance minister
in November last year, following the collapse of the putsch, Mr Gaidar
assembled a team of his closest associates to fill the key economic posts
within the cabinet.
Mr Gaidar's success since then has been considerable. The price rises of
January 2 have again put goods in once-bare shops, and destroyed the huge
store of unspendable roubles built up in 1990-91. He has brought in sales
and profit taxes to begin a transition to a rational fiscal policy; has got
privatisation under way; has liberated trade and cut away much of the
subsidies from enterprises - especially defence-related enterprises - which
once took up much of the former Soviet budget.
Yet, he now stands at a critical stage. The government he heads (since his
appointment as acting prime minister in July) is now struggling to continue
the momentum of reform against steadily rising opposition. Appointments by
Mr Yeltsin of three new senior ministers have strengthened the hands of
those in the industrial lobby who have pleaded - successfully - for more
credits for industry. The replacement of Mr Georgy Matiukhin as chairman of
the Russian Central Bank by Mr Victor Gerashchenko, formerly of the Soviet
State Bank Gosbank, has brought into that post a man whose first actions
confirm him as no friend to the government's priorities of balanced budgets
and rouble stabilisation.
The largest charge against Mr Gaidar is that of over-ambition: of the laying
out, in the memorandum he agreed with the International Monetary Fund in
February of this year, of a series of targets which he could not keep. The
memorandum's targets - for much lower budget deficits, declining inflation,
a higher exchange rate for the rouble, a break in the circle of wage-price
inflation, conclusion of an agreement between the Russian Bank and the
central banks of the other republics on common clearing mechanisms, the
definition of a 'rouble zone' - have been missed, in some cases badly.
Throughout, the economy of Russia has continued to decline, with sharp falls
in the crucial energy supplies sector.
Because of this, what has been a qualified and partial success seems like
failure. Further, the political forces against him are now becoming very
strong. Once the political season resumes Mr Gaidar and his band of
ministers and advisers will face a renewed onslaught: at some point, perhaps
soon, they may have to decide whether to continue to compromise - or to
resign.
