FT  28 JAN 92 / Democracy discomforts Hong Kong business: Conservatives fear
Beijing's anger towards the colony
THE emergence of a limited degree of democracy in Hong Kong is causing
unease among some of the colony's conservative politicians, many of whom are
finding it difficult to adjust to the changed political environment brought
about by democratic elections.
Since September's elections, the government in Hong Kong has changed from
one where the wishes of the colonial authorities were enacted into law by a
relatively compliant legislature, to one where virtually all aspects of the
government's legislative programme are vigorously debated, and, in some
cases, changed.
This has caused alarm in Beijing, which has no interest in seeing an
alternative centre of power establishing itself before 1997. It has made
plain its desire to inherit an 'executive-led' government from Britain's
colonial administration. The change in political landscape is also worrying
conservatives who want to take the line of least resistance with China.
But these concerns cut little ice with Hong Kong's democratically-elected -
mainly the United Democrats - politicians who can fairly claim to represent
the people. They want greater democracy in Hong Kong before the colony is
handed over to Beijing, and want relations between Hong Kong and China to be
rooted in the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration, rather than the Basic
Law.
And, according to foreign observers of the colony's politics, the United
Democrats' views command popular support. Explaining their appeal, one
diplomat noted that there was a strong current of support for
self-determination in the colony. 'There is also support for a degree of
confrontation with China; a desire to demonstrate independence. But it is
not anti-Chinese or anti-British,' he said.
The elections in September were a watershed in Hong Kong. They allowed
voters to elect candidates to 18 of the 60 seats in the Legislative Council
(Legco). This was the first time the people of the colony had been given the
opportunity to vote for political representatives.
The United Democrats, led by the mild-mannered yet outspoken Mr Martin Lee,
who in European terms would be called a Christian Democrat, won 12 of the 18
democratically contested seats, while others of equally liberal persuasion
won five of the remaining six.
A further 21 of the 60 seats were elected indirectly by so-called functional
constituencies - groupings which represent business, finance, the law and
the labour movement, among others. Of the rest, 18 members were appointed by
Sir David Wilson, the governor, with the remaining three occupied ex officio
by senior government officials.
Legco's powers are substantial. It can amend and vote out legislation
proposed by the colonial government. It cannot propose spending bills, but
it can exercise a line-by-line veto over any of the government's spending
plans. Last year it forced the then financial secretary, Sir Piers Jacobs,
to back down from his budget proposal to increase tobacco taxes by 200 per
cent.
Legco has already exhibited its new democratic muscle by voting to condemn a
UK-China agreement on the composition of Hong Kong's Court of Final Appeal -
a vote which commanded cross-party support - and last week by strongly
attacking the British government for the delay in appointing a new governor.
But the new-found robustness and content of the debates leads conservative
local politicians to worry about upsetting delicate relations with China,
which will assume sovereignty of the territory - albeit as a special
administrative region - in 1997.
Mr Stephen Cheong, a Legco member since 1980 who now represents the
Federation of Hong Kong Industries (FHKI) as its functional member, went so
far as to express fears that anarchy could develop in Hong Kong, during a
speech at a conference to promote the territory's future in London.
Mr Cheong was roundly criticised for this by the local media. The
Chinese-language Economic Journal suggested that the FHKI reconsider his
qualification to represent it. 'Democratic changes in Hong Kong are now a
matter of fact,' the paper said. 'The (United) Democrats' performance has
been reasonable and Hong Kong people should try to get used to living with
democracy.'
Yet, intemperate as Mr Cheong's remarks were, they do strike a chord with
the political supporters of Hong Kong's business and financial
establishment. These people stand for stability, a reasonable relationship
with China, no hurry on democracy, and keeping the economic environment
favourable for business. In short: the maintenance of the status quo as it
existed before September's elections.
In party political terms they call themselves the Co-operative Resources
Centre (CRC). It numbers more than 24 adherents in Legco and has four
members on the Executive Council - the governor's cabinet. All members of
the CRC were either appointed by the colonial government or submitted
themselves to a limited plebiscite as a functional constituency member of
Legco. Not one democratically-elected politician has joined their group.
Their concerns are derided by the democratically-elected politicians, who
see them as representatives of the ancien regime. They accuse them of
kowtowing to China either in the hope of preferment after 1997, or in the
misguided hope that by acquiescing now Hong Kong will be spared later.
But they do agree that the central issue is Hong Kong's relations with China
and an appropriate modus vivendi for them. The United Democrats' position,
however, places them on a collision course with the colonial government,
Westminster and Beijing. They want nothing less than the amendment of the
Basic Law - which sets out how Hong Kong will be governed after 1997 - and
more people democratically elected in future plebiscites.
China has said the Basic Law can not be amended. Mr Douglas Hurd, the
British foreign secretary, has said he will raise the matter with Beijing,
although he held out little hope for success. Yet politicians such as Mr Lee
will not let go.
'What the people of Hong Kong want are politicians who dare to speak the
truth particularly when China and, to a lesser extent the Hong Kong
government, is not doing the right thing by Hong Kong,' he says. 'Many
people are prepared to criticise the Hong Kong government. But where can you
find people to criticise China? That's why we did so well in the elections.'
Yet as the year progresses Mr Lee expects the temperature of politics in
Britain's last important colony to rise. Given the representation in Legco
the government will not lose a vote, the conservatives will see to that. But
that is a mixed blessing to the colonial and British governments.
'Every time we fight and lose it is a pyrrhic victory for the government,'
says Mr Lee. 'The question is how many pyrrhic victories can they afford to
win. Soon or later the people will become disillusioned.'
He may have a point.
