FT  11 SEP 92 / The French Referendum: Europolice eager to unite against
crime
MAASTRICHT looks like getting the police vote. The treaty contains a precise
plan to set up a Europol, creating a single market not only for criminals
but also for their pursuers.
Certainly, President Francois Mitterrand pitched for the law-and-order vote
on television last week, warning that 'No to Maastricht would be a Yes to
the Mafia'. Since then, the Lyons-based European Council of Police Unions
(ECPU), which has among its multinational members two thirds of French
police inspectors, has strongly backed Maastricht as 'laying the ground for
police co-operation, aimed at thwarting the collaboration of criminals,
which has no need to be endorsed by any referendum'.
In fact, such police co-operation between France and its EC partners is
already germinating beside a cornfield in the Neuhof suburb of Strasbourg.
In a building ringed by a double fence and barbed wire, some 15 police
officers from seven EC countries last week started designing the skeleton of
a Europol. Their report will go first to EC interior and justice ministers
and then to the EC summit in December, with the aim of having Europol start
business next January.
'We will not be an operational unit, a kind of Euro-FBI,' stresses one of
the Frenchmen in the Europol planning team. 'As the Maastricht treaty says,
Europol will, in its first phase, confine itself to exchanging information
on drug traffickers.'
But he said he would not be surprised if this remit were quickly extended to
attacking the Mafia, whose activities will be the subject of a special EC
ministerial meeting on September 18.
Will Europol die if Maastricht does? Few in the Neuhof planning cell think
so, because the need for the men in blue to join hands against international
criminals is so evident. 'Criminals have long exploited and hidden behind
our frontiers. It is time for us policemen and magistrates to set aside
these borders a bit and see what's going on on the other side,' says the
Frenchman.
A great deal of informal co-operation has grown up already among Europe's
police forces, through the 1990 Schengen convention. Europol's provisional
headquarters is based in Neuhof because the Schengen Information Centre
(SIS) now sits there.
Opened officially last week, the SIS is an enormous Bull-Siemens computer
system, ready to receive police data from the eight Schengen signatories.
The SIS data bank will remain empty until all eight signatories - France,
Germany, the Netherlands, Italy, Belgium, Luxembourg, Spain and Portugal -
have ratified the convention. More than half have yet to do so. However,
there are hopes this process will be complete by next year.
The UK remains averse to signing up to Schengen, as a British police member
of the Europol team notes, partly because of what it will mean on the Ulster
border with Ireland.
Mr Roger Bouiller, secretary general of the ECPU in Lyons, hopes that
eventually Maastricht will lead not only to more exchange of information
among the Twelve's police forces, but to a harmonisation of the legal rules
under which they have to work in pursuing criminals across each other's
borders.
