FT  28 AUG 92 / Survey of Malaysia (6): A post-Cold War dilemma / Discussing
the country's 'abrasive' foreign policy
THERE IS no mistaking the anxiety aroused in south-east Asia by China's
recent and loud reiteration of its claim to the South China Sea, a claim
underlined by the granting of an oil exploration concession in May to a
little-known American company in a disputed area near the Spratly islands.
Notwithstanding China's statements to the contrary, the governments of the
region believe that Beijing is taking advantage of a post-Cold War power
vacuum - left by the collapse of the Soviet Union and the withdrawal of US
forces from bases in the Philippines - to assert some authority over its
weaker neighbours.
The foreign ministers of Asean (the Association of South East Asian Nations,
comprising Malaysia, Indonesia, Brunei, Singapore, the Philippines and
Thailand) confronted the Spratlys dispute head-on at their annual meeting,
held in Manila in July. They put their concerns directly to their Chinese
counterpart Mr Qian Qichen, and appealled for a peaceful settlement of the
various disputes.
The claimants to the islets, reefs and atolls of the Spratlys include China,
Taiwan, Vietnam, the Philippines, Brunei and Malaysia - and all except
Brunei have troops in the archipelago. Scuba-diving expeditions for tourists
to one of the Malaysian-held islands are regarded as another useful way of
asserting sovereignty.
Mr Abdullah Badawi, the Malaysian foreign minister, told the Asean meeting
that his government wanted to sustain Asean's record as the world's fastest
growing economic region, and therefore viewed 'with grave concern' the
revival of the Spratlys issue.
'Any adverse development leading to heightened tension or conflict could
only result in dire consequences to the region's well-being,' he said,
'bringing in its wake the risk of extra-regional involvement and putting
back years of painstaking efforts at nurturing relations based on mutual
trust and confidence.'
The end of the Cold War, in other words, has created something of a foreign
policy dilemma for Malaysia, whose government regards itself as a champion
of the developing world and the non-aligned movement. The disintegration of
the Soviet Union threatens to give the United States an unacceptably
dominant role in world affairs, but too great a reduction of the US presence
in Asia could leave the way clear for equally unacceptable moves by regional
powers such as China, India and Japan.
Malaysia's response has been to continue condemning the west in public,
while maintaining good relations with the western powers in practice and
strengthening and rearming its own military forces. Western diplomats say
hopefully that they detect a lessening of Malaysian rhetorical support for
Zopfan - the south-east Asian, anti-superpower concept which stands for Zone
of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality.
Aside from arms purchases, Malaysia's ties with the west include the
five-power defence agreement (linking Malaysia, Singapore, Britain,
Australia and New Zealand), a commercial deal to repair US Navy ships at
Lumut on the west coast of the peninsula, and a US-Malaysian joint venture
called Airod at Kuala Lumpur's Subang airport to maintain C-130 transport
aircraft.
Malaysian officials and Kuala Lumpur-based diplomats agree that Malaysia's
abrasive foreign policy is very much the creation of Dr Mahathir Mohamad,
the prime minister.
They attribute his combative speeches - whether he is rejecting criticism of
Malaysia's logging industry or accusing the west of imperialism - partly to
personal conviction and partly to his ambitions as a leader of the third
world.
'He felt Malaysia would get more attention if it became more awkward,' said
one senior diplomat. 'His desire is partly to make sure that Malaysia is not
taken for granted, but also to put Malaysia on the map in a leadership role
for the third world.'
Dr Mahathir is said by his advisers to receive letters of support from other
third world leaders, who agree with what he says but do not dare to say it
themselves, although his confrontational style is not always appreciated.
At home, some officials have sought to prevent him from antagonising the
country's allies, and at the Earth Summit in Brazil in June he received less
support than he would have liked for his adversarial approach to the
industrialised nations. He also angered some of his fellow Asean leaders by
announcing a proposal to set up an East Asian Economic Caucus - a
controversial trade group excluding the US - without sufficient prior
consultations.
An increasingly important influence on Malaysian foreign policy is the
country's domestic Islamic constituency, which has some sympathy for the
newly-devout President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, for the Moslem inhabitants of
Bosnia and for all things Moslem.
Dr Mahathir often accuses the west of double standards - he recently
commented that western countries were willing to interfere in defence of
human rights in Malaysia but not in Israel or Bosnia - but his critics make
the same accusation in reverse about Malaysia. It was noticeable that
Malaysia took little interest in the persecution of the predominantly
Buddhist Burmese people by the authorities in Rangoon until Burmese Moslems
started fleeing into Bangladesh.
'Mahathir runs foreign policy, and some of what he does is aimed at
protecting his Islamic flank,' says another diplomat.
Perhaps the most commonly heard criticism of Malaysian policy is that it is
old-fashioned, rooted in the 1960s and based on the questionable assumption
that the world is divided into two rival factions - the rich industrialised
north, and the poor exploited south.
Such a world vision is difficult to reconcile with the reality of Asia:
while Dr Mahathir was forging a third world consensus on the environment at
a pre-Earth Summit meeting in Kuala Lumpur in April, companies and
governments from north and south were happily selling weapons to each other
at a defence exhibition a couple of kilometres away across town; in the
South China Sea, Beijing - a leader of the south - is flexing its muscles to
the detriment of its fellow southerners; and Malaysia, a champion of the
south, is developing so successfully along capitalist lines that it is well
on the way to becoming a fully paid-up member of the north.
