FT  07 OCT 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Argentina ready to bite at EC
fishing deal - With a bait of Dollars 100m, it is hard to resist selling
licences
OVER the last ten years, Argentina's once non-existent fishing industry has
grown steadily to the point where the country now exports more fish than
beef. In a sense, that is hardly surprising given the aversion to fish in
this nation of meat-eaters.
Nonetheless, growth has come more from rising international prices than a
huge increase in catches. Last year, Argentina raised exports to a record
Dollars 406.5m (Pounds 228.30), 26 per cent more than in 1990. But in volume
terms, exports were up by just 7.6 per cent to 274,457 tonnes. Five years
earlier, in 1987, exports of 242,299 tonnes brought in just Dollars 270.2m
in export revenues.
Now, the possibility of an agreement with the European Community allowing EC
vessels to buy licences to fish in Argentine waters may transform the
industry. Argentine negotiators say the pact would bring EC grants and loans
worth about Dollars 100m. That would give the sector a vital new impetus in
exchange for allowing around 50 EC ships into Argentine waters that
currently remain closed to virtually all foreign fishing ships.
A licensing regime has a special appeal to the government of President
Carlos Menem. First of all, the perpetually insolvent state needs revenue.
Second, its conversion to free market orthodoxy makes all protectionism
ideologically suspect.
But the accord's many local opponents say it would fatally undermine
Argentina's industry by replacing local vessels with EC ships, deny
Argentine companies vital EC markets and make a growing shore-based
processing industry impossible.
The opening up of Argentina's seas coincides with the decline in 'nomad
fishing'. Ships from countries like Poland, Spain, Russia, Taiwan, South
Korea and Japan used to roam the seven seas, fishing in international
waters. But the extension of territorial waters to 200 miles by many
countries has gradually deprived the nomads of fishing grounds and led to a
sharp increase in idle tonnage.
The EC's response has been to offer 'exit grants' as one-off payments to
encourage idle ships - nearly all Spanish - to leave EC registries. It has
also negotiated fishing agreements with third countries that allow EC
vessels to fish in their waters under licence, in exchange for duty-free
access to EC markets for their exports. At present, Argentine exports are
subject to EC duties and market quotas.
But Argentina's industry fears that signing an agreement would create a
dangerous precedent, encouraging other 'nomad' nations to demand similar
rights. And as foreign catches are generally processed and frozen on board
factory ships and exported direct to foreign markets, the great worry is
that Argentina's shore-based processing industry would atrophy with the
increase in foreign vessels.
Mr Julio Torre, director of Redes, a fishing trade magazine, says: 'By not
selling licences, the government would encourage local industry. Licences
are in the purest colonial style. (With licences) you would not even have
the fantasy of having an industry.'
Industry lobbyists say that allowing the EC to fish under licence would be
especially dangerous because this could cost them their biggest single
market: Spain bought a quarter of Argentina's fish exports in 1991. However,
it is unlikely that Argentine negotiators will grant the Spaniards direct
access to quotas of the most sought-after species, like the Hubbsi hake.
However, turning down free cash gifts worth Dollars 100m would be hard to
justify, as Mr Mario Olaciregui, president of Harengus SA, Argentina's
leading fishing company, recognises. He says 'Argentina wants more capital,
more technology, more investment. The accord with the EC would bring that,
plus new ships and finance for research and lower EC duty for Argentina's
exports.'
However, he warns that these benefits must be weighed against the risk of
Spanish ships displacing Argentina's exports to the EC. Furthermore, he
claims that EC grants would simply transfer the problem of idle tonnage from
Spain to Argentina. He says the only beneficiaries would be Spanish banks,
whose unwise loans to finance shipbuilding would be repaid with EC
taxpayers' money.
Mr Olaciregui believes that his company's growth should be a paradigm for
the rest of the industry. Harengus, founded in 1979, now accounts for almost
one-fifth of Argentina's fish and seafood exports.
Mr Olaciregui says: 'We have made total investments of Dollars 400m-500m in
10 years through 11 different joint venture companies with foreign
investors. We provide licences, local know-how and administration. But 100
per cent of the financing comes from foreign companies. They also provide
technology and the market.'
Although there is a will on both sides to reach an agreement, talks have
dragged on for months because Argentina was unwilling to allow
foreign-flagged vessels into its waters. But officials have promised the
Europeans a compromise formula in time for the meeting in Buenos Aires next
month.
But there are other complicating factors. To begin with, Argentina's ability
to accurately measure fish stocks is widely questioned. Policing is also a
serious problem, with the coastguard and navy hopelessly overstretched.
Still, there is a lot of room for growth: last year's record catch was less
than a fifth of the 1992 quota of 1.5m tonnes.
Another problem is the dispute between Argentina and Britain over the
Falkland islands. The Falklands have established a successful fish licensing
regime in a 150-mile radius around the islands. The British fear increased
fishing in Argentine waters could threaten Falklands fish stocks. They also
want to make sure that an EC accord would not imply recognition of
Argentina's claim to the islands.
Irrespective of any deal with the Europeans, Argentina must become
internationally competitive. But costs, instead of coming down, are
increasing month by month. And like so many other nations rich in natural
resources, Argentina must try to maximise the value of raw materials. Mr
Torre says catching, filleting and freezing fish in Argentina adds only 30
per cent to value. The remaining 70 per cent margin is appropriated by
processing plants and distributors in the developed world.
