FT  18 DEC 92 / Nato wary of military response in Bosnia
FOREIGN MINISTERS of the 16-member Nato alliance last night reached a shaky
compromise on further action to be taken against the Bosnian Serbs, but
their final declaration papered over deep differences on the nature and
severity of that action.
The declaration said the United Nations Security Council would 'shortly
consider' the adoption of a resolution on the enforcement of the ban on
military flights, which France originally hoped to propose on Sunday or
Monday.
But, following tense talks between ministers, the declaration became much
weaker than originally intended by a small group of countries led by France
and the US.
Britain and other countries were instrumental in inserting the proviso that
a UN resolution on the enforcement of the flight ban should 'bear in mind
the need to continue the current humanitarian effort in Bosnia'.
However, Mr Lawrence Eagleburger, US secretary of state, warned that
humanitarian aid might have to stop if the UN took steps to enforce the ban.
Britain had earlier warned that military action against the Bosnian Serb
militias could provoke attacks on aid convoys.
A further note of restraint was struck in the subsequent phrase that 'should
such a resolution be adopted, and should violations (of the flight ban)
continue thereafter, we would be prepared to support the UN in enforcing
that resolution'. That fell short of calls for action by some countries.
Earlier in the negotiations, Mr Roland Dumas, the French foreign minister,
supported by his US, Dutch and Turkish colleagues, proposed that the
Security Council vote as early as Sunday or Monday on a tough resolution
enforcing the no-fly zone in Bosnian air space, imposed by the council in
October.
However, the 12 other Nato members, opposed any steps which could endanger
the lives of troops of the UN protection force and humanitarian aid workers.
Those countries supporting military measures all said they were thinking in
terms of action by aircraft. All members of the alliance agreed that the
enforcement measures should not involve new ground troops.
The prospect of the adoption of tough new measures provoked Mr Radovan
Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, to warn of retaliatory action should the
ban be enforced by military measures.
Philip Stephens reports from Ottawa: British officials said that Mr John
Major would seek to bridge differences over Bosnia at his meeting today and
tomorrow with President George Bush in Camp David.
Mr Major was proposing a UN resolution that would allow military enforcement
of a no-fly zone but would first give Serbia a warning to stop the
violations.
Serbia's stark choice, Page 12
