FT  31 OCT 92 / Books: Stormin' Norman - maverick insider / A man who has no
ambition to rescue the US government either as God or Santa Claus
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO: THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF GENERAL H. NORMAN SCHWARZKOPF
written with Peter Petre Bantam Press Pounds 17.99, 526 pages
PJ O'ROURKE'S shorthand theory of American politics is that God is a
Republican, because he stands for rules and regulations and the ethic thing,
and Santa Claus is a Democrat, because he likes giving people what they
want.
What would the humorist make of Norman Schwarzkopf? God or Santa Claus?
Democrat or Republican? It is very hard to tell, and his autobiography It
Doesn't Take a Hero gives away few clues.
For now, the question is academic, at least if the hero of Desert Storm is
to be taken at his word. 'I don't want to be president' he has said
repeatedly. 'I did Washington five times. Each time I liked it less.' But
Schwarzkopf has not said he will not run, not in so many words. He has also
hinted, with uncharacteristic coyness, that there are some public positions
he would accept. But he will not say which. Nice one, Norm.
It is tempting after reading General Schwarzkopf's memoirs, skilfully
ghosted by Peter Petre, to imagine that, were George Bush consigned to
oblivion and Bill Clinton prove unequal to the task of leading the US out of
recession and self-doubt, Schwarzkopf might be called on to resurrect the
American dream by one party or another, or conceivably both. There are
precedents.
Not that the book suggests somebody who hankers after high political office.
On the contrary, Schwarzkopf betrays a healthy contempt for politics and
politicians whom he appears to regard mostly as meddlesome fools. But the
race for the White House gives this book an added edge. Whatever else it may
be, the book is not a distinguished military history, nor does it shed new
light on the two great events in which he played a part - Vietnam and the
Gulf War.
Schwarzkopf's views on the American experience in Vietnam, where he served
twice with great distinction, are curiously blinkered. His account of his
two tours of duty provide a great read but no attempt is made to ask why
America lost or what drove the Vietnamese in the south to revolt, which is
surprising for someone whose feel for Arab sensibilities was later to prove
vital in cementing the coalition which defeated Saddam Hussein. Schwarzkopf
emerges as a doer, never a doubter.
'My view of the Vietcong never changed,' he writes 'I saw them as
opportunistic brigands who oppressed the peasants, stole their money and
crops and bullied them into cooperation.'
This is an intensely personal autobiography of a tough, astute and ambitious
soldier with a strong streak of independence and even romance about him.
Someone who does not buck the system but bends it almost to breaking-point
to get what he wants; a maverick insider; a political ingenue savvy enough
to cut a deal with the best of them.
As he works his way up the ladder to four-star general Schwarzkopf provides
a fascinating insider's account of the Buggins' turn system of promotion in
the US army. He hates patronage but knows how to exploit it when he needs
to.
His childhood seems to have prepared him well for the loneliness of high
command. He travelled with his father, who was also a high-ranking soldier,
and learnt to deal with the pain and humiliation of his mother's alcoholism
with private anger and public dignity. He emerges as a thoroughly decent man
who has made his way with an attractive blend of homespun wisdom, steely
toughness and a certain charm.
There is a wonderfully evocative passage in which he describes how, in 1946,
his father was sent to help the Shah of Iran consolidate his hold on power.
The young Schwarzkopf slept under open skies on the roof of their villa in
Tehran, waking at dawn to the chants of the muezzin chanting the call to
prayer, punctuated by the sound of camel caravans and rug merchants tramping
past their door.
The book, as one would expect, provides a taut insider's account of what
went on behind the scenes in the preparation and execution of the campaign
to kick the Iraqis out of Kuwait. It is remarkably indiscreet and detailed
in places. Schwarzkopf, or his minions, must have been taking so many notes
of the great man's every exchange that it is surprising they ever got round
to winning the war.
While Schwarzkopf may not have thought too deeply about the political
meaning of the Vietnam experience, he certainly learnt the military lessons
of that humiliating defeat and, on a smaller scale, the botched invasion of
Grenada in 1983 in which he played a hitherto unrevealed but crucial role.
It was this: if American lives were to be risked in battle there should be
no corner-cutting. There would have to be enough troops and weapons to the
do the job with the minimum casualties. Nothing but the best for his boys.
His testy exchange with his boss General Colin Powell on February 20 as
pressure for an early start to the land war grew from a gung-ho political
establishment in Washington DC, and the weather forecast in the Gulf looked
inauspicious, gives the flavour.
Powell: 'We need to get on with this.'
Schwarzkopf, pleading more time to prepare: 'I'm not trying to be a
smart-ass . . . but what if we take lots of casualties?'
Powell: 'Don't patronize me with talk of human lives'
The book is at it strongest when Schwarzkopf is in action and here it sets a
rollicking pace: how, under enemy fire in Vietnam, he saves a black GI who
had stepped on a mine; how he knocks one of the US army's worst battalions
into shape; how he cajoles and flatters his insecure and ultra-sensitive
Islamic Saudi hosts into tolerating an infidel army complete with female GIs
and ghetto-blasters on holy soil.
It's all good stuff as far as it goes. An appropriate testament to a genuine
American hero. Whether it turns out to be his calling card for the White
House as a Republican or a Democrat, remains to be seen.
