FT  15 APR 92 / Arts: Stars of the Bolshoy
Natalya Bessmertnova first danced in London with the Bolshoy Ballet in 1963.
We saw then an exceptional talent - imperishable memories remain of her
Autumn fairy in Cinderella, a flame in red chiffon - and in later years we
have admired her in the classics and in roles made by her husband, Yury
Grigorovich. She is returned now, as a couple of years ago, with a group of
Bolshoy principals, a small corps de ballet, and a repertory designed for
concert performance.
The dancers are, in the main, senior artists, and there is the faintest
whiff of grape-shot in the programme book's article about Grigorovich, in
which he talks about the necessary moment of retirement for dancers. 'Of
course it is possible for them to continue - possible to do, but impossible
to watch'.
I, for one, would have felt cheated if it were not possible still to watch
Bessmertnova. Her art offers a potent essence of movement. Physically she
retains the same exquisite style, the same intense sensibility, that she has
always brought to traditional roles. In the Wili act of Giselle, which
formed the first half of Monday night's programme, Bessmertnova seemed an
incarnation of a great Russian tradition, the ballerina as romantic icon.
The imagery - Giselle posed, arms folded across her breast; the
compassionate spirit bent towards Albrecht - recalled photographs of Pavlova
and Spessivtseva in this same scene. Her dancing, slightly - and, I found,
ravishingly  - scaled down, was translucent, vaporous as the night air. The
fruit of immense knowledge and a glorious theatre tradition, this was a
compelling reading, as luminous, poetic as the Giselle we find in Gautier's
original libretto.
From Leonid Nikonov's Albrecht, partnering of absolute security and a
sincere characterisation. From the attendant Wilis, excellently schooled
performances. A decent back-drop, good lighting - though Heaven's curse on
those follow-spots - provided a sure frame for Bessmertnova's
interpretation.
The rest of the evening comprised divertissements replete with fouettes and
yearning against white curtains; well-known participants - Natalya
Arkhipova, Mikhail Gabovich, Yury Vladimirov, Maria Bylova, Boris Yefimov -
and some new names. The ensuing catalogue of grins and spins and soulful
emoting looked all the more trumpery after the sublimities of Giselle, and
efficient though performances were, there is a limit to our taste for such
high-wire acts to a sound-track of Minkus and worse. (And a little worse
than needs be because of thin - though amplified - orchestral playing.)
Bylova and Leonid Nikonov turned acrobatics into ecstasy in Spring Waters,
and Bessmertnova and Yefimov were no less ecstatic, though more restrained,
in a duet from The Golden Age. All the fouettes were relentlessly applauded.
The Dominion must be the dreariest theatre in London, with a stygian
auditorium. The programme book has decided there are characters in Giselle
called 'Two Willisses'. You remember them, of course: they had that cottage
near the lake, and grew the most marvellous roses.
At the Dominion Theatre till April 18, then touring Britain until July 18.
