FT  06 NOV 92 / Tobacco liability lawsuit dismissed
THE best-known damage suit against the US cigarette industry, and the only
one to meet any success in the courts, has ended.
Lawyers at Philip Morris, the cigarette and food manufacturer, revealed
yesterday that Mr Marc Edell, lead lawyer for the plaintiffs in the suit
brought by long-time smoker Rose Cipollone and her family, had voluntarily
withdrawn from the case. The request to end the nine-year-old litigation was
made yesterday morning and an order was signed by the presiding judge.
Philip Morris was one of three cigarette manufacturers sued by Rose
Cipollone and then her family after she developed and subsequently died of
lung cancer.
Philip Morris declined to speculate on the reasons for the dismissal. Mr
Edell was not at his New Jersey office yesterday morning, and was
unavailable for comment.
In 1988, four years after Mrs Cipollone died, a Newark-based jury awarded
her husband Dollars 400,000 (Pounds 258,000) on the grounds that the Liggett
tobacco company, another defendant in the lawsuit, had misrepresented the
risks of smoking. This was the first and only verdict requiring a tobacco
company to compensate the family of a smoker who had died of cancer. Two
years later, however, it was overturned by a federal appeals court.
The case then progressed to the US Supreme Court, which earlier this year
deliberated over whether federally-mandated health warnings on cigarette
packets protected tobacco manufacturers from being sued under state
liability laws.
In a complex and splintered decision, released in June, the Supreme Court
ruled that some suits could be brought, where, for example, plaintiffs
alleged that cigarette manufacturers hid or distorted the health dangers of
tobacco. A new trial of the Cipollone v Liggett et al case was ordered.
Yesterday, Philip Morris shares rose strongly on the news, gaining Dollars 3
1/4 to Dollars 78 5/8 . Loews Corporation, which owns Lorillard, another
manufacturer involved in the Cipollone case, gained Dollars 3 3/4 to Dollars
115 1/2.
