FT  31 DEC 92 / International Capital Markets: Czechs and Slovaks seek
last-minute deal over external debt
AS THE dissolution of the Czechoslovak federation at midnight tonight
approaches, the government and financial institutions are making final
efforts to achieve as much agreement as possible on an equitable division of
its assets and liabilities.
One of the most difficult issues to resolve is the question of the
federation's external debt. While there is agreement in principle, several
issues have not been resolved.
The Czech Republic and Slovakia agreed this year on the division of assets
and liabilities in the ratio of two to one, based on the population of the
two republics. This principle also applies to the division of the external
debt.
According to the State Bank of Czechoslovakia, the federation's total
external debt stood at Dollars 10.36bn in June 1992, of which Dollars 9.78bn
was denominated in convertible currencies and Dollars 585m in
non-convertible currencies owed to its old Comecon trading partners.
Just over Dollars 7.5bn of the convertible debt was owed to overseas banks,
the International Monetary Fund and the Group of 24 industrialised
countries.
An estimated Dollars 7bn of the external debt was owed by Czech and Slovak
enterprises, which are responsible for repayment. Just over Dollars 2bn of
this was borrowed by the Czechoslovak Trade Bank acting unofficially on
behalf of the state. The Czech Republic and Slovakia have accepted
responsibility for the proportion of these debts owed by enterprises located
in each republic.
The Czechoslovak state's share of the debt was just under Dollars 1bn,
borrowed since 1991 from the European Community, the World Bank and G24. It
is expected this debt will be split in the two to one ratio.
The state bank has borrowed Dollars 1.5bn from the IMF under special drawing
rights since 1991. Controversy has arisen over the splitting of these rights
between the two governments, with the IMF having suggested the division in
the ratio of 2.29 to one. But Slovakia claims such a division would give the
Czech Republic greater access to future IMF funds. The IMF is expected to
make a decision on the ratio today.
