FT  27 OCT 92 / Gap narrows in trade dispute: EC and US closer to resolving
differences on food exports
THE CHANCES of the European Community and the US resolving their bitter food
exports disputes - the key to a deal on the Uruguay Round of world trade
reforms - appeared to improve last night as the two sides narrowed their
differences.
Senior EC officials feared that the US was about to press the button on its
programme of punitive tariffs on Dollars 1bn (Pounds 625m) of EC food
exports, held in abeyance during last-ditch efforts to settle the row over
the Community's subsidised oilseeds regime.
The belief in Luxembourg was that Mr James Baker, the former US secretary of
state now running President George Bush's re-election campaign, had taken a
more central role over co-ordination of the American side of the tangled
negotiations. However, as Mr Bush's chief of staff, Mr Baker is charged with
co-ordinating all aspects of administration policy.
It is understood the US may target France in a reduced package of sanctions,
imposing tariffs on Dollars 300m worth of French products. The US 'hit list'
originally had Dollars 2bn of products on it, and the administration
indicated it would cut this to Dollars 1bn. By targeting a still smaller
amount, the US hopes to prevent a wider trade war. It is also likely to wait
at least 30 days before imposing any sanctions.
There were still hopes yesterday that Mr Ray MacSharry, EC agriculture
commissioner, would meet Mr Ed Madigan, US agriculture secretary, in New
York tomorrow, to set both sides' political seal on progress in talks on
Sunday and yesterday. Mr MacSharry, just before briefing EC agriculture
ministers on the talks in Luxembourg yesterday, said the New York meeting
was 'still up in the air'. A senior Commission official said, however, that
an aircraft was on standby to take the EC's farm trade negotiator to the US.
The Luxembourg talks, in the margins of a scheduled council of agriculture
ministers, centred on keeping the EC together behind the Commission's
negotiation stance in the face of French attempts to prevent any Gatt
settlement before the US presidential election on November 3.
France has never accepted that a Uruguay Round deal, aimed at liberalising
world trade, should place formal restraints on its subsidised cereals
exports, one of the main items in its balance of payments. Mr Jean
Pierre-Soisson, the new French agriculture minister, sought to rally support
among six of his colleagues at a dinner in Paris on Sunday night, before
yesterday's council meeting in Luxembourg.
Mr Ignaz Kiechle, the German farm minister, insisted after the Paris meeting
that 'France is not isolated' over cereals exports. His government in Bonn
says a Uruguay Round conclusion is a top priority to get Europe's economies
moving again.
Technically, any deal on an overall Uruguay Round package cannot be vetoed
by France, since it is subject to the EC's weighted majority voting system.
France would not be called on to vote, however, until an EC-US deal was
reached - and the figures being examined by Brussels and Washington
negotiators are not far from Paris's informal position on cereals exports.
