FT  02 OCT 92 / Survey of Software at Work - Autumn 1992 (25): Seeking to
win friends and influence people - Telemarketing; Direct mail
'In the next five years there will be two sorts of company, those who use
computers as a marketing tool, and those who face bankruptcy' - Warren
McFarlen, Harvard Business School
'JUST what I always wanted.' The phrase became a family joke for the
preposterous items to be found in a direct mail catalogue which kept
arriving, unrequested but persistent, at a household unlikely to provide a
warm welcome for a musical garden gnome.
Nowadays, the postcode alone would reveal social class and spending bracket.
Every time you fill in a form with name, address and other details, you
become hostage to the thousands of companies wanting to reach you with the
special offer you won't be able to resist.
Your name and address are grist to the database marketing mill. Squeezed by
the recession, pushed harder by the competition, more companies are looking
towards efficient use of information technology (IT) to help them make their
sales. And here at last is an area where IT can demonstrably prove its
value, not just in creating a systematic working environment, but in
providing data.
That data is likely to be used to seduce you into buying all sorts of
products and services direct, because, if it is accurate, the services might
well be what you are seeking. A previous sales and marketing issue of
Software At Work, (December 1991) concentrated on systems for progressing
and and managing sales leads. It brought into focus an emerging market, one
of the few boom areas of software development at present.
This return-visit deals with the initial marketing effort, winning leads,
identifying customers, and finding new prospects by telemarketing or direct
mail, with the aid of a marketing database.
The biggest issue facing people who embark on direct marketing is the
quality, accuracy and consistency of the data they require. It's all too
easy to assume that accounting information is adequate: it certainly is not.
The key facts usually exists in a morass of data, in different systems
throughout the company.
A point made by many users during their interviews is that there is usually
an overload of information. The challenge can be recognising it, thrashing
it out, consolidating it, and making it useful to the marketeers.
There can be other outside sources; market research, lists bought from
brokers, and profiling aids to fill in the background on names and
addresses. These include Acorn, the household classification provided by
CACI, Mosaic, a similar geo-demographic system from CCN, and Define, a
household and financial profiling system.
The providers of information are also getting more sophisticated. Ronin, an
international market research company, has enhanced Computer Aided Telephone
Interviewing (CATI) to include Expert System-Based Interviewing Software, a
technique for extracting more specific and detailed responses in a variety
of languages.
Taylor Nelson, the UK's largest market research organisation, uses barcode
data and computer links to poll the 8,500 homes on its consumer panel, and
provides the results in electronic format. CD-ROM discs make it easy to
disseminate large amounts of information, but the whole point of creating a
marketing database is to concentrate on quality, rather than volume of data.
The range of solutions is bewildering, ranging from microcomputer-based
systems such as Compass, to mainframe services such as CCN's. A remarkable
proportion of the users interviewed in this issue had chosen to 'outsource'
their marketing solution. They are using mainframes, specialist bureau
services and bespoke systems, solutions viewed as outdated elsewhere in the
computer industry. This swimming against the stream (in an era dedicated to
bringing things in-house on PC and client-server networks) might be
explained by the chasm that most marketing people felt between themselves
and in-house DP staff.
There is undoubtedly a need for specialist expertise. De-duplication of
names and addresses demands precise techniques, mastered by experts such as
The Computing Group, part of direct marketing company WWAV (Watson Ward
Albert Vandell).
Tony Masters, director WWAV advises that it is important to look at the
software product underpinning the marketing database: it has to be flexible.
'The technology is always moving forward. The percentage of turnover a
supplier spends on research and development is usually a good measure of
dedication.'
Forthcoming trade shows provide useful shop windows for those unsure where
to start. At last month's Business Computing Show, sales and marketing
systems arrived as a recognised sector.
More specialised is Softworld, a trade show dedicated to sales and
marketing, which uses 'interactive' techniques of presentations, workshops,
seminars and hands-on demonstrations as a showcase for a maximum of 45
software suppliers. The Softworld event manager, Jeremy Walker, who runs a
series of dedicated exhibitions, reports a boom in this particular niche
market - 'it's one of the last major growth areas for software, as yet to be
exploited in terms of applications products and installations. I know about
300 products in all, with about one new one per week.'
Christopher Bradley heads the sales and marketing IT consultancy group at
Coopers and Lybrand: he keeps count of every package supplier and most of
the 2,000 or so list brokers in the UK. He knows in excess of 250 UK sales
and marketing packages, and another 200 available in the US.
'The whole purpose of such systems is not just to win new sales,' he says.
'The real advantage comes not only from winning new sales, but in gaining
incremental profit on existing customers. The largest and most profitable
use of database marketing has been in cross-selling, improving lifetime
value. If we hammer home any one message, it's: 'Think of the lifetime value
 -not just the value of one sale.''
At Softworld, Mr Bradley represents the Association of Information Systems
in Marketing and Sales (AIMS), an organisation set up two years ago to
represent the suppliers of direct marketing software products and services.
There are all sorts of opportunities, he points out, for service companies
(such as electricity supply) to anticipate product needs, much as insurance
and financial companies already do. First, the industry has to lose its
reputation for bombarding the consumer with forest-loads of unsolicited,
duplicated mailshots.
'Please, keep the phrase 'junk mail' out of the headline . . . it's the very
thing we're trying to stamp out,' says Jeg Gray, marketing manager for
building society Northern Rock, (see page 17). He knows the power of a
direct appeal: it is on his shoulders, along with other colleagues in the
newly formed Direct Marketing Association, to make sure that database
marketing wins friends and influences people.
The DMA (UK), a more widely-based body than AIMS, was formed in April 1992,
as an association of advertisers, mailing houses, agencies, list brokers,
consultants and other parties in the industry. Mr Gray is well aware how
most people equate direct mail with waste paper through the letterbox - 'any
organisation which wants to have its customers buy additional products must
make sure that they do not annoy those customers by sending them totally
irrelevant mail,' he emphasises.
Mr Gray is convinced of the benefits of systematic database marketing, and
sees it as part of his job to convince the world at large of its benefits -
'the DMA is not interested in junk mail. We intend to advise and negotiate
with Whitehall, Westminster, and Brussels in order to position our industry
in its most favourable light, to win favour with the Great British Public.'
The unrequested but perfectly targeted missive should find a welcome on your
doormat, he argues. It could, after all, be offering you just what you
always wanted.
Forthcoming event: Softworld in Sales and Marketing: November 17-18, 1992 at
Heathrow Penta, (directory available); tel: Interactive Exhibitions in
London, 081 541 5040.
Contact: AIMS, PO Box 1508 Maidenhead, Berks., SL6 4RX; tel. 0628 778846.
Direct Marketing Association (UK), c/o Jeg Gray, tel. 071 321 2525.
