FT  30 MAY 92 / Golf: Seve builds for glory - The unbuilt Spanish courses
already vying to host the next Ryder Cup but two
THE 1993 Ryder Cup is 16 months away, the 1995 event 24 months after that.
Why, then, are we about to discuss the 1997 Ryder Cup? The answer is that
the race to stage the event in five years' time has just begun.
Things are starting to resemble the haggling that precedes the announcement
of a winter or summer Olympics except that, for 1997, the Ryder Cup
committee has already indicated that it wants the event to be held in Spain
that year. Thus, the question is less which country as which course.
These days, a potential Ryder Cup venue must have so much more than an
excellent course. Huge amounts of land for parking, exhibition centres,
catering, entertaining and spectators' facilities are almost as important as
the course itself.
Conventional wisdom has it that the Ryder Cup must be staged near a large
population source and have good access and egress. The Belfry, the site of
the 1985, 1989 and 1993 matches, meets this requirement perfectly. It is
close to the 2.5m population of greater Birmingham and has five motorways
within 15 minutes' drive of its main entrance.
The exception that proves the rule was Kiawah Island. Last year's event was
played on a brand-new course, at the far end of an 11-mile-long island,
which was 30 miles from Charleston via a two-lane road. Brilliant
organisation, not to mention spending Dollars 750,000 (Pounds 424,000) on
transport, made it a success.
Perhaps, then, we should scrutinise the Spanish clubs which have declared
their candidacy for 1997 so far.
The first to throw its hat into the ring was Valderrama, the exclusive club
much favoured by international businessmen at Sotogrande in southern Spain.
Although its members come from 22 countries, the club is well-nigh the
personal fiefdom of Jimmy Ortiz-Patino, a tireless and gifted organiser and
a man who would like nothing more than to stage the 1997 Ryder Cup.
Valderrama is to him what Xanadu was to Charles Foster Kane, and there is
little doubt he has the money and the will to do whatever is deemed
necessary to get the Ryder Cup and to make it a success.
The Volvo Masters has been held at Valderrama for the past four years. As a
result, the club has acquired considerable expertise at managing events.
Valderrama at Masters'-time is a bit like a swan, imperiously calm on the
surface although paddling hard underneath. Its case was helped by the recent
strike by employees at Club de Campo in Madrid which caused the last-minute
relocation of the Spanish Open and resulted in considerable extra expense
for the promoters.
Yet management expertise counts for little if the course is not of the
highest standard. In this regard, Valderrama could hardly be bettered. Last
year, it was voted the best course in continental Europe.
The next three requirements are space for exhibitions, catering, parking and
the like; good communications for the media; and satisfactory accommodation
and viewing facilities for the 20,000-plus spectators expected to attend
each day.
At Valderrama, space exists to the right of the present fourth fairway where
there would be parking for 12,000 cars. Television cables are laid
underground already. As to accommodation, the two teams would be put up at
the San Roque hotel, less than 10 minutes away by a back road. Within
comfortable driving distance are hotels of appropriate standard offering
17,000 beds.
Valderrama's most serious weakness is that it is not in Madrid. Undoubtedly,
this is an advantage as far as traffic movement is concerned, but a
disadvantage in that the catchment area contains a relatively small
population. Perhaps, though, Bernard Gallacher, the European team captain,
is right when he says that the contemporary Ryder Cup generates its own
support. Large numbers of spectators will attend wherever it is held.
The second challenger for the right to stage the 32nd Ryder Cup is the
Severiano Ballesteros golf club in the Galapagar district of Madrid, 15
minutes from the centre. Ballesteros might have been forced into declaring
his hand earlier than he intended because the course does not exist yet. But
he is confident of receiving planning permission in time for work to start
in the autumn.
'There will be two courses, but we will concentrate on making the A course
first-class in time for the Ryder Cup,' said Ballesteros last month. 'The
spectators will be able to park and they will all be able to see.'
Ballesteros is a key figure in all this. He will be 40 in 1997 and probably
making his final appearance in the Ryder Cup as a player. He might even be
non-playing captain. In either capacity, he is a powerful force to argue
against or ignore. Two years ago, he fought for Club de Campo to stage the
1993 Ryder Cup. He will be no less powerful in supporting his own venue in
1997.
'The Ryder Cup has to be in Madrid,' said Ballesteros. 'Everything is here.
It is the right place. Valderrama is a good-enough golf course, and so is El
Saler near Valencia, but they are in the wrong places.'
The third contender is La Moraleja's new course on the outskirts of Madrid.
It has been built with the Ryder Cup in mind, and an announcement will
probably be made at the time of the World Cup in November. For the moment,
it remains a little-known quantity.
The Ryder Cup committee will make a decision towards the end of next year.
Gallacher has approved of Valderrama. 'It is the right course and it has the
right infrastructure,' he says. 'People want to see the best players in the
world playing on one of the best courses in the world.'
He added, however, that he expected to see more than one bid from Spain and
that he expected the Spanish federation to indicate its support for one
venue above all others.
One thing is clear. If any club is to mount a serious challenge to
Valderrama, then it had better get its skates on. Valderrama, as they say in
golf, is the leader in the clubhouse.
