FT  26 MAR 92 / Smith New Court wins Pounds 14m: Securities house awarded
High Court damages for loss on Ferranti shares
SMITH NEW COURT, the securities house, has won about Pounds 14m compensation
for losses incurred on Ferranti shares it bought for Pounds 23m in July 1989
 -two months before the discovery of a fraud on Ferranti nearly halved its
share price.
The High Court held yesterday that SNC's bid price for the 28m shares had
been induced by fraudulent misrepresentations by Mr Christopher Roberts,
then head of private banking at Citibank, part of the US Citicorp group.
Mr Roberts had falsely told SNC it was competing with two other bidders,
said Mr Justice Chadwick.
SNC was awarded Pounds 10,764,005 damages against Citibank, plus interest it
later calculated at about Pounds 4m, and a substantial part of its costs.
Citibank was given judgment with costs against Mr Roberts for the same
amounts.
SNC lost its claim against Scrimgeour Vickers (Asset Management), the
market-making arm of Citibank which acted as broker for the share sale. The
judge held that SVAM, where Mr Roberts was an executive director, had not
been responsible for his misrepresentations.
Mr Roberts was found not guilty last year of making false and misleading
statements to induce SNC to buy the Ferranti shares.
After yesterday's judgment, Mr Michael Marks, chief executive of SNC, said
he was delighted with the outcome. Citibank said it would consider an
appeal.
Mr Justice Chadwick said SNC bought the shares in Ferranti International
Signal on July 21 1989. SVAM was acting on the instructions of Citibank, to
which the shares were charged as security for a loan to Parent Industries, a
company owned by Mr James Guerin. Parent defaulted on the loan.
Soon after SNC bought the shares, their price fell when it was discovered
that Ferranti had been the victim of a serious fraud.
SNC made a loss of Pounds 11.5m when it sold the holding.
According to SNC, the judge said, Mr Roberts mentioned receiving two other
bids and said he would disclose the identities of the other contenders once
SNC had made its own bid.
After SNC offered 82p per share, he told the securities house that Citicorp
had bid 75p-77p and Aeritalia, a state-owned Italian defence company, 81p.
There had been no such bids, but Mr Roberts's representations had the
intended effect: SNC was induced to remain a willing buyer at 82p, and that
led to an 82.25p-a-share bargain being struck.
'It is inconceivable that SNC would have remained willing to acquire the
Ferranti shares at 82p per share if two competing bids had not been
disclosed,' the judge said.
'If Mr Roberts had not told the SNC directors that he had received firm bids
 -and had not told them the amounts which had been bid - the SNC bid would
have been withdrawn.'
