FT  21 FEB 92 / Parliament and Politics: How to make a healthy mix of care
and cash - The choices facing voters over the NHS reforms
THE ELECTORATE faces an apparently clear choice. Labour will enter the
election pledged to abolish the market principles on which the government's
National Health Service reforms are based.
Out would go the internal market, self-governing trust hospitals and GP
fund-holders under proposals published yesterday in 'Your Good Health' -
described as a white paper for a Labour government. While it would require
legislation to bury the last remains of the Conservatives' NHS reforms,
Labour could sweep away much of them, like trust hospitals, by immediate
administrative action.
The NHS is, however, influenced as much by evolution as by legislative
change. Although the government put a commercial gloss on its NHS reforms
the central idea driving them - the separation of the funding of health care
from its provision - is becoming a feature of many health systems around the
world. Labour, while expressing determination to free the NHS from
'commercial pressures', does not entirely reject this purchaser-provider
split.
It acknowledges the case for ensuring 'the two functions of assessing needs
and delivering services remain distinct' and proposes to do this through
service agreements between health authorities and hospitals. These would
translate priorities in health authority performance agreements into
specific targets for hospitals.
Health authorities would use an unspecified portion of their budgets as
incentive funds to reward outstanding performance by hospitals and community
units. In this way, argues Labour, each unit would 'have an incentive to
improve the services it offers to the community without, at the same time,
having to compete in order to succeed'.
The Conservative government, says the Labour document, modelled its contract
system on business practice and contracts have been negotiated in commercial
secrecy. Labour's performance agreements would be developed as part of a
democratic process in a public service.
While self-governing trusts would disappear, hospital managers would be
given 'maximum freedom of decision-making'. GPs, although no longer
fund-holders, would gain a 'central role' in setting and monitoring service
agreements.
One of the first questions that health-care specialists will ask about
Labour's proposals is whether, having accepted the need to retain a
separation between assessment of needs and delivery of services, the party's
proposed service agreement structure would prove sufficiently robust for the
job.
The King's Fund health policy centre, while saying that there was 'much more
to welcome than to be concerned about' in Labour's plans, yesterday
questioned whether the proposed incentives and sanctions for promoting
efficiency were strong enough in the light of the decision to abandon the
internal market.
It also asked whether Labour had given sufficient thought to the balance
between central specification of performance and local freedom for action.
All political parties are seeking means of squeezing increased efficiency
out of a cash-limited public service, and there is some convergence in their
ideas for achieving this.
Overshadowing this remains the huge question of whether the NHS is
adequately funded. Labour's position is that the service has been
underfunded during the past decade and the document gave a renewed
commitment to tackling this. It commits an incoming Labour government to
reviewing the coming year's health budget against the background of public
accounts 'in order to establish how we can attack underfunding from the
start'.
