FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (4): 50 years in the
shadow - Finland's attitude towards an open Baltic has been muted
FINLAND has been somewhat less than enthusiastic about the opening up of the
Baltic area. Caution has been an understandable watchword in policy making
for a country which since 1944 has learned how to survive under the shadow
of Moscow.
President Mauno Koivisto aroused international criticism when he appeared to
criticise the high risk tactics of the Latvian and Lithuanian governments
during the tense days of January 1991 when the infamous para-military Soviet
Black Berets acted violently.
Since those events Finland has taken a more sympathetic attitude to the
countries of central and eastern Europe. In 1991 the government provided
FM221m (Dollars 54.4m) in grant assistance with a further FM247m (Dollars
55.67m) allocation this year.
The Finnish Department for Export Credits has provided commercial credits
worth FM50m (Dollars 11.2696m) to Estonia and FM7m (Dollars 1.578) for
technical help in the Baltic states. Earlier this year 100,000 tons of
heating oil were dispatched by Finland to help Estonia through its grim
winter.
At the beginning of 1992 Finland established technical assistance funds in
the World Bank and the International Finance Corporation of FM3m (Dollars
0.726m)and FM1.5m (Dollars 0.363m) respectively.
A number of Finnish private companies are also taking a keen interest in the
opening up of the eastern side of the Baltic to the rigours of the market
economy. This is particularly true in the transport sector. Neste, the
state-owned oil conglomerate, is establishing badly needed petrol filling
stations throughout the region in Warsaw, St Petersburg and Riga. It is
campaigning actively for the development of the Via Baltica - a modernised
motorway that it is hoped will link the area with western Europe early in
the next century.
Finland's Baltic role has to be seen in a much wider context. Finnish
foreign minister Paavo Vayrynen claims that his country is the only
developed market economy which shares a common border with Russia. This has
meant a focusing of Finnish assistance on specific areas close to Finland -
Murmansk, Karelia and the St Petersburg area.
But at the same time trade between Finland and Russia has almost collapsed
in the aftermath of the abolition of the mutually beneficial bilateral
clearing house system that operated successfully from 1948 to 1990. Like
Sweden, Finland is also going through a severe economic recession with
sizeable cuts in its own domestic spending programmes and a squeeze on
Finnish living standards. Such unprecedented belt tightening has not put the
traditionally insular Finns in an altruistic mood to shoulder any Baltic
responsibilities.
Finnish relations with Estonia promise understandably to be the closest. The
languages of the two countries are similar and their geographical proximity
over the Gulf of Finland ensured that even at the height of the Cold War
ties were not cut completely. In 1964 President Urho Kekkonen visited
Estonia, followed by trade and cultural contacts and the opening of a
consular office in Tallinn in 1970.
Finnish-owned hotel chains and transport companies are particularly active
in improving Estonia's attraction for business customers, while Finnish
administrators and businessmen are helping the Estonian reform programme.
