FT  09 MAR 92 / Threat of German strike grows
THE THREAT of a public sector strike in Germany grew stronger at the weekend
when trade union leaders rejected the government's pay offer as 'not worth
discussing' and warned that they would call a strike ballot if there were no
improvement.
The white-collar workers' union, DAG, has announced that it will decide
today on whether to start 'warning strikes' in central and state government
offices, and the OTV, the principal public sector union, did not exclude
protest actions in the key state of North Rhine-Westfalia.
The worsening mood in the 2.3m-strong public sector workforce, which would
pit the unions for the first time directly against the government, coincided
with more hopeful indications from both sides in the banking industry wage
conflict that they may return to the negotiating table.
At the same time there were gloomy warnings about the strained state of the
German economy, rising unemployment, and the need for tougher budget
restraint, both from government ministers and the government's top
independent economic adviser.
Professor Hans Karl Schneider, chairman of the so-called five wise men who
provide the German government with a regular independent economic analysis,
warned that the real level of unemployment would reach 4m this year and
expressed astonishment at the continuing demands of the unions for wage
awards of about 10 per cent.
The public sector unions are demanding a pay increase of 9.5 per cent, and
extra holiday pay, and last week were offered 3.5 per cent by the employers'
side, representing the federal, state and local authorities. At a weekend
rally in Essen, Mrs Monika Wulf-Mathies, leader of the OTV, said that if
there was no improvement in the offer by the next round of negotiations on
March 19, 'there can only be one answer: a ballot and a strike.'
Mr Helmut Kohl, the German chancellor, told a state election rally in
Baden-Wurttemberg that wage demands of 9.5 per cent had nothing to do with
economic reality.
The one ray of hope came in the bank dispute. Mr Hilmar Kopper, chief
executive of Deutsche Bank, said in an interview that the employers' offer
of 5 per cent was 'not the last word,' and union leaders said they were
ready to go back to the negotiating table.
