FT  18 MAY 92 / UK Company News: Kleinwort ready for talks on international
alliance
KLEINWORT Benson, the UK merchant banking group, is about to reactivate
negotiations with Banque Nationale de Paris and Dresdner Bank about joining
their international alliance.
These negotiations are expected to begin now that Dresdner, the second
biggest German bank, and BNP, France's number two bank, have passed an
important milestone in their separate talks on the formation of an
international alliance.
On Friday Dresdner told its shareholders that preliminary agreement had been
reached with BNP on a deal which would involve the two banks taking a stake
of up to 10 per cent in each other and forming a joint venture linking their
international operations.
Having cleared that hurdle, they will now start negotiations with KB.
The London based merchant bank had preliminary discussions with BNP on
forming a link with it a year ago, when BNP bought a 4.5 per cent stake in
KB. But these talks were frozen while BNP began its detailed negotiations
with Dresdner.
Bankers say that in the coming month, negotiations between KB and both
Dresdner and BNP will start. Initially these talks will concentrate on
whether KB can make an agreement with the two banks to co-operate on
international business.
However, if there is a basis for forming a tri-partite international
alliance, then Dresdner is likely to take a shareholding in KB and BNP is
likely to lift its KB investment.
Some KB directors believe that BNP and Dresdner should either make an
outright takeover bid to acquire 100 per cent of KB or they should restrict
their shareholding to a minority stake. They are uncomfortable about the
idea that BNP and Dresdner might between them control a majority stake of
less than 100 per cent.
It is likely that the banks will decide in the next three months whether a
deal involving all three of them is possible. KB believes that uncertainty
about whether the deal will take place could be damaging to its business.
Nonetheless, the French and German banks still have to surmount an important
hurdle before they can conclude their own separate alliance. They have yet
to put a price on each other's shares as a basis for carrying out the share
swap.
