FT  12 SEP 92 / Private View: The hard shell of Tory mercy - Tory MP Emma
Nicholson has adopted the cause of Iraq's Shias. What made her do it?
POLITICIANS CAN so easily make us cynical. Their addiction to the oxygen of
publicity makes them compulsive manipulators: they become dial-a-quote
junkies, inveterate photo-opportunists. Their eyes flick anxiously, their
lives are frantic, their self-esteem overpowering.
So when a Member of Parliament adopts a good cause the first question most
of us want to ask is: who benefits?
Emma Nicholson, MP for Devon West and Torridge, adopted the Shia Muslims of
southern Iraq (an area of which she had no previous knowledge) at the end of
the Gulf War. Two weeks ago, after errands of mercy and much public
agitation in Geneva, London and Washington, she had the satisfaction of
seeing George Bush declare a 'no-fly' zone south of Iraq's 32nd parallel.
She also adopted - or is fostering - a 10-year-old Iraqi boy, Amar, who was
badly burned in the napalm attack that killed his parents and whom she
brought to England from a refugee camp in Iran.
Who, in this case, would be so churlish as to ask cui bono? I was the churl.
Aren't troublespots irresistible for an MP who wants attention at home? I
asked her.
'No,' she replied. 'In fact I held back because of that. I don't ever mix up
aid for people in trouble with magnifying their problems for my benefit.'
But there were plenty of people with Middle East experience in the House of
Commons. Why should you jump in? You could be accused of opportunism.
'No. No, because being a do-gooder is basically very boring for other
people. It's not glamorous. It's very dull. People turn away. 'Oh] how
boring,' they think. 'At it again]' I'd already begged money from my
colleagues to adopt a Romanian orphanage.
'No, it couldn't have been more boring. In the middle of the Gulf War I
merely got up and asked the Foreign Secretary what we were going to do about
the victims afterwards. Couldn't be more boring for colleagues. To my
enormous surprise I got a very positive reply.'
She denied that she is a publicity-seeker. 'It's always nice to hurl rotten
eggs, and politicians are the modern world's Aunt Sallies.' She even claimed
to be wary of interviews, especially with women reporters, who, she claimed,
did their damndest to pervert the result. 'I always try to help other women.
I find this incomprehensible.'
Why do they do it? 'Career advancement for themselves. Desire to be cleverer
than the person they are interviewing. I think the only sadness I have about
my sex is that they are constantly sour, and scratch another woman where it
hurts.'
Emma Nicholson is a large, good-looking Tory lady. Her voice would be
described as plummy were it not for a metallic timbre, the only clue to her
serious deafness. She has an imperious manner and it is easy to picture her
playing Lady Bountiful to the raggle-taggle refugees of Iraq and jousting
with those charming Iranian officials ('We have lot of fun. A lot of
intellectual fun . . .').
Is there another, softer Emma Nicholson beneath the well-glazed crust?
She was born into a God-fearing political family, a good musician who got as
far as the Royal Academy of Music before being frustrated by deafness. She
was educated by Anglican nuns at St. Mary's, Wantage. In her twenties she
chose to live as a celibate career girl, first in computer software for ICL,
then in consultancy, then as a fundraiser for Save the Children before
realising her real ambition, to enter Parliament.
She was 45 before she made it. In the same year, 1987, she regularised a
relationship with Michael Caine, the 60-year-old chairman of Booker (of
Booker Prize fame), marrying him when his own 35-year marriage was
dissolved. They depend on earned income and are not spectacularly rich: the
Booker chairman's salary last year was Pounds 72,000. Nicholson kept her own
name and although her husband was knighted a year later she refuses to
answer to 'Lady Caine'.
That does not stop some constituency critics accusing her of playing the
grande dame, alienating local farmers and rarely showing her face. (It was
this same fault in Margaret Thatcher that prompted Nicholson to shift her
allegiance to Michael Heseltine). She claims that most of her constituents
understand and share her concern for the Third World.
Don't people come up to you and say 'What are doing with all these bloody
Muslims; I've got a problem with my cowshed'?
'They don't use the word Muslim. They call them foreigners.' Political
opponents attacked her in this way, and it upset her.
Your constituents might find it difficult to understand your interest in the
Shias and Iran. Don't you think their regime is crazy?
'There are worse things in life than living under a fundamentalist religious
regime - such as being next door under Saddam Hussein. Actually I think
apartheid is worse. I've never been able to visit South Africa in my whole
life. That for me is the bottom line of human degradation. Because at the
end of the day you can change your religion.'
You think religious restraints are more acceptable than others?
'They certainly seem to be restraints that many societies actively seek.
There's little to choose between the fundamental religionists in Iran and
the nuns in Wantage. It's just the other side of the coin.'
Pro bono publico could be the motto on Nicholson's escutcheon. 'Papa was an
MP, Mama was deputy chairman of Dr. Barnardo's. When I went with Papa on his
rounds I saw the rough edges of British life.'
She remembers one children's home in particular. 'They were grotesquely
handicapped, in the days before abortions (Nicholson is pro-abortion). They
were ruled over by a very kind, very bossy lady. I remember clearly standing
beside a child who was grotesquely deformed, poor little thing, who was
actually much older than me but the same height as me, and thinking: My God
I'm lucky] I've got to do something for these people.'
Then why didn't you join the Labour Party?
'Because they would ruin the country. They're based on an economic and
social theory which mercifully has been discredited. Socialism was dug in in
the mid-seventies. That's why I put my name forward. I couldn't bear to
stand on the sidelines any longer with red-blooded Socialism in the saddle.'
Nicholson would not accept that her own deafness motivates her good works:
she would not even allow me to call it a handicap. 'It's no worse than
having to wear glasses,' she said. 'Society's reaction is still odd, a
mixture of prurience and embarrassment.'
Why did you forego marriage and children of your own?
'I meant not to get married. I made that decision in my early twenties.'
What put you off?
'The need to explore the world, what talent I might have . . . I thought no
one would marry me who would be willing to accommodate that.'
Was it the quality of men you met?
'They were perhaps not big-hearted enough for me. Michael minds very much
about everybody.'
What kind of men did you meet? Computer programmers?
'No. Not much. Really the smart circuit.'
Debs' delights?
'Yes, and they weren't my style.'
Chinless wonders?
'Yes, and even some with chins. They were very nice, but they weren't me. I
don't think I was them either.'
No, I agreed, I should think you frightened the pants off them. She laughed.
Do you like the picture of yourself as the intrepid woman in
mosquito-infested parts of the globe? And showing off the photos afterwards?
'No. That is because I'm a woman. Because I always know that I'm too fat.
I'd much rather never see another photograph of myself ever again anywhere.
I always say: 'My goodness me] I wish I was slimmer or prettier'.'
Did you ever wish you were a man?
'I certainly think it would have been a lot easier for me to be a man,
without any doubt at all. But I am a woman, and not a man dressed up as a
woman.'
When finally I asked Emma Nicholson to confess to her ambition, she was
cagey again. Colleagues say she is disappointed not to have got much
further. I suspect that if she is passed over at Westminster she will try
her hand in the bigger theatre of Europe.
Was there anything else?
'I would dearly love to be a Fellow of the Royal College of Organists. I
love playing the organ. And now that I've had my hearing corrected, there's
nothing to stop me.'
Why the organ?
'I love church music; my favourite composer is Bach. I'm not really an
instrumentalist.'
And of course the organ makes a big noise, I said.
'Yes. It's enormous fun. Pull out all the stops. Great fun. Great, great
fun. You can even drown the vicar.' She snorted like a schoolgirl.
Ambition, compassion, public duty and party politics are, I think, all one
to Emma Nicholson. She comes from a background where 'serving' and 'ruling'
are not distinguished. Agreeable as she is, I could not warm to her public
persona. And perhaps this is the real weakness of our politicians: they are
terrified of letting us see the human being within.
