FT  20 JUN 92 / As they say in Europe: Scene: a blasted heath
THE HEADLINE in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung read: 'Anti-competition
of the game destroyers.' Football editor Peter Hess continued by asking:
'How was it before?'
Hess then contemplated the dismal state of the game: 'Was scoring a goal
really once the mind and purpose of the game of football? Or what? And the
highest aim: was it, in fact, to get just one more goal than the opponents?
. . . Is football played to please the manager or the public?' (This is
actually taken from Franz Beckenbauer's aria, 'Extra Time,' from Wagner's
unpublished work, 'Die Meisterspieler von FC Nurnberg').
Hess's commentary appeared over the report of the lamentable England-France
0-0 draw of last Sunday which British television commentators described,
uniquely, as a good performance (and that says something or other about
English football). The headline was a prophetic masterpiece: 'The depths
successfully plumbed: England can't, France won't' Unfortunately, the FAZ
report did not appear until Tuesday. German newspapers carry little news of
the day before as they close most of the pages at about four in the
afternoon under what seems to be some sort of non-competition agreement
between publishers - the media equivalent of a 0-0 draw.
It has been said that soccer is a game for gentleman played by cads, and
rugby a game for cads played by gentlemen, but the great French footballer,
Alain Giresse, is the ultimate gentleman. He has a question-and-answer
column in the sports paper L'Equipe. When asked why the English made so many
errors against France, he referred only to the 'intensity and the power of
the defence.'
What a contrast with Hess, who retold an obscure joke made after the game by
England manager, Graham Taylor, adding: 'This touch of English humour could
not make up for the damaging boredom of the preceding 90 minutes. That would
have required an hour and a half of Monty Python's Flying Circus.'
His comments appeared before the best game of the tournament: Scotland 0,
Germany 2. The Scots arouse a lot of affection in football circles. Giresse
was asked: 'Will Scotland change one day?' He replied: 'Good question] It is
incredible, the years pass, competitions come and go, but every time it is
the same Scots, faithful to their traditions. Here (in Sweden) they live in
town, stroll about, laugh and appear relaxed in all situations. And yet,
always animated by a formidable state of mind but deprived of technical and
attacking skills; always hard to beat but, at the end of the day, always
beaten.'
Now this from Le Monde diplomatique: 'You don't go to Macbeth to teach
yourself Scottish history, you go to learn what remains of a man when he
gains a kingdom and loses his own soul.' That introduced a huge feature
entitled 'Football reveals the major antagonisms of our societies,' which
showed that there is a good deal more to the game than many believe. Bill
Shankly, the late manager of Liverpool, got it right when asked if football
really was a matter of life and death. 'No, it's much more serious than
that,' he said.
The Monde quotation was from an anonymous work to be published this year
called The Football Match: Ethnology of a partisan passion in Marseilles,
Naples and Turin. It argued that 'one may decently lend to a football match
the dignity and allegorical depth of a great drama.' Le Monde's Christian
Bromberger said the game provides an opportunity 'for the affirmation of
collective identities and local and regional antagonisms.'
And national] The Dutch hatred of Danes, which I revealed exclusively here
two weeks ago, has shown itself again in the pages of NRC-Handelsblad.
Elsbeth Etty, in a comment headed 'Something Rotten,' wrote of the perfectly
good Dutch goal against the CIS that was disallowed last Monday. 'It was bad
enough when 11 European countries were thrown off course by a single
referendumette, but to do it again to 11 Dutch footballers is going too far.
It was indeed a Danish linesman who said 'no' to Marco van Basten's
beautiful goal. That was not clear only to Dutch television viewers; even
the BBC ('It's a goal, no doubt it's a goal') agreed.'
Footnote: Jean, at the Scottish Football Association, tells me that a
Macbeth played for East Fife (of course) in 1927-30.
James Morgan is the economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.
