FT  08 APR 92 / International Bonds: EC adds Ecu185m to existing deal in
quiet day
FOLLOWING a flurry of new international bond issues on Monday, the market
returned to the subdued and cautious tone which has prevailed for several
weeks.
The European Community launched the only substantial issue of the day,
adding Ecu185m to its outstanding deal maturing 1998. The 9 1/4 per cent
bonds were reoffered to investors at a fixed price of 101.836, where the
yield is 8.83 per cent - 5 basis points more than the yield available on the
outstanding Ecu935m in the secondary market.
The pricing was seen as sensible by market participants, offering an
incentive to buy the new paper. However, appetite for bonds is weak and
firms saw slow buying.
BNP Capital Markets, which lead managed the deal, said that buyers included
east Asian institutional investors and some UK and continental European bond
fund managers. The deal was quoted by the lead manager at 101.80 bid, a
shade below the reoffer level.
The proceeds of the issue were swapped into floating-rate Ecu for the
borrower, at a rate thought to be about 26 basis points below the London
interbank offered rate (Libor) for Ecu deposits. The proceeds are being
on-lent to Romania to back economic development in that country.
Few borrowers are looking to launch substantial issues in a weak market.
Syndicate officials said Finland still hopes to raise Dollars 1bn 10-year
funding, although no date or pricing has been set. Compagnie Bancaire, the
French financial institution, is thought to be considering a Dollars 400m
five-year deal.
Of Monday's issues, Export Development Corporation's Dollars 400m 10-year
deal was quoted by lead manager Credit Suisse First Boston around the launch
spread of 27 basis points over US Treasury bonds. However, participants in
the deal said that the issue remained only partially sold to end investors.
Ericsson's Dollars 150m five-year deal was freed to trade yesterday morning.
By the close, the yield spread had widened to about 95 basis points, from 90
basis points at launch.
