FT  16 JUL 92 / Arts: The Dybbuk
BETWEEN the wars, Solomon Anski's play was a staple of Yiddish theatre
everywhere. Anski (1863-1920) was Byelorussian, a political radical and a
devoted ethnographer of Ukrainian Jewry.
The Dybbuk is an extraordinary play, and Katie Mitchell's production for the
Royal Shakespeare Company gives it the works - in the best, most serious
sense, and also in a long-sighted new way.
The bare bones of the Chassidic tale Anski used as his basis might seem only
a superstitious folk-legend, with a sentimental-mystical twist.
There is far more in his overflowing play, and it founds the sense of the
story far deeper - but the details are densely, opaquely ethnic: a modern
director, even in Yiddish theatre, might scarcely know what to do with it.
Miss Mitchell has known exactly what to do with it. She has induced a fine
translator (Mira Rafalowicz) to make her fourth adaptation of the text; she
has taken a scholarly team to do fieldwork among Jews in the Ukraine.
She recreates a whole, devout community in The Pit, with the right songs and
dances and a cast fervently drilled in their bursts of Yiddish and Hebrew
(justified by their rhetorical force, incantatory or commanding or
folk-pithy).
Above all, she plants the central lovers' mystical rebellion against Torah
law firmly within that tradition and that community, and allows neither side
to 'win'.
A Dybbuk is the soul of one whose life has been cut off prematurely and
incomplete, and seeks a temporising refuge in the body of another.
Here, a poor Yeshiva scholar (Charles Daish) who loves Leye, a rich man's
daughter, is rejected by her father in favour of a wealthier husband;
unhinged, he falls to cabbalistic fancies and starves himself to death.
At the moment of Leye's eventual wedding, she becomes possessed by him as a
Dybbuk. The rest of the play is concerned with her ritual exorcism by the
great 'Reb' (Rabbi) Azriel - incarnated with huge gusto by John Shrapnel -
and its outcome.
Superstition has nothing to do with it. The burning theme of the play is how
the dead interpenetrate the world of the living (as of course they do among
us all, most comprehensively), at every level from spiritual to quotidian
and pragmatic.
Among the people whom Anski depicts with such faithful insight, that is
poignantly understood; the message emerges from their culture with special
clarity. It emerges in this production with humane power. Timely, too - but
you can draw your own morals.
As shy, obedient Leye, Joanne Pearce is faultless; and later, we cannot
doubt while the play proceeds that she is possessed by the Dybbuk. It is a
wrenching performance, and superb, though one cannot help but fear for her
health over the five-month run.
Among all the excellent players, Peter Needham lends the father dignity and
subtlety, and Rob Edwards creates a lofty, uncanny presence for the
Messenger, a vital go-between for matters of the highest import.
Altogether the play transmits a kind of wisdom; nothing in it that seems
quaint or picturesque is mere surface, but subserves its real, sober vision.
The Pit, Barbican Centre (071) 638 8891. In repertory until 28 November
