FT  09 JUN 92 / Government Bonds: Europe continues slide in high-yielding
paper
EUROPE'S higher-yielding government bond markets continued their slide
yesterday in the wake of Denmark's rejection of the Maastricht treaty. The
referendum result dashed investors' hopes of convergence in European
interest rates and led to a sharp drop in the high-yielding markets last
week.
Italy, which was once one of the more popular high-yielding European bond
markets, suffered a further setback on fears that the Bank of Italy may be
forced to raise interest rates in order to support the lira.
The emergency funds rate was raised by 50 basis points to 13 per cent last
week, and dealers said the market was worried that the central bank would
have to raise the discount rate from its current level of 12 per cent if the
currency comes under further pressure.
News that Moody's, the rating agency, has placed Italy's foreign currency
debt under review for possible downgrade also upset the bond market, dealers
said. The 12 per cent government bond due May 2002 fell in price from 96.40
at Friday's close to end at 95.50 yesterday. The futures contract fell from
its opening of 96.05 to close at 95.39.
Many of the European bond markets were closed yesterday for a public
holiday. However, dealers reported a continuation of last week's trend of
switching out of high-yielding markets into the safety of the D-Mark bloc
using the futures market. The Liffe bund futures contract rose from 88.06 to
88.21.
UK GILTS fell nearly half a percentage point as the market continued to
suffer from worries about convergence and the government's heavy funding
programme.
The Liffe gilt futures contract fell from Friday's close of 98.06 to open at
97.31, and ended the day at 97.22 on a volume of about 27,000 contracts. The
benchmark 11 3/4 per cent gilt due 2003/07 fell from Friday's close of 116
5/16 to trade at 115 7/8 by late afternoon.
JAPANESE government bonds ended the day mixed, with the futures contract and
long-dated issues closing lower while shorter-dated bonds finished the day
slightly firmer.
Dealers said the bond market opened on a firm note, helped by the stronger
yen and the release on Friday of slightly worse-than-expected jobs data in
the US for May. The figures raised hopes of a further easing in US monetary
policy and encouraged Japanese government bond prices to open stronger.
The benchmark No 129 issue opened with a yield of 5.465 per cent, moved to
5.455 per cent and fell on futures-driven selling to close at 5.505 per
cent. The futures contract, which opened at 102.07, reached a high of
102.09, then fell back to end the day at 101.75.
Dealers expect the market to trade in a narrow range ahead of the Bank of
Japan's quarterly survey of business sentiment - the Tankan - which is due
on Friday.
AFTER the excitement generated on Friday by an unexpectedly weak May
employment report, US Treasury markets settled down into a narrow trading
range yesterday as dealers and investors digested the implications of last
week's monthly jobs data.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government issue was up  1/16 at 101
25/32 , yielding 7.838 per cent. Prices were firmer at the short end of the
market, with the two-year note up  1/8 at 100 3/32 , yielding 5.057 per
cent.
Late last week, prices gained on the unforeseen rise in the monthly
unemployment rate from 7.2 per cent to 7.5 per cent, which boosted hopes of
another policy ease by the Federal Reserve.
A closer study of the figures, however, revealed that labour market
conditions were mixed in May, and there was enough evidence of an
improvement in the employment situation in certain sectors to prevent the
market from adding substantially to Friday's gains.
By yesterday, the consensus appeared to be that while the May jobs data had
negative implications for the state of the economic recovery, they were not
bad enough to warrant an interest rate cut by the Fed.
Dealers and investors, therefore, were holding their fire, awaiting the next
set of economic numbers, which are due out later this week.
Thursday will see the publication of May retail sales and producer price
index figures, while on Friday details of May consumer prices and April
business inventories will be released.
