FT  22 JAN 92 / Donors meet to co-ordinate aid for CIS republics
MORE than 40 donor governments and international financial institutions meet
in Washington today to co-ordinate their assistance to the fledgling
independent republics of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).
Although formally convened by Mr James Baker, US secretary of state, to
discuss means of making international aid to the former Soviet Union more
effective, the two days of talks are also expected to provide a forum for
wider ranging discussion of how to deal with the underlying economic and
financial crisis afflicting the former Soviet superpower.
Mr Baker will open today's plenary session by welcoming senior government
officials from donor countries and representatives of the IMF, the World
Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and other
institutions gearing themselves up to admit the new independent republics
and expand lending and technical assistance.
He said yesterday the conference was meant to send 'a message of hope' to
the former Soviet republics, but US officials played down expectation of
substantial US financial assistance.
Behind the scenes, five specialised working groups will concentrate on
specific aspects of aid. They will cover provision of shelter, ways of
ensuring continuing energy supplies, medical assistance, technical help and
food aid itself.
Most European participants in the conference seem determined to make it a
success, despite their hurt feelings over the way the US convened it.
The European Commission believes that helping the CIS avoid a winter of
chaos and privation is an international task, and that the US has a key role
in widening the aid effort to bring in Middle East, Asian and Latin American
donors.
'We are happy with the conference because there needs to be co-ordination
between actual donors - mainly the EC, the US, Japan - and potential donors,
like the Arab countries,' said a spokesman for Mr Frans Andriessen, EC
external affairs commissioner who leads the EC delegation.
The Commission thus appears to have swallowed its pride and overlooked the
fact that when its president, Mr Jacques Delors, first proposed last
September an international conference on aid to the former Soviet republics
 -admittedly in the narrower context of the Group of Seven industrialised
countries - the US did not respond.
Mr Andriessen is expected this week to propose a follow-up meeting to the
Washington conference, to be hosted by the Commission in Brussels in April.
Some EC member states are, however, still upset about what they see as
Washington's bid to get the political kudos for an aid programme mostly
funded by others. Among these states are Germany, overwhelmingly the largest
donor if all types of aid are considered, and France, which has sent a
junior minister and not its foreign minister, to Washington.
The conference also coincides with renewed transatlantic trade friction over
the Uruguay Round negotiations.
The EC is the largest aid donor to the CIS, providing Ecu47.46bn (Pounds
34bn) out of a worldwide total of Ecu62.4bn. But included in the total are
special payments, such as the Ecu8.35bn Germany is spending to move Russian
troops out of its eastern states by 1994.
On food aid, the EC and the US are not far apart. The US has offered
Ecu2.98bn in agricultural credit, and the EC Ecu1.75bn. The US is giving
Ecu132m worth of food aid grants while the EC budget includes about Ecu450m.
About Ecu200m of the EC aid is being targeted at Moscow and St Petersburg.
Technical assistance for transport, energy and food distribution and storage
is proving slower to deliver. The Community is the biggest donor here,
having pledged Ecu900m in 1991-2. But technical aid from the US will amount
to Ecu388m.
