FT  11 DEC 92 / Lonrho - Rowland's Exit: A departure wholly in character -
The options open to shareholders in an uncertain future
IT IS wholly in character for Mr Tiny Rowland that his exit from Lonrho
should be so hard to interpret.
It is unclear what direction the company will take when he is gone, or
indeed who is to run it. It is also unclear how far the deal is good for Mr
Rowland's loyal band of fellow shareholders.
The case for the deal is simply put.
Lonrho is issuing shares to Mr Bock at 85p. This is some 10p above the
market price. Existing shareholders are therefore better off, particularly
at a time when Lonrho is strapped for cash. Also, while some Lonrho shares
are evidently worth 115p - the price Mr Bock is paying Mr Rowland -
shareholders are being offered a rights issue at a mere 85p.
There are eminently respectable advisers to vouch for the deal: Deutsche
Bank for Mr Bock, through its subsidiary Morgan Grenfell. Royal Bank of
Scotland for Lonrho, through its subsidiary Charterhouse.
The case against is more involved, but not necessarily less persuasive.
The rights issue, being offered well above the market price, is designed to
fail. It is a technical device to secure Mr Bock's target of 100m shares
without breaching the London market's rules on pre-emption. This is
illustrated by the fact that while Mr Bock is underwriting 100m shares -
half the amount on offer - the other half is not underwritten at all.
In addition, Lonrho has undertaken that if enough shareholders take up their
rights to leave Mr Bock short of his 100m target, it will issue the
difference to him at 85p. Mr Rowland, needless to say, is not taking up his
rights. His entitlement has been assigned to Mr Bock for a nominal sum.
Although the 85p Mr Bock is paying is above the market price, it is little
more than half Lonrho's stated net asset value per share. How far that asset
value is realisable is an open question. But on paper at least, Lonrho
shareholders will have their net worth diluted, assuming they do not stump
up for the rights.
But while shareholders have no incentive to pay above the market price, it
is different for Mr Bock and his shadowy backers. They stand to end up with
25 per cent of the company.
Mr Rowland dominated Lonrho with a smaller shareholding. Arguably,
shareholders are seeing de facto control being transferred under their noses
for a very meagre premium.
The real premium, of course, goes to Mr Rowland, who gets 115p for half of
his stake. The rest can be bought by Mr Bock after three years at the
prevailing market price, apparently without paying anything for the option.
There seems nothing strictly improper about Mr Rowland extracting a higher
price in this way. It might be asked, though, whether it did not create a
conflict of interest when he explained the deal to the rest of the board. It
is understood that he did not vote at the board meeting in question. But
Lonrho is his company, and he is the dominant director.
Indeed, there is a defensive tone to Mr Rowland's own letter to
shareholders. His premium, he writes, does not represent any unfair
advantage, 'since neither my company nor I has ever dealt in Lonrho's shares
other than to buy them.' Either the argument is a non sequitur, or any other
shareholder who has never sold shares can apply to Mr Bock for 115p as well.
However aggrieved shareholders feel about all this, there is probably
nothing they can do about it. There is a striking contrast with Mr Alan
Sugar, whose modest proposal to buy out Amstrad's shareholders was turned
down yesterday. As more than one City observer has remarked, when it comes
to corporate infighting Mr Rowland makes Mr Sugar look like an amateur.
