FT  16 SEP 92 / No way out from tough decisions: John Major's cancellation
of a trip to Spain highlights the public spending dilemma
The way in which Mr John Major's trip to Spain was cancelled at the last
minute smacked of carelessness. An admission from Downing Street that the
prime minister was needed in London to get to grips with the public spending
round could hardly have been calculated to calm London's financial markets.
The threat of a sterling crisis may have been uppermost in Mr Major's mind.
But he may also have judged that it was impossible to disguise any longer a
looming cabinet battle over how the government is to meet its spending
targets for the next few years. With the recession threatening another big
increase in the government's social security budget, ministers are digging
in against cuts in other sensitive Whitehall budgets.
Mr Major may have calculated that it was better to demonstrate now that he
was intent on giving a political lead on public spending rather than
allowing resentment among his colleagues to develop into a public row.
But direct involvement by the prime minister will not solve his government's
dilemma over spending. How, during a deep recession, can it square its
election promise to deliver improved public services with the need to
reassure financial markets that public spending and borrowing are not
spiralling out of control?
The latest projections on the outlook for public borrowing have alarmed
Whitehall. Officials believe the recession's impact on the government's
balance sheet - pushing up spending and cutting tax revenues - means the
Treasury is already set to overshoot its Pounds 28bn borrowing target for
1992-93. More worryingly, the outlook for the 1993-94 financial year, which
begins next April, points to a borrowing requirement of closer to Pounds
40bn.
Even these gloomy projections assume that the government manages to stick to
its pledge of holding departmental spending to Pounds 244.5bn in 1993-94 and
to Pounds 258bn in 1994-95.
Barely two months ago Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, was claiming a
significant coup when he persuaded the cabinet to confirm these targets
publicly - and to set up a new ministerial committee to ensure that the pain
of meeting them was shared fairly between the main spending departments.
But it has become clear that the mechanism does not give ministers an easy
escape route from hard political decisions. When the committee - chaired by
Mr Lamont and including cabinet heavyweights such as Mr Michael Heseltine
and Mr Kenneth Clarke - meets for the first time tomorrow it will be handed
a gloomy assessment of the Treasury's initial skirmishes with spending
ministers.
Mr Michael Portillo, the chief secretary, has held a series of bilateral
meetings with cabinet colleagues to persuade them to whittle down the
estimated Pounds 14bn of extra money they had bid for next year. Mr Portillo
has managed to knock a 'significant sum' off the threatened overshoot. But
with some ministers unwilling to move on their individual bids, the
projected total remains well above the Pounds 244.5bn figure they
collectively endorsed in July.
In theory the target is not draconian. In real terms the figures pencilled
in for total spending should allow for an increase in each of the next two
years of 3.5 per cent. And with inflation likely to be lower than the
forecasts on which that calculation was made last autumn, the growth rate
could be higher.
But the global calculation obscures the ravages wrought by the recession on
the Pounds 70.5bn social security budget. Most of the overall increase in
public spending will be absorbed by higher benefits payments to the
unemployed. Other departments - education, transport, environment and the
Home Office among them - face an effective freeze or worse on their budgets
to pay the additional benefits bill.
The present plans already allow for an increase in social security payments
to Pounds 76bn next year. But it is acknowledged that the figure is based on
an optimistic estimate of unemployment. The Treasury's calculations assume a
jobless total of 2.4m. It is more likely to be 3m or above. That alone will
lead to an automatic increase in spending of between Pounds 2bn and Pounds
3bn.
The other main pressure point is the council tax - the planned replacement
for the community charge. Mr Michael Howard, the environment secretary, is
arguing that, if the average bill when the tax is introduced is to come
anywhere near the Pounds 400 per household suggested by the government, then
the Treasury will have to hand over an additional Pounds 2bn in extra grant
for local authorities and in temporary relief for those worst hit by the
transition.
Mr Portillo has tried to scale down Mr Howard's bid, but there is
recognition that the cabinet cannot permit a repeat of the increases in
household bills which ensured that the community charge's introduction was a
fiasco.
The implication is that the Pounds 4bn or so available for allocation this
autumn from the Treasury's contingency reserve has been more than spent.
When other unavoidable spending increases are added - the knock-on effect,
for example, of higher-than-expected pay increases this year for health
workers and teachers - the conclusion is that other ministers must abandon
their bids for extra cash and accept cuts in their existing programmes.
The Treasury has already targeted the Pounds 7bn roads programme, the
Department of Environment's Pounds 7bn housing budget, the urban aid
programme, the Home Office's prison-building plans, and the relatively
generous settlement won last year by the health department. It wants also
deep cuts in the Pounds 24bn defence budget.
But cabinet ministers threatened by the squeeze are beginning to challenge
the economic logic of financing increases in social security spending with
cuts in the government's capital programmes. They are sensitive to the calls
from the Conservatives' allies in the business community and from the
government's backbench supporters for more rather than less to be spent on
roads, schools and hospitals.
Some ministers are muttering that if the Treasury's target is to be met, the
cabinet will have to confront the politically explosive issue of whether to
stick with an open-ended commitment to higher state pensions, child benefit
and income support payments. No Conservative government since 1979 has been
prepared to grasp that nettle. But it may be that Mr Major has no other
choice.
