FT  31 JUL 92 / UK Company News: Second quarter setback behind 7% downturn
at Hepworth
HEPWORTH experienced steady trading in the first three months of this year,
but the second quarter saw a further decline in demand from its main UK
markets.
The building materials and home products company reported a 7 per cent
decline in pre-tax profits to Pounds 32.8m for the six months to June 30 on
turnover 3.6 per cent lower at Pounds 319.1m.
However, the group said trading in the important continental markets had
been reasonably good, with Saunier Duval, its gas boiler maker, performing
particularly well.
Building products benefited from buoyant demand for European clay pipes and
held profits at Pounds 11.9m on flat turnover, in spite of worsening trading
conditions in the UK.
Management was continuing to introduce new products and a reduction in the
division's UK workforce from 2,400 to 2,000 had already been announced,
costs of which would be taken in the second half.
The home products division, which experienced reduced UK demand for its gas
boilers and garage doors, saw profits fall from Pounds 7.3m to Pounds 6.3m
on turnover of Pounds 49.8m (Pounds 52.6m).
Saunier Duval raised profits to Pounds 13.5m (Pounds 10.5m) on turnover of
Pounds 90.9m (Pounds 75.6m). Demand for combination boilers remained buoyant
in its main French and Spanish markets and the outlook remained favourable.
The worst performance came from refractories where weak demand worldwide saw
profits fall from Pounds 9.2m to Pounds 4.6m on turnover of Pounds 64.6m
(Pounds 78.5m).
Management responded by significantly reducing the cost base and further
rationalisation is being implemented. The group warned that these costs
would fall in the second half, and full-year profits would be much lower
than last time.
Reduced demand also affected the mineral and chemicals division, but a
reduction in costs made last year partly mitigated the impact of weaker
trading. Although turnover dropped from Pounds 51m to Pounds 38.5m after a
disposal, profits fell just Pounds 300,000 to Pounds 5.5m.
Gearing dropped from 33 per cent at the year-end to 25 per cent.
Capital expenditure had been curbed in the light of deteriorating market
conditions, although heavy investment was continuing at Saunier Duval.
Earnings per share were 11.3p (12.2p). The interim dividend is held at 5.5p.
COMMENT
Hepworth is clearly a class act in the bombed-out building products sector,
but that was not enough to prevent the shares being marked down in May after
it became clear there was going to be no immediate post-election boom in the
UK. These results are respectable, given the present trading conditions -
although cost-cutting might reduce full-year profits by Pounds 8m - and the
company's caution following destocking of its boilers by merchants. Overseas
business now accounts for more than 40 per cent of profits and sales, partly
because the UK is so flat. What is impressive is the way Hepworth keeps on
cutting costs and improving products, and not just waiting for the upturn.
The shares closed 4p higher at 310p putting them on a prospective multiple
of just under 16. Hepworth remains one of the best quality recovery plays.
