FT  17 OCT 92 / Clinton country: the rise of the new South - Thirty years on
from the Alabama race riots, America's blacks are prospering from the
economic rebirth of the US southern states
THE PHOTOGRAPH still has the power to shock and anger: it shows a white
policeman, wearing sinister dark glasses, grasping a tall, well-dressed
black youth by his shirt as the policeman's dog sinks its fangs into the
boy's stomach. The picture - taken almost 30 years ago in Birmingham,
Alabama, at the height of America's civil rights movement - was one of those
perfectly composed images that linger in the imagination and help to define
an era.
Its portrayal of naked white violence and passive black resistance was
carried prominently on the front pages of newspapers around the world,
symbolising the struggle by blacks throughout the American South for equal
voting rights and an end to segregated facilities reminiscent of South
Africa's apartheid. The scenes in Birmingham in that spring of 1963, where
police turned dogs and water cannons on children protesting peacefully, also
gave the steel manufacturing city an international stigma it has never
shaken off entirely. Yet, a surprise awaits the visitor to Birmingham who, a
generation on, still expects a grimy, industrial backwater of malevolent
racism.
Race remains a strong political factor, notably in a long legal fight by
white municipal unions to prevent positive job discrimination in favour of
blacks by the city government. But a black mayor has run city hall since
1979 and, last month, the park in which the worst police violence took place
was dedicated as part of a specially renovated civil rights memorial
district. The city still makes steel, but most of its growth industries now
are in high technology and the wooded hills that ripple away from the centre
largely are free of industrial pollution. Birmingham has become a major
medical centre, too; actress Jane Fonda, renowned for being politically
correct, had a knee injury treated there recently.
You can get a good idea of its material wealth at the suburban Riverchase
Galleria, a vast, glass-enclosed mall which houses the same predictable
retailing names found in smart shopping centres across the continent:
Benetton, Brooks Brothers, Laura Ashley - even Crabtree &amp; Evelyn of London,
'purveyors of fine toiletries to the gentry'. Birmingham, in short, is a
prime example of the new South, the term used to describe the economic,
social and technological changes of the past 20 years which have turned
parts of the southern US from provincial backwaters into some of the
nation's fastest growing communities.
These changes have been underlined by this year's presidential election
campaign. The all-southern Democratic ticket of Bill Clinton (Arkansas) and
Al Gore (Tennessee) would have been unthinkable a mere decade ago. To the
rest of the US even then, the old South produced such conflicting images as
slavery, sentimental Gone With the Wind romance, virulent racism and Ku Klux
Klan cross-burnings, fundamental Christianity, redneck conservatism, foxy
decadence and a benighted, Gothic savagery. This potent, if confused, brew
meant that any southern presidential candidate had to be balanced by a
vice-president from well beyond the 11 states that made up the civil war
confederacy.
Admittedly, the Clinton-Gore team is not from the deepest South. Arkansas,
with its tradition of small, independent farmers and hill folk, has as much
in common with Texas (the adopted home of President Bush) as it does with
the old plantation economies of Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia and
the Carolinas. And Gore, brought up mainly in Washington DC, is about as
southern as Kentucky Fried Chicken. But the ticket does show - as Jimmy
Carter, America's most truly southern president to date, has pointed out -
the degree to which the region has become more like the rest of America (and
vice versa, judging from Clinton's policies which would not come amiss from
a liberal Republican).
Yet, a huge gulf still separates the bustle and post-modern skyscrapers of
Atlanta, the economic capital of the generally prosperous south-east, from
the back roads of rural Mississippi, the nation's poorest state in per
capita income. In the vast flatlands of the cotton growing Mississippi
delta, you can still come across barefooted blacks and shanty homes that
would not look out of place in Africa.
Undoubtedly, the single most remarkable change across the region is its
improved race relations. The catalyst was the civil rights movement; this
led to the passage, in the mid-1960s, of federal legislation which forced
the white South to end segregation in public places and give blacks the
vote. Schools, restaurants, toilets, and hotels became integrated. Black
voters began propelling their own politicians into municipal positions of
power.
The most encouraging example of racial tolerance now can be found in
Atlanta, which has had black mayors since 1973. The city owes its
prosperity, in part, to a realisation in the 1940s by its white business
leaders that racial harmony was good for profits; hence its long-time
slogan, 'The City Too Busy to Hate'. In the 1960s, it was the headquarters
of the civil rights movement, and the fact that it desegregated before other
southern centres encouraged many US companies to locate their regional
headquarters there. Today, the city is run by a cosy alliance of black
politicians and white businessmen.
Atlanta has long had a sizeable black middle class and America's highest
concentration of black higher education centres. Over the past decade or so,
it has become a magnet for ambitious blacks from across the nation, making
it the clearest example of a remarkable phenomenon: blacks whose parents and
grand-parents fled north earlier this century in search of a better life are
now drifting back. The reasons are several: job opportunities, a desire to
rediscover roots, and an escape from the stark racial polarisation and inner
city ghettoes of many northern centres.
Teresa Roseborough, a rising young star at the prominent Atlanta law firm of
Sutherland, Asbill &amp; Brennan, is typical. Born in the mid-west and educated
at universities in the upper South, she could have had her pick of law firms
across the US after serving on the Supreme Court staff in Washington. She
explains that one reason she chose Atlanta was because of its greater career
opportunities for herself and her husband  - but another was that she feels
more comfortable with southern people. 'They are more likely to be cordial -
irrespective of colour,' she says.'
None of this means the South is a paradise of racial harmony. Even in
Atlanta, which stands at one extreme, the races socialise rarely. And just
50 miles north lies Forsyth county, long known as a centre of redneck
racism. Occasional Klan cross-burnings still light the southern night skies
(although these are said to be more common now outside the region, in which
the KKK is regarded more as a minor irritant than a sinister force).
You can find plenty of subtly segregated facilities - like the Little Rock
golf course where Clinton played earlier this year; or Mississippi's
university system, which was the subject of a violent civil rights battle in
September 1962 and remains embroiled in a court case over its slow progress
towards integration. And there will always be politicians, such as
Louisiana's David Duke, who try to play the race card.
But this does not undermine the surprising fact that, in many respects, the
South seems to enjoy better race relations than the north. John Lewis, the
son of an Alabama sharecropper who is now a US congressman for central
Atlanta, argues that 'the greatest sense of hope, the greatest sense of
optimism, when it comes to race relations . . . is in the South - in spite
of the past, in spite of the problems we still have.'
Improved race relations certainly have played a key role in the South's
economic boom which, over 30 years, has changed a primarily agricultural
society into an increasingly urban one that depends on industry and
services. Drive a little way out of Nashville, the home of country music,
and you will reach two of the most modern car factories in the US: Nissan's
plant at Smyrna and General Motors' Saturn factory at Spring Hill. BMW has
just announced plans to build its first plant outside Germany in South
Carolina.
Economic development, however, is grinding away at the South's distinct
cultural identity. The impact of urbanisation is one cause. Another is the
growing number of Americans from other regions who now work, or retire, in a
region with low living and property costs and good weather. But it is easy
to exaggerate this loss of identity, especially if you do not venture beyond
the big cities. Southern food, for example, remains distinctly different. To
breakfast on grits and 'biscuit' (a kind of scone) and gravy at the Holiday
Inn in downtown Little Rock, Arkansas, is to appreciate that you are a long
way from home.
Family, always a linchpin of the South, remains a powerful binding force.
And, above all, religion still plays a crucial role; the region is still
home to America's tele-evangelists despite the financial and sexual scandals
which engulfed so many of the breed in the 1980s. Author VS Naipaul, who
toured the South late in the 1980s, wrote: 'In no other part of the world
had I found people so driven by the idea of good behaviour and the religious
life. And that was true for black and white.'
Then there is the past, which also lives on as a kind of religion. In the
north, no one outside history classes mentions the civil war now. In the
defeated South, though, it has continued to be an ever-present source of
potential resentment, be it the town war memorial, the Confederate flag
flying from a state capitol, or constant references by tourist guides to the
cold-blooded devastation wreaked by the Yankee General Sherman on his march
to the sea. Yet, even this religion is now losing its force. Jim Henderson,
an Atlanta lawyer from an old Southern family, says: 'My hunch is that my
generation - and I'm 40 - will be the last for which the civil war holds a
fascination.'
It is hardly surprising that such fundamental changes have been pounced-on
by that most powerful force for cultural homogeneity, the US television
industry. One of the most popular US comedies used to be The Dukes of
Hazzard, in which good ol' southern redneck boys chased assorted villains
around the countryside, accompanied by a blonde bombshell, a corrupt
sheriff, and a dungaree-clad grandpappy. In other words, the South as
hayseed slapstick.
In the 1990s, network television's definitive southern comedy is Designing
Women, which focuses on four strong, well-dressed southern women and a
rather fey black male companion who run a Georgia interior design company.
The tone is sophisticated and feminist. There are no racial undertones, yet
the show projects down-home common sense and warm, southern hospitality. No
coincidence, then, that the producer is a close friend and adviser to Bill
Clinton.
