FT  23 JUL 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Roses of Ecuador bloom against
the odds - Export growth in the face of Colombian predominance
ECUADOR HAS built up a small but profitable flower business in just 10
years, with annual exports now worth nearly Dollars 20m. However, production
is also rising rapidly in other central and South American countries -
especially Colombia - and flowers are flooding into the US market at a time
when spending has been hit by recession.
'If Colombia goes on growing like this, it's very dangerous for the flower
market - it will affect everyone, prices will be very low and there could be
reactions from US flower producers,' says Mr Mauricio Davalos, president of
Ecuador's flower exporters' association.
Ecuador has about 400 hectares under flowers, less than one-tenth of area
covered by Colombia's plantations. Most of the technology and much of the
recent capital has been brought in by Colombians, who have found that
growing conditions on the Equator just north of Quito are difficult to beat.
Soil, sunshine and the great variety of microclimates make it possible to
produce a big range of flower types.
Roses have been particularly successful in Ecuador, while cultivation of
pompoms, carnations and gypsophilia is increasing. Ecuadorean labour is
cheap. Most plantations lie within easy reach of Quito airport but transport
costs from Quito to Miami are relatively high compared with the Bogota-Miami
charges.
Investment in infrastructure is also unnecessarily high, according to Mr
Davalos. 'We have a terrible duplication of investment because the state
services are so bad - we have to buy radios for communication and
electricity generating plants, and there are water problems too,' he says.
Another problem for Ecuadorean growers is the cost of importing many of the
pesticides and fertilisers used in the industry.
The incoming government, which takes over on August 10, is expected to
privatise some state services, including telephones. There will also be more
support for exporters - under the present government devaluation has moved
more slowly than inflation and high interest rates have made credit
expensive. The number of companies exporting flowers has doubled in the last
four years, but this reflects foreign rather than national investment.
About 80 per cent of Ecuador's flower exports go to the US, and another 7
per cent to Germany and Holland. But the freight costs to Europe are almost
prohibitive, particularly now that several African countries with extremely
cheap labour are competing in European flower markets and Colombia already
has well-established links.
Despite a 35 per cent growth in flower income during the first quarter of
1992, Colombian producers have been hit by water and electricity rationing.
This has curbed expansion in recent months, while anti-dumping measures
taken by the US against Colombian carnation and chrysanthemum exporters have
made them more cautious.
Such factors apart, one of Colombia's big advantages is its technical
expertise in floriculture - a benefit that has spilled over into Ecuador as
Colombian agronomists have moved in with Colombian investors.
