FT  22 JUL 92 / UK Company News: Holmes Protect loses debt in restructuring
HOLMES PROTECTION, the US security company quoted in the UK, and where Sir
Ian MacGregor is chairman, yesterday announced its long-awaited debt
restructuring, as part of which it is issuing new shares to raise Dollars
37m (Pounds 19.3m).
The deal will eliminate Dollars 72.6m of loan notes and accrued interest,
leaving Holmes almost debt-free with net assets of Dollars 42m. In return US
institutions currently holding the loan notes will receive at least 19 per
cent of the enlarged capital and up to Dollars 28m cash.
Existing institutions mainly participated in the restructuring which prices
new shares at 62 1/2 p, equivalent to 2 1/2 p before a 1-for-25 share
consolidation which will take place after a special general meeting. The
shares fell from 4p to 3 1/2 p.
Mr Eric Kohn, chief executive officer, said having sorted out the balance
sheet, management could concentrate on the group's operations. 'The market
is generally difficult in US (where Holmes has most of its activities) but
for Holmes it is better because we are in niche markets.'
The announcement ends a controversial period in which the previous
management defaulted on loan repayments and interest last year after
spending Dollars 140m on 23 acquisitions in rapid succession.
A new management team, led by Mr Kohn and Sir Ian, a former chairman of
British Steel, then led a revolt and was appointed to the board last
September.
Yesterday's restructuring was a mixture of firm placing and underwrited open
offer for existing shareholders. Of the 41.3m shares to be issued, 5.2m have
been firmly placed with institutions. Sir Ian is taking up shares worth
Dollars 500,000.
The lenders' 19 per cent stake accounts for 7.8m shares. An additional 10.2m
shares have been conditionally placed with UK institutions. A further 15.36m
shares, which the lenders have in effect agreed to underwrite, will be on
offer to existing shareholders at a 1-for-9.26 conversion rate.
The lenders will also receive warrants to subscribe to an additional 5 per
cent of the enlarged capital, at the 62 1/2 p placing price, and they will
receive Dollars 2.2m in reimbursement of costs.
In a circular to shareholders, Mr Kohn said the group planned to increase
the rate of retention of existing subscribers and better utilise the
operating companies' security monitoring capacity.
'We have put the accounting on to a transparent and conservative basis, we
have got rid of the debt and we have five excellent operating companies,' Mr
Kohn said.
