FT  03 NOV 92 / Parliament and Politics: Maastricht machinations turn to
maths
THE WAR of words over the Maastricht debate succumbed to
back-of-the-envelope mathematics yesterday as the whispering in the Commons
lobbies turned to claims and counter-claims over the relative strengths of
the government and its opponents.
The Tory rebels 'officially' claimed last night that at least 40
Conservative backbenchers were 'rock hard' in their determination to oppose
the government in the Maastricht debate tomorrow night.
That optimistic figure was swiftly undermined by the rider that many rebels
will take their final decision at a key meeting on tactics to be held in the
Commons tonight.
Sobering independent calculations put the likely number prepared to vote
against the government at slightly under 30, with several more moving
towards the abstentionist camp. But the outlook was further confused by the
range of options facing the dissidents.
At their strategy meeting, the Euro-sceptics must choose between outright
opposition by voting against the government motion, abstention, or
supporting the Labour amendment. There are no guarantees that they will all
choose the same.
From the government's perspective, leaving aside the Conservative party,
their support is crucially boosted by 20 votes  - 19 Liberal Democrats and
one Ulster Popular Unionist.
Ranged against them are 268 Labour votes (one MP may abstain or vote with
the government) and 15 more comprising seven Scottish and Welsh
nationalists, three Democratic Unionists, four Social and Democratic Labour
party MPs and one Liberal Democrat. The nine Ulster Unionists are also
expected to oppose, but full attendance cannot be guaranteed. Nor have they
ruled out deciding at their meeting tomorrow that they would abstain if it
looked as though a defeat for the government might force an election which
Labour was well-placed to win. That creates a potential opposition of 292.
With its 20 allies, the government's total notional support (providing it
can count on all its 334 MPs) would be 354  - a 62-vote majority. That
means, technically at least, the Tory rebellion must equal 32 votes to
overturn the government.
Wednesday's figures might prove quite different from that theoretical
exercise. It may be that fewer than 32 vote against. The rebels might still
win if there are more abstentions than expected among MPs considered
loyalists.
Experienced Commons vote counters, however, say history shows rebellions
almost always fail to achieve the lofty claims made by their leaders.
An experienced Labour parliamentarian last night predicted that the
government would not possibly be defeated.
'At the very best, we will give them a good scare,' he said, 'and badly
weaken John Major into the bargain.'
