FT  15 APR 92 / Business and the Environment: Nothing less than a green
revolution
A 'green' revolution comparable to the agricultural revolution of 10,000
years ago and the industrial revolution of the 19th century is needed to
halt global environmental degradation, according to Lester Brown, president
of the Worldwatch Institute, the Washington-based environmental research
foundation.
He is cautiously optimistic about the future of the planet even though the
institute's recent State of the World report says that the global
environment has deteriorated dangerously in the 20 years since the original
world environment conference in Stockholm.
Unlike the earlier revolutions he sees the new economic and social
transformation being compressed into a few decades. It will be based on the
need to stabilise population size to achieve a balance between humans and
the natural resources on which they depend.
The industrial revolution was made possible by exploitation of fossil fuels
but the environmental revolution will mean a shift away from these fuels
which give off carbon dioxide, the main contributor to global warming.
The annual report shows a dismal picture of continued decline in the
environment. Each year it records that forests are getting smaller, deserts
larger, topsoil is eroding, the number of plant and animal species is
diminishing, greenhouse gases increasing and stratospheric ozone depleting.
'There have been thousands of local environmental successes, many pieces of
national legislation, international agreements such as the Montreal Protocol
 -and still the trends are heading in the wrong direction,' he says. 'If all
these trends continue it will eventually undermine the global economy. We
cannot survive the continual degredation of the planet.'
He is gratified by the greater environmental awareness of many businesses.
In the early days they merely put in a public relations executive to deal
with such problems. At a later stage they began looking at their operations
 -energy efficiency, cleaner production, recycling and waste reduction.
Now, he says, some are asking if there is a place for man-made products in
an environmentally sustainable world? Brown says that for industries such as
coal the answer is no.
But in contrast there will be an enormous future for a company manufacturing
environmental technology such as high-efficiency light bulbs. 'In the 1990s
and the early 21st century there will be growth in such areas comparable to
the expansion in computers over the past two decades.' Contrary to much
current wisdom, he believes that solar energy, wind power and other
renewables will replace fossil fuels over a period of time.
'If an environmental tax on energy is adopted of the kind being proposed by
the EC we will see scales tilt dramatically and investment go into these
alternatives,' he said.
In California, where there are tax incentives for developing renewable
non-polluting energy sources, there are 1,400 megawatts of wind generating
capacity supplying more than 1m people. In addition, solar thermal energy,
using mirrors guided by computers to train sunlight on a cell, produces 400
megawatts of electricity for 500,000 people.
Cheap solar energy can also be used to separate hydrogen from water for use
as a fuel. He foresees companies in northern Europe investing in Spain and
Africa to develop these forms of energy.
Brown is encouraged by the greater environmental awareness in Britain but
points out that the UK is not a leader in energy efficiency or recycling. So
will mankind solve these problems? 'I think we can turn things around but it
will take a far greater effort than most people imagine,' he said.
