FT  16 SEP 92 / The Liberal Democrats At Harrogate: Privatisation row looms
CONFERENCE delegates will be asked this morning to approve a consultation
paper on competition and regulation entitled After Privatisation. It would
be much easier for the party leadership if the debate were indeed taking
place after privatisation.
Proposals for curbing the 'excessive prices and profits' of privatised
utilities, of breaking up the monoliths of British Telecommunications and
British Gas into regional companies, and of tightening regulation and
improving the services to the consumer are already party policy.
But in a week when the delegates have registered unease at the leadership's
fascination with the market, today's discussion could end in rejection of
the motion's invitation to welcome the creation of a company to franchise
rail services and stations, and the gradual reduction of the level at which
the Post Office operates its letter monopoly.
Persuading the party to come to terms with prospective privatisations is the
task of Mr Malcolm Bruce, the trade and industry spokesman. He said: 'We are
uniquely seeking to strike the balance between free enterprise and public
services and social justice.'
For the Liberal Democrats, as for the government, the most difficult
privatisation is that of British Rail.
Mr Bruce emphasised that if it were in government the party would want to
increase rail services by allowing the private sector to compete to run
services, rather than envisage the full-scale privatisation the Tories
intend.
The consultation paper itself goes further, however, in looking towards the
sale and franchising of rail stations, and even - in the future - the sale
of some or all of the four existing BR business sectors, such as InterCity.
The party leadership sees the privatised utilities as an opportunity to
launch a vigorous and distinctive attack on the government over the
operation of the market and the promotion of fair competition.
Signs this week are that is an opportunity the party membership is prepared
to miss.
