FT  10 JAN 92 / US dollar peg 'hobbles attack on HK inflation': Simon
Holberton on a debate among the colony's economists
FALLS in US interest rates have raised doubts among economists in Hong Kong
about the wisdom of its fixed link with the US dollar, which limits the
government's freedom to attack a stubbornly high inflation rate.
The government, however, recoils at suggestions for change. It aims to deal
with inflation as best it can, without altering the exchange rate regime.
Officials say maintenance of the peg is vital to financial and political
stability in the run-up to 1997 when Hong Kong reverts to Chinese
sovereignty.
The peg, established in October 1983 at HKDollars 7.8 to the US dollar, has
ensured that the external value of the Hong Kong dollar has remained stable
and that it has been relatively immune from the colony's favourite pastime:
financial speculation.
But it prevents the monetary authorities from responding to the upward
pressure on domestic prices by increasing interest rates. This would lead to
distortions of the domestic money supply and could create a divergence
between free and official currency rates, undermining the peg and financial
stability.
Inflation, though below its highest levels, is still running at about 11 per
cent and, economists say, is expected to fall only to about 10 per cent by
the end of this year.
A cut in Hong Kong's interest rates - three-month money is currently trading
at about 4.65 per cent - is widely expected after recent reductions in US
interest rates, including a full-point cut in the Federal Reserve discount
rate to 3.5 per cent.
However, a fall in Hong Kong rates could further exacerbate asset price
inflation, most visible in the property and stock markets. Property prices
have risen in some areas of Hong Kong by 40 per cent over the past year and
rents have gone up by 30 per cent.
Banks have moved to cool speculation in the property market by tightening
lending, and the government plans to impose stamp duty on sales and
purchases of property worth more than HKDollars 2m (Pounds 145,000).
Some economists believe inflation is high because of structural changes
under way in Hong Kong as more of its manufacturing shifts to southern
China, where labour is much cheaper.
Hong Kong's economy is increasingly based on services and demand for these
is growing rapidly, pushing up prices and demanding greater and more
expensive skills from the workforce.
Hong Kong will have high inflation for some time, according to these
economists. Others see the root cause in the government's maintenance of the
fixed link with the dollar.
'The government has totally lost its monetary autonomy,' says Mr Benjamin
Chan, chief economist with the Bank of East Asia, an opponent of the peg.
'Inflation is in double digits but interest rates are declining. I don't
think the government wants to lower interest rates but it has no choice. I
think it's a major problem; the government can't fight inflation because it
does not have any tools.'
However, the government's belief that the US dollar peg is essential for
stability finds support among some private sector economists. They believe
that Hong Kong's exchange rate system has served the colony well, and argue
that inflation is due to the structural changes in the economy.
Mr Enzio von Pfeil, economist with British brokers Smith New Court points to
the rapid transfer of manufacturing capacity from Hong Kong to the bordering
Chinese province of Guangdong, where labour costs in some industries are 20
per cent of what they are in Hong Kong.
'This is very important for Hong Kong's competitiveness because the material
content of a lot of its exports come from Guangdong. Hong Kong companies can
get away with 17 per cent pay rises for their workers here because materials
costs are so low in China.'
Economists point out that the integration with southern China has meant that
Hong Kong's inflation has not fed through to its international
competitiveness. Mr John Greenwood, chairman and group economist of GT
Management (Asia), a fund manager, says that annual growth in the prices of
exports from Hong Kong has been at a stable 3 per cent a year despite
inflation at nearly four times that level.
Mr Greenwood points out that Hong Kong is going through a transition from an
economy based on manufacturing and services to one based more and more on
services alone. He does not expect importing labour to have much effect on
the inflation rate.
'What Hong Kong is selling is cheap goods made in China and expensive
services in Hong Kong,' he says. 'The price of non-traded goods in Hong Kong
can grow much more rapidly here than in the US because productivity in the
traded goods sector is growing much faster than it is in the US.'
