FT  03 JUL 92 / Personal View: Why Emu's critics are wrong
The rejection of the Maastricht treaty by the Danes has reopened the debate
on European Monetary Union, not just in the UK, but elsewhere too.
Sixty eminent German economists recently claimed that a hasty move to
monetary union 'will create strong economic tensions within Europe and
threaten to lead to political disruption, consequently threatening the
ultimate aim of a successful integration'.
The sceptics claim that the locking of exchange rates and the eventual
introduction of a common currency will condemn some regions of the European
Community to slow growth and high unemployment for the foreseeable future.
The only way to contain the resulting pressures, they argue, will then be
through the formation of a strong federalist political union for which
Europe is not yet ready.
Critics of monetary union point to the post-unification German experience as
a graphic illustration of the dangers. Locking the Ostmark to the D-Mark at
an unrealistically high rate has, they claim, simply priced great swathes of
east German industry out of business. But would things have been very
different if a rate of, say, 10 Ostmarks to the D-Mark had been chosen? East
German industry might have been viable, but only at the unsustainable low
real wages that exchange rate implies. The consequence would have been
unrest in the east and massive pressure for wage increases.
Germany's problem is that east German workers want the same real living
standards as their Western counterparts, but east German industry is
presently incapable of sustaining such levels. This fundamental difficulty
would ultimately have emerged at whatever exchange rate currencies were
locked. The key point is that while the exchange rate may in some
circumstances be useful as a weapon of short-run economic adjustment, it is
not essential because companies and wage-setters ultimately respond by
changing prices and wages to reflect the new economic conditions.
Of course, giving up domestic monetary policy as a weapon of macroeconomic
adj-ustment means that a greater burden will be placed on fiscal policy, but
this seems to be all to the good. Monetary union would thus force
governments to make explicit the choice about who should bear the burden of
adjustment and would also prevent the attempted correction by monetary means
of flawed fiscal policies. This is something which should add to rather than
detract from the democratic process.
But if more active fiscal policy will be necessary under a monetary union,
will it be feasible so long as there is no political union? The obvious
comparison would seem to be with the US. Could one really envisage keeping
the dollar, but having all decisions on taxes and government spending
devolved back to the individual states?
The federal tax and social security scheme provides an automatic mechanism
that redistributes resources from richer states to poorer ones. If this did
not exist, a state in decline would be faced with the prospect of either
cutting spending or raising taxes, either of which would encourage people to
migrate to other states with a less harsh fiscal climate. This in turn would
further accelerate the decline.
Aside from the fact that these arguments about fiscal policy have nothing to
do with monetary union per se - the same tensions due to divergent economic
performance would still eventually arise even if the individual states had
their own currencies whose parity they could change - the parallel with
post-1992 Europe is misplaced. Despite efforts to remove barriers to
migration of labour within the Community, linguistic and cultural
differences mean that labour mobility between nations will still be much
lower than in the US. Consequently, there will still be room for the
European nations to pursue their own fiscal policies.
Of course, this may change in time as workers become increasingly willing to
move throughout the Community. However, in that case, the politics as well
as the economics of Europe would have altered fundamentally, because once
cultural and linguistic barriers have been eroded to such an extent that
people feel happy living anywhere in the Community, the idea of a European
'nation' would make much more sense than it does today.
Monetary union could nevertheless turn out to be a mistake if the new
European Central Bank (ECB) conducts monetary policy badly. German critics
are worried that it will be pressurised by European governments into being
soft on inflation. Yet the statutes of the new institutions safeguard their
independence from political influence as zealously as the current statutes
of the Bundesbank. Indeed, the hand of the ECB will be, if anything,
stronger since it will be faced with 12 different national governments whose
interests will rarely coincide.
Finally, it is important to bear in mind the alternatives. Now that most
controls on the movement of capital within the Community have been removed,
it is highly questionable whether the current exchange rate mechanism could
be sustained indefinitely, because currencies will now be much more open to
speculative attacks. Thus, the only long-term alternative is likely to be a
more flexible regime of (possibly managed) floating.
Such a regime might work perfectly well, but only if the temptation for
individual countries to try to make beggar-my-neighbour devaluations or
revaluations could be held in check. If this did not happen the afflicted
countries would be tempted to respond by seeking ways to protect their
domestic economic interests, with all that this implies for intra-Community
trade and mobility. The lessons of the 1920s and 1930s in this regard should
not be forgotten.
The author is professor of economics at the London School of Economics. The
following economics professors also contributed: Daniel Cohen, Francesco
Giavazzi, Alberto Giovannini, Jurgen von Hagen, Damien Neven, Xavier Vives
and Charles Wyplosz.
