FT  19 MAR 92 / Election 1992 (The Labour Manifesto): Recovery tops the
agenda
Labour says it would build the economy, modernise the National Health
Service and raise the standards in schools. It also stresses a commitment to
constitutional reform. But its central theme is partnership between
government, business and the citizen. Manifesto highlights are:
National recovery
TODAY, millions of people fear losing their jobs, their homes or their
business.
The new Labour government's National Recovery Programme will start to remove
that fear, with immediate action on investment, jobs and training. It will
combat recession now and build sustained and sustainable recovery for the
future.
We will provide enhanced capital allowances to encourage companies
immediately to bring forward manufacturing investment in new machinery and
plant, innovation and design. They will last for a limited period.
We will introduce an investment tax incentive tailored to the special needs
of small businesses.
We will immediately begin the phased release of receipts from the sale of
council houses, land and property to allow local authorities to build new
homes and improve old ones.
We will allow British Rail to proceed with a leasing scheme of 188 new
Networker trains on the North Kent line - the first step in securing private
investment to help modernise Britain's railways and protect our environment.
Housing investment will generate jobs. We will also establish a work
programme, combining three days' a week work for the unemployed.
We will restore last year's training cuts which caused so much damage to
training for young people and the unemployed. We will establish a new
cash-limited 'Skills for the 90s' fund, with an initial budget of Pounds
300m to upgrade the training of those in work. Investment will be targeted
particularly at areas of skill shortages.
Over the next 22 months, additional resources of at least Pounds 600m will
be available for investment in education. Among other projects, this will
help to tackle equipment shortages and the backlog of school repairs.
Over the next 22 months, additional resources of at least Pounds 1bn will be
available for investment in the National Health Service.
We will extend the exemption from tax which applies to workplace nurseries
to all forms of employer assistance with childcare.
The economy
Labour's economic policy rests on one simple, common sense fact. The only
way for Britain to build a strong economy is to make the goods and services
which people at home and abroad want to buy.
Business needs sustained and balanced growth, stable exchange rates, steady
and competitive interest rates and low inflation. We will deliver them.
To curb inflation, Labour will maintain the value of the pound within the
European Exchange Rate Mechanism. We will manage credit sensibly. We will
stop excessive price rises in water, electricity, telephones, transport and
NHS prescriptions.
Taxes and benefits
We will introduce fair taxes. The most effective way to reduce poverty
quickly is to increase child benefit and pensions and take low-paid people
out of taxation. To achieve these goals, we will reform the national
insurance and income tax system.
We will increase child benefit to Pounds 9.95 a week for all children, with
the full value going to every family.
We will increase the basic retirement pension by an extra Pounds 5 a week
for a single person and Pounds 8 for a married couple.
We will abolish the 2 per cent national insurance contribution on earnings
under Pounds 54 a week  - effectively a Pounds 56 annual entry fee into the
national insurance system.
We will take 740,000 taxpayers out of taxation altogether, by increasing the
personal allowance and wife's earned income allowance by more than
inflation. Married couples will have the option of splitting the married
couple's allowance between them as they choose.
The basic rate of tax will remain unchanged at 25 per cent, as will the 40
per cent rate. A new top-rate income tax of 50 per cent will apply to
individuals with an income of at least Pounds 40,000.
Labour's tax and benefit changes are self-financing. They are fair. And they
will make every individual employee on earnings up to at least Pounds 22,000
a year better off.
State of the nation
Every autumn, we will make a State of the Nation report on the British
economy.
In order to provide honest information about the state of the British
economy, we will make the Central Statistical Office independent.
We are determined to make a swift reduction in unemployment by immediate
action for unemployed people, as well as direct investment, to create
thousands of new jobs.
Investment
An Investment Decade for Britain will start with the immediate introduction
of enhanced investment allowances. We will help Britain's high-technology
industries with a 25 per cent tax credit for additional investment in
research and development. Small firms will be assisted with a new investment
scheme, combining a cash-limited fund for new investments with tax
incentives tailored to their special needs.
Labour will work with industry to establish British Technology Enterprise
and create Technology Trusts throughout Britain, helping firms turn good
ideas into commercial products.
Labour's Minister for Science will develop a national strategy to promote
high-quality science and technology.
Regions
We will strengthen our regional economies. We will establish new Regional
Development Agencies in England, strengthen Scottish Enterprise and the
Welsh Development Agency and modernise regional incentives.
Labour's National Investment Bank, operating on strictly commercial lines,
will bring public and private sector together to invest in long-term
regional and national infrastructure projects.
Small and growing businesses will have a new deal. As well as the lowest
possible interest rates, they need the backing on which their competitors
can rely in France and Germany. Labour will establish a network of one-stop
advice centres. We will give special attention to the establishment of small
businesses by women, and members of the ethnic minority communities.
Transport
We will invest in modern transport. It is absurd that French Railways can
raise funds for new investment in the City of London, when British Rail is
not allowed to do so. We will remove these restrictions. Leasing schemes
will allow large-scale investments to be financed at relatively little cost
to the public sector borrowing requirement. Private finance will also be
mobilised for a high-speed rail network which will eventually link every
region to the Channel tunnel, with proper environmental safeguards.
Energy
We will improve energy supplies. Britain is well placed with reserves of
coal, oil and gas which must be husbanded in a national energy policy. We
will encourage enhanced recovery of oil from the North Sea and avoid
becoming over-dependent on imported fuel. We will meet our international
obligations to reduce harmful chimney emissions.
We will restore public control of the National Grid and give it new duties
and powers to ensure the long-term security of electricity supplies. We will
secure the long-term future of the coal industry by reducing imports,
stopping the 'dash for gas' and reining back on open-casting. We will retain
the Department of Energy and move its petroleum engineering directorate to
Aberdeen.
A critical task is to upgrade the skills of people in work. Training and
Enterprise Councils will be retained.
Employment
There will be a fair framework of law for both employers and unions. There
will be no return to the trade union legislation of the 1970s. Ballots
before strikes and for union elections will stay. There will be no mass or
flying pickets. But our individual employees are entitled to be treated at
least as fairly as their colleagues in Europe.
We will opt in to the Social Chapter of the new European Treaty and
introduce employment standards common in successful economies.
We will give all employees equal rights and status under the law. We aim to
guarantee every woman in employment the right to 14 weeks' maternity leave
on full pay, and to give fathers paternity leave.
Employees will have new rights to be consulted and informed about decisions
which affect them, as well as the right to union membership and
representation. We will restore union rights at GCHQ.
We will end the scandal of poverty pay and bring Britain into line with the
rest of Europe by introducing a statutory minimum wage of Pounds 3.40 an
hour.
Employees should have the opportunity to own collectively a significant
stake in the company for which they work, through a democratic Employee
Share Ownership Plan (ESOP) or a co-operative. We will strengthen support
for such schemes.
Recent pension fund scandals have shown how right Labour has been to call
for stronger legal protection. We will reform the law so that pension funds
belong to their members, not to employers. Half of the pension trustees will
be employees, with an independent chairman, and pensioners will be
represented.
Health
This election will decide the future of the National Health Service. Indeed,
it will decide whether or not we continue to have an NHS of the kind that
the British people want.
Labour will stop the privatisation of the NHS and return opted-out hospitals
and other services to the local NHS. We will halt the commercial market
which is creating a two-tier health service.
We will make additional resources of at least Pounds 1bn available for
investment in the NHS over the next 22 months. Each year thereafter, we will
continue to tackle underfunding.
Labour will recognise the additional claims on the NHS from the growing
number of very elderly people and the development of medical technology and
knowledge. We will retain the pay review bodies.
We will also launch a new programme to invest Pounds 60m in the
modernisation of Britain's cancer services, using the resources we will save
by scrapping the Conservatives' tax handout on private medical insurance.
Within our overall budget, we will tackle the shortage of intensive care
beds with a special programme providing an additional Pounds 25m to expand
this life-saving service.
We will set new targets to cut the inequalities in health between social
classes and ethnic groups. We will, for instance, strengthen screening by
restoring the free eye test.
GPs
GPs have a vital role to play in health promotion. We will increase the time
they have for each patient by reversing the financial pressures to take on
too many patients.
To achieve this change of direction, we will negotiate performance
agreements with each health authority and back them with an incentive fund
to reward authorities which perform well.
We will restore the right of patients to be treated in the hospital of their
choice. Women will have the right to be seen by a woman GP.
We will invest Pounds 25m from within our overall budget to purchase several
hundred more new, fully equipped ambulances.
Schools
Labour will modernise Britain's schools. Over the next 22 months, additional
resources of at least Pounds 600m will be made available for investment in
education. We will then continue steadily to increase the share of Britain's
national wealth invested in education.
We will offer nursery education to three- and four-year olds. Within six
months, every local education authority will have to set targets for
steadily increasing nursery and childcare services.
Teachers will be guaranteed a proper salary and career structure. A General
Teaching Council for England and Wales will help them achieve the highest
professional standards.
Within 12 months, we will end the scandal of primary school classes of over
40 children.
Nine out of 10 children of secondary school age are in comprehensive
schools. We will end selection at 11 where it still exists. We will
introduce a fairer system for all school reorganisations, with independent
public inquiries.
We will phase out the assisted places scheme (without affecting pupils
currently on a place, or offered one.
Because the national curriculum cannot be properly taught without new
textbooks, we will earmark funds for class and library books. We will start
this year by giving every primary school Pounds 10 per child for investment
in books.
We will start to tackle the backlog of school repairs. For instance, we will
invest Pounds 30m to ensure that within 12 months, no child has to use an
outside lavatory.
Conservative plans to privatise the schools' inspectorate will be scrapped.
Our Education Standards Commission, together with Her Majesty's Inspectors,
will monitor the performance of every school. If a school is
underperforming, the commission, which will be answerable to parliament,
will have the powers to ensure that it is brought up to standard.
Awards
National Awards, similar to the Queen's Award for Industry, will encourage
excellence in schools.
We will reform the Conservatives' scheme for the local management of
schools. All schools will be free to manage their day-to-day budgets, with
local education authorities given a new strategic role. Opted-out schools
will be freed from central government control and, together with City
Technology Colleges, brought into the mainstream of the local school system.
Home-school contracts will tell parents exactly what the school undertakes
to deliver and what their responsibilities are. If they are dissatisfied
with the school or education authority, they will be able to call in the
Education Standards Commission and get action taken.
We wish to see the key role of church and other voluntary-aided schools
secured and available equally and on the same criteria to all religions.
Curriculum
Labour will modernise the national curriculum and apply it in all schools.
From the age of 14, pupils will study five essential subjects: English,
mathematics, science, a modern language and technology. Every pupil will
also be offered a wide range of academic, technical and other options.
We will establish a five-subject A-level and bring it together with
technical qualifications into our new Advanced Certificate. Open to
part-time and full-time students of any age, it will include 'credits' which
can be transferred between different institutions.
Traineeship
Sixteen-year-olds not in full-time education will be entitled to a new
traineeship lasting for up to two years, with an option of a further two
years. Every young person in employment will be guaranteed the right to
Learn While You Earn.
The student loan scheme deters many bright youngsters from poor families. We
will replace it with a fairer system of student grants and targeted help for
housing and vacation hardship. We will take effective steps to safeguard
standards throughout higher education.
We will stop the Conservatives' adult education cuts.
Families
Britain's families deserve the support which families receive in other
European countries.
We will increase child benefit for 7m families. Higher pensions and related
benefits will benefit another 12m people. We will reform the tax and
national insurance system and take 740,000 people out of tax altogether.
After the first year's extra increases, we will restore the link between
increases in the basic pension and prices or earnings, whichever is higher.
Britain's national insurance system is far more efficient than private
insurance. We will explore ways of opening it up to new groups such as
low-paid and part-time workers.
Parents
Labour will end the Conservatives' freeze on benefits for widowed mothers
and other lone parents. We will encourage parents on income support to claim
maintenance by allowing them to keep part of it before benefit is cut.
We will restore nutritional guidelines for school meals and reverse the cuts
in free school meals as soon as possible.
As resources allow, we will improve and extend the invalid care allowance.
Labour will develop a flexible decade of retirement between the ages of 60
and 70, so that men and women can choose to retire on a full pension or
continue in work without discrimination.
Our new National Pensions Plan, building on the State Earnings Related
Pension Scheme, will offer people now in work a pension based on their 20
best years' earnings. Those who are self- employed will also be able to
join. Occupational and personal pension schemes will have to guarantee a
minimum pension before they can contract out, and guarantee equal treatment
for men and women.
We will reform means-tested benefits, replace the Social Fund, and restore
benefit rights to 16 and 17-year-olds as soon as possible. To relieve
anxiety about funeral costs, we will make a funeral payment of Pounds 600
available on request. The costs will in most cases be recovered from the
deceased's estate, although small estates will be disregarded.
Poll tax
Labour will abolish the poll tax immediately. We will replace it with our
Fair Rates system, related to people's ability to pay. We reject the
Conservatives' unfair banding and discount system which would create a
property poll tax. We will modernise the valuation system to ensure that
properties are fairly assessed.
Abolition of the minimum 20 per cent contribution  - which will be of
particular help to young people  - will be followed by an improved rebate
system, with special help to retired people on low incomes living alone.
Business rates will become a local tax again, with rate rebates for small
firms.
Labour will establish mortgage rescue schemes throughout the country.
Housing log books and an end to gazumping will also help homebuyers.
Right-to-buy
Labour will keep the right to buy. We will increase the number of homes for
rent by establishing a Housing Bank to facilitate the balanced use of
councils' capital receipts and offer investment capital at attractive rates
of interest.
Council tenants will be guaranteed real rights over their homes.
Compulsory competitive tendering will be abolished, but the Quality
Commission will have the power, where services have broken down, to insist
they are put out to tender, with contractors required to meet conditions
such as quality thresholds and fair employment.
We shall introduce annual elections in England and Wales, with one third of
councillors elected each year.
We will reform the system for allocating grants to local councils and
introduce less centralised rules on capital spending, enabling councils to
make prudent long-term investment.
Consumers' Charter
Our Consumers' Charter will cover all goods and services. It will include
tougher health and safety standards, compensation for injury from dangerous
products and comprehensive guarantees.
Every utility will be required to provide a customer contract, with
compensation if standards are not met. Gas and electricity disconnections
will be banned completely where young children or elderly people are
concerned.
We will strengthen the regulation of the utilities. We will establish a
Petroleum Products Regulator.
The provision of water is so fundamental that it is a priority for return to
public control.
Labour's independent Food Standards Agency will ensure high food quality
standards. Our Department of Food and Farming will offer British farmers and
consumers a better deal. Subsidies for production will gradually be replaced
with green premium payments to promote environmentally sound management of
the countryside.
We will transform transport policy by ensuring, for the first time, that all
road, railway, aviation, shipping and inland waterway transport projects are
judged on an equal basis, taking account of their environmental, social and
economic impact.
Within six months, we will review the roads programme and mobilise private
capital for large-scale public transport investment.
We reject Conservative plans to privatise British Rail. Instead we will
modernise, setting clear performance targets to improve the quality of
service, expand electrification and shift more freight from road to rail.
We will end the deregulation of buses, introduce bus priority measures
integrated with new rapid transit systems within a 'green light' programme
designed to encourage people to transfer to public transport. Proper
concessionary fare schemes will be developed in every area.
We will reform transport taxation in order to encourage smaller, cleaner
cars and the use of catalytic converters. Company cars will be fairly taxed.
We will seek to reverse the unacceptable decline in Britain's merchant navy
and encourage the greater use of British-owned and crewed vessels.
We will establish a new independent transport safety inspectorate within the
health and safety legislation to improve the safety environment.
We will not invest in new nuclear power stations, continue with those in the
planning process or extend the lives of existing nuclear stations beyond
their safe life span.
Democracy
It is time to modernise Britain's democracy. Central to Labour's purpose in
government is our commitment to radical constitutional reform. Our Charter
of Rights, backed up by a complementary and democratically bill of rights,
will establish in law the specific rights of every citizen.
We will start in our first Parliamentary session with a Freedom of
Information Act.
We will give power to the nations and regions. We will move immediately to
establish an elected Scottish parliament.
In our first year, we will introduce a new Welsh Language Act. We will
establish in the lifetime of a full parliament an elected Welsh Assembly in
Cardiff with powers and functions which reflect the existing administrative
structure.
A regional tier of government in the English regions will take over many
powers now exercised nationally, such as regional economic planning and
transport.
Local government
To simplify local government in England, we will establish 'most purpose'
authorities generally based on district councils. We will consult widely
before finalising proposals.
London is the only European capital without the advantage of its own elected
strategic authority. Labour will give Londoners the right to elect a new
Greater London Authority.
We will safeguard press freedom. We will remove unjustified restrictions on
broadcasting and establish an urgent inquiry by the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission into the concentration of media ownership. If the press fail to
deal with abuses of individual privacy, we will implement the Calcutt
Report's recommendations for statutory protection.
Ulster
Labour will continue the present talks on Northern Ireland. In the long
term, we want to see a united Ireland achieved by consensus and without
violence.
We will fight terrorism strongly by every lawful means, repealing the
counter-productive Prevention of Terrorism Act and replacing it with a
measure which is more effective in combatting terrorists and genuinely
acceptable in a democratic society.
Further constitutional reforms will include those leading to the replacement
of the House of Lords with a new elected Second Chamber which will have the
power to delay, for the lifetime of a parliament, change to designated
legislation reducing individual or constitutional rights. We will continue
to encourage a wide and well-informed public debate on the electoral system.
International stage
We need a new government to grasp new opportunities. A Labour government
will be ready to exploit Britain's unique, interlinking membership of the
United Nations Security Council, Nato, the Commonwealth, the European
Community and the G7.
It's a new chance to provide genuine security for Britain.
Unlike the Tories, we recognize that disarmament negotiations and
technological change can bring about problems for our defence industries.
Nearly 100,000 jobs have already been lost during the past two years and
123,000 more are in danger.
The Labour government will set up a Defence Diversification Agency to assist
workers, communities and companies affected by change.
The Labour government will promote Britain out of the European second
division into which our country has been relegated by the Tories.
EMU
We shall play a positive role in negotiations on Economic and Monetary
Union. We shall fight for Britain's interests, working for Europe-wide
policies to fight unemployment and to enhance regional and structural
industrial policy. The elected finance ministers of the different countries
must become the effective political counterpart to the central bank whose
headquarters should be in Britain.
As part of the evolving role of the regions of Europe, we will establish a
Scottish office in Brussels and seek repesentation for the Scottish
Parliament in European institutions. We shall seek fundamental changes in
the wasteful Common Agricultural Policy.
We shall make the widening of the community a priority.
