FT  19 JUN 92 / Arts: Moll Cutpurse
In 1610, the famous rogue Moll Cutpurse saw her own life dramatised as The
Roaring Girl by Thomas Dekker and Thomas Middleton. If real characters could
wander on stage, why could not Middleton mix it with Moll offstage? That
situation provides the comedy in Moll Cutpurse, an entertaining play about
Middleton at the Drill Hall Arts Centre.
Nick Stafford's fantasy works on situation rather than plot. Middleton
appears as a blocked writer who cannot bring himself to say 'Shakespeare' or
to quote from any of the plays. He decides to garner material for a new
play, and lights on Moll. She and her confederates, Maria and John, welcome
him as only those hungry for publicity welcome a TV documentary crew.
An intrigue of deception ensues, driven by greed and lubricity. The action
turns on a flimsy revenge plot, a bag of counterfeit coin and the writing of
Middleton's play. The labyrinthine business strikes a parody of Middleton's
own plots; and the language is a riot of plackets and peccadillos,
consistently bawdy and suggestive. Middleton attempts to shepherd all this
chaos into the pages of his own play.
Simon Deacon's ambient music lifts the action and helps focus Helen White's
clever direction. She gets fine performances from the cast of four. Peter
Shorey as Middleton and Janice McKenzie as Moll establish a bruising
rapport; Shorey in particular shows control and range. The play's funniest
scene, between Middleton and Moll's confederates (Beaux Bryant and Jim
Findley) finds him physically sick in being forced to hear Shakespeare's
130th sonnet.
But the New Perspectives Theatre Company has shackled itself in this
production to the ideal of 'political correctness': fine in principle but
clumsy in practice here. Old norms are assiduously avoided: so the women are
lesbian, the men gay, and relations between the sexes financial. The choices
for women look stark: servant, whore or wife; unless like Moll they 'live by
their wits against all costs.'
Beyond the bustle and energetic acting, Moll Cutpurse needs a wider scope,
grander design. As a play about Middleton, it offers little. Its seriousness
focuses on the position of women, then and now. Fifty years after
Middleton's death, one playwright was writing more and better on the same.
Her name was Aphra Behn.
Drill Hall Arts Centre (071 631 1353) until June 27 (except June 19)
