FT  27 OCT 92 / Survey of Sri Lanka (16): Plenty of potential for expansion
 -Textiles industry
NOT content with the steady income he earns from practising law, Mr Tilak
Gunawardana has turned his hand to designing pillow cases and bedspreads. He
sends his designs to a team of young women scattered around the country who,
working from home, produce samples to be displayed at international trade
fairs.
Mr Gunawardana's export turnover was a modest Dollars 14,000 last year, but
he is keen to tap into what he believes is an industry with plenty of
potential for expansion.
Clothing and textiles, Sri Lanka's star export over the past decade,
accounts for more than half of manufactured export earnings. Growth remains
strong. Last year earnings were about Dollars 850m; a 27 per cent rise on
1990.
However, structural problems remain. Most local fabric, produced on narrow
looms, is unsuitable for clothing manufacturers, necessitating the import of
cloth. About 75 per cent of gross earnings are spent on importing fabric,
buttons and zippers.
Mr David Thurairajah, consultant to the Apparel Exporters Association,
believes the development of a domestic fabrics industry is crucial to the
continued success of the garment sector. 'Our main competitors are
Bangladesh and Vietnam, which both have an abundant supply of low-cost
labour,' he says. 'Therefore we must develop an indigenous fabrics base to
make sure our prices remain competitive.'
The government started a programme of 'backward integration' in 1990, using
tax incentives to encourage the establishment of high-quality textile mills.
Since then 15 mills have been set up. They now produce nearly 50m sq m of
the 300m sq m the country requires.
Mr Thurairajah believes that Sri Lanka will have the capacity to produce
most of the fabric needed within the next five years, boosting the
industry's net foreign exchange gain from 25 per cent to 75 per cent.
'Prospects for the industry are good, as long as we are not dependent on
imports,' he says.
Indeed, the government is basing much of its hope for economic growth on the
sector. Earlier this year President Ranasinghe Premadasa launched a drive to
set up 200 garment factories in rural areas, a move intended to boost
exports and provide employment for up to 100,000 people.
'The main object,' according to Mr Thurairajah, 'is the industrialisation of
undeveloped areas to provide employment for the poorest of the poor.'
Significant pressure has been put on established garment companies to set up
parallel factories in the countryside. Banks have been encouraged to help
with financing.
Companies that set up rural factories will be exempt from corporate tax and
will be given access to lucrative EC and US textile quotas. Accusations of
'arm-twisting' have been heard in some quarters.
No new garment factories are to be set up in the free trade zones. In 1990,
some 67 per cent of gross export earnings in the zones derived from the
textile, garment and leather industries, leading to fears of saturation.
The establishment of rural factories is an important element of the
government's strategy of 'industry at the periphery'. The Premadasa
administration is highly sensitive to the build-up of rural resentment which
contributed to left-wing uprisings in 1971 and 1987-89.
'The aim is to have balanced development,' according to a senior government
official. 'The rural sector was suffering from unemployment and it would be
too costly to bring everyone to the capital. Setting up factories in the
countryside is a way of taking the weight off Colombo's infrastructure.
There is no compulsion. What we are trying to do is to give incentives.'
A finance ministry official admits: 'The incentives are some form of
compulsion. A classic failure of market forces is the tendency for industry
to concentrate on urban centres.'
Of the 200 garment factories that are supposed to be operational by the end
of the year, 73 are being built with eight already in production. Government
officials admit that only half the target will be reached.
On the whole, Sri Lanka remains an attractive country for foreign textile
companies. Hong Kong-based Unisouth Holdings is just one company relocating
its factory there. The advantages, according to a local representative, are
generous tax incentives and a well-educated labour force. Wages for a
semi-skilled worker in Sri Lanka are about Dollars 40-Dollars 45 a month,
nearly 10 times cheaper than equivalent labour in Hong Kong.
In the longer-term, however, most observers feel that Sri Lanka needs to
move away from the cheaper end of the market to the production of more
expensive items. 'We havn't yet developed the necessary skills to
manufacture high-quality articles of clothing,' admits Mr Thurairajah. 'But
we are gradually moving upmarket.'
Ms Monika Kinzebach, a designer on a German-funded project to advise Sri
Lanka's textiles industry, agrees that the country needs to move upmarket.
'Sri Lanka has the potential to develop its textile exports because things
can be produced here that would be too expensive to make in Europe. But, at
the moment, there is a lack of knowledge of the international market and
they are using designs that are difficult to sell.'
Mr Gunawardana, meanwhile, is working on ambitious plans for new ranges to
market in the trade fairs of Europe and Japan. He feels he may be on the
verge of big things. However, he is not giving up his legal practice just
yet.
