FT  07 JUL 92 / Survey of Software at Work (21): New system pays off - Case
Study / Sea Fish Industry Authority/CPS
THE MOST effective measurement of the usefulness of a system development
must be whether it works, and provides valuable information to its users, at
a reasonable cost, writes Michael Powell.
The Fisheries Act 1981 charged the Sea Fish Industry Authority with the task
of collecting a levy on all fish purchased and imported into the UK. This
levy, amounting to Pounds 6m in 1991, is used for research, training,
conservation, marketing, fish farm development and other activities which
promote and serve the interests of the sea fish industry.
In 1990, an ICL software house subsidiary, CPS, developed a computer-based
levy control system to handle all the accounting procedures, to allow
inquiries to be made on information held in the system, and to produce
analyses and reports, using the Ingres relational database management
system. It runs on an ICL DRS30 workstation system. This replaced an earlier
system, written in Cobol to run on older technology ICL DRS-20 kit.
The authority uses Multisoft Premier for its accounting needs. According to
Gordon McLean, computer services manager: 'We used to spend a lot of time
bespoking standard packages, but now we try to bend procedures to the
package, not the package to the procedures.'
The decision to use Ingres was tactical, says Mr McLean - 'we knew we could
get a PC version, for development, and then port the result on to Unix.'
From a request for tender, four suppliers offered completely different
solutions. ICL was chosen, with Ingres. Ingres' SQL (structured query
language) was used as the development language, although two small routines
were written in the C programming language - 'it's a stand-alone system with
no interfaces to other systems at the moment,' says Mr McLean. The
development cost well under Pounds 40,000.
The authority initially had the right to return to the authors if it had any
problems. However, the system is now considered to be stable, so no further
support contract was taken - 'we've only added the odd report here or there,
so there's no need to pay a lot for support' says Mr McLean. 'However, the
system was developed using version five of Ingres, and the latest version,
number six, is an advance on five. Implementing the system on this new
version is not a trivial job. ICL is currently working on that.'
He is reluctant to update to version six, feeling it is best to leave well
alone - 'we've had very few problems . . . apart from an odd hiccup if
there's a hardware fault. It's a successful system for us - giving us more
than we had before.'
On that measure, this has been an effective bespoke development.
