FT  24 JUL 92 / Matrix goes into receivership as machine tool sector
declines
MATRIX CHURCHILL, the Midlands-based machine tool builder which has been at
the centre of allegations about illegal exports to Iraq, became the latest
victim of the recession yesterday when it announced that it had gone into
receivership.
The news is the latest twist in the chequered history of Matrix Churchill,
which was bought from Iraqi ownership early last year and put through a
heavy restructuring by its new owners, Midlands-based Automation
Investments.
On Wednesday, Mr Stephen Hancock and Mr Philip Baldwin of Price Waterhouse
were appointed receivers of the company, which has 190 employees making
lathes and grinding machines at Birmingham and Coventry.
The receivership comes a few days after the disclosure that Beaver
Engineering Group, the Norwich-based machine tool maker, had been placed in
administrative receivership. It further underlines the woes of the British
machine tool industry, whose sales fell last year to their lowest in real
terms since 1984.
Yesterday, the Machine Tool Technologies Association warned that 'the
long-term prospects for machine tools, a key industry critical to the
strength of Britain's economy, is being seriously compromised by the
continuing steep decline of the manufacturing base'.
Matrix has suffered a loss of Pounds 6.9m, on turnover of Pounds 23m in the
18 months ended September 30, and a further loss of Pounds 1.1m on turnover
of Pounds 6.9m in the seven months ended April. It has been hit by the
curtailment of Iraqi contracts, reduced sales to eastern Europe, and the
worldwide recession in machine tools.
Mr Keith Bailey, AI chairman, said yesterday: 'We thought we could have done
something with Matrix if there had been an improvement in the market in
1991.'
Three former Matrix executives face trial in October accused of illegal
exports to Iraq. Mr Bailey, who is also chairman of BSA Tools, another AI
company, faces similar charges in November.
Observer, Page 19
