FT  29 FEB 92 / Heaven and Hell: Why there is no room for mice in Paradise -
The concept of Heaven from a feline perspective
FOR OUR two Burmese cats, Hell is 'Out' and Heaven is 'In'. For them, as
house cats, our spacious flat is the world. It contains all, or almost all,
they need or want: cupboards to vanish in, vases to knock over, an endless
supply of food and two human beings to be used as furniture or hot water
bottles when the occasion arises.
Until they were taken Out for the first (and so far only) time, they could
not have known that Heaven for them was In; but a brief foray in the garden
seems to have convinced them - if their apprehensive, then contemptuous,
sniffing and swift return to their basket is anything to go by - that the
comforts of In are hugely preferable to the unknown hazards of Out. They are
now in the enviable situation of being back in Heaven, and knowing it.
If it is true that there can be no good that Heaven lacks, our cats' world
lacks the perfection that is one of Heaven's traditional attributes. For
they cannot fulfil one of the deepest needs of their natures, which is to
hunt and kill.
We are told that in Paradise the lion will lie down with the lamb, so
presumably our cats will merely frolic with the mice and birds they now miss
stalking; but I cannot help feeling that this human Heaven does not answer
to our cats' heart's desire. It is here that we encounter the paradoxes that
swarm around the idea of Heaven, and make it an idea as elusive as the
infinite.
To start with, a feline Heaven will be Hell for mice: how then can they
share the same Paradise? Not only is the perfection of the feline Heaven
uncombinable with that of the (presumably tamer) mouse's Paradise - it
requires the mouse's damnation. This unfortunate result cannot be explained
by any moral turpitude on the part of the mouse. It is not as if, as in the
repellent Heaven of Thomas Aquinas, the beatitude of the saved is heightened
by the spectacle of the torments of the damned. It is simply that without
mice as prey, the feline Heaven seems less than perfect.
Reflecting on Heaven for a Burmese leads me to wonder if our ideas on the
subject are not, owing to the influence of Christianity, overly moralised.
In our official thinking we pay tribute to the notion, which in practice we
often ignore, that moral goods are more valuable than other goods - goods
such as beauty, pleasure or wealth. We do this, I suppose, because these
other goods come to us, if they come at all, as a matter of chance, whereas
moral goods - the virtues - are attainable by everyone by an exercise of
free will.
This Christian prejudice denies the fact that intelligence and stupidity,
imaginativeness and sensitivity, bravery and cowardice are as much
accidents, as much throws in the genetic lottery and products of good and
bad fortune in our lives, as are physical beauty or winning the pools.
That we are as we are is a matter of luck - a conclusion that would not have
surprised the pagan thinkers of Greek antiquity. But if this is so, are we
not unreasonable in insisting that ethical goods always outweigh non-moral
goods? After all, our actual behaviour hardly supports this heroic
assertion.
When we chose how to spend an evening, with earnest and morally impeccable
but boring friend or with a witty and engaging rascal, it is not always
virtue that tips the scales. Is it really reprehensible to prefer an
excellent meal with a bottle of fine wine and a charming companion to an
evening reading Kierkegaard over a glass of Perrier? If morality deserves
(and receives) a measure of demotion in our everyday lives, how much more so
in our musings about Heaven? Our religious traditions encourage us to think
of Heaven as the place where wrongs are righted, tears are dried, and the
mad injustice of the world is resolved into a peaceful harmony.
Certainly, this conventional idea satisfies our need for consolation. Yet,
as one grows older, it does so less and less. As our acquaintance with
sorrow and tragedy becomes all too familiar, the notion that great
misfortune has its place in the grand economy of things comes to disgust us.
Then theodicy - the project of resolving the problem of evil and so
justifying God's ways to man - starts to look like an enterprise in
thoroughly bad taste. How could justice in Heaven even begin to compensate
for lives ruined on Earth? Perhaps, then, we should empty Heaven of the
bric-a-brac of Christian morality, and instead think of it as a place where
all things are possible and all desires are satisfied.
Let the glutton be free to wallow in gluttony, let the rake have his fill of
concupiscence, let the miser revel in avarice and the predatory cat delight
in the torment of its prey, without their joy being overshadowed by
morality.
Such a Heaven would allow us to indulge aspects of our natures that are
contradictory: the pleasures of the debauchee, and the joys of the
anchorite, could coexist in the same soul without contradiction. A
conception of Heaven on these lines would admit that we need morality only
because of our poverty and frailty: like drainage systems, morality is
doubtless a necessary convenience, but it is not something that bears too
much thinking on, and it surely is not the supreme good of life.
Heaven, then, is abundance, a plethora of possibilities so
more-than-infinite that we need engage no more in the wearisome weighing of
costs and benefits, the calculation of duty and obligation, that is our
ordinary lot.
There is a problem, though, with this Heaven, as with any other that is
genuinely desirable - it must transcend not only the laws of ethics but
those of logic, too. The paradises of cats and mice are incompatible, and
can both be realised only if the law of non-contradiction - considered since
Aristotle the cornerstone of logic - is suspended.
For a few medieval theologians, this is not a problem, since the laws of
logic are only God's commands, and so can be waived at His will.
For us poor mortals, the problem with a Heaven that abounds in
contradictions is that it is inconceivable. This is to say that the very
idea of perfection eludes us: for human logic, it is incoherent. Since we
cannot even coherently imagine what Heaven could be like, the idea of it
evaporates in our minds, and we are left with the world as it is. But if we
have gone this far in our musings, there is a difference. If it is true that
the very idea of perfection is flawed, then we can no longer think of the
difficulties of our lives in terms of their departure from some ideal state.
If we indeed had a clear idea of perfection, and no less clear insight into
the contradictions of our natures, we would be forced to the conclusion
that, whereas there is truly an In, we are forever Out - which is Hell
indeed.
As it is, lacking any idea of perfection, we at least escape the sufferings
that arise from thinking that the flaws in our lives are in principle
removable. We end up neither In nor Out, but simply Here - wherever that may
be.
John Gray is a Fellow of Jesus College, Oxford.
