FT  27 OCT 92 / W German economy 'in critical state'
THE west German economy is in a 'critical state' and will generate only 0.5
per cent real growth next year, according to a joint report from the
country's five leading economic institutes. A modest recovery in the east
will bring aggregate growth to 1 per cent.
The annual autumn study, though at odds with the government's
hastily-revised forecast of up to 1.5 per cent growth in the west, released
at the weekend, reflects common agreement that international recession is at
last taking its toll. It is only weeks since the government was speaking of
2.5 per cent growth next year.
Predicting average inflation in the west of 3.5 per cent after 4 per cent
this year, the institutes urged that pay settlements be kept down to 3 per
cent - around half the levels of the past two years. The over-hasty
alignment of eastern wage rates with those in the west would be 'socially
and politically explosive', they warned.
Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the Bundesbank president, said that even though the
economy was weakening, there was no reason for the central bank to relax its
stance on maintaining stability.
Control of inflation and money supply remained the bank's priorities, he
said in a speech in Hamburg. Preliminary figures released yesterday
suggested that inflation in western Germany was virtually unchanged in
October. Consumer prices have risen 0.3 per cent in Baden-Wurttemberg during
the past month, taking the year-on-year inflation rate to 3.3 per cent.
In North-Rhine Westphalia, the most heavily-populated state, a similar rise
took the annual rate to 3.6 per cent. In the five new states, however,
inflation is still strong, and stood at 12.7 per cent in September,
according to statistics released yesterday.
As Chancellor Helmut Kohl warned his Christian Democrat party congress of
tax rises and public spending cuts, Mr Schlesinger said there was no need to
increase taxes at present 'but whether this applies in the longer-term will
need examining'.
The bank, hitherto stolidly against higher taxes, appears now to agree with
Bonn that at least the threat of a rise could help dampen both union
ambitions in the spring wages round, and private demand for credit which has
been an important factor in this year's surge in money supply growth.
A summer slump in Germany's foreign trade, reported yesterday, further
deepened the gloom spreading rapidly into every sector of the economy. At
DM47.9bn, August exports were 4.7 per cent lower than a year earlier, and
imports were down 11 per cent at DM47.6bn, according to the statistics
office. Compared with July, exports fell 18 per cent and imports 27 per
cent.
Industrial confidence is also down sharply, according to the Ifo institute
in Munich, one of the five authors of the autumn study. The D-Mark's rapid
appreciation during September has hit export prospects and incoming orders
fell again during the month, Ifo said in a separate report.
Manufacturing plant is working at around 83 per cent of capacity compared
with more than 87 per cent in September last year, and average outstanding
orders amount to 2.6 months' work, against 2.8 months in June.
According to details available from the five institutes' report, officially
released today, west German growth this year will be only 1 per cent, and
the east will show a rise of around 5.5 per cent, half earlier estimates.
Next year the east should see a gain of around 7 per cent and average
inflation should slow from 11.5 per cent to 8 per cent.
