FT  09 JUL 92 / Health reforms target killer diseases
THE government announced plans yesterday to set and monitor targets to
reduce the toll of killer diseases and to improve overall health standards.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, said the white-paper proposals
paper marked the 'next logical step in the process of health reform'.
The health plans will target five areas: coronary heart disease and strokes;
cancers; mental illness; sexual health; and accidents. A range of other
targets has been adopted by the government within the main headings - there
will be attempts to reduce the proportion of smokers in the population from
a third to a fifth by the year 2000, with similar efforts to reduce alcohol
consumption.
Mrs Bottomley said: 'No responsible government can be a disinterested
observer of an unhealthy nation.' She added that avoidable illness had an
enormous cost in terms of working days lost and expensive treatment.
Health standards in Britain are relatively poor in international terms. Some
of the targets in the white paper are likely to be achieved provided
existing trends continue but others - notably an attempt to halve
pregnancies among girls under 16 by 2000 - will be difficult.
The government was criticised by opposition parties and health promotion
specialists for not including the links between ill health and poverty in
the white paper's priorities, and for failing to announce support for a ban
on tobacco advertising.
Mr Robin Cook, the shadow health secretary, said the white paper had got the
right diagnosis but not the right prescription. He added: 'A white paper
that does not propose a single measure to combat poverty, homelessness or
unemployment is not a white paper that offers better health to all.' Mr
Bryan Davies, Labour MP for Oldham Central &amp; Royton, suggested the paper
should have been called The Health of Two Nations.
Mrs Bottomley shied away from making a direct connection between poverty and
ill health, saying there was a link between health and 'a great number of
social factors'. She offered breast cancer as an example of inverse
correlation between incidence and poverty.
Editorial comment, Page 20
