FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Party professionals come of age in new intake
 -A close look at the make-up of the Commons, which will reconvene on April
27
THE NEW intake of MPs provides stark proof that politics has become less a
job done by Conservative lawyers or Labour teachers than by political
full-timers who have spent their adult lives on their party's payroll.
Five are past or present members of Labour's Walworth Road staff: Peter
Mandelson (Hartlepool), Jean Corston (Bristol E), Mike Capes (Ilford S),
Gordon Prentice (Pendle) and Janet Anderson (Rossendale and Darwen).
The same trend appears in the new Conservative intake, with John Wittingdale
(Colchester S &amp; Maldon) Judith Chaplin (Newbury) and Hartley Booth
(Finchley) all from No. 10 Downing Street; David Faber (Westbury) from
Central Office; and David Willetts (Havant) from the Centre for Policy
Studies.
Such professional politicians are mainly pragmatists anxious to secure and
retain office, and thus are important ballast for their leaderships.
Union links. A significant proportion (14 per cent) of the new Labour intake
has built careers on union payrolls, notably Keith Hill (Streatham), Rachael
Squire (Dunfermline W), Angela Eagle (Wallasey), George Mudie (Leeds E),
Richard Burden (Birmingham Northfield), John Spellar (Warley W) and Roger
Codsiff (Birmingham Small Heath).
The new parliamentary Labour party comprises 138 union-sponsored MPs,
roughly the same proportion as in the last Commons. This underscoring of
Labour's union links implies less a radical reversal of Conservative trade
union legislation than a defence of the public sector, in which a large
number of the sponsored MPs' unions are active.
Richard Burden's union (the local government union Nalgo), for example, took
full-page advertisements in newspapers during the campaign to attack
Conservative health and education policies.
Equally, however, union insiders such as Keith Hill are the sort of
ambitious pragmatists whose defence of the public sector (in Mr Hill's case,
the railways) will be tempered by a broader view of their party's
longer-term interests. Ambitious politicians in marginal Labour seats have
an interest in breaking the historic pattern of short periods of Labour rule
interrupted by four-term Conservative governments.
Local government leaders. The large number of new Labour MPs from local
government underlines Labour's involvement in defence of the local authority
infrastructure.
Many of Labour's new intake are senior local government figures with long
experience of running municipal authorities: George Mudie (Leeds E), Jamie
Cann (Ipswich), John Gunnell (Leeds S &amp; Morley), Neil Gerrard (Walthamstow),
John Heppell (Nottingham E), Clive Betts (Sheffield Attercliffe) and John
Austin-Walker (Woolwich).
The only equivalents in the new Tory intake are those from 'flagship'
Conservative councils: Wandsworth's Sir Paul Beresford (Croydon C) and
Bradford's Eric Pickles (Brentwood and Ongar).
Political families. The decline of the old-Etonian contingent to 33 MPs (31
Conservatives, two Labour) confirms the demise of the political dynasties,
reduced now to the Churchills, Guinnesses (Channons and Lennox-Boyds),
Benns, Hoggs, Hurds, and Emma Nicholson's family, which has provided many
MPs in an unbroken line since the 1890s.
But the continuing importance of family is reflected in the election of Lady
Olga Maitland (Sutton &amp; Cheam) and Bernard Jenkin (Colchester N), both
children of former MPs, David Faber (Westbury), grandson of Harold
Macmillan, and Geoffrey Clifton-Brown (Cirencester &amp; Tewkesbury), whose
family has provided five MPs this century.
Labour's new intake brings a husband and wife to the Commons - Bridget
Prentice (Lewisham E) and Gordon Prentice (Pendle) - to rival the
Conservative couples, the Bottomleys and the Wintertons. The election of
Helen Jackson (Sheffield Hillsborough) brings to the House the sister of a
former MP, Chris Price.
Retreads. The new intake includes 16 former MPs, nine Conservative, three
Labour and one Liberal Democrat.
Conservatives in this bracket are Derek Spencer (Brighton Pavilion), Richard
Ottaway (Croydon S), Gerry Malone (Winchester), Michael Ancram (Devizes),
Piers Merchant (Beckenham), Warren Hawksley (Halesowen &amp; Stourbridge), Mark
Robinson (Somerton &amp; Frome), Iain Sproat (Harwich) and John Horam, whose
parliamentary career includes periods as first a Labour and then an SDP MP,
and who now sits as Conservative member for Orpington.
Labour's retreads are Bryan Davies (Oldham C &amp; Royton), John Spellar (Warley
W) and Nick Raynsford (Greenwich). The Liberal Democrats returned Paul Tyler
(Cornwall N). Three MEPs - all Labour  - have affirmed their faith in the
importance of Westminster over Strasbourg by entering the Commons: Llew
Smith (Blaenau Gwent), Geoff Hoon (Ashfield) and George Stevenson (Stoke S).
Two other past or present MEPs (Richard Balfe, Labour, and Andrew Pearce,
Conservative) failed to make the reverse Channel crossing.
Women. The new House contains a record 57 women MPs, up from 44 in the last
parliament. Labour, in spite of the failure of half its women candidates to
secure election in key marginals, supplies 34 of the new total, including
Tessa Jowell (Dulwich), Glenda Jackson (Hampstead &amp; Highgate) and Barbara
Roche (Hornsey and Wood Green).
Because of the selection of six new women for safe seats - such as Cheryl
Gillan (Chesham &amp; Amersham) and Angela Browning (Tiverton) - the Tories have
ensured that, in spite of the defeat of women such as Lynda Chalker in
marginal seats, the government benches contain 20 women, an increase of
three on the last parliament. Elizabeth Lynne's election at Rochdale means
the Liberal Democrats have two women MPs.
Ethnic minorities. The new House has two new Asian MPs, joining the three
black and one Asian MPs (all Labour) elected in 1987. Piara Khabra retained
Southall for Labour in spite of the rebel candidacy of the deselected MP Syd
Bidwell. Tory attempts to bring black MPs on to their benches succeeded at
Brentford &amp; Isleworth, where Nirj Deva retained the seat. But at Cheltenham,
the resistance to the imposition of black barrister John Taylor almost
certainly eased the way for the Liberal Democrats. Age. In the tough world
of contemporary politics, few MPs stay on after 70. Edward Heath (Old Bexley
&amp; Sidcup) and his Conservative colleague Sir Trevor Skeet (North
Bedfordshire) are the only remaining septuagenarians. Six Labour MPs were
born in 1923; the oldest is Andrew Faulds (Warley E). Mr Heath and Mr Tony
Benn are the only survivors of the 1950 parliament. The youngest MP remains
the re-elected Liberal Democrat, Matthew Taylor (Truro), born 1963.
Political trends. How leftwing is the new parliamentary Labour party?
No more than a handful of the new MPs are likely to identify with the
hard-left Campaign group, which had some 30 members in the last House.
Michael Connarty (Falkirk E), John Simpson (Nottingham S) and John Denham
(Southampton Itchen) were noted for their hard left attitudes in the early
1980s, but all are said to have mellowed.
It remains to be seen whether the frustration of national defeat prompts
dissent from the more hardline MPs. The Tories' attempt to focus on MPs who
have dropped or concealed their unilateralist credentials savours a little
of flogging a dead horse.
Nor does Europe carry such divisive potential, with many leftwingers
reconciled to the European Commission's social policy. With Mr Kinnock's
leadership in the balance, however, it is unclear whether the broad
consensus will remain.
Many of the new Conservative intake were selected during Mrs Thatcher's
reign and reflect its orthodoxies. Men such as Liam Fox and Charles Hendry
(High Peak) were teenagers when she won the leadership and came of age
politically during her premiership.
These 'Thatcher's children' may be expected to carry their political
nostrums with them through their parliamentary careers as did the One Nation
generation of retiring MPs such as Sir Ian Gilmour and Sir Paul Dean, whose
seats they have inherited.
Others of the new intake are explicitly identified with Thatcherite
positions, notably John Wittingdale (Colchester S), Sir Paul Beresford
(Croydon C), Iain Sproat (Harwich) and Warren Hawksley (Halesowen &amp;
Stourbridge).
A new intake heavily weighted by such people has a potential for embarassing
a government with a relatively small majority.
The author is a senior lecturer in politics at Aberdeen university.
