FT  02 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Drug problem damages corporate health - The
tribulations of Fisons
AN AIR of bruised defensiveness haunts the boardroom of Fisons these days.
The group, which is likely to report tomorrow a drop in pre-tax profits from
Pounds 230m in 1990 to around Pounds 190m last year, is still coming to
terms with the resignation in January of Mr John Kerridge, its executive
chairman. A US ban on two of its best-selling products, which has cost it
more than Pounds 65m in lost profits, continues to torment the company.
Meanwhile, Fisons' relationship with the City of London remains sticky.
A romance lasting nearly a decade of sustained growth turned sour in the
closing months of 1991 as it became clear that visits by the US Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), which controls which drugs are sold in the US,
had uncovered a series of manufacturing problems.
In addition, institutions became exasperated at the persistent failure of
Tilade, the asthma drug and the company's great hope for the 1990s, to gain
US approval. Repeated promises that the drug was on the verge of approval
were broken. Nearly two years later the City is still waiting.
If that were not enough, investors received a series of nasty surprises
during the autumn of 1990. The company announced progressively increasing
losses arising from the absence of two other drugs, Opticrom and Imferon,
from the US market.
This culminated in the profits warning on December 11.
Mr Patrick Egan, newly appointed executive chairman, admitted this week that
the company had two pressing problems - a replacement for Mr Kerridge and a
speedy resolution to its seemingly incessant differences with the FDA over
manufacturing quality standards for Opticrom, a hay-fever drug, and Imferon,
a product for anaemia.
The difficulties with the FDA continue. Mr Egan has said the company does
not yet have a date for the visit by FDA inspectors. Analysts had once
expected the visit to take place in January or February. A date of mid-March
was then mentioned, but there is now speculation the inspectors may not
arrive until April.
Mr Egan denied there had been a break-down in the relationship with the FDA,
but admitted there had been slippage in the timing of the FDA visit.
He argued, however, that the date was no longer critical because the company
has missed the spring hay-fever season for Opticrom. The product should be
ready in time for the autumn ragweed season which runs between September and
November. This period formed the bulk of Opticrom's sales, he added.
Before the withdrawals, Opticrom had annual US sales of about Dollars 40m
while Imferon's sales were about Dollars 20m.
Meanwhile, Mr Egan is busy searching for a chief executive. He said he was
considering internal and external candidates and expected to make a decision
within the next six weeks.
Mr Egan stressed the company's underlying strength and argued that the
set-back was only temporary. He insisted the company had a strong pipeline
of drugs in the two fields in which it plans to specialise - respiratory and
central nervous system pharmaceuticals.
He admitted, however, that the company did not have the resources to develop
all of the drugs it discovered, particularly outside its core fields. He
expected an acceleration in co-development projects with other companies as
well as an increase in the number of products Fisons licenses out.
Nevertheless, he argued that the company had critical mass for its research
and development although it was spending only Pounds 80m a year. 'We don't
need to be merged and we don't need to be taken over. We're operating quite
nicely,' he said. 'I have ruled out a merger with a company of the same size
or a larger group.'
Mr Egan also said he was not under pressure to sell the scientific
instrument division or the horticultural business, even though he was
receiving an offer a week for the latter. He was not actively soliciting
offers, he added. However he did say he might dispose of bits of the company
if he was under pressure to fund drug development.
Meanwhile, Fisons is trying to repair bridges with both the City and the FDA
following the ban on its drugs. Both must relearn how to trust the company.
Mr Egan and whoever he chooses as chief executive will have plenty to do
before Fisons feels less battered and bruised.
