FT  30 SEP 92 / India's dam-busters: Environmental concerns threaten the
future of a Dollars 3bn World Bank development project, writes Stefan
Wagstyl
Manibeli, a village of thatched huts, muddy river banks and an ancient stone
temple, will tomorrow top the agenda at a World Bank meeting in Washington.
The bank's directors are due to debate the future of one of the bank's most
controversial large-scale development projects - the construction of a huge
dam across the Narmada River in north-western India.
The Dollars 3bn (Pounds 1.73bn) project will supply drinking water to about
30m people through a 75,000km network of canals, the world's largest, and
generate torrents of electricity. However, it will also flood - partly or
completely - land belonging to some 240,000 of India's poorest people. They
include tribal villagers, such as the inhabitants of Manibeli, which is
located on the Narmada in Maharashtra state.
Most of the 230 families of Manibeli have already moved out to resettlement
sites purchased by the dam authorities. But most of the 30 or so who remain
say they are ready to drown rather than move from their land or the
surrounding forests which provide them with food, firewood and medicinal
herbs. Mr Narayan, the 45-year-old headman, says: 'We will not leave; our
parents are buried here.'
The villagers' stand has brought to a head the long-running battle over the
dam's construction. Critics, led by environmental lobbyists, want it stopped
on the grounds that too little consideration has been paid to the protection
of local communities or the environment. Supporters - including the World
Bank - say the benefits outweigh the costs and that displaced villagers are
being resettled on better terms than in previous schemes.
The project was first discussed as long ago as 1946 and the foundation stone
was laid by Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first prime minister, in 1961.
However, the scheme was delayed by protracted disputes between the three
states through which the Narmada flows - Gujarat, Maharashtra and Madhya
Pradesh. It was 1979 before they were resolved and 1985 before the World
Bank approved a Dollars 450m loan.
By then, environmental lobbyists, both in India and elsewhere, were winning
public support for their concerns about large-scale construction schemes. In
1986, Mr Rajiv Gandhi, the late prime minister, acknowledged that India's
big dams had failed to deliver the promised benefits. 'Perhaps we can safely
say that almost no benefit has come to the people from these projects.'
Mr Gandhi and the World Bank saw the Narmada scheme as a chance to learn
from past mistakes. They insisted the three states leading the scheme
compensate displaced villagers in ways which safeguarded their economic and
social well-being. They also demanded a detailed environmental master plan.
However, even though large-scale construction started in 1989, the three
states failed to meet the conditions imposed upon them. A trickle of
complaints from environmental activists became a flood, and last year the
World Bank ordered an unprecedented independent review by Mr Bradford Morse,
a US development aid administrator.
Mr Morse's report, delivered this summer, shocked the bank. He concluded
that most of the environmental lobbyists' complaints were justified. 'The
projects as they stand are flawed; resettlement and rehabilitation of all
those displaced by the projects is not possible under prevailing
circumstances, and the environmental impacts of the projects have not been
properly considered or adequately addressed,' Mr Morse wrote.
He expressed particular concern about compensation for those villagers whose
rights to land had never been recorded and about the continuing absence of
any environmental master plan. Mr Morse stopped just short of recommending
abandoning the project.
World Bank experts accept many of Mr Morse's criticisms, but argue there is
time to make improvements before the main dam's completion in 2000. The
three states make the same point, adding, belligerently, that the dam will
be built with or without the World Bank.
The bank's directors are unlikely to abandon the main dam and canals when
they met on Thursday. But they could well refrain from funding other dams
the states plan along the Narmada. And they could insist that Mr Morse's
objections are met before more bank money is spent on the scheme.
That will not entirely satisfy the Manibeli villagers. But they will have
the comfort of knowing they have secured better compensation than they might
have thought possible even a year ago. Moreover, they will have helped to
force a wholesale reappraisal of the project - and, by extension, of the
value of large-scale irrigation schemes everywhere. As a World Bank official
in India says: 'We have learnt some important lessons here.'
