FT  18 FEB 92 / City discount house hit by Pounds 24m losses
UNION DISCOUNT, the City discount house, yesterday reported heavy losses and
the departure of Mr Graeme Gilchrist, its chief executive.
The company lost Pounds 23.6m in 1991, following a sharp deterioration of
the core discounting business. It made a pre-tax profit of Pounds 7.8m the
year before.
Union's first loss on its discounting operations in 29 years highlights the
problems facing London's nine discount houses through which the Bank of
England channels liquidity to the commercial banking system and influences
interest rates.
Following announcement of the losses, Mr Gilchrist is to take early
retirement as chief executive and his duties will temporarily be taken by Mr
Robin Herbert, chairman.
Mr Herbert blamed the Pounds 2.91m losses in discount house operations,
compared with a Pounds 11.06m profit the previous year, on very short-term
interest rates which had remained higher than three-month rates throughout
the year.
The predictable downward direction of interest rates since sterling joined
the European exchange rate mechanism had also reduced discount houses'
opportunity to deal profitably, said Mr Derek Lyons, managing director of
Union's discount house operations.
Mr Herbert said that a return to a normal yield curve - with short-term
rates lower than longer-term rates - would improve discount house
profitability.
Union Discount's main diversification, into asset financing, cost the
company Pounds 16.25m at the operating level.
Most of these losses came from Sabre Leasing, which provides lease finance
to customers of office equipment suppliers.
Union also made an exceptional charge of Pounds 9.47m, most of which covered
the write-down of an Edinburgh building taken as security for its one
property development loan in 1988.
The company's equity and gilt-edged marketmaking division, another of the
diversifications, increased its profits from Pounds 2.27m to Pounds 3.90m
while money management division profits fell 6 per cent to Pounds 1.17m.
Union Discount is paying a final dividend of 2p per share for a total of
13.5p against 35p a year earlier. Losses were 98.9p a share against profits
of 57.02p.
Lex, Page 22; Observer, Page 20
Background, Page 24
