FT  03 OCT 92 / World Stock Markets: Mr Perot muddies election waters once
again - But with a Clinton victory in prospect, Patrick Harverson details a
sector-by-sector investment approach
Ross Perot has really put the cat among the pigeons now. Just when the stock
markets had not only become used to a two-horse race for the White House,
but were also gradually coming to terms with the prospect of a Democratic
victory, Mr Perot re-entered the race on Thursday.
Mr Perot's re-entry has muddied the electoral waters, and it is much too
early to tell how it might affect the final result. A consensus, however, is
gradually emerging about what a Clinton victory might mean for the equity
markets, and for individual sectors and stocks in particular.
One of the best reviews of the potential impact on stock prices of a
leftward shift in US politics was published this week by New York broking
house Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
The report kicks off by predicting that Governor Clinton will win, although
it was compiled before Mr Perot's return to the race. It has no clear
conclusion on what a Clinton administration would mean for the equity market
as a whole - there is, wisely, no prediction of where the Dow would be at
the end of the first year of a Clinton presidency - but the report does
provide some insights into the possible implications for individual sectors.
Auto and related stocks. What the car industry needs is volume, says DLJ,
and Clinton's proposed middle-class tax cuts 'should be just the ticket for
a nice boost in auto demand.' Democratic plans for action on research and
development tax credits are also welcomed. Any urge to increase import
restrictions on foreign cars, however, would not be good in the long run (it
could lead to higher car prices and remove the incentive on US manufacturers
to improve quality); auto executives in Detroit are reportedly very worried
by the thought of an environmental vice president, Al Gore, and do not want
a further tightening of restrictions under the Clean Air Act.
Banks. The introduction by the Democrats of government programmes which lead
to more fiscal stimulus and economic growth would be good for the sector,
but any extension of banking regulation could 'further restrict the US
banking industry from being an efficient financial intermediary, both
domestically and globally.' DLJ also points out that the best possible
environment for US bank stocks is slow, steady, non-inflationary growth,
which is what the US has now. Change, therefore, may not be a good thing.
Financial Services. DLJ anticipates higher inflation and higher long-term
interest rates if the Democrats go ahead with their spending plans. Among
the financial service stocks which have traditionally fared worst in such an
environment are Dreyfus and Kemper, two investment fund groups, American
General, a diversified financial services company, and Sallie Mae, the
student loans provider. Securities brokers have showed the least sensitivity
on this score.
Food and Beverages. Although food and beverage stocks are thought to have
little fundamental exposure to a Democratic administration, higher inflation
and interest rates would lower price-earnings ratios for stable growth
companies in this sector - so be warned, investors in Anheuser-Busch,
Coca-Cola, Campbell Soups, General Mills and Kellogg, to name just a few.
Machinery. Clinton proposes to spend Dollars 200bn on road building,
infrastructure and related programmes over the next four years. He also
wants to increase spending on education by 30 per cent over three years,
with the emphasis on vocational training. The machinery sector has a
shortage of workers with such training. DLJ believes the North American Free
Trade Agreement, vital to the future prosperity of the machinery industry,
will not be altered much by Clinton. Consequently, a Democratic president
would be good for the sector, especially Caterpillar and Ingersoll-Rand.
Retailing. Although the initial burst of Democratic spending would be
positive for retailing, DLJ warns that higher interest rates and inflation
would clamp down on any recovery, and so investors should seek out retailers
with the resources to expand and have lower cost structures: this means
Wal-Mart, Home Depot, Costco, Albertson's and Circuit City.
Healthcare This is the sector that will be most affected by a change of
government. On the positive side, any extension of the health insurance
programmes would stimulate demand for pharmaceuticals and hospital supply
items. On the negative, the Democrats want to control prices on
pharmaceuticals reimbursed by public health schemes.
In fact, earlier this week investors began discounting the implication of
price controls for medical companies' earnings by selling a range of stocks,
including United Healthcare, Merck and Johnson &amp; Johnson.
