FT  02 DEC 92 / World Trade News: The sticky issue of a bowl of Japanese
rice - Import ban is more than economics
MRS Kyoko Mochizuki will never forget how, in the devastation that followed
the second world war, her mother would sort through her kimonos to decide
which to take into the countryside to exchange for rice.
Urban Japan's dependence upon the rice farmers in those desperate years has
left a deep imprint on Japanese society.
A rural root system runs through urban, industrialised Japan. Village homes
have a residual symbolic significance in the cities. For several days each
August Tokyo becomes a ghost town as families return to the rural homes of
their ancestors.
So the decision about whether Japan should allow rice imports to help
complete the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade is
about more than economics.
Japan has to negotiate an accommodation with its rural heritage. The ruling
Liberal Democratic party (LDP) has to renegotiate its vital electoral
alliance with the farmers at a time when its public standing has been
battered by scandal and economic downturn.
In past crises the LDP has rallied the agricultural vote for stability,
giving farmers an inordinately powerful electoral voice. Now for the first
time since the war the LDP risks antagonising farmers during a gathering
domestic crisis when it most needs their support.
The Japanese rice market has been regulated and subsidised by a patchwork of
laws since 1942.
The government pays the farmers a high price for their rice and subsidises
its sale to consumers. The combination of these subsidies, with an import
ban and appreciation of the yen, has pushed Japanese producer rice prices to
about eight times the international level.
Consumers pay about six times what they would if they could buy imported
rice.
The subsidies, which by 1987 had reached a peak of Y3,130bn (Pounds 16.5bn)
for rice, out of total subsidies of Y5,070bn, slipping back to Y2,483bn in
1991, out of total subsidies of Y4,230bn, spread distortions through the
rest of the economy.
Japan is the world's largest net importer of food. Yet the subsidies allow
farmers to use land for rice production which would be better used for other
crops which are imported.
The agricultural subsidies help to inflate residential land prices beyond
the reach of most industrial workers because, by maintaining rice
production, they restrict land available for building.
In Tokyo about 13 per cent of the city is classified as farmland, worked by
30,000 families. Yet nearly half have no taxable income from agriculture,
while 14 per cent have sales worth less than Dollars 1,000 a year. About
half a million new homes could be built on Tokyo's agricultural land.
That Japan is prepared to pay the cost of these distortions is testimony to
the political power of the farmers: local agricultural co-operatives are
formidable political machines in an electoral system in which
sparsely-populated rural areas are heavily over-represented in the
parliament.
The co-ops recently engineered the electoral downfall of 15 LDP Diet members
in key agricultural districts over the liberalisation of beef and orange
imports.
Yet the idea that politics is deeply rooted in Japan's peasant past is
largely a myth, as much a post-war creation as the nation's manufacturing
industry.
In the 1920s and 1930s intermittent starvation was not unheard of in rice
growing areas as the government, supported by big business, allowed rice to
be imported from Japan's then colonies. Rice imports reached a peak of 28
per cent of consumption in 1933.
The conservative's alliance with agriculture was forged after the war in
response to crises which threatened conservative rule.
The shocking example of the Chinese revolution of 1949 made the
conservatives fear the Japanese countryside might fall to communism, at a
time when they needed to secure food supplies to shore up their weak urban
support. Between 1949 and 1953 agricultural subsidies trebled.
The rice price rose by 43 per cent between 1960 and 1964 in the wake of the
conflict over the renegotiation of the security treaty with the US.
And it leapt by more than 30 per cent in the early 1970s when the LDP was
fighting to maintain its popularity in the wake of the recession caused by
the first oil shock.
The average Japanese farm is a labour-intensive 1.2 hectares, one-hundreth
the size of the average North American farm.
In spite of the latter's huge productivity advantage, Japanese farm
household income in 1984 was about 19 per cent higher than in the US.
However, the agricultural vote is not a distinct bloc. In 1970 about 41 per
cent of the rural workforce was employed in agriculture. Now in rural areas
about 42 per cent are employed in the service sector, a third in
manufacturing and a quarter in agriculture.
There are three groups of farmers. About 500,000 are full-time, probably
efficient enough to withstand a sharp fall in rice prices brought about by
imports. A further 750,000 are part-time farmers who derive most of their
income from farming.
Then there are 3m 'class-B' part timers - that is, about 70 per cent of all
those involved in farming - who derive most of their income from other
sources. In the mid-1950s most farms were run by full-time farmers; the
class B part-timers were just 28 per cent of the workforce. Now class B
farmers are the main beneficiaries and staunchest supporters of subsidies.
Without the subsidies their farms would make huge losses because they spend
most of their time - and earn most of their incomes - in factories or
offices.
About 60 per cent of Japan's integrated circuit production is concentrated
in largely rural areas. Factories there employ many part-time farmers whose
income is being subsidised by the state.
So the electronics workers who stand most to gain from an open world trading
system are often the part-time farmers who have most to lose from the
withdrawal of rice import protection.
Thus the LDP speaks in several different voices while it gropes for
compromise.
It wants to send a signal to its international partners that it is prepared
to replace the outright ban by a system of tariffs, possibly as high as 700
per cent at the outset, to help finalise the Gatt round. But it does not
want to risk a revolt among the farmers in the run up to elections next
year.
The party will not budge until foreign pressure is irresistible, and only
then after winning concessions in exch-ange - perhaps on stricter
anti-dumping rules, which the EC and US have used with particular fickleness
against Japanese exporters.
