FT  01 DEC 92 / Democracy link puts investment plans at risk
CHINA'S decision to link Hong Kong's political development with the colony's
economic administration puts at risk hundreds of millions of dollars of
planned investments, Simon Holberton writes.
While China said it continued to welcome foreign investment in Hong Kong, it
has also indicated it will not talk to the colonial government until it
withdraws plans to broaden democracy there.
Some of the bigger projects which could be threatened if Britain and China
are unable to agree are: Black Point power station: a development planned by
China Light and Power (CLP), monopoly supplier of electricity to Kowloon and
the New Territories, and Exxon, the US oil company. It would have generating
capacity of 6,000MW and is expected to require investment of around
HKDollars 60bn (Pounds 5bn). China has agreed to the extension of CLP's
monopoly until well into the next century, but has yet to agree a grant of
land upon which the plant will be built.
A delay to the project would not only limit potential growth in Hong Kong,
but it could also harm neighbouring Guangdong province in China which
imports electricity from CLP.
Container Terminal 9, (CT9): the development of Hong Kong's container port
to enlarge its capacity. Investment is expected to be about HKDollars 9bn.
China approved the grant of land for CT9 earlier this year but last week
claimed it should also have a say in how the government negotiated disposal
of the land.
Cable television: Wharf, the company of the late Sir Y K Pao, has emerged as
the only serious bidder for an exclusive franchise to operate Hong Kong's
first cable TV service. China's agreement will be necessary if the
government accepts Wharf's proposal, which is estimated to require about
HKDollars 5bn in investment.
Hongkong Telecom: this company, which is majority-owned by Britain's Cable
and Wireless, has an exclusive franchise to operate Hong Kong's domestic
fixed wire telecommunications network.
The government wants to introduce competition into domestic Hong Kong
telecommunications and renew Hongkong Telecom's licence when it falls due in
1993 - both need China's approval. Hongkong Telecom's monopoly on
international telephony has already been agreed with China and is assured
until 2006.
Hongkong Electric: this is the monopoly supplier of power to Victoria
Island. Its monopoly right comes up for renegotiation in the next year or
so. Until the latest break down in Anglo-Chinese relations it was expected
to be approved without any difficulty.
