FT  01 JUN 92 / Survey of Singapore (3): A computer-driven future -
Information Technology
WITH characteristic determination and meticulous planning, Singapore has
seized on the computer as a driving force for its future economic
development.
The government believes that advanced information technology should be
applied in liberal doses to everything from education and domestic road
traffic control to international trade, both to improve efficiency within
Singapore and to enhance the island's role as a commercial and service hub
for south-east Asia.
A shortage of skilled workers has given an added impetus to the
computerisation strategy. While the Economic Development Board seeks to
attract high-technology hardware and research and development business to
the country, the National Computer Board (NCB) is charged with promoting the
use of computers, introducing labour-saving software and linking parts of
the public and private sectors into computer networks.
The success of the three-year-old, SDollars 20m TradeNet system for dealing
with trade documentation - one of those ideas which is blindingly obvious
once it comes into being - has encouraged the development of other networks
along similar lines.
Some countries would have been well satisfied with Singapore's previous
ability to process customs and trade documentation in a day or two, but
TradeNet went further. By linking the 20 relevant government departments
with 2,500 importers, shippers and other private-sector companies, the
system has cut approval times to as little as 15 minutes.
About 95 per cent of trade documentation is now processed in this paperless
network, saving the time and money once spent on messengers' journeys from
one government office to another. In some routine cases, no human
intervention is required as the various official approvals are collected by
computer and delivered to the applicant. DHL, meanwhile, has established a
time-saving link with Singapore customs - allowing customs officers to
access the company's electronic manifest and pre-select items for inspection
or payment of duty.
The next step is to link TradeNet internationally, and Singapore is already
discussing the issue with US customs. 'Imports and exports are extremely
information-intensive, and this is critical for us as an international
trading centre,' says Mr Ko Kheng Hwa, NCB general manager, recalling that
trade amounts to more than three times the country's gross national product.
'We can further improve our competitiveness if we make the trading system
more efficient.'
The NCB has also encouraged the use of 'expert systems' to manage ship
movements and cargo handling at Singapore's busy container terminals,
reducing turnaround times and freeing skilled workers for other tasks.
Another of the attractions of Singapore for multinational companies is the
efficiency of its domestic services and its infrastructure and here, too,
computerisation is making its mark.
Within five years, the government hopes to implement a flexible road-pricing
system whereby drivers would be charged for using busy roads by passing an
electronic toll gate - without stopping or slowing down. In the immediate
future, Singaporeans should be able to bid for car permits (vehicle imports
are restricted to prevent congestion) by using existing automated bank
telling machines in the street.
TradeNet has been followed by MediNet, allowing most Singaporeans to receive
approval for medical benefits within hours rather than days. LawNet,
allowing the rapid transfer of legal documents and information about the
courts, is due to follow.
The NCB manages civil service computer operations and says it has reduced
the required number of civil servants by more than 5,000 by pooling
information and improving efficiency. Data about land usage, for example, is
already centralised and the country's schools are linked through the
Education Ministry headquarters. An official audit showed that there were
returns of SDollars 2.71 for every dollar spent on information technology.
Ultimately, NCB officials aim to provide citizens with a 'one-stop, non-stop
government service' for routine documentary requirements.
Asked about the risks of losing the human touch - a common criticism of the
Singaporean vision of the future, not to say the present - NCB officials
acknowledge that the establishment of computer networks is easier in a
country where pervasive state intervention is already accepted as a way of
life. But they also point out that standing in a queue to obtain some dreary
official document is hardly a humanising experience.
The idea of computerisation, Mr Ko says, is not simply to gather or pump out
more information but to free people from routine tasks so they can do
something more useful.
Singapore's small size and excellent telecommunications systems have made it
the ideal testing ground for computerisation, and computers have allowed it
to transcend the island's physical limitations, which restrict more
traditional economic activities such as manufacturing or agriculture.
Singapore, for instance, is now the fifth-largest centre in the world for
foreign exchange trading and it is busy attracting new investments from data
handling businesses such as Reuters.
'Our objective is to create an intelligent island in Singapore,' says Mr Ko,
'where IT (information technology) is used in almost every facet of our
life.' To that end, the NCB co-ordinated a blueprint for the future known as
IT 2000, which aims to increase the number of graduate-level computer
professionals in Singapore to 35,000 by 1999 from the current 13,000.
'Singapore has played the role of a switching centre for goods, and lately
for services, even for people,' says Mr Ko. 'In the next stage we want to be
a switching centre for information and knowledge.'
