FT  14 MAY 92 / Tour operators expect tough year
BRITAIN'S tour operators reeling under the recession over the past 12
months, face an even worse year ahead as an expected post-election boom in
package holidays failed to materialise.
A number of tour operators have cut the price of May and June holidays by as
much as 60 per cent, in an effort to fill empty seats - in some cases up to
quarter of their capacity.
With Thomson, the largest operator, last-minute bargain seekers can pick up
a fly-drive holiday to Florida at Pounds 199 which would normally cost over
Pounds 400.
Analysts also point to a new trend for holidaymakers to wait longer before
making bookings, depriving tour operators of the benefit of early deposits.
The Civil Aviation Authority yesterday published figures showing that tour
operators had over-capacity of 1.6m holidays in the year to 30 September
1991 and a turnover of Pounds 440m less than the tour industry predicted.
The 40 largest operators had obtained CAA licences for 11.9m passengers, but
actually carried only 10.3m. This year, tour operators have told the CAA
they expect to carry 13.5m passengers, an increase of more than 30 per cent
on last year's actual figures.
CAA licences for this year project turnover of Pounds 4.44bn, a substantial
increase on both the forecast for 1990-91 (Pounds 3.65bn) and the actual
turnover achieved (Pounds 3.21bn).
But Thomas Cook, the travel agent, said yesterday that 'those in the
industry who expected a post-election expansion of package holiday demand
have been disappointed. The market is not as buoyant as some predicted'.
Holidays for May and June have 'not been selling as well as would have been
liked' but Thomas Cook said the case would be different in the latter half
of June through to September. Summer bookings - where discounting has not
yet been necessary - are already 'full to the brim'.
Mr Dermot Blastland, managing director of Owners Abroad's tour operations,
said that although there had been no immediate post-election boom, the
market had been 'getting stronger every day since the election'.
Thomas Cook believes that the projections by some operators of a 20-40 per
cent increase in demand this year is over-optimistic. 'Those which are
looking for a 7 per cent to 10 per cent increase are being more realistic',
it said.
Airtours has increased capacity by up to 30 per cent, but is looking for
increased market share to fill that.
Other operators played down the problem of over-capacity, and said Thomson
was in difficulties because it had seriously overestimated early summer
demand, and could not trim capacity.
Mr Harry Coe, group finance director of Airtours, the third largest
operator, said the level of discounting was not unusual. 'Every year there
is excess capacity in May and June, and every year there is price cutting in
the late bookings market in order to move it,' he said.
Mr Paul Slattery, leisure analyst with Kleinwort Benson, said it was
'extremely difficult to predict how the market will react this year'.
The move away from early to last-minute bookings meant that tour operators
now have much less deposit cash earning interest over several months than in
the early 1980s. This in turn meant that pinpointing the likely demand for
tour packages was increasingly difficult, particularly as consumers demand
higher quality at relatively cheap prices.
Mr Slattery added that increased over-capacity may well hit the market even
more this year, with the return to the sector of senior figures from the
former International Leisure Group, which when it ceased trading last year,
enabled a number of smaller operators to pick up trade.
