FT  24 FEB 92 / Environmentalists prepare to lock horns over 'megafauna'
ENVIRONMENTAL lobby groups from across the world are gathering in Kyoto in
Japan at the end of this week, preparing to wage war over the plight of the
world's 'charismatic megafauna' - large, noble animals such as the elephant
and rhinoceros.
Pariah of the triennial conference of the Convention on International Trade
in Endangered Species (Cites) will be Zimbabwe, which along with four other
southern African states is pressing for a resumption in the world trade in
ivory.
Staff of the Lausanne-based Cites secretariat are perhaps most concerned
that international obsession with a handful of 'charismatic megafauna' will
trample underfoot debate on trade in an array of equally important flora and
fauna - ranging from Cunningham's orchid or Wagner's viper to American
mahogany or the trade in live parrots.
They are concerned that amid the heated and pious debate between traders and
conservationists, few will be enthusiastic to put money where their mouths
are. At present, Cites' 10 professional staff subsist on a meagre total
budget of SFr3.9m (Pounds 1.5m) a year. They are pressing for a 43 per cent
increase to SFr5.57m, but fear few of Cites' 112 member governments are keen
to dig deeper into their pockets.
The 12-day conference, which starts next Monday , is likely to be dominated
by angry debate on the ivory trade. A total ban has been in place since
1989, following a decade in which Africa's elephant population slumped from
1.2m to 600,000.
Inside Europe, delegations from Britain, Germany and France have split the
EC by opposing a Commission proposal to allow a resumption of trade in
elephant hides and meat, but not ivory.
Zimbabwe, along with South Africa, Botswana, Namibia and Malawi, claims that
effective management of native elephant herds has resulted in such growth in
local populations that culling is needed. They want a resumption in trade of
ivory and other elephant products to enable them to generate more funds for
protection and preservation.
They say the trade ban does little to protect the elephant, and argue that
problems faced in Kenya and other east African states arise from corruption
and poor park management. Arrayed against Zimbabwe, speaking in highly
emotional unison, are the world's conservationist groups who fear an end to
the ban will annihilate the progress made over the past three years, as
elephant herds have begun to recover.
