FT  25 JUL 92 / Leading Article: The Treasury fights back
LAST WEEK, the UK Treasury was under attack. But help from its allies - the
prime minister over control on public spending and the principal central
banks over the exchange rate - has given it room for manoeuvre. It is not
very much room; and it may not last for very long. But the Treasury does at
least remain in charge of the principal levers of power, other than monetary
policy.
It may be prepared to bow the knee before the Bundesbank. But it is not
prepared to accept upstarts at home. An independent Bank of England, free to
follow domestic monetary targets, was never to be tolerated. The Treasury's
permanent enemies are, however, neither the Bundesbank, nor even the Bank of
England, but the spending ministries of Whitehall. At a time when recovery
seems to be 'jam tomorrow' and never 'jam today', the battle for spending
control has to be fought more vigorously than for many years.
Blessed with the prime minister's strong support - the sine qua non of
effective control over public expenditure - the Treasury gained a notable
victory this week, both in the changes in procedure agreed by the cabinet
and in the actual figures.
The beauty - from the Treasury's point of view - of the new procedure is
that it will place the spending ministers, like scorpions, in a bottle of
predetermined size. At the beginning of each spending round a figure will be
agreed. In this year's round, which will focus upon expenditure allocations
for 1993-94, the relevant figure is to be the old-style 'planning total'.
This is now reconfirmed at the Pounds 244.5bn agreed during last year's
autumn spending round.
From next year - when decisions on revenue, hitherto announced in the spring
Budget, are to be combined with autumn's spending decisions - the
operational ceiling is to be renamed the 'control total'. This will be the
planning total, less cyclical social security spending.
Larger bottle
In 1994-95 and 1995-96, the control total is to grow by no more than 3 and 3
1/4 per cent, respectively, in cash terms. After real growth of well over 4
per cent in the planning total between 1992-93 and 1993-94 (though, says the
Treasury, of only 2.8 per cent in a notional control total), the real
increase in the control total is to be 0.75 per cent in 1994-95 and 1 per
cent in 1995-96. Over the long term, the Treasury hopes that public spending
will grow more slowly than the economy. The ratio of public spending to
gross domestic product will then fall steadily, along with the deficit.
The new procedure should work, provided the scorpions do fight each other
rather than collude to seek a larger bottle. Their battles will not be with
the Treasury, even if negotiations still take the form of bilateral
discussions with the chief secretary, but with one another over shares of
the total. What will no longer happen, therefore, is a series of bilateral
discussions whose outcome will determine the size of public spending. And if
the chief secretary cannot keep the scorpions in order, the chancellor's new
cabinet committee stands behind him.
Too generous
Yet even if the procedure itself works, it may still not be enough.
Last autumn's planning total for 1993-94 was far too generous, involving an
increase of Pounds 13bn over the target agreed in autumn 1990. The
government simply had to meet this target, especially when inflation is
expected to be significantly lower both this year and next than earlier
forecast. But it still implies growth of general government expenditure of 4
per cent in real terms. When the public sector borrowing requirement is
already some 5 per cent of GDP and economic growth is, to say the least,
uncertain, that initial increase is excessive.
All the stringency has been left to 1994-95 and 1995-96, by which time the
public sector's finances could look very shaky. If there is no recovery, the
public sector borrowing requirement might well be over 6 per cent of GDP by
1993-94. Again, with no strong recovery, it would take forever for mild
stringency to bring that down to more reasonable levels. In the meantime,
tighter budgets and perhaps even higher real long-term interest rates, may
make the recovery less likely.
Public sector stringency is required in the medium term. But what is needed
still more is recovery. Some see 'green shoots' once again. This week's
retail sales figures do little to support that hope, even though the British
Chambers of Commerce argues that the economy is slowly improving, if
fragile. Import growth also suggests recovery in demand, but export
performance is too poor to add much to output. The economy is, in short,
still bumping along that celebrated bottom.
This is where the central bankers come in. By their intervention this week
they saved the Treasury from having to follow last week's tightening by the
Bundesbank. But with neglect still the US attitude to the dollar and Italy
in severe difficulties, further exchange rate shocks cannot be ruled out.
The British Treasury has reconfirmed domestic primacy, but it holds sway
over a battered kingdom.
