FT  15 AUG 92 / Pressure builds for action: Political tension over the
economy
Mr John Major's instinct is to tough it out. As he left earlier this month
for a summer break in Spain, colleagues detected irritation at the clamour
from some Tory MPs for emergency action to tackle the recession.
But the prime minister retains the sharp political instincts which
catapulted him into Downing Street above more senior rivals. If the clamour
from a minority in his party threatens to turn into a revolt by the
majority, he will be ready to act.
There is no question of devaluation. If anything, the calls from some Tory
backbenchers for a sterling realignment in the ERM have hardened Mr Major's
resolve. If others - the Italians, for instance - decided to move down
against the D-Mark, sterling's central rate would remain fixed at DM2.95.
But ministers are careful to add that within the constraints of the ERM and
the government's commitment to keep a tight grip on public spending, the
prime minister has an open mind on possible schemes to speed recovery.
The view in 10 Downing Street is that a modest package of measures which
bolstered consumer confidence might, just might, prove useful. But with the
emphasis on 'modest', the presentation and the politics would be as
important as the substance.
At present the political pressures are uncomfortable rather than
irresistible. However, ministers have been surprised at the
independent-mindedness of the new intake of Tory MPs, many of whom are cool
towards the prime minister's vision of Britain 'at the heart of Europe' and
are less content to be lobby fodder than their predecessors. The distance
between the government and some of the parliamentary rank and file has been
demonstrated by the critical stance towards government economic policy of Mr
John Townend, the new chairman of the Tory backbench finance committee.
In the approach to October's party conference, most Tory MPs and grassroots
activists are torn between dismay that the promised post-election recovery
has not materialised and an acknowledgement that public squabbling could
undermine confidence still further.
A small but vocal minority of die-hard Euro-sceptics is determined to link
the recession with membership of the ERM and Mr Major's support for
Maastricht. With Lady Thatcher in the lead, they threaten at least the
appearance of serious disarray in the party.
Ministers hope that less gloomy economic statistics next month and a French
'yes' vote on Maastricht will defuse the political tensions. But they are
acknowledging also that no one will yet rule out a pre-conference move to
bolster consumer confidence and calm the nerves of the Tory faithful.
