FT  12 JUN 92 / Optimism after 10 years of agony: Argentina is still pained
by its defeat in the Falklands conflict
TEN YEARS ago on Sunday, Argentina endured the worst moment in its history
as its humiliated armed forces surrendered to British troops in the Falkland
Islands.
As the islanders celebrate the event this weekend in the company of former
British prime minister Margaret Thatcher, Argentina is still agonising over
the defeat.
Despite this, for the first time in years, there is a sense of hope and
optimism in the air in Buenos Aires.
Argentina has changed since it sent its forces to recover the islands and
now is enjoying a period of unprecedented political freedom and economic
growth.
In many ways, yesterday's defeat and today's relative prosperity are closely
linked. Defeat not only broke the power of the military and restored
civilian rule, it also eroded the power of other groups such as the church,
big business and trade unions that had blocked reforms for decades.
Hyperinflation in 1989 hastened the end of the corrupt, inefficient
state-dominated economy.
When he took office in 1989, President Carlos Menem was forced to introduce
what has become one of the world's most radical and most successful free
market reforms. Today, Argentina has low inflation, rapid economic expansion
and growing international prestige. The economy is set to grow 6 per cent
this year and inflation should fall to below 20 per cent from 84 per cent in
1991.
Growth, stability and respectability, as well as overarching objectives in
their own right, are also part of the strategy to win control of the
Falklands. Recovering the Falklands remains a national aspiration that no
government can ignore. Only last week, Mr Menem repeated earlier statements
that Argentina would peacefully establish sovereignty over the islands 'by
the year 2000'.
Argentine diplomats argue that as their country becomes a respected member
of the international community by creating a stable, prosperous and
democratic system open to international trade and investment, the Falklands'
rejection of ties with Argentina - culminating in full integration - will
therefore appear increasingly unreasonable.
The architect of Mr Menem's foreign and economic policies is Mr Domingo
Cavallo. He became foreign minister in 1989, when he established Argentina's
pro-western foreign policy. In 1991 he became economy minister, creating a
convertible currency and bringing much-needed energy and coherence to Mr
Menem's flagging reforms.
Argentina not only restored diplomatic relations with London in 1990. It has
submitted to American pressure to scrap the controversial Condor II
ballistic missile project and abandoned exports of sensitive missile and
nuclear technologies. It has applied for membership of the 24-member
industrial-nation Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and
rarely misses an opportunity to join in United Nations peace-keeping
missions.
In return, it has won crucial backing from the US and other G7 countries in
the International Monetary Fund and World Bank.
Talks with London over the Falklands have moved on from sterile bickering
over sovereignty to mundane, but more productive discussions over fishing
rights and oil exploration regimes. Meanwhile, both sides have simply agreed
to disagree over the underlying issue of sovereignty.
Mr Guido di Tella, the foreign minister, has even gone so far as accepting
the importance of recognising the islanders' rights, rather than their
interests - an important distinction which demonstrates an Argentine
willingness to compromise.
Another important strand in the intertwining economic and foreign policies
is Argentina's courtship of British trade and investment. Britain's exports
are set to double this year from about Pounds 70m in 1991, while Argentine
exports should remain stable at about Pounds 140m. Bilateral trade is still
to reach the level at which it stood in 1981: Pounds 298.1m.
Officials want to attract UK investment in Argentina's aggressive
privatisation programme. Furthermore, privatised utility companies are
expected to invest heavily in upgrading the collapsing infrastructure,
making Argentina a promising market for everything from railway equipment to
power generators.
Buenos Aires believes growing British exports and investments will help
reduce the Falklanders' suspicions of all things Argentine. They also hope
UK companies with business in Argentina could counteract the highly
effective anti-Argentine Falklands lobby in Whitehall and Westminster.
However, the potential for expanding trade is limited by the lack of British
government export insurance cover. British officials say coverage will only
be resumed once Argentina establishes a track record in honouring
international financial commitments.
That will be easier than persuading London to change its policy of defending
the Falklanders' right to self determination. And the islanders remain as
resolutely anti-Argentine as ever.
Furthermore, Argentina still faces problems that will inevitably encourage
suspicion of its opponents in the British parliament.
The economy may be booming on the back of consumer demand, but Argentina's
industry is still a long way from being internationally competitive.
In spite of 10 years of democracy, congress is weak and, like the judiciary,
dominated by an all-powerful presidency.
Mr Menem himself is permanently dogged by corruption scandals. He cares
little for institutional reform, except for pushing hard for a
constitutional amendment which would allow him to stand for re-election.
An economic reverse, such as an upsurge in inflation, could have dangerous
political side effects. Equally, a political upset, such as another scandal
or complications arising from Mr Menem's campaign to amend the constitution,
could destabilise the economy.
The Argentine belief that its commendable policies will bring it any closer
to winning the Falkland Islands in the foreseeable future may thus prove to
be a delusion.
