FT  04 JAN 92 / Leading Article: Dividends in recession
THROUGHOUT the second half of the 1980s, Britain's corporate sector
increased dividend payments faster than profits. But not any more, it seems.
Last year dividends on the FT Actuaries All-Share Index rose by a mere 5 1/2
per cent, which is little more than a third of the rate experienced in the
late 1980s. Since that nominal increase is broadly in line with underlying
inflation, there was no increase in real terms. Is it a return to sanity or
a loss of boardroom nerve?
Making sense of British dividend policy is not as easy as it might be.
Economic theory suggests that the market should put an equal value on
retained profits and dividends, except to the extent that the tax system
favours one against the other. Since the Heath government's corporation tax
reforms of the early 1970s, the discrimination against dividends in favour
of retentions has largely been removed. Yet in practice the market is not
just neutral; it places a significantly higher value on dividend income -
witness the plunge in British Steel's share price when it warned last year
of a possible dividend cut.
The most plausible explanation is that Britain's unusually active market in
corporate control has caused dividend policy to become uniquely sensitive to
the pattern of portfolio demand. Whereas in Germany quoted companies are
able to adjust the annual payout to reflect the earnings trend without fear
of retribution, the British have to worry about hostile takeovers. It is no
coincidence that dividends started to outpace profitability in the mid-1980s
when the threat of a hostile bid became real even for ICI. In effect,
management has been paying its shareholders an advance loyalty bonus with
their own money.
Tax privileges
In Germany portfolio demand is heavily skewed towards fixed income. By
contrast, British investors' experience of inflation largely destroyed their
appetite for bonds in the 1970s and 1980s. Pension funds in particular
sought to match their liabilities with a rising dividend income from
equities, not least because of their right to reclaim tax on dividends. If
these tax-privileged institutions are viewed as the real owners of the
corporate sector and their stake in industry is consolidated, they pay an
effective 13 1/3 per cent tax rate on dividends compared to 35 per cent on
retentions.
But taxed investment institutions are equally yield conscious. And some take
the view that high yields and payout ratios are appropriate in an economy
where managerial performance has been unexciting. For if profits are
distributed in full, corporate investment and acquisition programmes would
have to be submitted to the institutions for approval. By this means fund
managers and trustees would appropriate for themselves the right to decide
whether profits were worth more in the hands of incumbent management or in
their own institutional coffers.
Feeble record
It sounds, at first blush, like enhanced accountability. Yet the
institutions' own record in holding management to account scarcely commands
respect. Their ability to identify bad investments and remedy bad management
is notoriously feeble. Nor is it clear that imposing institutional
priorities on the corporate sector makes wider economic sense.
Some smoothing of dividends may be acceptable in normal circumstances. But
the present profits squeeze is part of a wider structural adjustment to the
new disinflationary world of the ERM. In the past a recessionary fall in
real dividends has been brought about in much the same way that real house
prices have been allowed to fall without damage to nominal prices: inflation
has outstripped increases in declared dividends. Why should the
institutional rentiers be exempted from the adjustment to reality that home
owners now face?
It is tempting to explain the difference in dividend policy between
countries like Britain and Germany in terms of philosophy: liberal
capitalism versus corporatism. But that is too simplistic. The real issue is
about contrasting forms of corporatism. In the peculiarly British
corporatist model, the institutions have recently been acquiring more say
relative to management, which in turn has made gains over the past decade at
the expense of labour. The result is that dividends enjoy priority in a
recession over capital investment, pay and jobs. German corporatism. by
contrast, operates on the reverse set of priorities, with dividends coming
bottom.
Much of the recent increase in British dividends came from recession-proof
privatised monopolies and duopolies, which is probably why the market is not
expecting a sharp fall in nominal dividends this year. But last year's nil
real increase in the payout suggests that there may be a big squeeze in more
competitive sectors. Stand by for nasty surprises - and ponder those German
priorities.
