FT  25 JAN 92 / Police warn of 'super-dollar' forgeries in UK
Dollars 100 bills virtually indistinguishable from the genuine article - are
circulating in Britain and several other countries.
The forgeries are of such high quality that some police sources suspect they
are produced by a government, possibly in the Third World.
Because the 'super-dollars' are so difficult to detect criminals are
reported to be paying distributors up to 70 per cent of their face value for
the notes before passing them in shops and banks. Ordinary forgeries change
hands at less than a third of face value.
Scotland Yard this week confirmed the existence of the notes in Britain,
saying they were an international problem and did not appear to have been
produced in Britain.
When similar high-quality forgeries surfaced in Egypt in December, it was
suspected that they might have origiEast. The US Treasury Department's
secret service representative in Britain said there was a continuing
investigation into the 'super-dollar'.
In Washington a US Treasury official said the distribution of some series of
notes had been traced back as far as Middle East terrorist groups, but they
might not be producing the forgeries themselves. Tho-mas Cook Travel said
staff at its foreign exchange bureaux first spotted the 'super-dollars'
about a year ago.
Their suspicions were aroused by a 'gut feeling' based on experience of
handling thousands of notes rather than relying on the signs that normally
give away counterfeits - fuzzy printing, paper quality or the lack of
watermarks. Mr Charles Black, an expert former counterfeiter who is
consulted by the police on new finds and has been shown a sample of the
'super-dollar', said: 'It looked identical to the real thing.'
The forgers had reproduced all the dollar's security features including
small red and blue fibres in the paper, magnetic ink and ultra-violet dull
paper. The US dollar is the most frequently counterfeited currency
worldwide. A US embassy official in Paris said: 'Our currency really only
involves two colours. Its popularity as well as the lack of more colours and
the lack of additional security features is the reason why it tends to be
popular with counterfeiters.'
The Dollars 100 bill in particular is the object of forgers' efforts. 'In
some American states Dollars 100 notes are not very easily spent, and yet
over here they seem to be one of the most common dollar notes,' said
Superintendent Chris Newman of Scotland Yard's counterfeiting squad.
He advised anybody with a suspect Dollars 100 bill to consult an expert at a
bank. Sophisticated and accessible new technology has been blamed for recent
increases in the amount of counterfeit currency in circulation leading to
more discoveries, such as a record quantity of forged Dutch banknotes seized
in London last week.
Mr Black said forgery had become 'a thousand times easier' with the advent
of high-definition four-colour photocopiers. The IRA is thought to use
colour photocopiers to forge tax exemption certificates which are used to
defraud the Inland Revenue, and it may also be involved in currency
counterfeiting.
To combat the rise in counterfeiting, many countries have been introducing
notes with design changes intended to deter forgers. An improved Dollars 100
bill with a polyester security thread and microscopic printing was launched
last summer, but it will not come into full circulation for a number of
years.
