FT  13 FEB 92 / Old Masters give market new life: Saleroom
'PORTRAIT of a Lady with a Pet Squirrel and a Starling', painted in London
in the 1530s by the Flemish master Hans Holbein, is to be sold at Christie's
in London on April 15.
The auction house is reluctant to quote an estimate for such an exceptional
work but bids in excess of Pounds 15m are expected.
The highest price secured in the UK for an Old Master painting is the Pounds
8.1m paid by the Getty Museum of Malibu at Christie's in 1985 for Mantegna's
'The Adoration of the Magi'.
According to the Hon Charles Allsopp, chairman of Christie's Europe, the
Holbein is 'the most exciting picture to come on to the market here since
Van Gogh's 'Sunflowers' in 1987 and by far the best Old Master picture to
have been offered since Velazquez's 'Portrait of Juan de Pareja' in 1970.'
In the same sale, which is to be held in April, Christie's will also offer
'Daniel and Cyrus before the Idol of Bel' by Rembrandt, which might make at
least Pounds 8m, and 'The Old Horse Guards London from St James's Park' by
Canaletto, which should attract bids of about Pounds 5m.
The arrival on the market of three such important paintings puts impossible
stress on the rickety barriers which attempt to maintain the UK's national
heritage. The Rembrandt and the Canaletto were offered for sale to the
National Gallery but the gallery has an annual purchasing grant of just
Pounds 2.75m, which has been frozen for 10 years.
The total purchasing grants of the nationally financed museums amount to
Pounds 8.47m. The National Heritage Fund, which has an annual grant of
Pounds 12m, is unwilling to commit all its resources to retain perhaps just
one of these paintings.
The Holbein was not offered to the National Gallery. It is owned by Lord
Cholmondeley who wants the highest possible price from the open market.
Mr Neil MacGregor, director of the National Gallery, said yesterday: 'The
'Lady with a Squirrel' is one of the greatest of Holbein's works of this
kind. Its retention in this country is therefore of great importance.
'Only a generous change of heart from Lord Cholmondeley can now bring
matters to a happy conclusion.'
Lord Cholmondeley says he needs the money to maintain the two large houses
that he recently inherited - Cholmondeley Castle in Cheshire and Houghton in
Norfolk. He has just received a Pounds 1m estimate for the cost of repairing
drains and piping at Houghton.
'Daniel and Cyrus' is tiny - 23.4cm by 40.1cm  - but it has been passed as a
genuine Rembrandt by the experts who are re-attributing about half the
artist's work to his followers. It belongs to the Eliot family of Port
Eliot, Cornwall.
The Canaletto, like the other two paintings, has never appeared on the
market. It was bought by the Earl of Radnor from the artist in 1749 and has
passed down through inheritance.
It may not be coincidence that the three paintings have come up for sale at
the same time.
Owners of valuable works of art face two threats - the possibility of a
high-taxing Labour government and the proposals by Mr Tim Renton, minister
for the arts, to draw up a list of national treasures that cannot leave the
country. The Holbein and the Rembrandt would certainly be on the list.
It is now up to Mr Renton to find extra funds or to see the three
masterpieces almost certainly sold to foreign bidders. Ironically, the
Canaletto must have been painted from just about the site of Mr Renton's
office.
