FT  23 JAN 92 / Mexico gambles on parity with dollar: Some fear Aspe is
courting disaster with his exchange rate policy
THE finance ministers of Chile and Mexico, the countries that have pioneered
Latin America's free market reforms, agree on much when they meet. But
Chile's Alejandro Foxley thinks Pedro Aspe is courting disaster with his
exchange rate policy.
If the Chilean is right, and the Mexican is wrong, there will be important
consequences not only for Mexico's economy but also for Mr Aspe's political
future. For the 41-year-old minister is viewed as one of the men most likely
to succeed Mexican President Carlos Salinas in 1994.
Mr Aspe wants to move the Mexican peso to parity with the US dollar, perhaps
within a year. At the end of 1991, he halved the rate of devaluation of the
peso to a nominal 2.4 per cent a year. With Mexican inflation last year of
18 per cent, against 4 per cent and falling in the US, that appears to
translate into a damaging loss of competitiveness for Mexico's exports.
The current account numbers may also suggest caution for a policy that
implies real appreciation of the Mexican currency. The deficit rose to more
than Dollars 11bn last year from just over Dollars 5bn in 1990, and will
rise further this year, some forecasts suggest to Dollars 15bn.
Yet Mr Aspe, interviewed yesterday in London, appeared as sure as ever.
Reducing peso depreciation bears down on inflation, the reduction of which
is a top priority, and enhances investor confidence.
He says the growing current account deficit causes him no undue stress.
Non-oil exports continue to grow at a healthy three or four times the rate
of growth of the economy, which last year was 4.5 per cent.
Meanwhile, consumption has not played a large part in growth of imports,
thanks in part to falls in food purchases from abroad. This has been due
more to three years of good rain than any improvement in Mexico's low farm
productivity, for which problem the administration has a longer-term plan
including a dramatic constitutional reform.
Mr Aspe says the current account gap is largely because heavy investment has
led to a sharp expansion of capital goods imports. As Volkswagen,
Mercedes-Benz and Nissan tool up to produce cars in Mexico, they initially
import machine tools. The current account thus deteriorates, before it
improves as exports begin.
The corollary of the current account deficit is large inflows of capital.
There is no government financing need, because it is running a budget
surplus equivalent to 0.8 per cent of GDP, even before substantial
privatisation receipts have been taken into account. (Privatisation receipts
are used to cancel its domestic debt.)
The capital inflows are thus entirely a private sector phenomenon which  -
unlike in Britain in the mid-1980s, when a similar claim was made - are
going mainly to finance increases in investment, rather than increases in
consumption or purchases of assets at inflated prices.
Because the inflows inflate the money supply, they have been offset by the
central bank's open market operations (the sale of securities to soak up
money) and by selling state assets. If Mr Aspe's privatisations go according
to schedule, 'in 1993, I'll not have enough assets to sell,' he says.
If the minister's forecast for inflation is correct - he expects it to drop
just below 10 per cent this year - then his policy also implies a negligible
loss of competitiveness. The inflation differential between the US and
Mexico will be about 7 percentage points, of which 3 per cent will be offset
by the peso devaluation, and a further 3 per cent by Mexican productivity
growth - if, as expected, it follows the pattern of the last two years.
The big problems arise if Mr Aspe is too sanguine about inflation, and the
key to that is the level of wage settlements in the Mexican economy. The
government has, of course, significant influence over public sector wage
settlements, which have started the year at around 15 per cent. He expects
they will be down to 12 per cent by March and on track for his inflation
target.
But he has little power to guide the fast-growing private sector. He says
the first indications this year from the private sector are positive,
suggesting settlements averaging 12 per cent. But it is early days.
In his doctoral thesis at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Mr Aspe
wrote that it was tougher to get inflation down from 20 per cent to 5 per
cent, than from 1,000 per cent to 20 per cent. 'I still think it's true,' he
said yesterday. He is about to find out how tough.
