FT  12 SEP 92 / Arts: Mixture of the routine and the very fine - Recordings
of 20th century music by Boulez and others
Debussy: Images, Prelude a l'apres-midi d'un faune, Printemps. Cleveland
Orchestra/Boulez. Deutsche Grammophon 435 766-2.
Stravinsky: Petrushka, Le Sacre du printemps. Cleveland Orchestra/Boulez.
Deutsche Grammophon 435 769-2.
Stravinsky: Le Rossignol. Bryn-Julson, Palmer, Laurence, George, Caley,
Howlett, Tomlinson, BBC Singers &amp; Symphony Orchestra/Boulez. Erato
2292-45627-2.
Stravinsky: Le Sacre du printemps, Persephone. Fournet, Rolfe-Johnson,
London Philharmonic/Nagano. VCK 7 91511-2 (two CDs).
Stravinsky: Oedipus rex. Cole, von Otter, Estes, Sotin, Gedda, Chereau,
Swedish Radio Symphony/Salonen. Sony SK 48 057.
PIERRE BOULEZ relinquished his post as director of IRCAM in Paris at the end
of last year to concentrate on his composing and conducting. In the long
term, one may hope that there will much more of the former than the latter,
but at any rate the first fruits of his return to the concert hall and
recording studio are now appearing. The two releases for Deutsche Grammophon
mark the start of what is promised as a long-term and substantial
association, during which he will re-record much of his repertory.
In the 1960s, Boulez began to put on record for CBS the 20th-century works
with which he had made his reputation as a conductor. Those performances of
Debussy, Stravinsky, Bartok and the Second Viennese School set new standards
of clarity and structural integrity which have influenced interpreters ever
since.
As Boulez has seemed to mellow in the past two decades, he has added more
flexibility and natural expression to his conducting. Anyone who heard his
performances of Pelleas et Melisande for Welsh National Opera earlier this
year will have heard how much warmth he can now bring to that score, without
sacrificing any of his rigour or lucidity.
The new discs of Debussy and Stravinsky with the Cleveland Orchestra offer
the first evidence of this new breadth. The opening of 'Gigues' in the
orchestral Images is magically done, with string textures exactly graded,
woodwind figures etched sharp against them and each paragraph individually
shaped. It is a ravishing performance; the triptych of 'Iberia' sparkles
with rhythmic life, 'Rondes de printemps' presents a kaleidoscope of
changing orchestral colours. But the Prelude a l'apres-midi is disappointing
 -stiffly jointed, unrhapsodic, rather conventional in its articulation and
unsensuous in a way that even Boulez's 1960s version managed to avoid.
The same mixture of the routine and the exceptionally fine pervades the
Stravinsky disc. Petrushka opens tepidly indeed, with only the occasional
flashes of rhythmic assertiveness to a give a hint of its conductor and
though it gains gradually in vitality, there is something over-civilised
about it all, despite the responsiveness and the drive. Le Sacre, though,
does deliver the goods in the end. Boulez is an old hand at delineating its
instrumental strands, precisely pointing its accents. He still makes the
second half of the work more monumental and remorseless than any other
conductor, and no one drives the final pages home with such savagery.
There are no weaknesses either in his new account of The Nightingale, the
conte lyrique in three short acts, which Stravinsky began in 1908 but did
not finish until 1913, the year of Le Sacre. It is a work Boulez has
conducted in London several times but never before on record and he offers
here a perfect balance between analytical exactitude and fairy-tale
enchantment, relishing each of its virtuoso orchestral effects (derived in
equal measure from Rimsky and Debussy) and bringing every episode to vivid
life. The text is sung in the original Russian (though the accompanying
tri-lingual booklet never reveals the fact) and the cast is led by Phyllis
Bryn-Julson's limpid, ecstatic Nightingale.
For Stravinsky from a conductor whose generation must have profited
enormously from Boulez's example, Virgin Classics' bargain set is thoroughly
recommendable too. For the cost of a single full-price CD, one gets a
thoroughly worthwhile performance of Le Sacre, couched in Kent Nagano's
characteristically lithe, perceptive terms and most efficiently played by
the LPO, and an altogether outstanding account of the melodrama Persephone,
which seems more and more to be one of the supreme masterpieces of
Stravinsky's neoclassical period.
In terms of recording and performance, this is by a long way the best
version in the catalogue, graced by Anthony Rolfe-Johnson's beautifully
polished singing, and Anne Fournet's impassioned narration; the playing of
the LPO and of its solo woodwind especially is exemplary.
Esa-Pekka Salonen's Stravinsky series for Sony has contained some fine
performances, though his Oedipus rex is not one of the best instalments.
Vinson Cole's Oedipus is rather tiresome and Simon Estes' s Creon laboured,
but is well worth hearing for Anne-Sofie von Otter's meltingly seductive
Jocasta, the collector's curiosity of Nicola Gedda's Shepherd (a bit
effortful in all honesty) and Patrice Chereau's exemplary narration,
perfectly judged and unaffected.
Salonen is at his most disciplined in Stravinsky, and the playing of the
Swedish orchestra and chorus are kept on a tight rein. Somehow, though, the
remorseless terror of the piece just eludes him.
