FT  29 MAY 92 / World Trade News: Greek exporters take to the sea, air and
narrow road - War in what was Yugoslavia, means finding new routes to
European Community markets
FOR GREEK exporters, war in the former Yugoslavia already means higher
transport costs, fear of goods being hijacked and, for producers of oranges
and cucumbers, a sizeable loss of business.
International sanctions against Serbia are likely to pose further problems
for Greek trade with the European Community, which last year accounted for
two-thirds of total trade worth Dollars 25.8bn (Pounds 14.5bn).
Until last summer, around 40 per cent of Greece's trade with its EC partners
passed through Macedonia and Serbia. In the past 10 months, road haulage
traffic through the northern Greek border has dropped by half, while trains
to Belgrade and Munich no longer run regularly.
Customs officials say that between 100 and 150 international long-distance
TIR trucks used to cross the Yugoslav and Bulgarian borders every day. Now
fewer than 70 go through. Most drivers prefer to take a slow two-lane road
through Bulgaria rather than the Belgrade highway.
Greek exporters and freight forwarders are spending time and ingenuity
devising alternate routes to western Europe that avoid Serbia.
Agreement was reached earlier this year on a new rail route to Austria
through Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary. But problems of time-keeping and
theft still loom large, says Mr Kriton Ioannides of Proodos, a Greek freight
forwarder.
'Quality was lacking: not enough locomotives were available in Romania to be
sure of keeping to schedule; rail freight theft is a problem in all east
Europe countries,' he explains.
Proodos, which imports white goods and cars by rail and exports fruit and
vegetables, organised special trains to travel non-stop between Austria and
Greece with an armed escort aboard.
'We had the train put together at the Austrian border and made sure that, if
it stopped, it would be at a small station where the guards wouldn't be
attacked,' Mr Ioannides said.
Trains can reach Greece in 35 hours, the time taken on the old rail route
through Croatia and Slovenia. Mr Ioannides says higher costs are not enough
to deter traders if it becomes impossible to transit Serbia.
Trucks now take a more expensive time-consuming route, using ferries to
Italy from western Greek ports. But costs are up to 30 per cent higher for
manufactured goods and up to 90 per cent higher for fresh fruit and
vegetables at times when the bulk of a crop becomes available.
At peak points in the season, especially summer when tourists' cars compete
for space with trucks carrying grapes or peaches, not enough ferries are
available.
Also, the small western Greek ports are not equipped to handle large numbers
of TIR trucks. An Igoumenitsa harbour official said: 'Even in January it was
chaos here when the oranges were leaving. We don't have parking space for
more than a handful of 20-tonne trucks.'
Agricultural produce accounts for more than 20 per cent of Greek exports,
with fresh fruit and vegetables the highest earners. But, last winter,
orange exports to the EC fell by 38 per cent to 87,500 tonnes, according to
Incofruit, the exporters' association.
Cucumber exports were down by 37 per cent to 29,700 tonnes. Exports of
oranges to eastern European countries rose by 22 per cent to 157,000 tonnes,
but overall fruit and vegetable earnings still declined to Dollars 352m for
the 1991-92 season, a 6 per cent fall from the previous year.
Mr George Polychronidis, director of Incofruit, estimates that exports of
oranges and cucumbers would have been 20 per cent higher if access to EC
markets had been easier:
'We lost market share in the EC both because of higher transport costs and
poorer quality because the produce was on the road an extra 24 hours. Sales
to eastern Europe can't compensate because prices are much lower and the
market is still very unstable.'
Bumper harvests of cherries and peaches were expected this year, but these
were too expensive to find markets easily in eastern Europe.
Exporters on the island of Crete, which accounts for more than 50 per cent
of Greek fruit and vegetable exports, are planning for the first time to
air-freight produce, aboard charter flights taking European tourists home
from holidays.
After years of resistance to similar proposals, the Greek ministry of
transport last week agreed that tourist charter jets could carry a limited
amount of cargo.
A report by the Chamber of Commerce in Heraklion, Crete's principal town,
estimates that up to 750 tonnes of fruit and vegetables could be shipped
each week to cities in Britain, the Netherlands and Germany.
'Air freight costs twice as much as road and ferry. But we think this can be
covered by the extra value of fruit marketed within a few hours of being
picked,' a Chamber official said.
