FT  02 JUN 92 / Slovak populist shakes the federalist foundation: Word
'independence' is avoided, but rhetoric is unambiguous
STANDING in the medieval square of the small town of Banska Stvianica in
central Slovakia, Mr Vladimir Meciar, the most popular politician in the
republic, works the crowd with the well-trained techniques he learned in his
boxing career.
His large silhouette positioned beneath the statue of Saint Sebastian, he
answers written questions allegedly gathered from the crowd. In
well-prepared verbal blows, Mr Meciar displays his wit as he blends
political slogans with well-timed jokes about his enemies.
An expected winner in Friday's elections for the regional republic's
parliament, the Slovak National Council, he knows when to strike. Since
joining the opposition in the assembly after a spell as regional prime
minister a year ago, his popularity increased in parallel with the growth of
nationalism in Slovakia, the smaller of the two republics in the
Czechoslovak federation.
With an average 30 per cent support in the opinion polls for his party, the
Movement for a Democratic Slovakia, and support from other smaller parties,
he represents the greatest threat facing the federation since the demise of
communism.
The party's programme calls on the Slovak parliament to declare the
republic's sovereignty. He has also promised to push through a constitution
which would take precedence over the federal one. He says that a referendum
would then be put 'if the Czechs and Slovaks continue to disagree'.
Representatives of the Czech and Slovak governments have been unable to
agree a post-communist relationship. As negotiations continued to fail and
Slovakia's unemployment rate soared to three times that of neighbouring
Czech lands, nationalists fuelled the growing resentment against the federal
government.
The Movement for a Democratic Slovakia receives between 25 and 34 per cent
in the various opinion polls, but his policies also have the backing of
other parties with which he might be able to construct a parliamentary
majority. Moreover, together they could put together a strong bloc in the
federal parliament in partnership with the Czech republic's left-wing
parties. Right-wing politicians have warned in Prague that his victory could
herald the end of a workable federal parliament.
Mr Meciar's calls for increased state subsidies for ailing enterprises has
won the support of the Democratic Left Party, the renamed communist party,
which, while allegedly pro-federation, is calling for greater state
intervention in the transition to a free market. Led by a charismatic and
relatively young man, Mr Petr Weiss, it gets about 12 per cent in the polls.
His party is also supported by smaller, but equally nationalist parties, in
Slovakia, such as the Slovak National Party, the only party to call openly
for independence. It has an estimated 10 per cent support in the Slovak
population.
Careful to avoid the word 'independence,' Mr Meciar talks about 'increased
autonomy.' Polls show that only a small minority wants outright
independence. Still, the rhetoric is unambiguous: 'If we want to be the
equal of other countries in Europe,' he told his Banska Stvianica rally, 'we
have to join it as separate state. Slovakia must have its own legal status
in Europe. We must be able to take decisions by ourselves and with our own
money.'
President Havel, after a recent meeting with Mr Meciar, warned of 'dangerous
ideas about the possibility of dissolving the common state from above and
constituting fully independent republics. . . . then tied in a vague dualist
union.' Speaking at the opening of his own electoral campaign, Mr Havel
stressed that this would lead 'to nothing but a chaotic break-up of the
state'.
