FT  15 FEB 92 / US Democrats target high earners
DEMOCRATIC leaders in the US Congress are taking aim at excessive executive
pay packets with a proposal to apply stiffer tax disincentives to companies
which pay their managers more than Dollars 1m a year.
Their proposal raises the stakes in a debate that has sharpened recently,
and caps a move earlier this week by the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) to allow shareholders to exert more pressure over the pay scales of
company executives.
The pay curb is expected to provide ammunition for the Democrats in their
battle with President George Bush over what package of tax measures would be
most helpful to the weak US economy.
Democrats are seeking to pull him into a debate on tax fairness, contrasting
their efforts to cut taxes on middle income families with the limited tax
bill he supports. The principal measure of that Republican bill is a capital
gains tax cut the benefits of which would go mainly to the wealthy, and
which excludes the middle income tax break Mr Bush suggested in last month's
State of the Union speech.
The Democrats' argument won support yesterday from Mr Pat Buchanan, Mr
Bush's right-wing challenger in next week's Republican primary in New
Hampshire. 'In retrospect, Mr Bush's State of the Union address appears to
have been a giant political scam to hoodwink New Hampshire voters into
believing George Bush favours tax cuts for working people,' he said.
The President's advisers yesterday implicitly acknowledged that they may
have positioned themselves badly on the tax issue. Mr Marlin Fitzwater, the
White House spokesman, dubbed as 'weasels' the Democratic members of the
House of Representatives' ways and means committee, which plays the key role
in tax legislation, and complained that Mr Dan Rostenkowski, the committee's
chairman, had 'set us up'.
The Democrats' pay proposal would rule that executive pay above Dollars 1m
would no longer be an allowable expense, so companies could not deduct it
from taxable income.
This is expected to raise Dollars 1.9bn of extra revenue over the next six
years, contributing to Dollars 71bn of new revenue measures - principally a
new top personal income tax rate of 35 per cent. These would finance several
tax cuts, including a Dollars 200 per person social security tax credit and
a one percentage point reduction in the corporate income tax rate to 33 per
cent.
