FT  25 MAR 92 / Bank moves to calm nervous money markets
THE Bank of England has acted to calm nervousness in the money markets about
the possibility of a rise in base rates after the general election.
Its efforts were rewarded yesterday when the three-month interbank rate,
which shadows base rates, closed a fraction lower, indicating the market's
view that the likelihood of an early rise in base rates had diminished.
Nevertheless fears remain in the markets that the new government may be
forced to increase base rates to stop sterling slipping beneath its limit in
the European exchange rate mechanism. The worry has been driven by market
speculation that Labour has a good chance of forming the next government.
Another possibility is a coalition of Labour and the Liberal Democrats.
One theory in the markets is that either development would lead to nervous
international investors switching funds out of sterling. As a result, the
new administration might have to increase base rates.
In its routine activities in distributing money to the banking system, the
Bank has attempted to damp speculation about a possible rate rise by handing
out relatively large amounts of money early in the working day. Such
measures have the effect of steering the market to lower rates.
Yesterday, the Bank offered Pounds 709m to the banking system in exchange
for bills in the morning out of a total shortage predicted for the day of
Pounds 750m. Partly because of this, the three-month rate eased by a
sixteenth of a percentage point to close at about 10 3/4 per cent.
Before yesterday's operations, the three-month rate had risen by about three
eighths of a percentage point in three weeks.
The market's anxieties about a rate rise have been focused on the period
after the election, since an increase before that is considered highly
unlikely. Should sterling come under strain in the ERM ahead of the poll,
the Treasury would probably authorise the Bank to intervene on currency
markets to increase its value.
LARGE British companies improved their liquidity in the fourth quarter of
last year, pointing towards modest growth in the second half of this year.
Figures from the Central Statistical Office yesterday showed that the
liquidity ratio of big industrial and commercial companies improved to 124
per cent in the fourth quarter of last year from 118 per cent in the third
quarter. The recent figures were well above a low of 61 per cent in the
third quarter of 1990.
The ratio measures current assets maturing in less than a year as a share of
liabilities that have to be repaid in less than a year. It gives an
indication of the ability of businesses to find short-term funds.
