FT  31 DEC 92 / Slovaks fear a grim awakening after the party: Vincent
Boland tests opinions of independence in the town of Cadca
LIKE A hundred other towns in Slovakia tonight, Cadca is holding a party to
celebrate independence. There will be a ceremonial hoisting of the Slovak
flag, bells will toll at midnight, the new national anthem will be sung and
there will be fireworks in the town for the first time in 40 years.
The rockets and catharine wheels have been bought with some of the 25m
kopecs (Pounds 600,000) made available to the nation by the government in
Bratislava to celebrate the event. But the 25,000 people of this run-down,
polluted town in northern Slovakia are divided on independence.
Around 7,000 of Cadca's inhabitants board trains every morning to travel to
work at the steel mills in Ostrava, 90km away in the Czech republic. Their
journey tomorrow will take them across the world's newest frontier.
Ask the travellers if they will feel any difference and they shrug. Ask if
they fear any consequences and they remain silent. Then one man says yes, he
is 'afraid'. He is not quite able to say why. He gives a little embarrassed
laugh.
But there are signs pointing to potential areas of mutual misunderstanding.
Mr Ivan Krivcik, a young waiter, says he has visited Prague just twice in
his lifetime, but has been to Vienna, a short distance up the Danube from
Bratislava, five times. The break with the Czech republic will not mean a
lot to him. 'I have friends in Austria, Germany, even Britain, but I have no
friends in the Czech republic,' he says.
Ms Katarina Genzorova, who teaches at the technical school at Cadca, sees it
differently. She lived in Bohemia, the western province of the Czech
republic, for six years and has many friends there. 'It is sad and
unnecessary and it has upset me a lot,' she says.
Mr Miroslav Golis, director of the town's library, sums up what must be a
widespread feeling throughout Czechoslovakia today. 'We Slovaks will miss
the Czechs more than they will miss us,' he says wistfully. Mr Peter
Glasnak, mayor of Cadca and master of ceremonies tonight, has a theory to
explain the apparent indifference. 'In our society we always highlight the
mistakes, never the successes. That is our eternal science.'
He supports Mr Vladimir Meciar, the volatile, nationalist prime minister of
Slovakia, and the man who will enter the history books as the father of
Slovak independence. 'People like his personality. He tells them what they
want to hear,' he says without irony.
Telling people what they want to hear is Mr Meciar's most potent political
weapon. But if he wants an idea of the problems he will have to solve after
independence, he could do worse than visit Cadca. It is a town blighted by
years of impoverishment. It has no industries and a 20 per cent unemployment
rate, Mr Glasnak says. That is why over a quarter of its inhabitants take
the train to Ostrava every morning.
Not even the snow can hide the blight, which is made worse by clouds of
smoke and soot from the plant providing the town with central heating.
It is not a place for illusions. 'Tonight there will be a party,' Mr Glasnak
says. 'But in the morning we must wake up and realise there is a lot of work
to be done.'
Three years ago the Velvet Revolution came and went leaving little trace.
Now Year Zero for independent Slovakia begins at midnight and Cadca is
holding its breath.
