FT  20 MAR 92 / US breast implant maker to withdraw from market
THE WORLD'S largest maker of silicone breast implants plans to withdraw from
the business.
Dow Corning, a 50-50 joint venture between Dow Chemical and Corning based in
Michigan, also said yesterday that it would set up a Dollars 10m (Pounds
5.7m) fund for research and would offer up to Dollars 1,200 to women wishing
to have the implants surgically removed.
The business has been plagued by political controversy, lawsuits and US
congressional investigations.
In abandoning the market, Dow Corning follows two other companies that have
done the same. Bristol-Myers Squibb stopped making a different type of
implant last April and Bioplasty, a small company, withdrew last week. Two
other small US companies remain in the market: Mentor and McGhan Medical.
The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) placed a moratorium on silicone
implant sales in January after questions were raised about the product's
safety. Internal Dow Corning memos were released that are alleged to show
negligence by the company, a charge it denies.
An FDA ruling next month may place tight restrictions on the future sale of
the implants, some 80 per cent of which are used by women desiring cosmetic
surgery.
Dow Corning's decision nonetheless seems likely to spell the effective
phasing out of the US implant industry and could yet lead to some of the
largest product liability claims in recent history.
The company estimated that about 750,000 women around the world have Dow
Corning implants, which were introduced in 1962. The number of women in the
US is around 450,000. The actual number of implants made by Dow Corning is
1.3m.
Depending on how many women wish to take advantage of Dow Corning's offer of
Dollars 1,200 for surgical removal, the company could face costs of Dollars
900m or more. Dow Corning stressed that it would only reimburse women who
could not otherwise afford the surgery and whose doctors stated the
procedure was medically needed. The company has not decided how it will help
women outside the US pay for the removal of unwanted implants.
Dow Corning took a Dollars 25m charge in the fourth quarter of last year to
cover legal and other costs related to the implant controversy which
included the Dollars 10m research fund announced yesterday.
The company disclosed last week that it has Dollars 250m of insurance to
cover potential legal costs stemming from claims that the implants damaged
the health of patients.
But analysts say that the hundreds of lawsuits outstanding could create a
potential liability of more than Dollars 1bn - quite apart from the costs
related to surgical removal.
Corning is more reliant on implant revenues than Dow Chemical, and Corning's
share price has halved - to yesterday's Dollars 34 - since December.
In the UK, the government's chief medical officer Dr Kenneth Calman has
consistently reassured women about the safety of breast implants. He
maintains that they are not dangerous and do not carry an increased risk of
cancer.
However, most implants used in the UK are imported from the US. Therefore,
Dow Corning's withdrawal from the market will affect availability.
Dow Chemical charge, Page 27
