FT  10 APR 92 / International Bonds: Finland returns to market with Dollars
500m, five-year issue
FINLAND yesterday made a cautious return to the Eurodollar bond market
yesterday, although its plans were disrupted by an easing of US interest
rates and the unwillingness of investors to commit new funds to the market.
The Dollars 500m five-year issue was smaller and shorter in maturity than
many syndicate officials had anticipated. Earlier this week firms were
expecting a Dollars 1bn issue of between seven and 10-years.
Finland and Morgan Stanley International, which lead managed the issue, were
also cautious in pricing the deal. Initial price talk indicated a yield
spread of 40 to 43 basis points more than US Treasury paper, but this was
seen as too aggressive by many market participants.
The deal was launched yesterday morning at an indicated yield spread of 42
to 45 basis points over Treasuries, and priced in the afternoon at the
higher level.
Finland is rated AA2 by Moody's Investors Service and AA plus by Standard &amp;
Poor's, the two big US credit rating agencies. This is only one notch below
Norway, which has a Dollars 1bn five-year issue, launched last week, trading
at a yield spread of 27 basis points in the grey market.
Despite compromise over the issue amount, maturity and pricing, the deal
received a mixed response early in the day. Participants said investors
remained uncertain about the outlook for Finland's credit quality, following
measures to stabilise the markka last week.
In the afternoon the Eurodollar market was disrupted as the US authorities
moved to relax monetary conditions. US Treasury bonds at the five-year
maturity rallied by around  1/2 a point.
Although the lead manager said it was committed to holding the yield spread
at 45 basis points, the spread widened as Treasury bond yields fell.
By the close of trading in London only around half the issue was in the firm
hands of investors. The deal was quoted at 100.16, against a fixed re-offer
price of 99.675. The yield spread was around 50 basis points in a volatile
market.
Elsewhere, SNCF, the French state railway company, doubled the size of its
outstanding FFr3bn domestic/international hybrid bond issue maturing 2004.
Lead managers CCF and Credit Agricole offered FFr1.5bn bonds to
international investors yesterday, with the same amount allocated to
domestic institutions.
The 8.6 per cent paper was reoffered at a fixed price of 96.695, where the
yield is 9.06 per cent, in line with the yield available on the outstanding
bonds in the secondary market.
