FT  26 MAR 92 / Libya faces imminent UN sanctions vote
LIBYA last night faced the near certainty of UN Security Council-mandated
sanctions after Col Muammer Gadaffi's repudiation of an apparent deal to
surrender the alleged Lockerbie bombers.
British officials said they were confident that a resolution to impose
sanctions, including a ban on air links and arms sales, would pass by a
comfortable majority in the 15-member council.
Mr Diego Arria, of Venezuela, president of the Council, said he proposed
that there would be a formal debate on the issue tomorrow morning with
private consultations taking place today.
However, diplomats said the vote may await the initial stage of proceedings
brought by Libya against the US and Britain at the International Court of
Justice which open today at the Hague. Libya is where the two Lockerbie
suspects should stand trial, and an injunction barring the US and Britain
from pressing it to surrender the pair. The court's decision could take
weeks, but the US, Britain and France have said they would not await its
verdict before putting the sanctions resolution before the Security Council.
The three had deferred pressing for such a vote after an Arab League mission
visited Tripoli on Tuesday. There were suggestions Libya was prepared to
hand the two suspects to the League, which would in turn make them available
for trial in the US or Scotland. But the delegation reported on its return
to Cairo that Libya was prepared to turn them over only under conditions
unacceptable to Britain and the US.
Arab diplomats said that Col Gadaffi and Mr Abdel Salam Jalloud, his number
two, told the delegation that statements by Libya's ambassador to the UN
suggesting an unconditional handover of the Lockerbie suspects were
'inaccurate'.
Security Council members reacted with disappointment and even anger to the
repudiation of the deal, with UK officials branding it 'obfuscation and
prevarication'. Libya would be given 'a few days' to hand over the two men.
The US last night accused Libya of 'perfidy' in reneging on its offer to
surrender the alleged bombers. Mr Thomas Pickering, the US delegate at the
UN, said it was clear the Libyans were not about to hand over the accused
men to Britain or the US.
ABC news of the US, a television news service, and journalist Mr Pierre
Salinger were ordered yesterday by the High Court in London to hand over to
British police video footage and sound recordings of interviews with the two
Libyans charged in connection with the Lockerbie bombing, PA reports.
Two judges dismissed their challenge to a production order made at Middlesex
Crown Court under anti-terrorist laws earlier this month and gave them until
noon today to hand over the tapes.
ABC and Mr Salinger, its London-based chief foreign correspondent, had asked
the judges to quash the 'unlawful and unreasonable' order made by Judge
Clarkson on the grounds that it was too wide-ranging and they had not been
told the reasons relied on by Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist branch for
obtaining it.
Mr Salinger visited the two Lockerbie suspects, Abdel Basset Ali Al-Megrahi
and Lamen Khalifa Fhimah, in Libya shortly after they were indicted in the
US last November for an alleged conspiracy to blow up Pan Am flight 103 over
Lockerbie.
Mr Salinger warned the ruling could change ABC's policy on keeping material.
