FT  07 MAR 92 / Arts: A low-key labour of love shot from the hip - Screen /
Nigel Andrews talks to director Paul Schrader about his latest film
TO ANYONE who still remembers the Big Band sound there is only one
significant telephone number in New York. It is 'Pennsylvania 6-5-Oh-Oh-Oh'
and it belongs to the Penta Hotel, formerly the Statler Hilton. In this maze
of decayed inter-war glamour, where Glenn Miller's ghostly trumpets threaten
to purl forth in the lifts or lobby, film-maker Paul Schrader was recently
at work shooting his new film Light Sleeper. The man who created Taxi
Driver, American Gigolo and The Comfort Of Strangers had taken a sabbatical
from Hollywood to go native in New York, making a small-budget film with two
bright, idiosyncratic stars in Willem Dafoe (Platoon, The Last Temptation Of
Christ) and Susan Sarandon (Oscar-nominated for Thelma And Louise).
The hotel's faded glory tempts one as a metaphor for a stylish director now
going shoestring. But Schrader, when I visited the set, insisted he was
making the movie out of love and not because Hollywood has not offered him,
say, Evita. Fifty this year, he has sketched the story of a man in a
mid-life crisis: a drug courier (Dafoe) whose lady boss (Sarandon) has
decided to swap cocaine for cosmetics and go straight. Out of a job and out
on the street, Dafoe finds life further unsettled by police curiosity about
a girl drug addict's death.
'It's a film of the stripe of Taxi Driver,' says Schrader. 'It's about a guy
who 'drifts' from place to place and sees certain dangerous things and
events gradually conspire. He's 40 and he doesn't know what to do with his
life. He hasn't managed to do much at all up to this point.'
The story may not be directly autobiographical, but there are clearly
personal resonances. 'Take this guy in his twenties, he was very hostile and
paranoid.' (Like the hero of Taxi Driver). 'In his thirties he was very
narcissistic.' (Like the hero of American Gigolo). 'Now he's 40 and he's
very anxious. So the arc of character reflects the different feelings we
have as we get older.'
Schrader himself wrote the script, cast the movie and moved mountains to get
it financed. 'Again it's like Taxi Driver. That was a small personal film,
just Dollars 2m, which Marty Scorsese and Robert De Niro and I all felt
passionate about and made sacrifices to make. The only reason Light Sleeper
is low-budget is that nobody's getting paid. Most of us are on deferment.'
Even so, a Hollywood studio has to be persuaded to pitch in at some point.
How do you sell a low-key, idiomatic film in the age of Terminator 2? 'You
appeal to their (the studios') best interests financially] At one point on
this film I was Dollars 300,000 into it and still didn't have a bank loan.
But I was making it an attractive package. I'd pulled in good actors and got
them to defer their salaries and I'd set up the crew. It's basically the
Coppola Theory. If you go on saying you're making a movie long enough,
someone will believe you and give you the money]'
Schrader takes a break to shoot Susan Sarandon in a fetching red suit
running down a hotel corridor screaming 'Fire]' She does this six times for
the camera. After the last take the exhausted actress runs straight into an
FT microphone. 'This is the first film I've made since Thelma And Louise and
yes, it's about as far from Hollywood as you could get. (Puff pant). But I
prefer locations; there's more excitement. People are scrambling, they help
each other with their jobs, there's less demarcation. (Puff). Los Angeles
always feels like a 9 to 5 job. On location everyone surrenders to the
project.'
Willem Dafoe is less breathless even though he is about to film - is already
rehearsing - a climactic shoot-out. He came to Light Sleeper because he
liked Schrader's direct approach to making and setting up films. 'The story
just came straight out of him, he wrote it very fast and I love the idea of
shooting a film 'from the hip'. There's something very true about this
story's sense of time and place, it's not Hollywood-concocted.'
Back in Paul Schrader's 'trailer', the director is recuperating from the
first week's shooting. Since I'm the first foreign press-person to visit the
set, he has not yet polished his PR act. 'I haven't yet been asked what this
film is about,' he tells me disarmingly, 'so I haven't worked out an
answer.'
Schrader is more certain of what he and his cinema as a whole are about. 'I
suppose the directors who've influenced me would be Scorsese, Bertolucci,
Antonioni. But there are different role models one has as a film-maker and
for me the best is someone like Stanley Kubrick, who tries to 'reinvent the
wheel.' I don't have those ambitions, but I like to keep doing something
fresh, something people haven't seen in that light before. So my personal
model would be Kubrick rather than Hitchcock or Ford, people who keep mining
the same territory.
'But, you know, we're all Hollywood directors really. Even when we're
working on location in New York. Right now the people who used to be at the
top commercially like Disney are having a rough time. And a film-maker like
Spike Lee comes along and suddenly he's in style. For years everyone knew
that there was a 'black' market to be tapped and no one had either the
brains or the guts, or the astuteness, to get into it. Well, Spike got into
it his own way and on his own terms. Now he's brought up behind him a
half-dozen young directors and you have a fully-fleshed, very vibrant wing
of American film-making.
'So when you say 'Hollywood' that's an oddball term. To me Hollywood means
the American motion picture industry. And that means not just Sidney Pollack
and Steven Spielberg, it means David Lynch or Spike Lee. The same people,
the major studios, finance both. George Lucas of Star Wars said to me when
he heard I was going to make a low-budget film in New York, 'You're not
really a Hollywood director.' And I said, 'George, we're all Hollywood
directors. We're just different kinds]'
But how many older members of that breed - back to my earlier question  -
would be as ready as Schrader to trade the well-upholstered comforts of West
Coast filming for a tiny film noir on the East Coast?
At this Schrader gives me his most passionately argued answer of the day. I
get a free reprimand plus a free lecture on a movie style. ''Film noir' is
the most bandied phrase in cinema today. There is no such thing as modern
film noir. It's a historical period not a genre. Genres are things like
Westerns, gangster pictures, science fiction. Historical periods are things
like German Expressionism, Nouvelle Vague, film noir.
'Film noir came up after the war through a convergence of several
influences. The expatriate, Germanic influences in Hollywood; the sense of
let-down that many Americans felt after the war, when guys came home and
couldn't get work and their wives were more independent because they'd had
jobs, and many marriages broke up.
'It was a kind of dead-end backlash and it crept into cinema after the war.
And of course it was already percolating in hardboiled fiction. It was very
vibrant through the early 1950s, then it gradually died out with the new
affluence and the rise of television and colour photography. So yes, film
noir was an important chapter in American cinema. But you can't repeat it.
If we're making movies about anxiety or loneliness or personal crisis today,
they're our own movies. They're not films noirs, they're a group that may be
just as unified but different. Perhaps years hence someone will come up with
a new phrase to describe them.'
Suggestions, please. Meanwhile Light Sleeper opens in Britain on March 13.
