FT  29 AUG 92 / Independent Schools - FT 500: Day single-sex schools take
top slots / Analysis of a survey of this year's A-level results in private
schools in England and Wales
WESTMINSTER School, the London day and boarding school, tops the second
FT-500 survey of A-level results from independent schools in England and
Wales. Westminster has girls in the sixth form and is one of Britain's
oldest public schools.
It is not, however, a typical top school. Most of the top 50 are single-sex
city day schools, many of them former direct-grant schools which were part
of the state system until the mid-1970s. Only one of the top 50 - The King's
School, Canterbury - is fully co-educational throughout the school. In all,
nearly three-quarters of the top 100 are predominantly day schools, and more
than nine-tenths are single-sex, though some of those are boys schools with
girls in the sixth form.
Many leading public schools performed better this year than last. Excluding
general studies from last year's results, Cheltenham Ladies College is up
from 32nd to 12th, Malvern Girls' College from 52nd to 15th, and Harrow from
82nd to 43rd. (The positions are not fully comparable because a different
ranking methodology was used last year).
Yet famous names still languish far below: Rugby at 106th, Haileybury at
109th, Repton at 110th, Marlborough at 85th, Clifton at 152nd and Lancing at
179th. Boarding schools are finding life particularly tough going, with
boarding numbers down 10 per cent in the last three years alone.
Significantly, more than 60 per cent of Westminster's pupils are now day
only. None of the old public boarding schools is as favourably sited to make
the transition.
The results for the survey were supplied by the Independent Schools
Information Service. They include all A and AS levels sat this summer,
excluding general studies. Schools with fewer than 10 pupils entered for
examinations have been excluded. Including them, Princess Helena College,
Hitchin, with two A-level candidates, came out second.
AS-levels comprise about half the workload of an A-level. They are intended
to enable schools to broaden their curriculum, and are used by the
government as a reason for not reforming England's extraordinarily narrow
A-level curriculum. In fact, the results show them to be largely ignored by
the independent sector: most schools recorded only a handful, if any, AS
results.
The exclusion by ISIS of general studies will cause some controversy. For a
number of schools, particularly in the north, general studies is a taught
subject; but for many it is a non-taught extra A-level, while a large number
of top-notch schools do not do it at all, so its inclusion only creates
distortion. The guide to the tables explains the columns. A special feature
is an FT score giving the position of each school on a 21 to 100 scale, with
100 representing the top-performing school and 21 the bottom school.
This scale is an important counter to the 'raw' ranking of each school from
1 to 479, given in the left-hand column. On any measure of exam results,
about 25 schools stand out at the top. There is an equally evident rump of
about 50 schools at the bottom. In between, however, the gap separating each
school is tiny, with most schools scaled at between 50 and 80. In all, some
90 schools have an FT score of between 70 and 80, all of which produce a
typical three A-level profile of grades BBC, give or take a little. About
another 130 have an FT ranking of between 60 and 70, implying a typical
A-level profile of CCC.
Prospective parents should, therefore, beware of reading too much into the
raw ranking, even if A-level results are their main concern. They should
also look at the performance of the best of the state sector in their
locality, which may turn out to be at least as good. In October the FT
intends to publish a comprehensive national guide to schools across the two
sectors, not restricted to the top few hundred.
Exam results are emphatically not the 'be all and end all' of a school's
achievement. Nor are they the only, or even necessarily the main, factor
that parents should consider when choosing a school. Says Mr David Woodhead,
director of ISIS: 'We always advise parents that exam results illustrate
only one aspect of a school's success and should be seen in the context of
everything else a school does.'
The selection policy of schools varies widely and needs to be taken into
account, though it is a fallacy of those opposed to publishing 'raw'
information that league tables reveal nothing but selectivity. As to value
added, parents should make their own judgement from visiting the school.
There is no adequate numerical measure: assessing progress from GCSE to
A-level, the current fashion, simply begs the question of the progress a
pupil has made to GCSE - usually in the same school - in the first place.
Many schools not even ranking in the table deservedly have excellent
reputations. Sibford School in Oxfordshire, for instance, is well known for
the quality of the vocational studies in its sixth form. Its staple diet is
the City and Guilds diploma in vocational education and it offers only a few
traditional A-level courses. 'We do not select on academic ability, beyond
basic competence, and nobody comes here to do three A-levels,' says Mr John
Dunston, Sibford's headmaster. 'But there is a growing demand for what we
do. It would be greater still if hidden barriers against vocational courses
could be broken down.'
The FT-500 survey shows little direct relationship between fees and results.
Westminster charges annual fees for day pupils of Pounds 7,575 a year.
Winchester, second in both this and last years' surveys, charges Pounds
8,775 a year. By contrast, most of the old city grammar schools in the top
fifty - Portsmouth, Bradford, Leeds High, St Albans High, Loughborough High,
Guildford, the two at Chester - charge between Pounds 3,500 and Pounds 4,500
a year; and most award around a third of their places on bursaries or
through the government's assisted places scheme. A school's physical
facilities generally have more to do with the wealth of its foundation than
the scale of its fees - only the prospectus or a visit will reveal them.
King Edward's, Birmingham, ranked 4th in the survey, makes the point
forcefully. Its fees are around Pounds 4,000 a year. About 40 per cent of
its pupils go on to Oxbridge each year. A similar proportion are financially
assisted to a greater or lesser extent, with a third of its total entry
subsidised by the assisted places scheme. Yet the school is just completing
a Pounds 2m capital investment programme, providing a new swimming pool, a
design centre, and refurbished laboratories. Half of the Pounds 2m came from
local businesses and much of the rest in loans from the wealthy Kings
Edward's foundation.
King Edward's also highlights complications on the 'single sex' front. Mr
Hugh Wright, the school's headmaster, claims to be a 'firm supporter' of
co-education. But, he says, 'it is simply not necessary here in Birmingham,
because we are one of two schools on the same site, working in partnership
and close proximity with King Edward VI High School for Girls.' The two
schools share the same governing body, and undertake a wide range of
activities in partnership.
Such 'twinning' is common with city grammar schools - Bolton, Oldham,
Chester and Guildford have a similar arrangement, to name but four. It is
proving an attractive model for the traditional public schools too. This
term Malvern College and Malvern Girls College come together on a single
site, together with a local prep school. 'It was a straight response to
market forces,' says Mr Roy de C. Chapman, the headmaster. Forest School in
south London has done much the same.
'Market forces' are not new to the independent sector. But they are
altogether more bracing than hitherto. It is not just league tables and the
recession. The state sector is coming to pose a stronger challenge than at
any time since the end of direct-grant, with the national curriculum, a new
emphasis on achievement, and liberation from town hall bureaucracy acting as
driving forces. Parents want more than an old school tie for Pounds 8,000 a
year.
