FT  12 MAY 92 / BBC details open-market scheme for its services
THE BBC yesterday acted to expose all its services to competition and the
open market - a process that might lead to the loss of several thousand
staff jobs.
The corporation issued to staff detailed guidelines on how Producer Choice -
the system of giving programme producers the freedom to buy services such as
camera crews, design, make-up or even studios outside the BBC - will work.
The introduction of the open market, which should be in full operation in a
year, is designed to make more money available for programmes.
It is also one of the most potentially revolutionary changes in the way the
BBC is run.
Mr Will Wyatt, managing director of BBC Television and a member of a
resources committee that recommended the move to an open market, said: 'The
aim is to compare costs (with the independent production sector), make costs
transparent and reveal the full costs of the organisation.'
Under the scheme, programme production departments and departments offering
production services will become business units trading on a full-cost basis
with prices 'a matter for negotiation between buyer and seller'.
The scheme applies to the BBC's television and radio network, regional
broadcasting and news and current affairs.
Sir Michael Checkland, BBC director-general, warned last August that by the
end of next year there would be 3,000 fewer staff jobs, partly because of
initiatives such as Producer Choice and partly because of the move to 25 per
cent independent production.
Mr Tony Lennon, president of the Bectu broadcasting union, said yesterday
that the issuing of the guidelines 'has finally confirmed that the entire
BBC support services and transmission will be moving to self-funding within
an internal market or go bust'.
Mr Lennon, whose union is holding an eight-hour strike on Friday as a
protest against Producer Choice, added: 'This will turn the BBC into a
tented army of autonomous business units.'
Under the scheme, the aim of each business unit will be to break even rather
than make a profit and, at least to begin with, neither surpluses nor
deficits will be carried forward from one financial year to the next.
There will be a management assessment of any unit's failure to break even.
Achieving break-even will then be expected the following year.
'Decisions to keep open a business unit which cannot achieve break-even can
only be made by the board of management,' the guidelines warn.
All the new units will have to pay the market value of property occupied to
encourage cuts in accommodation, meet charges for working capital and
equipment and pay their share of overheads.
Mr Michael Starks, Producer Choice project director and a former head of
resources in BBC Radio, said yesterday that he believed the new system would
be 'quite a strong, powerful engine for putting pressure on the (BBC
bureaucracy'.
Considerable effort is also being made to train staff in more
market-oriented disciplines. By the end of this year nearly 2,000 will have
attended Producer Choice workshops or training courses.
The first evidence of the operation of Producer Choice, introduced in the
film department in April last year, suggests that jobs will be lost, but
that there will not be a total stampede to the outside market. Out of 53
film crews in the department before Producer Choice, 13 have gone.
Mr Wyatt said opening the BBC to market forces would make available a choice
producers had long sought. It would also offer 'demonstrable efficiency'
before renegotiation of the BBC's charter at the end of 1996.
