FT  28 NOV 92 / Living with a legacy: Minorities in Germany face renewed
hostility
Mr Ignatz Bubis, chief spokesman of the small Jewish community in Germany,
does not believe that he needs any special security measures at his home or
office in Frankfurt.
Yet he has closed-circuit television screens in his offices, and a heavy
metal barrier guarding his front door. 'I don't think it is necessary, but
the police insist that I take precautions,' he says.
Over the years, he has received a steady flow of anti-Semitic letters, being
a prominent member of the community, of a political party (the liberal Free
Democrats) and a prosperous businessman, but recently they have changed.
'They always used to be anonymous,' he says. 'Now they often enclose their
names and addresses.' The suggestion is clearly that the racists have lost
their fear.
In recent weeks Mr Bubis, 65, who was elected chairman of the Central
Council of Jews in Germany in September, has been thrust into the limelight
as a leading critic of government inaction over the wave of violent attacks
on foreigners in the country. In the past week, since the murders of a
Turkish woman and two girls in an arson attack in the northern town of
Molln, he has seldom been off the television screen.
At the same time, his has been a voice of calm and moderation, refusing to
see the incidents as a portent of a return to Nazi rule.
The Jewish community in Germany numbers between 35,000 and 40,000 today, a
tiny residue of the 600,000 who lived there before the Holocaust. It retains
an importance far beyond its numbers, not merely as a reminder of the past,
but also as a symbol of hope for Germany's ability to cope with any new
manifestations of xenophobia.
The views of Mr Bubis and his fellow Jews, therefore, are critical in the
exploding debate over immigration fears, the wave of asylum seekers from
eastern Europe, violence against foreigners, and the whole question of
German nationality and identity.
He is in no doubt that something has changed since unification. He is also
adamant that it should not be exaggerated. 'I stayed in Germany after the
war (he was the only member of his immediate family to survive the
concentration camps) because I had confidence in Germany,' he says. 'I still
have confidence in Germany.
'I do not believe there is a big new threat to Jews here. What there is, is
a new nationalism in Germany. And this nationalism goes together with a
certain anti-Semitism, and hostility to foreigners.'
Most people are not hostile to foreigners, he maintains, but a significant
number does think of 'Germany for the Germans. They say: 'We have been
occupied for 50 years, divided for 50 years, and that is enough. Now we have
our sovereignty back. We are a political power again, as well as an economic
power.' The point is, it is socially acceptable to talk like that today.'
Mr Daniel Cohn-Bendit occupies the opposite end of the political spectrum to
Mr Bubis. The former student leader from the Paris uprising of May 1968, he
is today a member of the Greens, and special counsellor to the mayor of
Frankfurt on race relations. Frankfurt has by far the largest immigrant
population in Germany - at some 26 per cent. The proportion of immigrant
children in its primary schools is 40 per cent, rising to 60 or 70 per cent
in some areas.
Mr Cohn-Bendit sees the racial problem far more as a social problem than a
nationalist one. 'German society is not nationalistic. There is a certain
national pride. I don't think anti-Semitism is any stronger in Germany than
it is in France or Britain - or Italy.
'This problem (of racial violence) is a result of the rump of society
responding to a certain situation.'
He sees it as simultaneously a problem of youth in revolt, and a problem of
social deprivation in an ever more affluent society. It was already
happening before unification.
'You cannot keep a society going on the basis of a bad conscience,' he says.
'This is the third generation since the war, and they won't understand. But
Germany has a real problem. How can you make young people here understand
their history, without giving them a bad conscience?
'There is a proportion of young people who are being deliberately
provocative. And the greatest provocation of all is to say: 'I am a Nazi.''
At the same time, he sees in the attacks against foreigners as a revolt of
the least privileged levels of German society. 'There is a German
sub-proletariat competing directly with the immigrants,' he says. 'They see
themselves doubly discriminated against: they are already the poorest, and
then their schools have the highest numbers of immigrants.'
He blames the politicians for their failure to face up to the problem of
immigration and to find programmes to relieve the resulting social tension.
The dilemma at the heart of Germany's current race problem is that there is
no official immigration policy, but there is a liberal asylum law which is
freely used by all would-be immigrants to enter the country. He believes
that Frankfurt has had far fewer bad racial incidents precisely because it
has an integration policy.
Mr Bubis blames the politicians too, for their failure to see the racial
violence as a threat to civil society as a whole. 'Perhaps most important is
that they failed to see the problem as an attack on democracy,' he says.
This week's murders in Molln have finally forced the authorities - in the
shape of Mr Alexander von Stahl, the chief federal prosecutor - to recognise
that such a presumed neo-Nazi attack was indeed a threat to national
security.
Mr Bubis also accuses the judiciary of failing to impose harsher sentences.
Until now, most skinheads have been accused of little more than trespass,
instead of attempted murder and arson. The sentences have been token.
'They have sought to minimise the problem. They have been too liberal. They
did not want to dramatise it. But I believe it must be dramatised.'
Bubis and Cohn-Bendit identify the problem differently, and would have
different priorities in their solutions. Yet neither blames the easterners,
as many west Germans do; and both agree the problem can be solved.
Mr Bubis says that firm action by both government and judiciary would bring
the violence under control rapidly. 'If they act now, I think it will be
over quickly,' he says.
Mr Cohn-Bendit believes that the murders in Molln could mark 'the end of the
rise of the extreme right'. But it does require a big rethink of policy
towards foreigners.
'We will normalise immigration. We will have quotas. We will regulate it. We
will regulate asylum without dramatising it, and without denouncing the
asylum seekers.
'We have to de-dramatise the situation, without seeking to minimise it.
Chancellor Kohl must say: 'We have made a mistake. We have failed to
integrate these people into our civic society.' Then he must summon all the
specialists dealing with foreigners, and draw up a policy to do just that.'
