FT  19 JUN 92 / Fears over dropping Tube line extension
THE COST of abandoning the Pounds 1.7bn planned extension of London's
Jubilee underground line may be more than Pounds 200m, according to the
London Docklands Development Corporation.
Olympia &amp; York, the Canadian developers of Canary Wharf in London's
Docklands, had promised to pay Pounds 400m over 25 years towards the line.
Canary Wharf was put into administrative receivership last month, putting
the Jubilee Line extension in jeopardy.
The government has said it will not go ahead with the line unless a
purchaser can be found for Canary Wharf that would be willing to take over
O&amp;Y's commitment to the extension.
In a briefing paper submitted to the Department of Transport, the London
Docklands Development Corporation says that taxpayers and shareholders of
construction companies have already spent more than Pounds 100m in
preparatory work on the extension.
London Transport says it has spent Pounds 100m on bringing designs to the
point at which contractors can tender for work. Contractors are estimated to
have spent a further Pounds 20m on preparing bids.
The development corporation estimates that the costs of aborting the
extension may be a further Pounds 35m to Pounds 85m. It says that delaying
the work would only increase costs.
'Office and other space will fill up very much more slowly if the Jubilee
Line extension is postponed or cancelled,' it warned.
Contractors have submitted bids for almost all of the 10-mile extension.
London Transport has already identified an all-Italian consortium led by
Italstrade, the Italian engineering group, as being likely to win the
contract a 2 1/2 -mile section.
The development corporation refutes the view that government funds earmarked
for the extension could be used for other transport projects. It said: 'Even
if the Treasury agreed to such an approach, which is doubtful, London
Underground and British rail would not be able to bring sufficient projects
forward at such short notice.'
