FT  07 MAY 92 / Survey of Pension Fund Investment (11): Trust deeds may need
amendment - Increased understanding of derivatives is paying off
but slowly. Concern about the inherent risks remains a deterrent, but other
issues also counter the shift towards derivatives.
Trustees can prove resistant, particularly when they are not certain how to
assess the use of such products, and fund managers themselves may be unsure
how to report performance. However, efforts to broaden understanding of
futures and options among both fund managers and trustees are starting to
pay off.
According to a recent survey by KPMG Management Consulting, five out of the
10 top UK pension fund organisations use futures and options in more than 25
per cent of their funds - an increase on last year, when eight out of the 10
funds surveyed used futures and options in less than a quarter of funds
managed. However, the use of derivative products is far less widespread
among smaller organisations.
themselves aware of the benefits which might be derived from using futures
and options,' said Mr Angus Matheson, chairman of the National Association
of Pension Funds' investment committee.
But from that starting point, the journey is not always straightforward.
Once fund managers have decided to adopt futures and options, they must in
turn convince trustees of the advantages.
Trust deeds can prove a further pitfall.
'Check your trust deeds. Do not do anything unless you are empowered to do
it,' advises Mr Clive Gilchrist, managing director of BES Trustees and vice
president of the NAPF. 'If you want to play the game, learn the rules.'
Some trust deeds specify which investments are not permitted; others define
which investments are allowed. In the latter case, unless derivative
products are specifically included, the trust deeds have to be changed.
Some important barriers have been removed, however. Crucially, fund
managers' tax position was clarified in the 1990 budget. Although there was
no dramatic shift in attitudes, fund managers started to look at the market
seriously after the tax change.
There has been progress on other issues, such as performance measurement. A
recent set of recommendations by the London International Financial Futures
and Options Exchange (Liffe) for the reporting of financial futures and
options in investment portfolios, provides an industry standard for the
first time. The guidelines will allow trustees to assess more easily whether
fund managers are using futures and options for investment or hedging
purposes, or whether they are taking more speculative positions.
'(These recommendations) will lead to a better understanding of the uses of
these instruments, higher standards of reporting and more consistent
performancecalculations,' said Mr Tim Gardener, head of planning services at
Mercer Fraser, the actuarial consultancy firm commissioned to write the
report.
The educational effort by Liffe, which has run seminars with the NAPF for
trustees, has fostered interest in derivative products.
Where fund managers are using futures and options, their application is
generally quite restricted. For the most part, UK fund managers do not
regard futures and options as a separate asset class, but as part of the
underlying asset class. (For example, a stock option is essentially an
equity asset, not an option.)
Derivative products are 'part of the armoury', says Mr Gilchrist. While a
few US pension funds have started to allocate part of their funds to
specialised managed futures funds, there are no signs of a similar trend in
the UK. Managed futures fund managers consider futures an asset class in
their own right, representing a diversification of portfolio risk.
'The idea of trying to persuade pension fund trustees to put a pot of money
into a dedicated futures fund is very far away,' said Mr Peter Stanyer, head
of investment for British Rail pensions. So far, futures fund managers and
specialist trading advisers (particularly US-based commodity trading
advisers, or CTAs) have been marketing UK pension fund managers to little
avail. The poor performance of futures funds this year is unlikely to
encourage any change of heart.
Most pension funds use futures and options in two ways: to hedge exposure -
that is, to reduce potential losses on cash holdings by taking a contrary
position in the futures market; and for asset allocation - to shift exposure
from one market to another. These uses come under the concept of efficient
portfolio management, under Securities and Investment Board rules.
A future obliges the holder to buy or sell at a set price at a future date;
an option gives the holder the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell
at a set price at a set date. Futures are of particular use in asset
allocation, while options can be used for stock selection.
The use of derivatives for asset allocation is attractive, because buying
and selling large holdings of stocks or bonds can be both time-consuming and
expensive. It is often cheaper and more efficient to shift exposure by, for
example, buying FT-SE index future contracts and holding a cash deposit, so
creating a synthetic equity asset.
There is a growing use of index products on foreign markets, which is likely
to increase as portfolios become more international. Funds which aim to
match the performance of stock indices often use index futures rather than
stocks.
Because UK pension funds are broadly UK equity-based, they have so far been
most active in Liffe's FT-SE contracts. Liffe's gilt futures are also widely
used. They are less active in individual stock options, but if the market
picks up following the merger of the Liffe and the London Traded Options
market earlier this year, activity could increase.
UK pension funds remain for the most part resistant to over-the-counter
products offered by banks, partly because of the credit implications, and
also because they fear such products will lack liquidity.
