FT  22 OCT 92 / World Bank to decide fate of Narmada dam
THE World Bank's executive board is due to meet tomorrow to decide on the
fate of the controversial Sardar Sarovar dam projects in India's Narmada
valley, amid unrelenting criticism of the projects' impact on the
environment and on the inhabitants who will be forced off their land.
The World Bank had already responded to criticism of Sardar Sarovar by
commissioning an independent report from Mr Bradford Morse, a former
administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, and Mr Thomas
Berger, a former Canadian Supreme Court judge.
The Morse-Berger report was scathing in its assessment of the project, and
in particular of the measures provided to resettle displaced farmers, and
the World Bank then revised its position by drawing up a new plan called
Next Steps.
But Mr Morse and Mr Berger have now castigated Next Steps for ignoring or
misrepresenting their findings.
'The Bank may choose to reject our findings. India may choose to ignore our
report. It is clear, however, that the Bank's Next Steps document has sought
to present a version of our report that is at variance with the report
itself,' Mr Morse and Mr Berger told Mr Lewis Preston, the World Bank's
president, in a letter last week.
This strong criticism has upset the Bank's efforts to build an executive
board consensus behind the Next Steps approach to the Dollars 3bn Narmada
dam and associated canal and drainage works - the aim of which is to provide
irrigation and drinking water to some 30m people in western India.
Construction had been under way on the Sardar Sarovar projects since 1987,
but the Morse-Berger review recommended halting work until proper
environmental studies had been carried out and new resettlement plans
prepared for the estimated 240,000 people who may be displaced by the
projects.
Work has been temporarily held up by the Indian flooding season, but the
World Bank's Next Steps plan would continue construction while the studies
are carried out.
'The idea that environmental impact studies would be done as construction
proceeds undermines the prospect for achieving environmental protection,' Mr
Morse and Mr Berger wrote.
While they found the resettlement proposals of the Gujurat state government
inadequate, they are particularly critical of the revised plans of
neighbouring Madhya Pradesh, which they say are designed to encourage those
ousted by the projects to move to Gujarat.
'We believe the gap between Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat policies is
continuing, and that, as our report explained, this erodes the right to
choice by oustees in Madhya Pradesh,' they say in their letter to Mr
Preston.
Some Bank executive directors had hoped that the Morse-Berger report would
provide an adequate umbrella against criticism of Sardar Sarovar and allow
them to press ahead with the projects, which have been strongly pressed for
by the Indian government.
However, in the face of continuing criticism from Mr Morse and Mr Berger,
directors are under growing pressure from their home countries to vote
against continuing to finance Sardar Sarovar.
