FT  03 NOV 92 / UK Company News: County NatWest highlights new income
measures
COUNTY NATWEST, the securities house, is to give prominence to two new
measures of earnings in its client circulars, following changes to the
format and structure of the profit and loss account.
In an equity briefing issued by the firm, it warns that Financial Reporting
Standard 3, launched last week by the Accounting Standards Board (ASB), will
cause 'considerable confusion' among unwary users.
FRS 3, which replaced Fred 1, the earlier consultation draft on the profit
and loss account, virtually abolishes the extraordinary item and
incorporates all remaining unusual gains or losses in the earnings figure.
County intends to stress what it calls 'normalised' earnings - the new
earnings figure stripped of extraordinary items - and 'maintainable'
earnings, or those attributable to continuing business operations.
It warns that the ASB's recast earnings figure will be 'highly volatile,
potentially misleading and the least useful for any valuation purposes'.
This is part of the ASB's stated intention, which is attempting to divert
the attention of users of accounts away from what it believes is excessive
concentration on the single earnings figure.
But the new standard has caused considerable concern among analysts and
other stock market observers, who will be forced to make their own
calculations of earnings and determine the basis on which p/e ratios are
calculated in the future.
The Institute for Investment Management and Research said last week that it
was creating a working party to derive a maintainable earnings figure, which
it hoped might become an industry standard. It expects to reach a conclusion
within about six months.
County said it is developing a system that will provide aggregated earnings
and p/e ratios using any specified definition and expects to publish further
details shortly.
Its maintainable earnings figure will take the headline ASB figure, add
notional interest on disposal proceeds and earnings on acquisitions, and
subtract earnings from discontinued operations and notional interest on
acquisition costs.
Its normalised earnings will comprise the headline earnings figure, with the
removal of material, non-recurring exceptional items.
