FT  27 NOV 92 / Survey of FT Traveller, Paris (25): At least the Lucky
Nugget Saloon won a star - EuroDisneyland, located east of Paris, is one of
those places that people either love - or loathe
THERE is a possibly apocryphal story that a man arrived at Euro-Disneyland
carrying a large bag in which he had hidden a Smurf costume, like those worn
at a rival French theme park. Once inside he changed into his costume and
chatted to visiting children until the Euro Disney security guards hustled
him away.
An interloping Smurf is probably the least of Euro Disney's problems. In its
short life, EuroDisneyland has been assailed by a barrage of obstacles
ranging from a stream of abuse from France's intelligentsia (one of whom
called it a 'cultural Chernobyl'), to a traffic-stopping Operation Escargot
blockade by militant French farmers and a tumbling share price amid
speculation about serious financial difficulties.
EuroDisneyland is one of those places that people either love - or loathe.
Some visitors return with tales of smiling children and carrier bags stuffed
with souvenirs. Others rattle off complaints about high ticket prices,
lengthy queues and commercial, as well as cultural, imperialism. If you want
to see for yourself, the best way to visit EuroDisneyland is to go
off-season, preferably when it is not too cold, or too wet. Euro Disney did,
after all, decide to build Europe's most expensive leisure complex on one of
the boggiest bits of northern France.
Should you go during the peak summer season, when the weather is likely to
be better, it is probably best to stay overnight. You would then arrive in
the early evening in plenty of time to see the stunning firework display and
could enjoy the park in the morning, before the afternoon crowds descend.
It is also sensible to buy the Michelin guide to EuroDisneyland, which ranks
all the attractions according to its usual star system. That way you can
make sure that you spend your time on the three star rides - the sci-fi Star
Tours attraction, Phantom Manor haunted house and runaway minetrain - and
skip the dross.
Epicureans beware. Michelin could find little good to say about
EuroDisneyland's catering arrangements. Only one of the park's restaurants,
the Lucky Nugget Saloon, was given a star - and that was for decor, not
food.
EuroDisneyland, Tel:4941 4910 for information and reservations, is
accessible by road 32km east of Paris at Marne-la-Vallee on the A4 motorway,
by the RER rail network from central Paris or by shuttle from Charles de
Gaulle and Orly airports.
