FT  07 AUG 92 / Leading Article: A little lesson for Big Steel - Mini-mills
and imports have forced US companies to reform
Fly south-east from Chicago and you will quickly reach one of the most
imposing landmarks of 20th-century American industry - an ugly, sprawling
monument to the past glory, present tribulation and future uncertainty of
the big US steel companies.
There, strung out along the southernmost curve of Lake Michigan, like
grotesque mechanical monsters at a watering hole, stands the most
concentrated collection of steel plants in North America. The largest of
them all, US Steel's Gary works, stretches for more than six miles along the
shore.
This is the heartland of 'Big Steel', the giant corporations which have
dominated the US industry since the turn of the century. And, though you
might not guess it from the lake shore's grim appearance, Big Steel has
poured over Dollars 20bn (Pounds 10.4bn) into the modernisation of these and
other US plants during the past decade to combat two potentially deadly
threats which have battered the leviathans for more than 20 years.
One is cheap imported steel. The other is the seemingly unstoppable growth
of nimble US 'mini-mills', which have much lower capital demands and
operating costs than the giants. This month brings two significant
milestones in these battles:
On Monday, the International Trade Commission, a US government agency, will
make a preliminary judgment on Big Steel's complaints that foreign rivals,
unfairly subsidised by their governments, have been dumping steel in the US
market and depressing prices.
The steel companies began firing off the complaints last spring, upon the
expiration of Voluntary Restraint Agreements (VRAs), in force since the
early 1980s. These restricted the import of steel into the US to give the
domestic industry time to modernise. However, in recent years, steel imports
have actually been declining, in part because of the weak dollar.
On Wednesday, US Steel, the biggest company in the industry, acknowledged it
was considering building a mini-mill of its own. This would be the first
such plant by a steel major and tacit admission that even after their
radical restructuring over the past decade, the big steel companies must
adapt a great deal more if they are to survive.
'They have some very formidable challenges ahead of them,' says Mr
Christopher Plummer, a consultant at Philadelphia-based Resource Strategies.
Still, over the past 10 years Big Steel has undergone a remarkable
transformation for the better. At the start of the 1980s, after decades of
neglecting technology pioneered in Europe and Japan, the American industry
was one of the world's less efficient producers and in danger of being
swamped by imports.
Today it is on many measures among the world's most efficient. Apart from
the huge capital investment, it has benefitted from the closing of dozens of
inefficient plants and a halving of the industry's workforce; the VRAs; the
decline of the dollar; and capital and technical help from Japanese rivals
which have got round the trade barriers by investing in joint ventures with
the Americans.
Yet the large steel companies remain troubled. Virtually all of them are
losing money, as they have in most of the past 10 years, and many are
crippled by weak balance sheets and onerous retiree health and pension
costs.
The most immediate cause of pain is the US recession, which has sharply cut
American demand for steel. The effects of that have been exacerbated by a
global glut of steel products, which has forced world prices down to the
level of 1980 - and even lower once inflation is taken into account.
This problem is likely to recede gradually as the US and global economies
emerge from recession, and American prices could get a further fillip if the
industry eventually wins some form of protection through its anti-dumping
actions.
But Big Steel also faces a longer-term, purely domestic threat, symbolised
by a spanking new mill which lies 100 miles south of Lake Michigan, amid the
red barns, silver grain silos and flat corn and soybean fields of rural
Indiana.
This is the technologically innovative Crawfordsville plant of Nucor, the
largest and most successful of the mini-mills which over the past three
decades have come from nowhere to snatch from Big Steel much of the US
market for commodity products such as bars, wire and rod. They now account
for about 21 per cent of US steel consumption, compared to about 17 per cent
for imports.
The mini-mills differ from the US majors in that they are non-union, niche
players with extremely lean organisational structures and make steel with
less capital intensive technology. Big Steel is vertically integrated,
meaning that each company carries out every stage in the transformation of
iron from raw ore into finished steel. The mini-mills start not with ore but
scrap metal, which they simply liquefy in an electric arc furnace.
All these factors have given the minis large cost advantages in low- grade
steel markets. Big Steel's response has been to retreat to the more
technologically sophisticated, higher margin markets for flat-rolled
products, which account for about half of US consumption.
Nucor's two-year-old plant at Crawfordsville is special because it is the
first mini-mill to make flat-rolled products - albeit for the less
sophisticated end of that market - and it does so with a new technology,
called thin-slab casting, which sharply cuts the time and capital costs
required to make sheet steel.
Just how far Big Steel has come, and the challenge from the mini-mills that
still lies ahead, can be seen by comparing the reforms which have
significantly improved the efficiency of US Steel's Gary works with Nucor's
Crawfordsville operation.
Five years ago the quality of Gary's flat-rolled output was so poor that it
was in danger of being struck off the supplier list for two of its biggest
customers, Ford and General Motors. Today, it holds a string of quality
awards and its productivity, at around 2.7 man hours a ton, compared to over
seven a decade ago, is probably the best of any Big Steel plant.
Mr John Goodwin, the plant manager, attributes about half of this
improvement to Dollars 1.2bn of capital investment, which has been used to
upgrade blast furnaces and rolling mills and make all of its output
continuously cast (a cost-saving production method which integrated plants
were slow to adopt.)
The other half was due to a big change in the culture of the plant, with
managers devolving much more responsibility to workers. 'It sounds easy,'
says Mr Goodwin, 'but it's very difficult. Our culture has always been: 'I'm
the boss and you do what I say, when I say.' '
For example, a team of five workers has been assigned to customers' plants
to assess problems with steel shipments and makes recommendations for
improvements.
Along with other parts of US Steel, Gary has gone some way to reducing job
demarcation lines, and in one of its new finishing lines it intends to have
just one category of union member running the whole operation. This should
lead to more efficient use of the machinery. 'But it's a lot easier to
accomplish at a greenfield site,' says Mr Goodwin.
That is clearly evident at Crawfordsville, where the heavily sweating
labourer you see standing at the base of the casting machine turns out to
also be the shift manager.
Nucor's employees are extremely flexible in their work practices. This is
partly because they are from overwhelmingly rural backgrounds - not for
nothing is Crawfordsville in the middle of corn fields - and distrust
unions. It is also because a very large element of their pay is linked to
productivity, so the more flexible they are, the larger their take-home
package.
The cost of employing labour at the two plants is not far apart. Gary spends
about Dollars 30 for an hour's work and Crawfordsville Dollars 28. But
because US Steel has the historic burden of high retiree benefits, the Gary
worker only sees around Dollars 14 an hour in his pay package, compared with
Dollars 20 for the Nucor employee.
Now put these labour advantages together with Nucor's relatively cheap
electricity costs (thanks again to a rural, greenfield location) and the
operating advantages of its new technology. The result is the lowest
manufacturing costs of any US flat-rolled producer - some Dollars 50 to
Dollars 75 a ton below Big Steel. Nucor claims the gap will widen as
Crawfordsville matures.
'While those guys in Big Steel are wringing concessions from the labour
unions, getting a morsel there and a granule here, this thing is a powerful
beast that has a long way to move forward,' says Mr Keith Busse, the plant
manager.
Crawfordsville's 1m tons of output is small in a sector totalling 40m to 50m
tons. But Nucor expects to be producing 8m tons from Crawfordsville and
three clones by the turn of the century. Other mini-mills sniffing around
the new technology could boost the total to 13m to 15m tons, says Mr
Plummer, who adds: 'There's no way that can happen without some companies
being pushed out.'
However, companies such as Nucor have no monopoly on new technology and US
Steel's consideration of a mini-mill of its own shows how the most flexible
and efficient of the Big Steel companies can fight back.
US Steel could even have a technical advantage over Nucor, since one new
method of steel-making it is considering - thin strip casting - may produce
higher quality steel than Nucor's thin-slab technique.
Mr Tom Usher, president of US Steel, which looked at and rejected the
thin-slab method, argues that Nucor will never compete at the very top end
of the flat-rolled market because its technology cannot make sufficiently
fine steels - a view strongly disputed by Mr Busse.
Whatever the truth, many analysts believe that over the next 10 to 15 years
the traditional distinctions between the mini-mills and integrated companies
will blur as the two converge on new technologies both for smelting and
casting steel, and as the Big Steel companies are driven to become nimbler
niche players themselves.
Whether US Steel and other integrated plants can beat the mini-mills at
their own game will depend in large measure on management enterprise, on
each company's capital resources and on its ability to get the steel
workers' union to adopt more flexible labour practices. US Steel looks
reasonably well-placed, but some of its weaker brethren do not.
A flight over Gary provides a chilling reminder of the fate awaiting those
that fail to adapt. Below, in the heart of America's mightiest steel
complex, lies a large empty space, the site of razed factories that once
served commodity markets lost to mini-mills and imports. Weeds cover the
wasteland.
