FT  15 MAY 92 / EC carbon tax may run into political sands
THE EC's proposal on the introduction of an energy and carbon tax could run
into the sands because it is conditional on the US and Japan adopting
similar measures.
The Bush Administration is considered most unlikely to adopt a carbon tax.
Aside from the fact that Mr Bush is fighting an election this year, his
administration has staunchly resisted pressures for a fiscal solution to
energy and environmental problems.
The US aversion to deadlines on emissions controls was highlighted by Mr
Bush's earlier wavering on whether to attend the Rio Earth Summit. He made
his attendance conditional on a redraft of the treaty on climate change to
exclude specific deadlines for emission controls. The US is the only major
industrial nation which has not adopted the year 2000 deadline to reduce
emissions to 1990 levels.
Instead of taxes, the US strategy is based on a range of specific measures,
such as tightening efficiency standards for equipment, and promoting energy
efficiency audits.
The question, however, is whether the US can make progress on these fronts
without an energy tax. Last week the Washington-based Institute for
International Economics concluded taxation should form a key part of any
strategy to combat global warming.
The Japanese government, keen to take a high political profile on
environmental issues, was caught out of step by the Commission's approval of
such a tax on Wednesday.
Debate is continuing within Japanese ministries over an energy tax, but two
of the more powerful, the ministry of international trade and industry
(Miti) and the ministry of transport, have generally opposed a tax that
would increase fuel costs for industry.
Their concerns were reflected in Japanese delegates' insistence that the
Tokyo Declaration, issued last month at a UN-sponsored eminent persons'
meeting on the environment, contain only an ambiguous reference to energy
taxes and emphasise the importance of economic growth.
'Countries may wish to consider special taxes and charges in the context of
the global partnership being forged at Rio de Janeiro (the Earth Summit),
keeping in mind the impact on international competitiveness,' the
declaration said.
The EC announcement puts particular pressure on Mr Noboru Takeshita, the
former prime minister and faction chief within the ruling Liberal Democratic
Party. He hosted the eminent persons' meeting and has made clear to his
political colleagues that the environment issue is his territory.
'We are not surprised that the EC has made an announcement, but we are
surprised by the timing,' a Miti official said.
It will take the direct intervention of Mr Takeshita to settle an
inter-ministerial debate that has so far lasted more than three years. A
month ago, Miti insisted that government discussion of an energy tax was
'only informal', but last night the ministry said that such a tax was 'under
consideration'. Some Japanese officials argue that the country has already
made a contribution by agreeing to 'freeze' carbon dioxide emissions at the
1990 level by the year 2000.
However that ambiguous policy includes a per capita 'freeze', which has
allowed Miti to set a separate target for an 8 per cent increase in
emissions until the end of the decade. The target is based on projected
annual GNP growth of about 3.6 per cent.
The Environment Agency is in favour of an energy tax, and has suggested a
sliding scale of charges that would reflect the amount of carbon dioxide
emitted. And the finance ministry is apparently not opposed to doubling the
present petrol tax from Y2.4 to Y4.8 per litre, raising about Y400bn that
could be devoted to environment protection and used to cover a tax revenue
shortfall.
In the Netherlands, which strongly favours using taxation for ecological
ends, Environment Minister Hans Alders said: 'The more countries that
participate, the better it is ..But to make it dependent (on US and Japanese
participation) means nothing will get done,' he said.
Mr Ken Collins, the chairman of the European Parliament's environment
committee, said after the decision that he had decided to cancel his
attendance at next month's Earth Summit in Rio. He described the event as 'a
sham'.
