FT  13 MAR 92 / Election 92: Major rejects calls for television debate
PRIME MINISTER John Major yesterday rejected repeated opposition calls for
him to participate in a televised election debate with leaders of the other
principal parties.
However Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, agreed last night to a televised
debate with Mr John Smith, his Labour shadow.
In his last scheduled Commons exchange with Mr Neil Kinnock before polling
day Mr Major branded Labour's challenge a loser's gambit.
'Every party politician that expects to lose tries that trick, the party
that expects to win says no,' he said. The gauntlet was initially thrown
down in a question from Mr Ken Livingstone, the leftwing Labour MP for Brent
East.
Egged on by raucous calls of 'chicken' from the opposition benches, the
Labour leader took up the baton, calling Mr Major's maxim a 'pathetic
excuse.'
'Since he has been prime minister, 50,000 companies have gone out of
business, 75,000 families have lost their homes and 800,000 people have lost
their jobs - why won't he debate that record?' he asked.
Last night, Mr Michael Heseltine, environment secretary, said on Channel 4
news that a televised debate would become 'a sort of lottery' because a
subject was bound to come up on which 'the prime minister is not an expert'.
He said it would be susceptible to US techniques whereby a one-line joke
later turns into a headline.
The two leaders' increasingly heated comments represented a small public
relations victory for the Liberal Democrats - the party has long supported
the idea of a televised debate - who had pre-empted Labour's challenge at a
morning press conference.
The party said it would be prepared to consider a compromise consisting of
three separate head-to-head debates between the party leaders, provided it
was not automatically assumed that the Major-Kinnock confrontation would be
the last of the three.
Mr Des Wilson, Liberal Democrat campaign director, said it was clear the
prime minister was 'not an effective platform speaker' and did not 'respond
well to sharp questioning'.
In the Commons Mr Major hit back at Mr Kinnock by suggesting the Labour
leader's prolixity would make it difficult for him and Mr Paddy Ashdown, the
Liberal Democrat leader, to 'get a word in edgeways'.
'We have set in place the foundations for recovery, the Budget builds on
them and after the election we will carry them through,' Mr Major said.
At this, Mr Kinnock promised to give the prime minister 'plenty of time' to
express his views. 'Why don't you join with me and the Liberal Democrat
leader and say to the broadcasting organisations: we have nothing to fear
from the British people. Let's have a debate, let's fix the date, let's get
on with it,' he said.
Mr Major retorted by saying 'We have better than a debate: we have a general
election.' He quoted Shakespeare to accuse Mr Kinnock of drawing out 'the
thread of your verbosity finer than the staple of your argument.'
He said the quotation came appropriately from 'Love's Labours Lost' - 'and
Labour will lose'.
The prime minister proposed a motion of thanks to the speaker, Mr Bernard
Weatherill, who is standing down at the election.
