FT  01 OCT 92 / Italy 'pressured US over Iraqi loans affair'
THE GOVERNMENT of Italy put strong pressure on the Bush administration not
to indict the state-owned Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL) in connection
with the scandal over Dollars 5bn of illegal loans to Iraq, made by BNL's
Atlanta branch, according to documents released in an Atlanta court
yesterday.
The documents describe numerous diplomatic initiatives by Rome, including a
March 1990 White House lunch meeting at which Mr Rinaldo Petrignani, Italian
ambassador, warned Mr Richard Thornburgh, then US attorney-general, that a
BNL indictment could affect US-Italian relations.
The ambassador is quoted as having insisted that BNL was a victim in the
Atlanta fraud and having said the bank should be considered by Washington as
'an organ of the Italian Government.' He went on to say that, if the bank
were indicted, this would 'add insult to injury' and 'would not be
understood in Italy, especially in the context of collaboration between the
two governments in the field of judicial investigations.'
The documents were made public as Mr Christopher Drogoul, former BNL Atlanta
manager, made his long-awaited court appearance, and for the first time
began naming the names of the BNL executives in Rome alleged to have known
of the Iraqi loans.
Mr Drogoul testified under oath that, in 1988, Mr Giacomo Pedde, then BNL's
chief executive in Rome, told him: 'I am aware of the recent agreements you
have concluded with the Iraqis. I want you to do everything you can to
support the Iraqis at this time. It is very important for us here.'
According to testimony, Mr Pedde - who refused to appear in Atlanta court
this week, saying he felt ill - had previously told Mr Drogoul: 'I want to
mention to you that the relationship we have with Iraq at this time is very
sensitive.'
Mr Drogoul also named Mr Teodoro Monaco, a BNL Rome executive whom he had
also met during a visit to Baghdad, as having been fully aware of the Iraqi
loans from Atlanta.
Both Mr Drogoul's testimony and the documents released appeared to cast
serious doubt on the central premise of the US government's case against Mr
Drogoul - that BNL Rome knew nothing of the Iraqi loans because the Atlanta
manager had acted entirely on his own.
The documents disclosed yesterday were a series of reports on the Atlanta
investigation by Mr Paolo Di Vito, a BNL Rome executive.
