FT  04 JAN 92 / J. Sainsbury to discount foods by up to a third
RENEWED price skirmishing is set to break out in the food retailing sector
as J. Sainsbury, the UK's biggest grocery chain, revealed yesterday it would
be launching an aggressive price promotion campaign on Monday.
Although it will not release details of the price-cuts until tomorrow, the
company said it would be discounting some items by up to one-third.
The offer will run throughout this month in J. Sainsbury's 310 supermarkets
and its nine Savacentre hypermarkets. The offer will be in addition to the
normal price promotions the company has on 1,000 of its 17,000 lines every
week.
The move raises the spectre of a full-scale price war in the grocery trade,
although some analysts dismissed that possibility.
'It's media-manipulation time again,' said Mr Philip Dorgan, food retailing
analyst at Goldman Sachs, the US investment bank. 'It is not in Sainsbury's
interests to start a price war, but it is in its interests to be seen to be
price-competitive.'
Mr Dorgan added that J. Sainsbury might be trying to capitalise on the
favourable publicity it received in a recent survey by Which? magazine,
which named it Britain's 'favourite supermarket'.
Other grocery chains have adopted a more aggressive approach to pricing in
recent months. In August, Tesco ran a much-publicised 'Why Pay More?'
campaign. At the end of last year, Gateway set up 15 discount superstores
under the Food Giant banner.
Although J. Sainsbury traditionally runs a price campaign at this time of
year, the cuts are expected to be deeper than usual.
The move seems to be a change of tactic by J. Sainsbury. It has long argued
that it does not need specific price campaigns because it is engaged in a
permanent state of price promotion.
At the time of the group's annual results presentation in November, Lord
Sainsbury, chairman, said: 'I believe we are in a highly competitive trade
and in that sense we are in one long price war.'
The move unsettled the City, which marked J. Sainsbury shares down 14p to
359p, while shares of the other leading food retailers were also hit. Tesco
fell 7p to 225p, and Argyll Group, which runs the Safeway chain, dropped 8p
to 274p.
London Stocks, Page 13
