FT  14 FEB 92 / Management: Home but not alone - My Office / Lucy Kellaway
takes tea with Richard Branson in the snug and friendly surroundings of his
Holland Park mansion
Richard Branson was unhappy at school; desks remind him of school; so he
abominates desks. Instead he lounges, top three shirt buttons undone, on a
pale apricot sofa in his double-fronted private mansion in Holland Park.
From here, the founder of Britain's best known private company does deals
and makes sure that his personal image is coming across right. The phone
placed in front of him on a large, low coffee table rings incessantly.
'Look Trevor, I like these people, and I think they want to do a deal. But
we shouldn't sign anything, unless we can live with it.' Replacing the
receiver, he explains that he has always worked from home ever since a
teenager because it is 'snug, cosy and friendly'.
Until two years ago he worked and lived on a houseboat on the Thames, 'but
the meetings got bigger and so did the kids'.
Now he lives in splendour in Notting Hill Gate in a house bought at the peak
of the market. He works at one end of a 40 foot sitting room, while his
children have piano lessons at the other.
'It's really Joan my wife who put it together. She used to work in a
bric-a-brac shop,' he says, casting an eye over the festooning curtains, art
deco lamps and the overbearing rococo mirrors with naked cherubs carved into
the frames. The room is dotted with family photographs, including wedding
shots of Branson and his wife with their two children on a beach, everyone
in white satin, and everyone blond and very beautiful.
Branson draws attention to the heavy, ornate mantelpiece, which is groaning
with airline trophies. 'We have a lot of people coming here to lunches. We
try to get across that Virgin is the best airline in the world,' he says.
Branson is trying to turn the conversation his way and later admits as much.
'The only interview that Will (his press man) will let me do are ones that
will help the airline. I always try and direct the conversation towards it,'
he says, letting his smooth mask drop for one minute.
The approach apparently works: a recent appearance on a lightweight TV chat
show brought a record 38,000 calls to the airline the following week, which
he believes was directly linked to his personal performance.
What message does Branson think his office gets across about him, or his
company? He hesitates, seems unable to answer. The phone goes again. 'Hi,
look, how much will I be in the film? Do you think we are going to get some
nasty feedback? Right. Right. Right.'
Despite his reticence, the answer screams at the visitor. Judging from the
surroundings, Branson wants to remain an unconventional guy, and refuses to
enter the corporate mainstream. He holds no board meetings, does not go out
unless he wants to, and puts up visiting businessmen in his house, chatting
to them over breakfast with the family.
This style did not go well with being a public company and was part of the
reason for his retreat from the stockmarket. He also did not enjoy the
public scrutiny - and criticism - that comes from being a public company.
Indeed even now, Branson reacts angrily to any adverse publicity, however
slight - something which is apparently not just a matter of personal vanity.
'If someone doesn't like my sweater, that's a potential negative against the
airline,' he says.
A slightly scruffy young woman brings in a cup of tea. She is one of a team
of four personal helpers who work in the house. 'There's a girl called
Penny, a girl called Emma, a girl called Clodagh and a guy called John,' he
says. The guy and the girls spend a big part of their time dealing with the
200 letters which arrive every day, turning the relevant ones into a two
line summary, so that Branson has time to read them.
Despite the Pounds 1bn-odd turnover of his companies, Branson clings to his
distrust of the big organisation. 'I believe in 'small is beautiful', and
that companies should be run from the bottom up, rather than the top down.'
The Virgin companies are dotted around a dozen buildings in Notting Hill,
none employing more than 50 or 60 people. 'We've got 30 different
switchboards in the area - it might be more expensive, but it's much more
personal.'
His most important business aid is a large, black-lined notebook. This sits
in front of him on the table, with a proof copy of his 1993 Who's Who entry
sticking out of it. In this book he writes down 'all my meetings and all my
ideas. I have numbers 1 to 50 every day. If something comes up, I jot it
down'.
The book goes with him around the world. 'At any excuse I jump on a plane to
New York, LA or Tokyo,' he says. He then goes out of his way to chat to the
400 passengers and the 20 or so crew, which also yields 50 different
'thoughts, ideas and suggestions' which he writes down in his book. He talks
about the importance of dealing with complaints and striving to improve the
service.
It all sounds as if Branson is becoming a convert to fashionable management
notions. 'Total Quality Management? I've never heard of it,' he says. 'No,
I've never read any books with suggestions of how to run a business,' he
adds. The strong implication is that he doesn't need to.
