FT  27 OCT 92 / Parliament and Politics: Labour's relaxed soft-shoe shuffle
IT IS, as one shadow cabinet member put it yesterday, a soft-shoe shuffle.
But there can be little doubt as to the direction Labour is moving and that
is away from any action, however passive, that would help the Conservatives
in the ratification of the Maastricht treaty.
Up until even the beginning of September, the obstructionist case was
largely a matter of parliamentary tactics. But Black Wednesday, turmoil in
the economy and, finally, the pit closures row has left Labour's
backbenchers baying for Tory blood.
The party leadership, though overwhelmingly pro-Maastricht as the best
treaty currently available, is well aware that it cannot ignore the mood.
Add to that the now widely held (if yet to be revoked) impression that the
prime minister is risking either a general election or his own head, and
even fiercely Europhile Labour MPs acknowledge that they must vote against
next Wednesday's 'paving' motion, whatever its wording.
For that reason, Mr Jack Cunningham, the shadow foreign secretary, was
speaking with the full backing of his colleagues yesterday morning when he
signalled that the opposition would oppose the resolution.
His ground for opposition - the need for Denmark to clarify its position
prior to a resumption of the ratification procedure in the Commons - is, in
fact, consistent with what Labour said shortly after the Danish referendum.
There is no doubt, though, that this is little more than a pretext -
somewhat thin camouflage - for Labour's twin goals: to maximise the
discomfiture of the government and to keep the party united.
As far back as May on the second reading of the bill, 61 MPs defied the
whips and voted against. After the Danish No vote in June, even that
passionate pro-European, Mr Roy Hattersley, felt obliged to give notice that
Labour might let the treaty through only if the government reversed its
opposition to the social chapter of workplace rights.
Yet the leadership is also acutely aware of the danger to its reputation in
Europe if it were to prove instrumental in killing the treaty. Its long game
has always been to abstain or, alternatively, allow a free vote on the
definitive third reading, thereby ensuring that the treaty goes through.
That may prove increasingly difficult, given the mounting resistance to any
compromise among Labour MPs.
Mr Giles Radice, one of the most prominent Labour Europhiles, has repeatedly
insisted that the party must be consistent to its pre-election position by
not blocking the bill at the crucial third reading.
Yesterday, however, he agreed that the context in which Downing Street has
cast the paving debate implies that it will amount to a vote of confidence
in Mr Major. 'They (the government) are so incompetent, they are making it
impossible for someone like me to support them,' he said.
A final decision on Labour's course of action will not be completely clear
until next Monday.
Given the government's recent propensity for U-turns, it is possible that
something might occur before then which could cause a change of heart.
But all the signs are that Labour is unlikely to reverse its stance. A
senior party official pointed out yesterday that even if the government
backtracks by turning the debate into a motion on the adjournment - a
technical device that avoids the need for a substantive text - Labour will
still feel obliged to treat it as a confidence vote.
'This is nothing to do with Maastricht or the EC,' he said. 'The debate was
never necessary. The government could simply have gone to the committee
stage. The prime minister has moved the goalposts and we can only assume
that he is treating it as a confidence issue.'
A shadow cabinet member agreed. 'The government have painted themselves into
a corner. If the prime minister loses he will be personally very, very
damaged,' he said. 'John Smith and Jack Cunningham are both lifelong
Europeans, but they are very relaxed about voting against.'
