FT  17 AUG 92 / Russia alerts troops as Georgia violence simmers
AT LEAST 22 people are reported to have been killed in three days of clashes
in the breakaway Abkhazia region of western Georgia.
The violence prompted Moscow to despatch paratroopers to guard military
depots and other buildings that still belong to the Russian army. The
Russians also began evacuating army officers and their families holidaying
in a Black Sea resort in the area.
Two Russians were reported to be among those killed in the sporadic
violence.
In spite of a formal ceasefire between the Georgian authorities and Abkhazia
at the weekend, fighting flared again yesterday in Sukhumi, the local
capital.
Fighting first erupted on Friday when Georgian national guardsmen and police
tried to seal off roads and bridges in Abkhazia to prevent militant
separatists moving more than a dozen hostages.
Most of the hostages, including Georgia's interior minister, Mr Roman
Gventsadze, were subsequently released.
The ruling State Council claimed Georgian forces now fully controlled the
situation in the west of the country and had arrested 200 suspected members
of 'bandit groups', the usual term for supporters of ousted Georgian
President Zviad Gamsakhurdia.
The Abkhazia region wants to break away from Georgia and effectively
declared its independence last month after a parliamentary vote.
But Georgia has dismissed its independence claim, arguing that ethnic
Abkhazians represent only a quarter of the population and are outnumbered by
Georgians.
On Saturday, Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, the Georgian leader and former Soviet
foreign minister, declared Abkhazia to be 'an integral part of Georgia' and
said forces had been deployed to protect the region from 'banditry'.
Abkhazian leaders accused him of launching an invasion. Bands of armed
Abkhazians have fought fierce clashes against what they regard as Mr
Shevardnadze's invading army.
Top Georgian and Abkhazian officials renewed talks on restoring order to
Sukhumi yesterday as their forces withdrew to create a 4km buffer zone. But
isolated bursts of machine-gun fire rang out across the city, where Georgian
patrols were stopping local cars in an apparent search for arms.
The Abkhazian dispute is the latest in a series of fierce ethnic battles in
the former Soviet Union.
In an attempt to help contain such conflicts, seven members of the
Commonwealth of Independent States signed an accord on Friday to establish a
joint peace-keeping force.
Itar-Tass news agency reported that the specially trained force could only
be deployed with the agreement of the council of CIS leaders and the various
parties involved in a particular conflict. The agreement was signed by
Russia, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgystan, Tajikistan, Armenia and Moldova,
although four other states may also join before next month's CIS summit.
This weekend, Mr Mikhail Gorbachev, the former president of the Soviet
Union, warned of the dangers of massive upheaval unless the CIS member
states developed stronger links.
Writing in Saturday's edition of La Stampa, the Turin daily newspaper, Mr
Gorbachev commented: 'If the Commonwealth fails truly to develop, then all
will have to fight each other. All borders will become objects of dispute,
all the parties involved will be in conflict. We will find ourselves faced
with a situation of extreme danger, which could develop into a war of vast
proportions,' he said.
Russia's air traffic controllers abandoned a brief strike yesterday in the
face of public hostility and the 'catastrophe' they claimed was threatened
by the government calling in replacement military controllers.
Saturday's strike disrupted a few domestic flights to Moscow, St Petersburg,
Omsk, and Volgograd, but international connections were largely unaffected.
All Russia's airports were operating normally last night. The controllers
had been demanding a big pay rise.
