FT  16 DEC 92 / Survey of The Baltic Basin States (12): Hopes for Hanseatic
revival - Hamburg, Europe's biggest port, gets a new role
IT WAS back in 1987, when local election fever was building up in the
northern German Land of Schleswig-Holstein, that Mr Bjorn Engholm, leader of
the Social Democrat opposition, hit on the idea of the 'new Hansa.'
His idea was to revive something of the great old Hanseatic trading
tradition, which linked the northern German ports like Bremen, Hamburg, and
Lubeck in a commercial empire stretching around the Baltic Sea.
It was not simply an idea of promoting trade, says Dr Werner Jann, director
of the Schleswig-Holstein government's Denkfabrik (think tank) in Kiel.
Behind it lay a conviction that Schleswig-Holstein was locked into a pattern
of thinking that it was on the periphery of real Europe, picking up the
scraps of trade and investment from the wealthy economic crescent running
from southern England, through the Benelux countries, the Ruhr and southern
Germany to northern Italy.
'Mr Engholm was the one who brought these north European contacts much more
into the public eye,' Dr Jann says. 'It was against a much broader
background. He asked the question: 'What will happen when the European
single market comes about?'
'There was a danger that Europe would orientate itself much more towards its
rich heartland, the famous banana curve from London to Milan. What was going
to happen in the north?
'Mr Engholm said we should try to define an independent identity as a
region. It was no good just wringing our hands and saying: 'We are so far
away.' What we needed was the inspiration of the Baltic region as a region
of the future.'
That was all before it became apparent that eastern Europe was going to open
up both politically and economically, making the ambition of a great
increase in pan-Baltic links suddenly more realistic, and more attractive.
Mr Engholm went on to win the 1988 election in Schleswig-Holstein. Today, as
national leader of the SPD, he is the most likely challenger for the German
chancellorship. One of his first acts in Kiel was to set up the Denkfabrik,
with the task of putting practical flesh on the bones of his idea.
The result was a study proposing a whole range of future links in the
economy, science and research, culture and the environment. 'Our aim was not
just to promote government-to-government contacts, but to get the whole
private sector involved in greater co-operation,' says Dr Jann. 'We
suggested that chambers of trade and industry had greater common interests,
and universities.'
Thus, for example, the chambers of commerce in Schleswig-Holstein and south
Sweden have set up a 'co-operation exchange,' and the city chambers of Kiel
and Gdansk, in Poland, have signed a co-operation agreement. A BaltChamber
has been established to represent the entire region.
Another joint initiative came from Mr Pehr Gyllenhammar (the head of Volvo)
and Mr Engholm, to set up the North European Club, a regular forum of
business leaders from the region. Its aims are to investigate and promote
improvements in transport and communication infrastructure, scientific
collaboration, environmental management, and cultural and youth exchanges.
The club is now seeking to find new business leaders from the emerging
economies of eastern Europe as members - still few and far between.
In the whole exercise, Schleswig-Holstein is co-operating closely with
neighbouring Hamburg, the great port which adds a whole new dimension of
services to attract Scandinavian investors - whether they choose to set up
in the city itself, or in the cheaper hinterland. Indeed, Hamburg itself is
setting up a big East European trade centre, to exploit its new position as
a link between east and west.
This summer, Mr Engholm took a trip to Gdansk, Kaliningrad and Tallinn to
underline the east European side of his Baltic commitment, signing
co-operation deals with each authority along the way. In Poland, for
example, he signed an agreement to give Polish agricultural specialists six
months training and practical experience in Germany.
In Kaliningrad, Mr Engholm promised not to allow the promised Via Baltica -
the trunk road planned to run from Hamburg via Rostock and Gdansk to Tallinn
and St Petersburg - to bypass the Russian enclave. The whole area, he
agreed, desperately needed better communications to develop into a centre of
Baltic co-operation.
As for Estonia, where co-operation is already well advanced,
Schleswig-Holstein agreed to found and support a new economic academy, and
both sides agreed to expand the existing freight ferry service between Kiel
and Tallinn to include passengers.
Quite apart from promoting better communications for its Baltic partners,
Schleswig-Holstein needs them at home.
There is an urgent need for a new link across the Elbe at Hamburg, to
prevent that city from being a bottleneck instead of a facility to
north-south trade. At the same time, even more grandiose plans for a fixed
link across the Fehmarn Belt, cutting the travelling time between Copenhagen
and Hamburg to two hours by high-speed train, are well advanced. The
ambition is to have in place a privately-financed rail link, possibly with a
road link as well, by the year 2003.
All efforts at co-operation, it must be said, have yet to show real
achievement in terms of trade and investment flows. Schleswig-Holstein is
less involved in regional trade than most of the other littoral states: in
overall trade, just 19 per cent of the Land's external ties in 1990 were
with other Baltic states - Finland has about 47 per cent. 'All these things
take time to work through,' says Dr Jann. 'One single big contract could
change the whole picture.'
Given the planned enlargement of the European Community to include Sweden,
Norway and Finland, Mr Engholm and his colleagues are convinced that the
position as a poor northern cousin in Germany is about to change. He no
longer sees the EC internal market as a threat, but as an opportunity.
