FT  18 JUL 92 / President Havel to quit next week
MR VACLAV HAVEL said yesterday he would resign as president of
Czechoslovakia on Monday. This will leave the federation without a head of
state and accelerate the process towards the creation of two independent
Czech and Slovak republics.
He had been expected to stay in office until October 5, despite his failure
to be re-elected by the federal parliament this month, when a handful of
Slovak deputies vetoed his candidacy.
Mr Havel will now be free to run for the Czech presidency, a post being
prepared by the new Czech parliament, which is drafting a constitution.
Slovakia has said it will also adopt its own constitution, with a Slovak
president, possibly as early as late August.
Mr Vaclav Klaus, the Czech prime minister, supports the candidacy of the
internationally respected playwright-turned-president. But Mr Havel this
week said he would accept the post only if he was elected directly and if
'the position was not solely honorific'. Czech deputies in Mr Klaus's party
favour giving strong powers to the prime minister instead.
The resignation of Mr Havel coincided with the overwhelming approval by the
Slovak parliament of a declaration of Slovak sovereignty.
It does not challenge the current 1968 federal constitution, but it is
perceived as the first step towards an independent Slovakia.
Mr Vladimir Meciar, the Czech premier, told the Slovak deputies: 'This
declaration tells all European nations that we are now ready to negotiate as
equals.'
The declaration, which was approved by the parliament 'according to
constitutional principles', proclaims that 'the thousand years' striving of
the Slovak nation for self-realisation has been accomplished'.
Mr Jozef Prokes, leader of the pro-independence National Slovak Party and
Slovak deputy prime minister, read the document to a handful of enthusiastic
demonstrators in Bratislava, the Slovak capital, while the rest of the
republic appeared to pay little attention to this symbolic gesture.
