FT  21 MAY 92 / International Bonds: Toyota launches record Dollars 1bn
Eurobond deal
TOYOTA, the Japanese motor group, launched its Dollars 1bn Eurobond issue
yesterday, the largest offering by a company in the international bond
market and the second large deal to hit the market this week after the
Province of Ontario's Dollars 2bn global offering on Tuesday.
The deal was well received in the market, with syndicates reporting strong
demand for the AAA rated paper. The five-year bond has a coupon of 6 7/8 per
cent and was launched at a fixed reoffer price of 99.58 to yield 38 basis
points over the five-year US Treasury bond, but in the course of trading the
yield tightened to 35-36 basis points, traders said, with the bond priced at
99.50-99.55.
Nomura and Merrill Lynch, the joint lead managers, said the deal was
fully-placed, with European pension and insurance funds buying about 40 per
cent and the rest going to Japanese and other Far Eastern investors such as
investment trusts.
The deal was seen as fairly priced, and traders said the combination of a
bullish tone in the underlying government bond markets yesterday and the
fact that the lead managers had two full days in which to market the issue
contributed to its success. Toyota is one of several Japanese companies
which currently face having to refinance equity warrant issues.
The US dollar sector of the international bond market saw a heavy load of
issues yesterday, with a Dollars 100m deal from Telebras, the Brazilian
telecommunications group, and a Dollars 500m deal from Skandinaviska
Enskilda Banken, the large Swedish bank.
Telebras' five-year bond carried a coupon of 10 per cent and was priced to
yield 365 basis points over the US Treasury bond, which dealers say should
make it appeal to investors in search of high-yielding paper.
Dealers point out that successive Telebras bond issues are being priced more
aggressively: a three-year bond from the same borrower launched in February
was priced at 450 basis points over the three-year US Treasury bond. 'The
market for LDC debt has come in dramatically in recent months, and you can
now price these deals more aggressively provided there is a 10 per cent
coupon,' claimed one dealer.
S-E Banken increased its bond offering from Dollars 300m to Dollars 500m
shortly after the deal was launched. Credit Suisse First Boston, the lead
managers, said the five-year bond was priced at 78 basis points over the US
Treasury, narrowing to 76 basis points over. The bond was trading at about
99.90 by late afternoon and the proceeds were swapped into floating rate
dollars to produce a floating rate asset with a coupon of Libor plus 45
basis points.
Outside the dollar sector, Credit Local De France launched a FFr2bn zero
coupon issue which, with a maturity of 15 years is the longest-dated zero
coupon bond in this currency sector.
BNP, the lead managers, claimed there was strong demand for long-dated
zero-coupon issues: retail investors buy this kind of paper for tax reasons
while institutional investors are more likely to buy it for the combination
of maturity, currency and leverage. Launched at the reoffer price of 28.299,
the bond traded at 28.27-28.32 by late afternoon.
