FT  16 MAY 92 / City puts rise in inflation down to special factors
NEWS THAT the annual rate of headline inflation jumped to 4.3 per cent in
April failed to fluster the City yesterday with most economists and the
Treasury attributing the rise to special factors rather than underlying
inflationary pressures.
According to the Central Statistical Office (CSO), the 1.5 per cent leap in
the retail prices index from 136.7 in March to 138.8 in April mainly
reflected price rises for tobacco, alcohol, petrol and vehicle licences that
resulted from higher excise duties introduced in the March budget.
The rise was exacerbated by last year's Pounds 140 reduction in poll tax
bills dropping out of the index, although that was partly offset by much of
last year's increase in VAT also dropping out of the 12-month comparison.
Many of the increases for other goods and services were less than a year ago
and seasonal food prices fell by 1.9 per cent, the first April drop since
1972. That brought the year-on-year rate of inflation for seasonal foods to
minus 2.5 per cent, the lowest rate since February 1989, when it was minus
3.3 per cent.
The CSO said the fall was due in particular to plentiful imports and
home-grown supplies of tomatoes, lettuces and cucumbers, along with slightly
lower demand in mid April. Non-seasonal food prices also went down, falling
0.1 per cent on the month.
Prices in all the other components of the index rose in April, with tobacco
showing the biggest increase. The CSO said the average price of 20 king-size
cigarettes rose from Pounds 1.97 in March to Pounds 2.09p in April.
There were also steep price increases in the housing component of the index,
which rose 3.9 per cent on the month. The CSO said poll tax bills had
increased by 13.3 per cent on average, and water and sewerage charges by
10.1 per cent. Repairs and maintenance charges also rose.
Prices of household goods rose only 0.1 per cent on the month, the smallest
increase since 1967. That reflected discounts on furniture and furnishings.
