FT  30 NOV 92 / UK to press ahead with controversial asylum demands
BRITAIN will today press its 11 EC partners for further harmonisation of
asylum and immigration policies - in spite of claims that the proposed rules
break international law.
Faced with an influx of refugees from the ex-Yugoslav republics and eastern
Europe, immigration ministers meeting in London will consider plans to speed
the procedure for dealing with 'manifestly unfound-ed' applications for
asylum.
The Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants, Amnesty International and
the European Consultation on Refugees and Exiles have all condemned the
proposals. They claim member states are riding roughshod over existing
international conventions on human rights.
The organisations are also worried about the lack of public scrutiny of
intergovernmental negotiations on immigration policy, which take place
outside the EC framework.
Mr Johannes Van Der Klaauw, Amnesty's EC representative, said on Friday:
'The new rules do not adhere to the essential principles and safeguards -
the minimum standards for satisfactory (asylum) procedures.'
But Amnesty admitted that the fact that the EC would agree framework
'resolutions' rather than legally-binding rules limited the opportunities
for a legal challenge.
The London meeting, which will continue tomorrow, also provides the last
formal opportunity for EC immigration ministers to discuss whether to lift
internal EC border controls on people from January 1. Britain is determined
to retain controls, despite European Commission objections, but other member
states have also begun to voice doubts about removing all frontier checks so
soon.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, British home secretary, who will chair today's meeting,
told the European parliament last week there would be no general removal of
frontier controls on January 1, when the barrier-free European market should
be declared open.
The recent surge of violence against immigrants in Germany, and the EC's
failure to ratify conventions strengthening external frontiers, has
increased pressure on the ministers to toughen asylum policy and maintain
border-checks.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which has been discussing
the new rules with the EC, estimates that as many as 550,000 asylum
applications could be made during 1992, 440,000 in Germany alone.
Ministers will also be asked to consider criteria for returning asylum
applicants to the first 'safe' country they reached, and for defining such
countries.
Bangemann interview, Back Page, Second Section
