FT  04 FEB 92 / International Company News: RJR Nabisco returns to the black
RJR NABISCO, the US tobacco and food group which was subject to a Dollars
25bn leveraged buy-out in 1989, has posted full-year profits of Dollars 368m
after tax, compared with a net loss of Dollars 462m in 1990.
But the bulk of the improvement came from the company's successful debt
reduction programme, with net interest expenses for the year down to Dollars
2.11bn from Dollars 3bn. The group's 'business unit contribution' -
operating profits before the amortisation of trademarks and goodwill - rose
more modestly, from Dollars 3.43bn to Dollars 3.54bn, and in the final
quarter actually declined slightly to Dollars 904m from Dollars 928m.
During the past 12 months, the company has undertaken various refinancings
aimed at replacing debt either by equity or cheaper loan capital. The steady
improvement of the balance sheet since the buy-out has allowed RJR Nabisco
to shed its 'highly leveraged transaction' status, winning access to cheaper
bank finance. Yesterday, RJR shares gained Dollars  1/8 to Dollars 10 3/8 .
Domestic tobacco operations remained under competitive pressure, with lower
volumes and higher marketing costs outstripping the benefit of price
increases and favourable raw material costs. Net sales for the full year
rose 1 per cent, but business unit contribution fell 4 per cent.
The international tobacco side, however, fared much better, adding volume in
Europe, Asia and the Middle East. Net sales there increased by 19 per cent
in 1991, while business unit contribution was up by 21 per cent. Overall,
tobacco's business unit contribution for the year was static at Dollars
2.73bn.
On the food front, net sales for the year increased by 11 per cent to
Dollars 6.45bn, while business unit contribution totalled Dollars 920m,
against Dollars 802m. However, this is partially distorted by disposals and
by the contrasting consolidation of Latin American operations in 1991. The
company said that, after allowing for this, net sales rose 2 per cent and
business unit contribution was up 8 per cent.
The food side, said RJR, saw the benefit of lower commodity costs and
productivity gains, but this was offset in part by lower volumes.
