FT  06 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Compass buys Travellers Fare for Pounds 32m
 -Caterer to take Casey Jones and BR sandwich into the workplace
THE BRITISH Rail sandwich, already a cultural icon, is poised to leave the
station platform and enter the workplace.
Compass Group, the catering and hospitals company, yesterday announced it
was paying Pounds 31.7m for Travellers Fare, which sells sandwiches and
other refreshments at stations and airports and was originally bought out by
management from British Rail in 1988.
Mr Francis Mackay, Compass' chief executive, said the company was interested
in developing the retailing brands established by Travellers Fare. These
include hamburger outlet Casey Jones, Upper Crust sandwich shops and cafes.
Compass intends to market these outlets, usually clumped together in 'food
courts', to contract catering clients like hospitals, universities and
private companies.
'We want to take the brands into these places, improve the throughput and
lift margins,' he said.
Travellers Fare operates nearly 300 oulets and employs 3,000 people. Pre-tax
profits in the year to March 31 were Pounds 3.6m from turnover of about
Pounds 80m. The 1988 buy-out was led by venture capital groups 3i, CINVen
and Charterhouse Development Capital.
About half of sales come from branded outlets, with the rest from Quicksnack
kiosks at smaller stations. Travellers Fare only operates fixed-site
outlets, while British Rail does on-train catering.
In a separate transaction, Compass is buying Letheby &amp; Christopher, caterer
to leading events like Ascot and Glyndebourne. Compass will pay Pounds 7.3m
for the company, which is being sold by First National Finance Corporation.
Letheby &amp; Christopher made pre-tax profits of Pounds 600,000 in the year to
October 31 from turnover of about Pounds 20m.
Compass is funding the purchases through existing bank facilities. Net
borrowings will increase from Pounds 34m to Pounds 72m. This will bring
interest cover down from eight to five times, according to Mr Mackay.
He said the acquisitions were likely to be earnings neutral this year.
Management would be retained to run the companies as distinct units within
Compass.
According to Mr Mackay, British Rail sandwiches will not be served at the
Institute of Directors, another Letheby &amp; Christopher client.
Compass has expressed interest in the overseas portion of Gardner Merchant -
the Forte contract catering arm it recently failed to acquire. But Mr Mackay
said yesterday it was 'very unlikely' it would buy any part of Gardner
Merchant. It is understood Forte is considering a management buy-out bid for
all of Gardner.
