FT  14 MAY 92 / Value of GPA flotation scaled down to Dollars 800m
GPA will today announce the flotation of 40m shares in the world's largest
aircraft leasing group, which is likely to value the shares on offer at
around Dollars 800m (Pounds 442m), almost half what was originally
envisaged.
The group's earlier hopes for a Dollars 1.5bn flotation were scaled back
because of lack of demand in Japan and fatigue in the US equities market
inundated with new issues.
The final price will be determined by market conditions at the time of the
sale in mid-June. Mr Gerry Grimstone, director of Schroders, the UK lead
manager, last night said: 'If the marketing goes well the number of shares
for sale will be increased.'
The pathfinder prospectus, published today, shows that the group plans to
issue 28m new shares while selling 12m of the 120m existing shares,
including convertibles, at a price of between Dollars 20 and Dollars 25. In
the case of the UK portion of the sale there will also be a two-for-one
share split, giving a price range of between Dollars 10 and Dollars 12.50.
Some banks distributing the shares in Europe believe they can sell the
shares for more than Dollars 20 and have therefore argued for an eventual
price range of Dollars 18 to Dollars 23. Mr Grimstone said he was confident
that the price would not fall below Dollars 20.
However another adviser said: 'It is possible that the shares could go for
less than Dollars 20. But given the crisis in the airline industry it is
still a tribute to GPA's managerial skills.'
While most of GPA's existing shareholders have agreed not to sell more than
20 per cent of their shares for a year from today - when the year-end
results are announced - some shareholders are still opposed to any such
compulsory lock-up agreement.
As of yesterday some Japanese investors who bought stock at Dollars 32,
including Nippon Life and Kawasaki, had declined to sign a lock-up
agreement.
GPA's advisers, which include Schroders in the UK, Merrill Lynch and Goldman
Sachs in the US, and Nomura in Japan as global co-ordinator, will announce
this morning that 75 per cent of shareholders have agreed to a formal
lock-up agreement and a further 11 per cent to a morally binding commitment.
Mr Maurice Foley, GPA chief executive, had warned that anything less than 85
per cent could jeopardise the float. Mr Grimstone said he was still
'delighted' that so many shareholders had agreed to a lock-up agreement.
Many Irish institutions refused to sign a lock-up agreement because they
cannot enter into legally binding agreements, although they have written to
the company saying they do not intend to sell more than 20 per cent of the
shares in the first year.
