FT  21 JUL 92 / International Capital Markets: Japan widens its search for
new capital sources - The FRN market re-awakening
JAPANESE banks are set to re-open a dormant sector of the international bond
market in their urgent search for new sources of capital.
The Japanese Ministry of Finance has relaxed regulations allowing banks to
issue perpetual subordinated floating rate notes. Sakura Bank is expected to
launch an Dollars 800m perpetual FRN issue in the next few weeks.
Perpetual FRNs were used extensively by capital-hungry banks in the early
1980s. Between 1984 and 1986 around Dollars 20bn perpetual FRNs were issued
by banks and companies.
The market was seen as highly liquid, offering many of the characteristics
of money-market investments but with a higher margin. In early 1987
liquidity dried up and the market has been largely dormant ever since.
Variations on the theme, such as step-up perpetual notes - where the margin
paid to the investor increases through the life of the bond - failed to
stimulate new issues.
Six of Japan's leading banks could already be below international capital
adequacy standards which come into force at the end of this financial year,
according to a report published yesterday by IBCA, the credit rating agency.
The weakness of the Tokyo stock market has eroded the capital strength of
all Japanese banks by reducing unrealised gains on securities holdings.
Under the Basle accord on international bank capital adequacy, the banks can
count 45 per cent of unrealised gains as tier II or non-core capital.
With the Nikkei stock market average at 16,000, Bank of Tokyo, Sakura, Fuji,
Tokai and Hokkaido Takushoku may already be below the Basle standard - which
prescribes a minimum capital-to-assets ratio of 8 per cent. Yesterday the
Nikkei closed at 15,884.
Some banks are much more sensitive to falling equity prices than others. The
larger trust banks and the long-term credit banks have built up very large
hidden reserves and have not liquidated securities holdings to cover weak
operating profits or LDC debt provisions.
Others, such as Chuo Trust, Yasuda Trust and Bank of Tokyo have made more
extensive use of their hidden reserves and carry stocks at a much higher
book value in their accounts.
Although perpetual FRNs will be issued in the international market, most of
the paper is likely to be placed with Japanese institutional investors.
Japanese life insurance companies have already made subordinated loans to
the banks to boost their capital resources.
Bankers said yesterday the new bonds would be priced at a level where big
Japanese investors are prepared to buy new paper, rather than by reference
to the secondary market level of outstanding issues.
Barclays has around Dollars 2bn perpetual floating rate paper outstanding,
launched in the mid-1980s. Barclays paper trades at a margin of around 1 per
cent over the London interbank offered rate, a much higher return to
investors than when the paper was launched.
But even at attractive interest rates it remains uncertain whether investors
will buy sufficient quantities of perpetual paper to support the banks'
capital ratios.
'These (issues) will be expensive, and it appears doubtful that the limited
market for such paper could absorb the large scale issues the banks need to
make,' commented the IBCA report.
