FT  09 DEC 92 / Foreign Affairs: Pass the human parcel - The EC resolution
on asylum may force refugees to countries least able to support them
At European Community summits many statements are issued. Only a few are
seriously discussed. One statement which this week's Edinburgh summit can be
relied on to nod through is a 'declaration on principles governing external
aspects of migration policy', proposed by the British presidency.
While welcoming the 'greater ease of travel and contacts throughout Europe'
allowed by the collapse of communism, the summiteers will express their
concern that 'uncontrolled immigration could be destabilising and could
undermine the situation of third country nationals who have legally taken up
residence in the member states'. And they will go on to list the factors
they think could help reduce migration: 'the preservation of peace and the
termination of armed conflicts; full respect for human rights, including
respect for minority rights; the creation of democratic societies and
adequate social conditions; a liberal trade policy, which should improve
economic conditions in the countries of migration; and co-ordination of
action in the fields of foreign policy, economic co-operation and
immigration and asylum policy'.
If that is to be taken as a list of devout Christmas wishes, it borders on
the platitudinous. If it is a list of New Year resolutions on which the EC's
member states intend to act it is laudable, but strains credulity. They
hardly have the power to create democracy, let alone adequate social
conditions, beyond their own borders. They apparently lack the power, or
anyway the will-power, to preserve peace and terminate armed conflicts. They
have done a bit, but hardly enough, to encourage respect for human and
minority rights. They presumably do have the power to adopt a liberal trade
policy, but seem disinclined to exercise that power when dealing with goods
that 'countries of migration' can actually produce at competitive prices
such as steel.
That leaves 'co-ordination of action', notably in the field of immigration
and asylum policy. Here the member states have indeed been busy, although
they remain strangely coy about the details of what they have been up to.
Last week the ministers with responsibility for immigration matters met in
London under the chairmanship of the British home secretary, Mr Kenneth
Clarke. They did issue a press release listing the recommendations they had
approved and the resolutions they adopted, but the texts of these documents
were not made public.
If it were up to the British government the texts would no doubt still be
shrouded in that cloak of secrecy with which it instinctively surrounds all
its activities when not positively obliged to disclose them. Mr Clarke, for
instance, had nothing to say about his deliberations with his European
colleagues when he appeared the next day before the House of Commons
committee considering Britain's own national Asylum Bill.
One might think - indeed some MPs did think - that the former would have
some bearing on the latter. But apparently it is none of their business.
Luckily the Dutch government is rather less secretive. And so the texts of
last week's resolutions soon became available to British non-governmental
organisations and journalists.
One of those resolutions, calling for an 'accelerated procedure' to deal
with 'manifestly unfounded applications for asylum', was referred to in this
column on October 28. I am happy to report that some of the more offensive
language I quoted then from the original British draft, advising refugees to
stay in their own countries or continents, has disappeared. And the overall
objective, to speed up the processing of applications in the interest of
genuine refugees as well as that of host country, is reasonable enough.
But the resolution does not suggest that other EC countries should follow
the Dutch example of speeding up the process by offering applicants free
legal aid. Instead it introduces the notion of the 'host third country',
defined at some length in an accompanying resolution, but meaning in essence
a country outside the Community - other than the refugee's own - from which
he (or she) has come and to which he (or she) can be sent back.
Did I say 'can'? It is actually more like 'must'. Although there is a
let-out clause under which 'any member state retains the right, for
humanitarian reasons, not to remove the asylum applicant to a host third
country', any state which exercises that right in more than a handful of
cases will clearly be letting the side down, since 'the principle of the
host third country is to be applied to all applicants for asylum,
irrespective of whether they may be regarded as refugees', and 'thus, if
there is a host third country, the application for refugee status may not be
examined and the asylum applicant may be sent to that country.'
In short, the object of the resolution is to make sure that refugees are
sent back to the first 'safe' country they were able to reach. It
complements the Dublin Convention, signed in 1990, under which member states
agreed that asylum applications should be dealt with by the first EC country
in which the applicant had arrived.
Although, as of last week, only four states had got round to ratifying this
convention, Britain has been making vigorous use of it. A verb 'to Dublin'
has even been coined to describe the action of sending someone back to, say,
Belgium on the grounds that he spent a night in Brussels airport before
reaching Britain.
Britain is the main beneficiary of these arrangements. Few people will be
'Dublined' to Britain, since few refugees will pass through Britain on their
way to other EC states. The UK has placed itself at the hub of two
concentric circles of selfishness. It can send people back to other EC
countries, and now all EC countries will be expected to send them back to
'host third countries'.
Which will those host third countries be? All too often the central European
ones closest to the horrors that people are fleeing from, and most in danger
of being sucked into those horrors themselves: Macedonia, Croatia, Slovenia,
Hungary, the Czech and Slovak republics, Poland. All those countries, in the
midst of their own desperately difficult transition to democracy and the
market, are struggling to cope with great flows of refugees and migrants,
and have neither the institutions nor the resources to cope with them.
To qualify as a host third country, you must not threaten the life or
freedom of the applicant, or subject him to torture or inhuman or degrading
treatment, or send him back to the country whose persecution he originally
sought to escape. As soon as you pass this test, your reward is to be
expected to keep all the refugees that arrive on your own territory, and to
accept back all those that have tried to move on to more prosperous and
stable countries, which one might think better equipped to look after them.
Is it by this obscene game of pass-the-human-parcel that west European
leaders believe they will encourage 'full respect for human rights' and 'the
creation of democratic societies and adequate social conditions'?
