FT  30 SEP 92 / The Labour Party At Blackpool: Smith spells out vision of
government - Leader's speech redefines movement's values and party's mission
ACTION to help industry, boost the housing market, preserve strategic assets
such as coal, and the positive promotion of opportunities to overcome
discrimination were included in Mr John Smith's programme for an 'active
government' in his first conference speech as Labour leader.
Labour stood for the government taking responsibility, 'not pointing the
finger at somebody else'. Active government lay 'at the very heart of a
fair, a prosperous and a free society,' Mr Smith said.
But he said government should not run people's lives. 'Government need not
run companies or small businesses, but it must create the conditions for
them to prosper.'
Seeking to redefine Labour's mission after its fourth successive election
defeat, Mr Smith argued that the party had been 'born out of the
determination of ordinary citizens to play their full part in society, to
claim for themselves the opportunities enjoyed by others, opportunities of
individual advancement and fulfilment that they had previously been denied'.
Labour was a vehicle for individual aspirations, he explained.
Those who had written off the party after April 'were wrong not merely
because the Tory dream has turned into a nightmare. They were wrong because
they failed to understand the enduring values of our movement.'
Labour's commission on social justice was the first serious attempt since
Beveridge to find ways of dealing with deep social ills. 'Income, wealth
distribution, poverty, social welfare policy and taxation are all
interlinked.'
Mr Smith denounced the government's vision of individuals as consumers and
Mr John Major's desire to see the 'privatisation of choice'. The result was
a society 'shaped to answer financial demand, not social need. It's a
society that respects purchasing power, not individual rights.'
Sterling's weakness on foreign exchange markets 'was not the work of weeks -
it was the result of years of economic error compounded by mismanagement. It
has left the pound, not top of the pile, but as the one currency that no one
wants to hold.'
Market forces had to serve society's needs. 'And if the market system
becomes an agent of speculation and stagnation instead of an engine for
prosperity, then it is time for governments to act.'
Mr Smith wanted a government 'acting to help industry, create jobs, boost
the housing market. Not sitting on its hands waiting for those green shoots
to sprout.'
He said active government was also about protecting important resources.
An active government would involve 'efficient and caring' public services,
environmental protection and a strengthening of workers' rights, including a
minimum wage, he said.
Government also had responsibility to ensure everyone could contribute to
public life. 'It is not enough to make discrimination illegal. An active
government must positively promote opportunities for all our citizens in
every aspect of public life.'
