FT  25 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: EC legislation planned on oil
and gas licensing
THE EUROPEAN Commission is today set to approve draft legislation that would
guarantee free and open competition between companies applying for oil and
gas exploration and drilling licences in the European Community.
It is the first EC directive aimed directly at ensuring that oil producers
enjoy the benefits of the single European market from January 1, 1993.
Controversial measures to guarantee a free market in other energy sectors -
electricity and gas - have already been approved by the commission.
Under the new directive, governments would be required to publish the
criteria on which they grant licences to oil and gas companies and would be
unable to discriminate against applicants - for example, on grounds of
nationality.
According to EC officials, some member states allow only their national
natural resources companies to drill for oil and gas. Others attach
unacceptable conditions on price and the location of production plants, or
insist applicants work with particular partners or supply specified
customers.
The draft directive would not force national governments to accept the
lowest bid for exploration and drilling contracts, and member states could
continue to impose restrictions on the grounds of national security, or to
prevent the depletion of natural resources. But they would have to eliminate
other discriminatory conditions.
Britain, which controls licensing in much of the North Sea oil and gas
fields, will back the broad thrust of the proposal, which it believes will
help open up new EC markets to its oil and gas producers. 'We already
operate a transparent and non-discriminatory regime in the North Sea,' said
one British official yesterday.
Meanwhile, controversial proposals to build up Community oil stocks have
been dropped from today's commission agenda. The plan - a brainchild of Mr
Antonio Cardoso e Cunha, the EC energy commissioner - is still likely to
come before the commission in the coming weeks and will incense many EC oil
producers. They believe the industry is already sufficiently well-prepared
to cope with an oil crisis without Brussels' interference.
