FT  23 JAN 92 / Radical teaching reforms urged: Primary school report may
help end 'silly practices' says Clarke
RADICAL reform of primary school teaching practices, rejecting the 'dogma of
recent decades', is urged in a report published yesterday. It also calls for
an emphasis on whole-class and subject-specific teaching.
'There is a need for fundamental changes in primary education,' said Mr
Kenneth Clarke, education secretary, responding to the report which the
government published. It was produced by three primary school experts
appointed by Mr Clarke only seven weeks ago.
Ministers have no direct powers over teaching practices, but the report will
be sent to every school and teacher training college in England and Wales.
Mr Clarke said he hoped it would 'help to get rid of some of the rather
silly practices which have crept into schools in recent decades'.
Dubbed the 'three wise men' by Mr Clarke, the report's authors are Professor
Robin Alexander of Leeds University, Mr Jim Rose, Her Majesty's chief
inspector of primary schools, and Mr Christopher Woodhead, chief executive
of the National Curriculum Council.
They highlight the marked decline in reading and numeracy standards revealed
by national tests for seven-year-olds last year. They also attack the
prevalence of 'highly questionable dogmas which have led to excessively
complex classroom practices and devalued the place of subjects in the
curriculum'. Instead, they urge an increase in single subject and whole
class teaching.
The report advocates the grouping of pupils by ability in each subject and
calls for all schools to have access to specialist expertise in all nine
national curriculum subjects.
Reform of primary teacher training is also implicit in the report. At
present, most primary school teachers take a four-year Bachelor of Education
course, which combines subject study with educational theory and teaching
practice. An increase in the teaching element and reductions in the theory
and overall course length are now likely.
The report was broadly welcomed by the opposition and teacher unions. Mr
Jack Straw, shadow education spokesman, said it was 'an important
contribution to the debate about teaching methods'. Mr Matthew Taylor,
Liberal Democrat education spokesman, said: 'It backs what most teachers are
doing - a mixture of old and new methods.'
Mr Peter Smith, general secretary of the AMMA teachers' union, said the
report should lead to 'a real professional discussion' of the issues. But Mr
Doug McAvoy, general secretary of the National Union of Teachers, condemned
it as 'rushed, based on the experience of just three people'.
Clarke's wise men, Page 7
