FT  16 JUN 92 / Refugee's return averts rift with Bonn
A SUDANESE refugee at the centre of a tussle over European asylum procedures
has been discreetly sent back to Germany by the British authorities,
defusing a potential source of strain in UK-German relations.
The Home Office confirmed that Mr Ahmed Gazmalhaliq Abdulla, whose tortuous
journey from Sudan and then around Europe has brought wide attention, was
sent back to Germany on May 12.
This was after Mr Abdulla's lawyers, who claimed he risked persecution in
Germany, failed to win permission for a court appeal to allow him to seek
asylum in Britain.
Mr Abdulla, who had spent almost a year in an asylum-seekers' hostel in
Germany, travelled to Britain at the end of last year after his hostel had
been attacked several times by rightwing extremists during violence against
immigrants in Germany last autumn.
UK authorities rejected Mr Abdulla's asylum request, but in January the Home
Office gave him temporary approval to remain in Britain while lawyers
prepared a case to back his claim that he would be under threat in Germany.
By appearing to support the notion that immigrants faced the danger of
racial persecution in Germany, the UK's decision raised controversy in
Britain and Germany. The Home Office said the case had been 'blown up out of
all proportion'.
If Britain had given the refugee a permanent home it would almost certainly
have affected political relations between London and Bonn, and could have
led to similar departures of immigrants from Germany to the UK. This seems
to have accounted for the government's rapid action to send Mr Abdulla back.
His lawyers claim that the decision was taken in spite of only patchy
evidence that violence against foreigners is abating in Germany.
The number of cases, which totalled 2,427 last year, amounted to 809 in the
first four months of this year. This was down by more than half from the
final four months of last year, when there was a bulge in the number of
cases recorded. But it was still four times the number of cases for the
first four months of 1991.
