FT  14 SEP 92 / Brussels balloon flies into danger: The French referendum is
prompting EC officials to revise long-held assumptions about the Community
Doubt is a rare commodity among the politicians and bureaucrats who run the
European Community in Brussels. Cocooned in a world of grand designs and
logical structures, they normally project a smooth self-confidence about the
role of the EC at the centre of Europe.
With the French referendum on the Maastricht treaty just six days away, this
confidence has been punctured. Whatever the outcome on Sunday, there is a
realisation among Eurocrats that they can no longer assume that the
development of the Community is an historic inevitability.
The national debate in France on Maastricht has been sobering for the entire
Community. For the first time since the Treaty of Rome in 1957, the French,
the traditional driving force behind European integration, have held a
debate on Europe - and it has been conducted on national terms.
Both supporters and opponents of the treaty have invoked the fear of German
hegemony to buttress their campaign, while President Francois Mitterrand's
statement that France would not support majority decisions by the Twelve on
important matters of foreign policy could have come straight out of the
mouth of Mrs Margaret Thatcher.
The French have rediscovered the allure of national sovereignty. This
Gaullist tendency was detectable in the closing phase of negotiations on
Maastricht last December when France pushed to vest more power in the
Council of Ministers, and it has grown. Last week Mr Mitterrand chose to
emphasise that the independent professionals who would run the European
central bank would be subject to the control of elected politicians in the
European Council. 'Either he dared not tell the French the truth,' says one
EC observer, 'or he simply distorted the treaty.'
On the other hand, last night's announcement of a European currency
realignment gave credence to Mr Mitterrand's view that politics will indeed
play a part in decision-making by the future European central bank. As part
of the lira devaluation in the European Monetary System, the Bundesbank is
expected to ease its tight monetary policy with a cut in its leading
interest rates today - a sign of the fierce political pressures acting on
even Europe's most independent central bank.
From Brussels' viewpoint, second French thoughts about Eurofederalism are
troubling. The shift coincides with evidence in other European countries -
Britain, Denmark, and most ominously, Germany - that popular enthusiasm for
Maastricht's path to political and monetary union, never strong, is
weakening. The Danish vote in June against Maastricht no longer looks like
an aberration. 'If there was a referendum in Germany tomorrow,' says one EC
official, 'it would fail.'
How has this sudden burst of Euroscepticism come about? One explanation is
public ignorance: the dense 250-page text is about as readable as a London
bus timetable. Even supporters of closer integration worry about this. Mr
Jacques Delors, who has threatened to resign as European Commission
president if Maastricht is rejected, constantly complains about the design
of the treaty while on the campaign trail in his native France.
A senior EC official describes the shock experienced in Brussels when a
spate of public opinion polls showed a majority in France against
Maastricht. It was, he says, as if the heads of government and civil
servants responsible for Maastricht had existed in a space bubble, too
remote to gauge the true sentiments of the people.
Coming down to earth has been a bruising experience. It has forced officials
and ministers to focus on the possibility of a French rejection. The great
fear is that the dynamic development of the Community will dissipate as
governments become paralysed by uncertainty about the EC's future.
Mr Delors launched the plan for monetary union with meticulous preparation,
but Chancellor Helmut Kohl and President Mitterrand added on the ill-defined
political union in response to the unforeseen collapse of the Soviet empire
and the resulting unification of Germany. Five years of steady economic
growth and the success of the single market project (1992) was enough to
persuade the true believers that the gamble could be pulled off; but the
costs of German unification - coupled with the economic slowdown on the
Continent - have made the enterprise appear much more fragile.
Yesterday's realignment, by preparing the ground for a fall in European
interest rates this week, is likely to have an important impact on the
outcome of the French vote. The chances of a Yes may have increased - but
the possibility of a No will still exercises the financial markets. French
rejection, says one senior EC observer, would mean that 'the timetable for a
single European currency by the end of the century is dead'.
The combination of the Bundesbank's interest rate cut and the lira
devaluation underlines the flexibility employed by European central banks
and their governments to keep alive the exchange rate mechanism (ERM). Yet
the lira devaluation adds renewed emphasis to the question marks over
Italy's commitment to participation in the final stage of economic and
monetary union (Emu).
A French No would make the horse-trading among the Twelve, which lies at the
heart of the EC process, infinitely more complex. The Delors II package,
which would funnel billions to the poorer southern member states to bring
their living standards closer to those of the richer northern countries,
would be impossible to attain. The EC's plans for enlargement would also
risk being delayed.
Second, Maastricht's plans for 'political union' linked to a common European
foreign policy would appear even more remote. So too, the tentative vision
of a common European defence.
Yet the show would go on, albeit on a different course. Member states would
still continue the process of wider European co-operation. The consequences
of the single European market - the project which provides for the free
movement of goods, services, capital and people by the end of this year -
make this inevitable. The question is whether a weak EC would have the
energy to address neglected areas such as law enforcement and immigration.
Both these areas are assuming greater urgency in view of the continuing
refugee exodus from eastern Europe, so vividly demonstrated by the Rostock
riots.
A Yes vote in France would not resolve a broader question: Will the EC be
able to absorb the lessons provided by the French referendum and the
ratification process?
Much of the opposition to Maastricht is driven by fears about the
consequences of the internal market. In France, for example, farmers may
vote against Maastricht because they are angry over Common Agricultural
Policy, which reduces their financial aid. But in the coming months and
years, as the single market starts to embrace previously protected national
businesses such as telecommunications and public procurement, the scope for
conflict rises exponentially.
Arguments about Emu are inevitable. Maastricht's basic monetary compromise -
German agreement to give up the D-Mark in return for an independent central
bank - looks precarious. Last night's Bundesbank's apparent volte face on
interest rates in response to overwhelming political pressures may add to
suspicions among German monetarists that the European central bank will
indeed enjoy only limited independence. Fears in Germany that the Twelve
will try to dilute the strict convergence criteria required for Emu are
understandable. Even if Mr Kohl's coalition secures ratification in the
Bundestag and Bundesrat this year, both chambers are now demanding the right
to hold a 'vote of approval' before the EC can move to the final stage of
Emu.
The invocation of national German interest is viewed with sympathy in
Brussels. It underlines the present trend in Europe: an increase in the
assertiveness of national parliaments as the realisation dawns about
Maastricht's impact on national sovereignty.
In Britain, where the House of Commons has long debated the pros and cons of
Europe, if not the fine detail of EC legislation, this assertiveness is
viewed as healthy. In France and Germany, where national legislatures took
EC membership for granted as part of their country's post-second world war
rapprochement, it is a new phenomenon. And it demands a response, according
to Brussels officials.
Their answer is subsidiarity - the notion that the EC should exercise
restraint in its application of Community law and devolve power to members.
Mr Delors, often caricatured a power-grabbing centralist, has been pushing
for devolved power as far back as 1988. The problem is that in the absence
of concrete proposals few bureaucrats, particularly in the European
Commission, have paid much attention.
The result is a crisis of confidence in the Commission. Eurocrats complain
they have become a convenient flogging horse for politicians in the European
Council who wish to duck responsibility for unpopular decisions. They argue,
correctly, that the European Council - not the Commission - is the big
winner at Maastricht through the increased role for intergovernmental
co-operation outside of Community law.
Mr Major, Mr Mitterrand and Mr Delors have all made this point in the past
fortnight. Yet few have drawn the consequences. However, technocratic and
undemocratic the Commission may be, it pales by comparison with the
smoke-filled rooms in the Council. For the Council is not subject to serious
scrutiny either by the European Parliament, which has failed to establish
broad legitimacy, or the national legislatures which have for the most part
ignored European affairs.
How to make the Council and the Commission more accountable is one of the
great tests of the coming decade, says a senior EC official.
For the moment all eyes are on the French, and the Danes. It is far from
clear that a French Yes can salvage a treaty which remains hobbled by the
Danish vote and which requires unanimity to have the force of law. No one is
sure how the Danish question can be finessed.
If Maastricht fails, the EC will be a far weaker, less reliable, partner for
the US and other allies - a throwback to the 1970s when member states could
not even agree on a common response to the oil crisis. With momentous events
unfolding outside the EC's frontiers in Yugoslavia, eastern Europe and the
former Soviet Union, this is a distinctly uncomfortable prospect.
