FT  18 DEC 92 / Parliament and Politics: Turbulence marks 'annus Majoris' -
Alison Smith looks back at the prime minister's year since his general
election victory
AS John Major sped off on the last day of the Westminster term for his final
overseas trip as EC president, he could reflect that the year had turned out
rather better than he might have expected in January, if rather worse than
he might have hoped in April, when the Conservatives won a historic fourth
term in office.
APRIL
After an election campaign during which it appeared that Mr Major was the
only person in the UK who was sure the Tories would win, the prime minister
continued to sound upbeat. Two women joined his cabinet, but Tories heard
almost as much from Mrs Margaret Thatcher who said, cryptically, that Mr
Major was 'not his own man'.
MAY
The opening of parliament highlighted plans such as the privatisation of
British Coal and the toughening of asylum law. William Waldegrave, public
service minister, moved towards open government by publishing lists of
cabinet committees and cabinet office guidance for ministers.
JUNE
The start of the UK's six-month presidency of the European Community, and
the political idyll for the Tories was broken by the Danish referendum No to
Maastricht. Over 100 MPs, mostly Tories, signed a Commons motion calling for
a 'fresh start' in the UK's policy on the European Community. Mr Major
insisted Maastricht was 'good for Britain and good for Europe', but decided
to postpone its further consideration until the autumn anyway.
After attending the Rio world summit on the environment, which came under
fire for achieving too little, Mr Major insisted it was a 'milestone' that
so many nations had committed themselves to further action.
JULY
The row over Europe intensified. Baroness Thatcher (as she had become) used
her maiden speech in the Lords to renew her call for a referendum on
Maastricht. Tory Euro-sceptics accused Norman Lamont, the chancellor, of
selling the UK's sovereignty in agreeing to a minimum VAT level.
John MacGregor, the transport secretary, published the government's plans
for privatising British Rail, and Malcolm Rifkind, the defence secretary,
promised a peace dividend. Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland
secretary, achieved a breakthrough when Northern Irish parties agreed to
talk to the Dublin government.
Mr Lamont said that the annual public spending round would be particularly
tough because of a new 'top-down' system to keep departmental budgets within
an overall limit. Mr Major duly rejected recommendations for pay rises of up
to 24 per cent for senior officials and judges, proposing 4 per cent
instead.
AUGUST
With parliament in recess, Mr Major chaired a conference in London on the
former Yugoslavia that agreed a framework for negotiating peace, but which
had little confidence in the goodwill of the warring factions.
SEPTEMBER
Black Wednesday, when sterling was suspended from the European exchange rate
mechanism, put even other pieces of bad news during the month into
perspective.
The Treasury and the German Bundesbank swiftly began wrangling over their
very different impressions of what had happened.
Mr Major talked of being swept away in a hurricane of speculation, and was
widely seen as having lost his first encounter with Mr John Smith, the new
Labour leader, who made a witty and effective debut in the emergency
economic debate.
Though Mr Major had made clear his continuing support for his friend David
Mellor, the national heritage secretary resigned after a succession of
stories about his private life unnerved Tory MPs.
OCTOBER
The Tory party conference was racked with conflict over Europe, though Mr
Major dismissed reports of divisions as 'froth and bubble'. Yesterday's Tory
idols, Baroness Thatcher and Lord Tebbit, made heartfelt attacks on
Maastricht; Mr Hurd warned against the madness of the party tearing itself
apart over the issue, and won the conference vote.
Scarcely was the conference over when British Coal announced that 31 pits
would close, making 30,000 miners redundant, because of insufficient demand.
Within 10 days, after clamour from Tory MPs, the government had U-turned and
promised a full review. The row, which mobilised public campaigns in places
as unlikely as Cheltenham, completely upstaged the Birmingham EC summit,
which discussed 'subsidiarity' - making EC decision-taking at the most local
level possible.
NOVEMBER
The trial of three Midlands businessmen accused of breaking the embargo on
arms sales to Iraq collapsed after Alan Clark, a former minister, admitted
the government had known what the businessmen were doing. Mr Major said he
hadn't known and, amid charges of a government cover-up, announced an
independent inquiry.
The government won a critical Commons debate on proceeding with the
Maastricht bill by just three votes, after Mr Smith managed to unite his
party around a policy of opposing the government by waiting for the Danes.
As would-have-been Tory rebels complained about the strongarm tactics from
government whips, one waverer said he had been won over by Mr Major's
promise to him that the final Commons vote on the bill would not come until
after a second Danish referendum.
Mr Lamont's Autumn Statement cheered Tory backbenchers with its emphasis on
capital projects and a strict 1.5 per cent ceiling for public sector pay.
But Mr Lamont himself looked accident-prone after consecutive rows about a
credit card bill and his acceptance of taxpayers' money towards legal costs.
The political talks about the future of northern Ireland collapsed as they
ran up against the agreed deadline.
DECEMBER
MPs began their marathon of detailed consideration of the Maastricht bill,
with less drama and more boredom than forecast. Mr Major's performances
continued to improve against Mr Smith at their bi-weekly duel at question
time in the Commons.
Mr Major told MPs about his triumph at the Edinburgh EC summit. Against
expectations, the meeting reached consensus on how to enable the Danes to
ratify Maastricht and the EC's future finances. Amid growing concern about
the former Yugoslavia, the last gasps of domestic politics came as the
government faced the sharper-than-expected rise in unemployment, which went
up by 41,100, its 31st consecutive monthly rise.
Joe Rogaly, Page 13
