FT  03 FEB 92 / International Company News: Ferruzzi unveils plan for sugar
deal
FERRUZZI, the Italian agro-industrial and chemicals concern, has unveiled
terms for the merger of Eridania and Beghin-Say, its Italian and French
sugar subsidiaries. The deal will create a foods group with expected sales
of over L11,000bn (Dollars 9.2bn) this year.
Early market reaction suggested that the transaction, first mooted last
November, could prove controversial because of the price attributed to the
Eridania assets being bought by Beghin-Say.
Mr Giuseppe Garofano, chairman of Ferruzzi's Montedison subsidiary, which
controls Eridania, stressed the valuation had been carried out with the
knowledge and approval of the Commission des Operations de Bourse, the
French stock market authority.
Under the proposal, Beghin-Say will make an exclusive rights issue on behalf
of Eridania, which will participate by conferring its Italian sugar business
and its 30 per cent stake in Cerestar, the starch group in which Beghin-Say
is the other shareholder. Beghin-Say will then be renamed
Eridania/Beghin-Say (EBS).
Eridania itself, which will remain as a shell company to be renamed
Finanziaria Agroindustriale, will be absorbed by Montedison.
Ferruzzi controls Montedison, which in turn controls 55 per cent of
Eridania. The latter holds 60 per cent of Beghin-Say's capital.
The transaction will be highly benefical for Montedison, which should gain a
L65-70bn a year profits boost by eliminating the dilution of earnings
attributable to minority shareholders at Beghin-Say.
However, the acquisition of Eridania's assets, valued at FFr7.6bn, (Dollars
1.4bn) may be less palatable to Beghin-Say's shareholders. The company,
which enjoys high operating margins, could become less attractive an
investment when combined with Eridania's less profitable Italian business,
analysts said.
Beghin-Say will issue 9m new shares, priced at FFr800 each, to pay for the
Eridania assets. Minority shareholders in Eridania will then be offered
shares in EBS on the basis of two new EBS shares for every 37 ordinary
Eridania shares, or one new share for every 24 Eridania savings shares held.
Investors not accepting the offer can either take Montedison shares, at a
ratio yet to be determined, or sell their rights for cash.
Mr Garofano justified the valuations on the basis that the merger would
create Europe's third biggest foods group.
