FT  05 MAY 92 / Survey of Danish Shipping and Shipbuilding (5): Lindo
technology lands Saudi oil tanker order - How computer-aided design has paid
off
IT WAS a remarkable day for Danish shipbuilding when the Odense Steel
Shipyard at Lindo - known locally as the Lindo Yard  - won an order to
supply three 310,00 dwt oil tankers to Saudi Arabia's Vela Inter- national.
Lindo won the order in February against competition from Asian yards,
hitherto thought to be unbeatable when it comes to this type of ship.
It was also a lesson to a group of five European yards, from Spain, Germany
and Italy, which have been working on a design project to bring back the
construction of supertankers to Europe. The consortium, however, has
estimated that European yards cannot be competitive with a subsidy of under
13 per cent of the contract price. The subsidy on the tankers being built
for Vela will, in effect, be just over 2 per cent.
The factors which enabled Lindo to win this order are, according to Kurt
Andersen, a naval architect and Lindo's managing director, a combin- ation
of high technology and well-trained employees.
Lindo is one of the most technologically advanced yards in the world. This
is partly because the yard is able to build relatively large ships in a
relatively long series, conditions which make investment in advanced
technology viable. If other Danish yards do not use such advanced technology
at all stages of the production process, it is because they do not believe
that the investment would pay off.
The most up-to-date robot cutting and welding systems are in use at Lindo,
but what makes the yard outstanding (it is not the way of managers of
companies in the A. P. Moller group to boast too openly of their
achievement, so Mr Andersen merely says that Lindo is 'one of a number of
yards which is in the front rank') is its computer-assisted design and
manufacturing system.
The ships now under construction at Lindo were designed on the computer
system. Models and conven- tional drawings have been dispensed with. The
system also handles the planning of the complete production process,
involving the acquis- ition and use of around 400,000 components per ship,
in metic- ulous detail. The system at the same time controls the cutting and
welding robots, and when the ships are being fitted out there is two-way
communic- ation between terminals on board the ship and onshore.
As an illustration of the advances which technology has brought to Lindo,
the yard handles about the same quantity of steel as it did 20 years ago,
but there are now 2,200 employees compared with 5,800 in the early 1970s. In
the past four years the yard has improved productivity by 30 per cent, and
Mr Andersen has set an annual 6 per cent improvement target after learning
that a leading Japanese competitor was out to raise productivity by 4 per
cent a year).
But technology is not everything. 'The essential thing for us is that we
have a large group of people who have shipbuilding under the skin and who
are able to work with the best available tools,' says Mr Andersen. The rapid
increase in productivity has not caused friction between the management and
the work- force. Relations have usually been good at Lindo in any event, but
in 1986 the order book was so thin that it looked as if the yard might have
to close. Without the improve- ment in productivity, which new technology
has brought with it, there might have been no jobs at all at Lindo.
Good labour relations facilitate a two-way contrib- ution to improving
product- ivity at the yard. A prog- ramme, known as 'removing the stumbling
blocks', is in process, which is designed to ensure that human resources are
used with as little waste of time and effort as possible. Removing the
stumbling blocks requires people on the workshop floor - if that is the
right expression for a shipyard  - to draw attention to and help to
eliminate the obstacles to an ever-smoother production process.
'High technology is important, but it alone does not suffice: it is people
together with high technology which do the trick,' says Mr Andersen. The
impressive advances in productivity at Lindo (and other Danish yards) have
earned an extra bonus - the respect of the politicians.
There was a tendency in the 1980s to dismiss shipbuilding as a low
technology business which no self-respecting indus- trial country need
bother itself with. 'This has changed,' says Mr Andersen. 'The politicians
no longer look down on ship- building and recognise that even in its high
technology form the industry provides a lot of jobs for well-educated
workers and engineers.'
Lindo's total order book is currently worth about DKr9bn and will keep the
yard busy until mid-1995. It is currently building a series of six 'feeder'
container vessels for A. P. Moller, seven double-hulled (not just
double-bottomed) 280,000 dwt oil tankers for Moller and three 310,000 dwt
single-hulled tankers for Vela International are the yard's next task.
