FT  07 FEB 92 / Noriega gains ground: Henry Hamman focuses on the former
Panamanian leader's attempts to fend off US drugs charges
FORMER Panamanian leader General Manuel Antonio Noriega's defence against
drug trafficking charges in Miami gained ground this week. A Drug
Enforcement Administration agent acknowledged that a man identified by the
prosecution as a major Medelln cocaine cartel money launderer had been
arrested on the basis of information from forces commanded by Gen Noriega.
The testimony by Mr James L. Bramble, in charge of the DEA's Panama
operations from August 1982 until June 1984, raised questions about earlier
prosecution claims that Gen Noriega had protected the cartel's operations in
Panama in return for pay-offs.
Prosecutors had cited the money launderer, Mr Ramon Milian Rodriguez, as a
major conduit for drug money from the US to bank accounts controlled by the
cartel in Panama. According to DEA information, Mr Milian was responsible
for transferring Dollars 200m in drug profits from the US to Panama.
Mr Bramble - reading from official DEA reports he had written - acknowledged
that the information that led to Mr Milian's arrest had been independently
developed by Panamanian narcotics officers and passed on to the DEA.
When Mr Milian was arrested in Florida, government agents seized Dollars
5.5m in cash, more than 61 pounds of cocaine, and a Lear jet aircraft. The
DEA report called the seizure 'significant.'
In other testimony, former DEA agent Mr Arthur Sedillo, who was stationed in
Panama from August 1977 until August 1979, read a cable he had received from
the then-chief administrator of the DEA, Mr Peter Bensinger, in which Mr
Bensinger asked that Gen Noriega be congratulated for his role in an
'impressive seizure' of cocaine being smuggled to the US via Panama.
The defence, by calling current and former government officials and
requiring them to read documents they wrote concerning Gen Noriega's efforts
in drug law enforcement, is attempting to counter the prosecution's claim
that Gen Noriega essentially turned Panama into a safe haven for Colombian
cocaine dealers.
Both Mr Bensinger and another former DEA chief administrator, Mr John Lawn,
argued that the kind words they may have written about Gen Noriega were
diplomatic niceties rather than statements of fact.
But letters and memoranda by both Mr Sedillo and Mr Bramble also referred to
co-operation between the DEA and Panamanian forces under the command of Gen
Noriega.
Mr Frank Rubino, the lead defence counsel, said in an interview that showing
the extent of this co-operation was a central part of the defence strategy.
When Mr Bramble finishes testifying he is expected to be followed by another
DEA agent who worked in Panama.
Another defence lawyer, Mr Jon May, confirmed that the defence has abandoned
plans to require testimony from Lt Col Oliver North, the White House
official at the centre of the Iran-Contra affair, and other celebrity
witnesses who had been subpoenaed.
Mr May and Mr Rubino expect to finish presenting their case in 4-6 weeks,
when the prosecution is expected to offer a rebuttal. Then the jury will get
its chance to decide who and what to believe.
