FT  17 SEP 92 / The ERM And Britain: No firm plans on return to ERM, says
Treasury
after last night's dramatic announcement that the UK is suspending
membership of the European exchange rate mechanism - it is back to the old
days of running the economy.
Although the Treasury hopes the UK will be able to rejoin the ERM when
market conditions are more settled, officials made clear last night that
there were no firm plans about the pound.
The announcement means that for the moment decisions about interest rates
will be taken with regard to broad economic conditions including the need to
bear down on inflation, rather than the requirement to peg the currency to a
specific limit. How long this situation will last was a matter for intense
speculation last night. One option would be for Britain to rejoin the ERM as
early as Monday, after the result of the French referendum on Maastricht is
known.
If there was a Yes vote, a large flow of money into the weaker European
currencies, including the pound, could be expected, and sterling might be
able to rejoin at the central DM2.95 rate that applied before last night's
announcement.
Many in the currency markets believe that a No vote - or perhaps a
wafer-thin majority in favour of Maastricht - will scupper the timetable for
European economic and monetary union, dealing a blow to theories about a
convergence in European economies, and probably consigning Britain to the
second rank of a 'two-speed' ERM system.
A No vote might thus lead to Britain finding that it can gain re-entry to
the ERM club only on the basis of a formal devaluation of sterling against
the D-Mark and other relatively strong currencies such as the Dutch guilder
and the Belgian franc.
A third option which cannot be ruled out is that Britain gives up - at least
for the foreseeable future - any idea of linking its currency to the other
main European currencies. Such a decision would end the goal that started
with ERM entry in October 1990 of trying to bring down UK inflation by tying
UK monetary policy to the credit rates set by the Bundesbank. Such a step
would be a huge about-turn for the UK government. But it may decide, after
the humiliation of opting for an ERM suspension last night, that the
pressures of living with the system may be too large to cope with.
A crucial factor in the discussion is the state of the UK economy. From
today, base rates will be set at 12 per cent, up from 10 per cent on Tuesday
night, a level that many consider is far too high given that Britain is
still struggling to recover from its longest peacetime recession since the
1930s.
An important factor in the discussion will be whether it will be possible in
the foreseeable future to engineer lower base rates while Britain stays in a
fixed exchange rate system in which Bundesbank credit rates seem likely to
stay high for some months.
One important argument - which would be against all that Mr John Major's
government has stood for over the past 23 months - is that Britain might
find it easier to cut interest rates by continuing the policy of letting the
exchange rate float, the situation that prevailed last night when sterling
was quoted in New York trading at around DM2.70, some 8 pfennigs below its
formal ERM floor of DM2.778.
Linked to this question is whether the battered UK economy can withstand a
prolonged period of relatively high interest rates.
Mr Richard Jeffrey, head of economics at the stockbrokers Charterhouse
Jeffrey, said of yesterday's 2 percentage point rise in base rates: 'The UK
economy was already looking a bit like a wonky three-legged stool. Now one
of the legs has been kicked away.'
Last year UK output fell by 2.4 per cent, the biggest one-year drop since
government records started in 1948. Assuming the economy contracts this year
by a further 0.6 per cent - which was the consensus view of City economists
before yesterday's developments - the two-year decline will be the largest
recorded for any ERM country since the mid 1970s.
As for next year, the best guess of economists before yesterday was that
output would rise anaemically by about 1.6 per cent, far below the growth
rates of the mid 1980s.
On the economic front, a glimmer of hope came yesterday from the
announcement of a 0.8 per cent rise in retail sales volumes in August
compared with July. Many economists are sceptical about whether that trend
will continue.
Since the middle of last year, retail sales - which account for roughly a
quarter of UK economic output - have been virtually flat, providing little
sign that consumer demand is about to lift.
Consumer spending, totalling two thirds of gross domestic product, has
fallen much more steeply this time compared with the previous recession in
1980-81.
As for the state of government finances, Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor,
faces further headaches. The public-sector borrowing requirement for 1992-93
 -in spite of a lower-than-expected PSBR for August announced yesterday of
Pounds 2.9bn - looks likely to climb this year to about Pounds 32bn and
perhaps reach Pounds 40bn in 1993-94 as a result of the recession eating
into tax income and pushing up social security spending.
If the recession spilled over to next year - which seems increasingly likely
 -the impact on revenues and spending would be still higher. That might make
it difficult for the government to meet guidelines agreed by European
Community nations at the end of last year to keep government borrowing below
3 per cent of gross domestic product as part of the move towards monetary
union.
