FT  11 FEB 92 / UK Company News: Ratners' chief unveils plan to restore
sparkle in the UK
MR JAMES McAdam, who last month became executive chairman of Ratners Group,
has wasted little time in setting a new course for the struggling jewellery
company.
Yesterday, he announced a move to restructure the UK jewellery operations
under a single management board, resulting in the departure of Mr Victor
Ratner as deputy managing director responsible for buying and merchandising.
Mr Gerald Ratner, Victor's cousin and former chairman, will resume a more
direct executive role by chairing the new UK jewellery management board. Its
aim will be to co-ordinate the operational activities of the Ratners, H
Samuel and Ernest Jones chains more efficiently.
The City reacted favourably to the news and analysts suggested the move was
an encouraging sign that Mr McAdam was already getting to grips with the
business.
But Mr McAdam stressed he was not stamping his authority on the company for
the sake of it. 'We have created a sensible operational structure. Gerald is
driving the business forward at the sharp end. That is what he likes doing
and does best.'
Mr McAdam said the decision was amicable and had been fully supported by Mr
Gerald Ratner: 'He is as supportive of this decision as I am. We are
together on this'.
Mr Victor Ratner will be compensated for loss of office but will remain as a
consultant on a three-year contract. 'He has been with the company for 13
years and has a lot of experience in buying. That expertise will still be
available to us as required,' said Mr McAdam.
'What one reads between the lines is that Gerald is taking a more active
role in the business and the company cannot afford to employ two Ratners on
large salaries,' said one analyst, who pointed out that Mr Victor Ratner's
consultancy contract would presumably prevent him from setting up in
competition to Ratners Group.
Mr Masarrat Hussain, 57, the administration director who has worked at
Ratners for more than 30 years, will at his own request also retire from the
company at the next annual meeting.
