FT  25 MAR 92 / Survey of North Wales (3): Money is not everything -
Attitudes to tourists are ambivalent
EARLIER this month the actor, Anthony Hopkins, appealed to business for help
to save Snowdonia. Without further aid, he said, the landscape would be
'scarred beyond repair'.
The National Trust already has a Pounds 2m appeal to reverse the damage done
to one of Britain's most beautiful national parks. Farmland, hedgerows, dry
stone walls and moorland have all been lost as a result of increasing
economic and social pressures on the area.
The threat to Snowdonia, where some footpaths have become as popular and
well-trodden as many main roads in Gwynedd, is likely to become even more
acute as the improvements to the A55 expressway across the top of north
Wales make it easier to get into the national park.
There is a very real danger now that visitors could endanger Snowdon itself,
with the mountain going the way of so much of the Lake District in Cumbria,
which is being slowly destroyed in the summer months by the sheer weight of
visitors, their cars and their coaches.
The threat is not new. North Wales has for long been one of the major
holidaymaking areas in Britain. Although up-to-date figures are difficult to
obtain, it is thought tourism brought in around Pounds 430m in 1989-90, a
figure that probably rose to around Pounds 500m last year, sustaining around
35,000 jobs.
Without the earning power generated by holidaymakers, north Wales would be
immeasurably worse off. Farming is already under severe threat, small rural
industries are disappearing, incoming industry is difficult to obtain and,
in any case, barely replaces what has disappeared. Tourism is, therefore,
important. What it must not do is destroy what it seeks to enhance.
Tourism is not, of course, a single entity. The holidaymakers who pour into
the caravans and self-catering flats in Colwyn Bay, Rhyl, and Abergele
probably do not venture in large numbers up the mountain.
Probably two-thirds of the 15m-or-so day visitors who flood into Clwyd and
Gwynedd do head for Snowdon, Bettws-y-Coed and its falls, the rock-climbing
centres, Bodnant's gardens, the incomparable castles at Conwy, Caernarfon
and Harlech, Lloyd-George's grave outside Criccieth and the sailing at
Porthmadog, or Beaumaris on Anglesey.
Care needs to be taken, therefore, to ensure that too great a pressure is
not put on any one centre at any one time. The Wales Tourist Board and the
local tourist bodies are aware of the need to spread the load by lengthening
the season and investing in specific attractions. But if they are to
succeed, still more needs to be invested.
Progress has certainly been made. Rhyl, which for years slumbered and gently
slid downhill, is seeking to reverse the decline. It now has an attractive
all-weather Sun Centre and is building a large theatre next to it. A major
investment in a sea-life centre will open this summer. Skytower was brought
down from the Glasgow garden festival, and a Canadian company, Forrec, is
undertaking an Pounds 8m scheme on the front.
Elsewhere, too, there are, or have been, important investments. Another
theatre capable of seating at least 1,200 in the auditorium and able to
stage the Welsh National Opera Company is nearing fruition in the gracious
Edwardian town of Llandudno.
On Anglesey, the Sea Zoo has become a popular attraction. New hotels have
opened, especially in the higher-income country-house sector. Butlins
continues to invest at Pwllheli and marinas are springing up around the
coastline.
Despite the spending and the improvements, north Wales has suffered. Last
year, early bookings were severely affected by the Gulf War, and although
trade picked up well after mid-year, 1991 was probably no better than
average. This year's outlook is for little change.
The need to get income on a rising trend in real terms is emphasised by Mr
Dewi Davies, of the Wales Tourist Board. 'Many people under-estimate how
important tourism is to us,' he says. 'It probably accounts for between 8
and 10 per cent of our gross domestic product.
'That is at least the equal of, and probably rather higher than, that of
Greece or Austria, long thought to be among the most important centres of
tourism in Europe. In Austria tourism accounts for about 8 per cent of GDP
and in Greece the figure is around 6 per cent. Tourism in north Wales is
therefore just as vital to the economy as in these other countries.'
If a balance is to be achieved between protection of the environment and
sustaining the economy some action on limiting numbers in Snowdonia is
almost certainly inevitable. But how? In a free society it is not possible
to tell people they simply cannot go to an area on any particular day. There
are plenty of questions but few answers.
Activity holidays and other niche developments need to be encouraged. To
attract that section of the community that enjoys rising incomes and the
desire to spend part of it on second holidays, more 'gracious' country
hotels are needed. Plenty have opened; more are needed.
Sailors, walkers, golfers, riders, those just wanting to laze away a couple
of days, all bring valuable extra spending. They need to be encouraged
because they frequent other than the honeypot centres.
The mass market, though, needs to be very carefully managed if it is not
seriously to undermine the long-term viability and vitality of the economy
of north Wales.
