FT  16 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Purchase and improved margins lift
Greencore
GREENCORE, the Irish sugar and agribusiness group, reported a 25 per cent
increase in pre-tax profits to IPounds 31.5m (Pounds 34m) for the year
ending September 25 on turnover up 19 per cent at IPounds 388m.
The results are the first full-year figures from the company since its
privatisation and flotation in April 1991. They also reflected the
incorporation of Food Industries into the group in November 1991 at a cost
of IPounds 57.9m.
Increased margins were achieved in all three divisions - sugar, agribusiness
and other food.
Mr Gerry Murphy, chief executive, said the results 'reflect the achievement
of greater operating efficiency through the group and the successful
integration of the companies acquired with Food Industries'.
The increase in turnover and a near doubling of the interest charge to
IPounds 8.8m were attributable almost entirely to the incorporation of Food
Industries.
Mr Kevin O'Sullivan, finance director, said it was a 'great achievement' to
have covered the costs of acquiring Food Industries 'with a little to spare'
within a year of its purchase.
The sugar division increased operating profits by 10 per cent to IPounds
22.5m on a marginally smaller turnover of IPounds 126.3m, due primarily to a
reduction of low-margin overseas sales and improved efficiency from new
capital investment. Mr Murphy said the current beet harvest was producing
sugar yields 'at the highest level in forty years'.
Market analysts in Dublin said the results reflected well on the new
management team brought in over the past year under Mr Murphy.
They said the only concern was the current high level of interest rates in
the Irish economy and the devaluation of sterling last September. Both would
have an adverse effect on the company.
Mr Murphy said: 'Current interest rates are unsustainable and something has
to give soon, although I do not believe a unilateral devaluation would be
good for the country.'
There was the chance of a further acquisition in the coming year 'if we find
the right business at the right price and depending on the state of the
equity and financial markets.
Earnings emerged at 31p (27.6p) and a final dividend of 5p makes an 8p
(4.5p) total.
