FT  03 JUN 92 / Arts: Desdemona und ihre Schwestern - Opera
With Henze's English Cat and Manfred Trojahn's Enrico among its recent
successes, the Schwetzingen Festival - based at the baroque court theatre a
few miles south of Mannheim - has proved fertile ground for operatic
premieres. This year brought a new chamber opera by Siegfried Matthus, east
Germany's leading composer, whose Judith and Cornet Rilke have already
reached other parts of Europe and America.
Despite a brilliantly executed performance, Desdemona und ihre Schwestern
(Desdemona and her sisters) was a disappointment. Matthus's dramatic
instincts, honed by a close association with the Komische Oper dating back
to the Felsenstein era, for once seem to have failed him. The opera, for
which Matthus as usual wrote his own libretto, is based on a novel by
Christine Bruckner, a cult figure of the women's movement in Germany. The
text of Desdemona reads like a tract of militant feminist ideology. Three
women - Megara from ancient Greece, Desdemona in her bridal chamber and
Judy, a convicted terrorist - step out of their historical surroundings to
reflect on and rant against a male-dominated society, which has made them
suffer by not allowing them to express themselves.
The work is a series of 'operatic monologues' (Matthus's description) for
soprano, mezzo and contralto, with the two 'spare' voices occasionally
expressing the innermost thoughts of the third. To provide some contrast,
Matthus introduces an unaccompanied quartet of male voices, who interrupt
the feminist diatribe with some distinctly unfeminist extracts from the Old
Testament, sung 'in the kind of place where men can talk about women
undisturbed'.
This high-brow role-playing lasts 90 minutes: it should have been cut by a
third. The work's main weakness is that it becomes excruciatingly
predictable. The text allows no room for dramatic development, and the
'sisters' are kept firmly in separate sound-worlds: much better to have one
singer adopting a number of different mantles, as in some stage adaptations
of the same novel. Nor does Matthus's brief finale ring true: the three
women suddenly conclude that nothing changes, and join the men in a few
juicy references to sexual interdependence from the Book of Solomon.
Some good music is wasted along the way. Matthus uses a 20-piece orchestra
sparingly, with eloquent scoring for electric bass guitar, bass flute and
bass clarinet. He never lapses into the affected modernisms of much
avant-garde music: instrumental effects invariably come off well - the vast
percussive crescendo before the finale was overwhelming - although the
outburst of taped rock music in one scene was uncharacteristically cheap.
The music for male quartet is a chromatic dirge and no match for the
fully-fledged choruses which are such a powerful feature of Matthus's other
operas. But the three women have plenty to get their teeth into - notably a
Kurt Weill-like mezzo ballad for Megara; a harp-accompanied soprano lament
for Desdemona, and spectacular contralto solos for Judy, full of tottering,
tension-filled rhythms.
These produced several stunning outbursts of contained fury from Yvonne
Wiedstruck, a singer-actress with great potential. As Megara (mystifyingly
confined to a wheelchair for half the performance), Karan Armstrong managed
to look both raunchy and motherly, relishing the attractive vocal
decorations in her part. Lucy Peacock's Desdemona was spunky and pretty.
Nothing but praise, too, for the predictably boorish male quartet (Clemens
Bieber, Uwe Peper, Peter Edelmann and Josef Becker). The opera deserved a
female production team - it might actually have profited from a Berghaus
point of view - but instead it was given a professional, post-modern staging
by Gotz Friedrich, with designs by Reinhart Zimmermann and Annette
Zepperitz. Rolf Reuter conducted with admirable clarity.
The production joins the repertory of the Komische Oper in Berlin on June
27.
