FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (5): Battle to end the economic civil
war - Poverty will remain the most profound threat to a stable state
POLITICS is the least of South Africa's problems. For whether constitutional
negotiations take months or years, whether apartheid gives way to democracy
or autocracy, poverty will remain the central worry for most South Africans,
and the most profound threat to a stable state.
'The urgent need to raise living standards and improve the distribution of
income and wealth in South Africa poses a major challenge to policy-makers
over the medium term,' says a recent International Monetary Fund (IMF)
report entitled Economic Policies for a New South Africa.
'Unless the rate of economic growth rises to a level well above that of the
last decade, there is little prospect for reducing the current very high
level of under-employment in the economy or for generating address social
needs on a sustained basis.'
The irony of the new South Africa is that democratisation is itself impeding
growth: ending apartheid has meant unprecedented social turmoil, as the
battle for power pits black political groups against one another, police
against township residents, organised labour against the government.
Mr Derek Keys, the new finance minister, describes the situation as
'economic civil war'. His aim is to promote a social compact between
business, labour and the unions, to develop a 'national consensus to grow'.
'My real first priority is to find the areas of consensus,' he says, noting
'you can't make people invest here, with all the political disruption that's
taking place. I think if people see effective co-operation between business
and labour and the state . . . I think that will be the biggest single
contribution we can make to investment.'
His message could hardly be more different from that of his predecessor, Mr
Barend du Plessis, who resigned as finance minister six weeks ago after
suffering a nervous collapse. Mr du Plessis clashed repeatedly with the
largest union federation, the Congress of South African Trade Unions
(Cosatu), over issues such as the introduction of value-added tax, and
gained a reputation for arrogance and intransigence which exacerbated
economic hostilities.
Cosatu had long demanded the formation of an economic negotiating forum,
involving business, labour and the state, to debate the economic future.
Within weeks of taking up his new post (Mr Keys became minister of trade and
industry and economic co-ordination in January, adding finance to his
portfolio in May), the new minister had met representatives of business and
labour to plan the forum.
The aim will be to find 'a national consensus to hold off on consumption
expenditure and apply more to investment,' says Mr Keys. In a country where
class and economic power divide society as sharply as race and ethnicity,
this could prove a tall order. For South Africa's blacks are scarcely in the
mood to be told to defer gratification now in the interest of sustainable
long-term growth: they expect at least some minimum improvements in living
standards - clean water taps in the squatter camps, decent shelter, better
education - and the African National Congress (ANC) would ignore these
demands at its peril.
But the ANC knows that the key to future prosperity will be to promote
investment in new productive capacity to stimulate growth and job creation.
Certainly, the record of growth over the past decade could hardly be more
dismal. Real gross domestic product per capita has fallen by 1.1 per cent
annually for a decade, leaving an estimated 5.5m people, or 40 per cent of
the potential labour force, unemployed. For the past three years - when
growth could have done so much to smooth the path to political reform - the
economy has been in recession, and severe drought has made it likely that
growth this year will be negative as well.
The deteriorating fortunes of the gold industry have also impeded growth. In
the 1991/92 fiscal year gold contributed only one per cent of state revenues
compared with 9.6 per cent in 1982/83.
The imposition of international financial sanctions severely curtailed what
growth there would otherwise have been. To service the country's debt
rescheduling agreement with foreign banks, growth had to be choked off at a
very low level to avoid a surge of imports, which threatened the balance of
payments.
That constraint should soon be removed: international creditors have
recently proved much more willing to roll over maturing debts, and some new
lending should be available from commercial banks (though this will depend
on political stability); from the World Bank (which will make development
funds available once a multiracial interim government is installed); and
from the International Monetary Fund (once the US lifts its political veto
over such funding).
But Mr Chris Stals, governor of the South African Reserve Bank (central
bank), believes an economic structural adjustment programme is needed first
to create an environment conducive to growth. 'South Africa has an economy
where you get equilibrium only at a low level of growth. The moment you push
it higher, you get inflation, skills shortages, etc . . . We need to have
higher growth without disequilibrium. That requires action on monetary
policy, fiscal policy, trade policy . . . '
He argues that the Reserve Bank has succeeded in stabilising the financial
situation over the past year, with money supply growth now limited to under
10 per cent per annum (compared with 27 per cent in the late 1980s), bank
credit extension rising at a rate well below inflation, the exchange rate
stabilised and gold and foreign exchange reserves substantially
strengthened, at R9.5bn, enough to cover two months' imports. Inflation,
too, is improving, though a large drop in producer prices has yet to feed
through into consumer prices, which continue to rise at 15 per cent
annually.
But he says more remains to be done in terms of macro-economic
restructuring. On this issue, Finance Minister Keys has so far said little.
He believes that the economy is basically sound, agreeing with Mr Michael
O'Dowd, a director of Anglo American Corp, who wrote recently: 'So far from
being a 'basket case', the performance of the South African economy in
conditions of great adversity has, in recent years, been most impressive.'
If Mr Keys plans drastic restructuring to place the economy on a higher
growth path, he is not letting on. He accepts the case for lower tariffs,
but plans no dramatic cuts, arguing - against received wisdom among local
economists - that South Africa is not a high tariff economy. He shrugs off
the problem of inefficiency and corruption in the civil service, highlighted
recently when a commission of inquiry found that the government department
which administered the black homelands had wasted or embezzled millions,
perhaps billions of rands. And he defends as necessary a budget deficit
which will probably exceed 5 per cent of GDP.
'The economy is as strong as a horse,' he argues, 'but it's got too many
jockeys at the moment.'
With a characteristically colourful turn of phrase, he elaborates:
'Government is sitting facing forwards, hoping the horse will start off
moving. The ANC is on it facing backwards, trying to get the horse to move
backwards. Cosatu is sitting on sideways, hoping to claim the credit whether
it goes forward or backwards. The private sector is standing holding the
reins . . . bemused by what is happening on top of the horse.
'I see my job as persuading the private sector to start . . . leading the
horse, regardless of what the jockeys think they are doing,' he concludes.
He agrees with the IMF, that if economic growth is to be raised to 3.5 per
cent a year (the minimum rate required to reduce unemployment) the ratio of
investment to GDP will have to rise to 27 per cent from 19 per cent now. But
under the IMF's scenario, that would mean a sharply reduced government
budget deficit and average real wage growth of under 1 per cent a year. Both
those goals are probably unattainable in the face of demands for increased
social spending and for redistribution of corporate wealth.
But that, in the end, is South Africa's predicament: democracy cannot
survive without growth; but the road to democracy is littered with so many
impediments to growth - political instability, demands for social spending
which boost inflation, labour militancy - that the democratic goal may never
be achieved. It could hardly be a more daunting prospect.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCE AND CAPITAL FLOWS
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                         1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   1989   1990
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Trade balance             2.7   10.0   10.8    9.0    6.0    6.0    6.2
Current accouunt         -2.4    4.1    4.3    3.6    1.4    1.3    2.2
Net capital inflow        1.2   -6.8   -3.6   -1.7   -3.1   -1.9   -1.1
Change in net reserves   -1.3   -2.6    0.7    1.9   -1.8   -0.5    1.1
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: South African Reserve Bank
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
