FT  05 SEP 92 / Finance and the Family: A bitter pill for consumers to
swallow - John Authers considers private medical insurance costs
WARNING] Trying to compare private medical insurance policies can be bad for
your health.
Ten years ago, private medical insurance (PMI) was a standardised product.
The market was dominated by BUPA (the British United Provident Association),
the policies of which were copied by others in the industry.
Since then, changes have made health insurance one of the most bewilderingly
fragmented and complex fields. A quickening rate of inflation in health care
costs has a lot to do with this. Bupa estimates annual health care inflation
at around 14 per cent - triple the rate of retail price inflation.
Then came the changed aspirations in Mrs Thatcher's wake. Many more people
now seek private medical insurance, not necessarily for rational reasons,
and most new customers are in a lower income bracket than the industry's
traditional customers.
These factors between them led to the introduction of 'budget' plans, which
offered lower cover, in return for affordable premiums. Companies had
different ways of cutting the amount of cover they had to offer, so the
costs are not usually directly comparable.
New companies entered the field, such as Norwich Union and Allied Dunbar,
most of which had new ways of approaching the problem.
For example, Norwich Union's market research suggested that customers were
more concerned to ensure that any treatment they did need should be paid
for, but were prepared to spend money on initial consultations. If you go to
a consultant and find you are fit, therefore, NU's cheapest policy will not
pay you anything, and you will have to foot the bill.
If the consultant finds something is wrong with you, life will be both more
distressing and more expensive, but NU will foot the bill.
Other innovations include travel insurance as part of the package (from
Allied Dunbar), loyalty bonuses, no-claims bonuses, and the option to take
an excess - insurers will only pay medical bills in excess of a certain
amount.
All this leads to startling variations in premiums, both between and within
companies. As policies will not, quite reasonably, cover you for a condition
which already exists, tailoring a policy to individual needs is very
difficult.
Perhaps it is best, therefore, to examine exactly why you might want to use
medical care from outside the National Health Service.
Some insurers would claim that private care is not a luxury, but a necessary
product to rank alongside life assurance and pensions. But most, including
Bupa, accept that it is primarily an aspiration.
Health fees inflation however, has made this aspiration rather harder to
fund - changing contracts make this difficult to measure, but most in the
industry accept that premiums have risen by around 30 per cent over the last
year.
What, therefore, do you gain by opting out of the NHS? The prime gain, if
this is to be thought of as anything like a necessity, is time, particularly
for those active in business.
A recent Which? survey confirmed that private health care is indeed much
quicker than the NHS. But the margin is narrower than the gulf in cost
between public and private treatment can justify.
As many as 32 per cent of private patients have to wait more than a month
before going into hospital, according to Which?, but only 2 per cent wait
longer than three, and none wait as long as six months.
Most NHS patients (three quarters) reach hospital within three months of
being referred, but one in five wait for three months or longer. This can
then drag into the kind of emotive nightmare which occasionally appears in
the newspapers - 9 per cent wait more than a year, and 3 per cent more than
two. But the chances of getting treatment quickly on the NHS do tend to tip
the balance against taking traditional private insurance for reasons of
time.
This has led to the growth of the 'six-week' plan. Private medicine can more
or less guarantee to treat you within this period, so the policies will pay
out for treatment if you need to wait more than six weeks on the NHS. These
policies are so much cheaper that they demonstrate how good your chances are
of getting quick public treatment.
For example, according to the latest survey by Money Marketing, a quotation
which would cost Pounds 62.85 from Bupa for top-quality wards, or Pounds
30.33 for the lowest band of wards could cost as little as Pounds 11.90 per
month if only six-week waiting lists are covered.
In many ways this is a traditional 'risk' insurance - you pay quite small
amounts of money to protect against the risk of something which is unlikely
but potentially disastrous if it happens.
What of the other benefits of private medicine? Which?'s respondents found
that food and interior decor were better in private hospitals, but a
comfortable majority of NHS patients were satisfied with privacy and
visiting arrangements. Also, Which? found that if you have complications,
you are sometimes better off in the NHS, as private hospitals often do not
have a full range of emergency back-up facilities.
Private insurance might, then, be best regarded not as an aspiration - it is
too expensive for that - but as an insurance against the risk of a very long
NHS waiting list. Unless you have insurance via the company you work for,
that probably means looking at budget and six-week schemes.
