FT  04 JUL 92 / Food: New York calling - Nicholas Lander meets food chat
show host Arthur Schwartz
FRIDAY NOON. Radio WOR New York. Arthur Schwartz introduces his daily show
'Food Talk' and within 30 seconds all 14 incoming telephone lines are
flashing. On Fridays the programme is devoted to restaurants.
Schwartz begins with two reviews - one laudatory, the other critical - and
then answers callers' questions. Line 5 wants a sushi restaurant at a
reasonable price, line 3 the best French restaurant on the Upper East Side.
Schwartz then deviates to talk about the pleasures and pitfalls of a truly
American phenomenon, all-you-can-eat sushi bars. You must remember, Schwartz
counsels, that you are not allowed to eat the fish without the rice and that
whatever you leave will be charged at the much higher a la carte prices.
Schwartz's personality and experience are two reasons why his programme has
been so successful. Born in Brooklyn, Schwartz ate well and copiously at
home thanks to his Jewish mother. When he saw an advertisement for a food
editor of a suburban magazine he produced outstanding references from his
wife, mother and mother-in-law attesting to the quality of his oysters
Rockefeller, pot roast and chocolate souffle
He got the job, eventually becoming food editor of the New York Daily News,
for which he has been reviewing restaurants for the past 14 years. But
Schwartz is modest enough to admit that if he is the right man for the job,
the timing of his show could not have been better.
One of the biggest misconceptions that still persists about life in America
is that Americans are not really interested in what they eat. In the
mid-west they may still be preoccupied with quantity but there are many
Americans on the east or west coast who can talk as passionately and
authoritatively about food as any native of Lyons or Bologna.
This was brought home to me four years ago sitting in on another radio chat
show, this time hosted by Narsi David in San Francisco. A caller phoned to
discuss the secrets of chicken stock.
Nothing extraordinary - except that the caller was an 83-year-old woman who
had been cooking for the past 60 years and was still trying to perfect her
technique.
The American preoccupation with eating has been chronicled by John Mariani
in an excellent book entitled America Eats Out, William Morrow Dollars 25
(Pounds 13.50).
And Americans do enjoy eating out. Figures from the American National
Restaurant Association confirm that. The average size of the bill may be
small but the spread of tastes is enormous - the biggest growth areas are in
pizza, Mexican and Asian restaurants - with much reduced demand for new
hamburger restaurants.
Behind these figures there is a development which is adding to the
popularity of Schwartz's radio programme.
Americans are becoming increasingly concerned and confused about what they
can and cannot eat and which foods are good for them.
It used to be simple. Now, every week brings conflicting reports about the
safety of the meat, the quality of the vegetables and the purity of the
waters around the American coasts from which the one food item that was
thought to be beyond reproach - fresh fish - is caught.
Although Schwartz has not lacked callers since his programme went on air the
most frenetic day he and his assistant, Mary Ann, ever had was when the
studio guest was neither a top chef nor a restaurateur but a food storage
and safety expert from Cornell University.
In addition to phone calls, Schwartz receives 40 to 50 letters a day from
listeners seeking advice and help. It is only the thought of having to reply
to all this correspondence which temporarily wipes the permanent smile from
his face.
But the final ingredient in the success of Schwartz's programme is the
enthusiasm of his regular callers: Louis from Westchester who came third in
the Great American Meatloaf cook-offs; Mark with a mania for hygiene; and
Greg, who collects Japanese cooking knives at Dollars 450 each. Confronted
by them, Schwartz knows he has found listeners almost as passionate about
food as he is.
