FT  04 NOV 92 / Business and the Environment: A strange case of jungle fever
 -How a billionaire's tropical dream is starting to pay off after 25 years
Mention Jari in Brazilian business circles and people generally raise their
eyebrows. As the world's biggest tropical forestry project, Jari is the
product of an American shipping magnate's dream to plant trees in the Amazon
to produce pulp and paper as well as cultivate rice and raise buffalo.
After 25 years, billions of dollars, a lot of ridicule and setbacks, Jari
may just be turning into a model for industrial development and silviculture
in tropical rainforests.
The project, now run by a group of Brazilian companies, is the largest
employer in the Amazon and this year expects its first net profit. More
important, it is defying the established view that poor Amazonian soil would
not support large-scale agroforestry.
Arriving at the remote site at the confluence of the Amazon and Jari rivers,
it is easy to see why the project was labelled crazy. Accessible only by
small aeroplane or slowboat from Belem, 250 miles away, Jari is a bizarre
sight.
Skimming over lush forest for more than an hour, the aeroplane lands in
Monte Dourado, a neat but somewhat out-of-place company town complete with
club, hospital and identical houses with front lawns.
Drive through the jungle and suddenly at the edge of a muddy river in the
middle of nowhere arises a gleaming metal pulp mill and powerplant. Pines
that would look more at home in the Swiss alps grow in sandy fields. In
cleared areas herds of bemused water buffalo wander, looking as if they
would rather be wallowing in the mud far away.
Nowadays, environmental concerns mean that permission would never be granted
for such a project. But back in the late 1960s Brazil's military rulers were
eager to 'colonise' the Amazon, which makes up 60 per cent of national
territory. Started in 1967, Jari owes its existence to the determination of
the late billionaire Daniel K Ludwig, who loved to do things which everyone
said were impossible.
Intended as his crowning glory, the scheme to tame the jungle and install a
pulp mill, buffalo farm and rice plantation in an area the size of Belgium,
was the biggest and craziest of all.
Convinced of an impending world food and fibre shortage, Ludwig sent men all
over the world in search of the perfect tree for pulp. He also needed a
parcel of land near a deep water harbour in a country with cheap labour.
Undaunted by its remoteness he settled on Jari, an area of wild jungle
populated only by Indians, monkeys and a few rubber-tappers. Inside its 1.6m
hectares, Ludwig built a port, railroad, 9,000km of roads and the town of
Monte Dourado from scratch, shipping in people from the northeast and
industrialised south.
The first problem came when the seedlings planted on the newly cleared land
promptly died. Already 69 when the project began, Ludwig was in a hurry.
Rather than experimenting with many species to see which fared best in the
poor Amazonian soil, he risked millions on a monoculture of gmelina, a tree
native to India and Burma, chosen because it could be harvested for pulp in
just six years.
Gmelina was a disaster, succumbing to disease when it finally did grow. In
1973, Ludwig brought in pine trees, planting many thousands of hectares.
These, however, grew slowly in the sandy soil and torrential rains. The rice
plantation was a dismal failure despite a complicated system of irrigation
by dykes.
In 1978, undaunted by such setbacks, Ludwig shipped in a Japanese pulp mill
with 220,000 tonnes per year capacity. A wood-fired power plant was also
ordered, towed by barges across three oceans and up the Amazon in 87 days.
A year later, eucalyptus was planted and it is now the main crop, taking up
40 per cent of the 100,000 hectares of planted trees. By this time, Jari had
become the focus of Brazilian fears that imperialist foreigners would
expropriate the Amazon.
Rumours abounded that it was an American military training camp. Unable to
find partners or finance, Ludwig had to abandon plans for a second pulp mill
and newsprint plant. Jari was put up for sale in 1980 amid a financial and
managerial crisis.
Ludwig's planned investments of Dollars 300m-Dollars 500m (Pounds
180m-Pounds 300m) had run into billions, while the first year of pulp mill
operation in 1979 saw revenues of just Dollars 70m instead of the Dollars
300m he had predicted.
In 1982 Jari was bought for around Dollars 300m by a group of 22 Brazilian
companies. With the government providing finance and technology in the form
of advisers from Embrapa, the Agricultural Research Institute, the Jari
company is now producing 291,000 tonnes of pulp per year, of which 80 per
cent is exported. This year it will finally move out of the red.
The turnaround has been mostly due to the new attention on technical
concerns. Facing an imminent lack of wood, the new owners decided to
increase the diameter of trees, increase plantation size, and cultivate a
type of eucalyptus more suitable to local conditions.
Contracted in 1984, Sergio Coutinho, the project's forest adviser, developed
a new model. After extensive soil surveys which discovered 23 different soil
types, he classified the land depending on how intensely it could stand
alteration - low, medium, high or very high - and it is now exploited
accordingly. A soil correction programme was initiated as well as cloning to
produce the best tree for each area.
Coutinho has no illusions about the immensity of the task. 'Man is by nature
a destroyer. The big challenge here has been to develop this large frontier
of tropical forest differently.'
As a result of his work Jari has shown an incredible increase in
productivity. Eucalyptus is now yielding an annual 27.7 cu m/hectare - 110
per cent up on 1982; pine 19.9 - 49 per cent up; and gmelina 22.6 - 18.9 per
cent up. These results fly in the face of traditional wisdom that the
shallow nature of Amazonian soil would cause productivity to decrease,
forcing the land to be abandoned as has happened in agricultural projects
all over the forest.
'We expected that with such poor soil, the first rotation would grow but
then production would fall. Instead we now have areas on their third and
fourth rotation and the yield is rising,' Coutinho says. He believes that
through forest management combined with adjusting trees to local soil
characteristics, average yield could reach 40 cu m/hec by the end of this
decade.
A natural target of attack by green activists, environmental concerns have
top priority at Jari. Dismissing the thesis that the forest should be left
untouched as 'absurdly romantic - the people of the Amazon deserve a decent
living too,' Coutinho points out that exploited areas account for less than
10 per cent of the total land. Native forest has been left on slopes and
around water and in 400m-wide bands between plantations to allow circulation
of animals as well as acting as a barrier against the spreading of disease.
Eight 20,000-hectare genetic reserves have been created to serve as fully
preserved control samples of areas of different forest types to be cut down
for economic activity. Coutinho's team has catalogued more than 629 species
of trees, all of which are monitored in situ.
Nevertheless, the sight of rows of spindly eucalyptus replacing centuries
old Amazonian trees is shocking. But Eduardo Barreto, president of the Jari
company, says: 'Producing pulp in the Amazon exposes you to fire, but
criticism is based on ignorance. We have four hectares of native forest for
every one of planted forest. We are protecting biodiversity and proving that
it's possible to generate an environmentally friendly and economically sound
business in the Amazon.'
Ludwig's dream of taming the jungle may not have been realised, nor would
anyone cite Jari as the solution to the Amazon's development problem, but
after 25 years of hard work and enormous amounts of money at least it is
providing an example.
