FT  27 FEB 92 / Political Notebook: The silence of the Labour lambs
Every tourist guide to parliament regales visitors to the Commons' with the
ancient story of the greenhorn MP voicing joy at the prospect of at last
confronting his enemies across the floor of the House.
''Eee lad,' warns a wiser colleague (this is, of course, the Labour
version), 'those across the chamber aren't your enemies, they are your
opponents.
'Your enemies are behind you.'
For month after arid month, media sensation-seekers have searched in vain
for one of Mr Neil Kinnock's enemies taking a potshot at him from Labour's
backbenches. Instead, they have encountered not the snarling jackals of old,
but the silence of Labour lambs.
There have been some tiny clearings of throats, of course.
Mr John Smith, the shadow chancellor, was reportedly not overly pleased with
his leader's indiscretions on national insurance in a Covent Garden
restaurant.
That aside, almost since the Gulf war, when a few peace-crazed firebrands
like Mr Tony Banks and Ms Clare Short resigned from their junior frontbench
jobs, all has been quiet. The longest-serving opposition leader this century
has undergone the longest period of publicly uncriticised leadership,
arguably, on record.
But is it genuine and can it last? The short answers are: 'Yes' and 'At
best, until not long after the election'.
As the contest has neared, Mr Kinnock's ruthless success at dragging his
party back to electability has created its own virtuous circle. As Labour's
opinion poll ratings have risen, so has dissent fallen to a rare mutter.
The reasons lie, in part, in the collapse of the hitherto stout party of
Labour's hard left. The Campaign group, once the bulwark of undiluted
socialism, is now a rump. Its regular Wednesday meetings attract fewer than
than two dozen backbenchers and even these are divided - if not bitterly -
over Europe, state ownership and proportional representation.
With the younger bloods largely in favour of PR and Brussels, and older
hands like Mr Bob Cryer disagreeing, there is no coherent hard left agenda.
Should Mr Kinnock form a government, the real pressure will come from the
so-called soft left, many of whose faces grace his front bench.
A minority government or a tiny majority would largely dictate a programme
that the Liberal Democrats would have the most difficulty in voting down.
For that very reason Labour is stressing its commitment to legislation for a
Scottish parliament and Freedom of Information in the first session.
Yet some articulate and influential figures on and off Labour's front bench
believe that some highly controversial matters must be confronted
immediately. One is the UK's exchange rate weighting in the Exchange Rate
Mechanism; another the way the Treasury calculates the public sector
borrowing requirement.
Mr Smith has told both the press and the City that he would resign before
tinkering with sterling's DM2.95 mean exchange rate and that devaluation
through a realignment is out of the question.
If he said anything else the shadow chancellor would risk dangerous exchange
rate turbulence even before he stepped through the door of Number 11. There
is every reason to believe him.
The problem is that some on his own side and even in the shadow cabinet will
want him to change his mind. When confronted with Smithian obduracy they
reply, in the words of Mandy Rice-Davies: 'Well, he would say that, wouldn't
he?'
On the PSBR, Mr Smith is merely silent. Earlier this month Mr Clive Soley,
Labour's housing spokesman, was firmly slapped down for suggesting that
local authorities should be able to spend some of their capital from council
house sales without public spending repercussions.
Similar views are understood to be held by the champions of local authority
bonds.
An unofficial grouping of influential figures are now determined to press
for thorough-going reform of PSBR accounting, modelled on less stringent
European practice, just as soon as Labour takes office.
With an election still to be won, Mr Kinnock must be praying that he may
soon be forced to confront such problems. But he might also care to chew
over another old political adage: 'Do not worry about your enemies, but
beware of your friends.'
