FT  18 AUG 92 / Technology: Robots in bulk - Andrew Baxter describes how the
humble warehouse is opening its doors to automation
Looming over British Steel's tinplate works in a steep valley at Ebbw Vale
is a somewhat forbidding structure. It may not win any architectural awards
but its contents hold the key to a problem that British manufacturers
frequently ignore.
Over the past decade, industrialists have modernised their production
processes to survive in increasingly competitive markets, but updating the
warehouse next door tends to get overlooked.
'Companies worry about the introduction of automation that does not come
within the sphere of their experience,' says Jack Haggett, managing director
of Haden Technology, the UK warehouse technology and logistics company.
'There's a little bit of technofear.'
At Ebbw Vale, British Steel decided some six years ago to bring its
warehouse up to the same technological standard as its production plant by
introducing a modern storage and handling system.
The aim, says British Steel, was to achieve a much-improved delivery
performance, better stock control, save energy - automated systems can work
in the dark - and reduce damage by cutting manual intervention to a minimum.
The solution was commissioned in 1990 - a 32-metre-tall automated highbay
warehouse with 14,748 rack locations for tinplate coils and bulks, packed
with automatic guided vehicles (AGVs), stacker cranes and conveyers and
controlled by a computerised management system linked to the British Steel
tinplate computer.
With the warehouse fully operational, all the expected savings have been
achieved, says British Steel.
Highbay warehouses sit like giant shoe-boxes on their long sides throughout
continental Europe, but are rather thinner on the ground in the UK. Haggett,
whose Letchworth-based company designed the Ebbw Vale system, says Germany
is investing 10 times as much in automated warehousing as the UK.
There are a number of reasons for this, he says. Planning problems are a
genuine concern in the UK - highbay warehouses may not be rejected outright
by planning authorities but often have to be enhanced externally, thus
raising the cost.
UK industry also demands a 20-25 per cent return on its capital, which does
not seem to be the case in Germany, says Haggett. 'There they look at the
whole-life cost of whether, for example, it is cheaper to use wheelbarrows
or conveyers.'
Then again, a cheaper low-rise warehouse may lose some of the efficiency
gains of its highbay counterparts, but is easier to convert to other uses.
'That's a perceived problem with highbay warehouses in the UK,' says
Haggett.
Joachim Miebach, founder of Frankfurt-based Miebach Logistic Systems, offers
another reason for the different approach in the UK, where the company has
recently undertaken a number of big automated warehousing and logistics
projects via its office in Oxford.
'I have a feeling that in the UK there is some reluctance to use machinery
to solve a warehousing problem, and a preference to use IT only - barcoding,
checking systems and sophisticated inventory control.
'In Switzerland, and especially in Germany, the tendency is to start with
the machinery - highbay warehouses and stacker cranes. These have to be
automated, so IT is a necessary consequence.'
The recession has also had a damaging effect on UK automated warehousing
investments, reducing the market to about a quarter of its level at the end
of the 1980s. However, UK inquiry levels have recently risen just as
continental European business begins to slow.
Redressing the balance in the UK will depend partly on companies such as
Haden and Miebach raising their profile. 'All our work shows there are
tremendous cost savings from high-tech automated warehousing,' says Haggett.
'But it is hard to break through the barriers.'
One way to achieve it is to have allies among the customers. Assuming a
company has a fairly high level of activity with fast movement of goods,
there then needs to be what Haggett calls a 'crazy man' pushing through
fundamental change that is 'off the process' or separate from the main
effort to update production technology.
For the layman, a look inside a highbay warehouse at work might easily bring
on an attack of 'technofear'. Deciding the right combination of the
available technologies, organising equipment purchases from a big range of
mainly continental suppliers, and taking turnkey responsibility for the
warehouse and its integration with production is a challenging task.
Over the past five years, one of the most important developments in European
warehousing has been in attitudes to computer control. Centralised systems
controlling all the details have been found to be too costly and
time-consuming, leading to a trend towards decentralisation with
self-contained computer systems for separate warehouse functions passing up
only the necessary data to the main computer.
AGVs, the driverless warhorses of modern warehouses, are also changing, with
the traditional wire guidance system being replaced by more sophisticated
controls. These could either be a robot-style teaching method, where the AGV
repeats a movement automatically after being taken through it manually; or
through vision systems which enable the AGV to recognise a pre-programmed
route.
But prospects for further applications of robots in warehouses are limited.
While well-established, and increasingly reliable, at picking and placing
layers of goods, they still have difficulty adapting to the huge variety of
goods found at an average warehouse.
Consequently, the trend in warehousing towards fast delivery of small
quantities of goods at high frequencies can be hard for a robot to handle,
although they are making a mark in niche markets such as in pharmaceutical
warehouses, where packages are more uniform.
Companies like Haden and Miebach spend a lot of time talking to robotics
suppliers in the hope of pushing for improvements, but the real problem,
says Miebach, is that 'we have not come across the warehouse robot that can
imitate the movement of the human hand'.
Sometimes, though, there are occasions when no mechanical solutions are
necessary. 'There have been times when we've told a client to paint a few
lines on the floor, buy a PC with a warehouse management program, and the
problem will be solved,' says Haggett.
