FT  29 SEP 92 / Anxiety mounts as poverty traps more victims: Fears over
possible cuts to the social security budget
ANTI-POVERTY campaigners are facing the coming tight public spending round
with at least as much anxiety as ministers.
In the most difficult public spending climate for years, there are mounting
fears that the Pounds 70bn social security budget - by far the biggest
single area of government expenditure - will not escape cost-containment
scrutiny.
Anti-poverty groups are rallying to the cause of Britain's low-income
families with a spate of reports designed to demonstrate that the poor
deserve greater support. The Low Pay Unit said yesterday that the pay gap is
wider now that at any time since official figures were first collected in
1886. In another report published today the Child Poverty Action Group
argues that some unemployed families have suffered cuts of more than 40 per
cent in the real value of unemployment benefit since 1979.
The latest official figures on poverty were published by the government just
before parliament rose for the summer recess. They give ammunition to those
who contend that the relative position of the poor declined during the
1980s.
Even so, suggests Professor Peter Townsend of Bristol University, one of
Britain's foremost academic specialists on poverty, the true position may be
worse. 'The government's procedures for gathering the figures are highly
technical and bizarre, and I have a fair amount of suspicion that they try
to choose data which put the poor in the best possible light.'
Poverty statistics are rarely open to value-free interpretation. There is as
much argument over definitions of poverty as there was this summer over
whether it causes urban disturbances such as those on the Hartcliffe Estate
in Bristol. The government's figures for 'households below average income'
show beyond reasonable doubt, however, that some of Britain's poorest people
became ever poorer in the 1980s.
Incomes of the poorest 10 per cent of the population after housing costs
were 6 per cent lower in 1988-89 than in 1979, while their share of total
income declined and the proportion of people living on less than half
average income rose from 9 per cent to 22 per cent after housing costs.
One of the government's intentions in its reform of social security in the
late 1980s was to target support on groups, such as families with children,
whom ministers believe are in most need.
Figures published in a written answer a few days before parliament rose show
the effect this policy is having on groups considered to have a lower
priority. The annual income support entitlement for a single unemployed
adult declined, at 1989 prices, from Pounds 1,725 in 1986-87 to Pounds 1,394
in 1989-90 - lower than in 1979-80, when it was Pounds 1,542.
Mr Peter Lilley, social security secretary, has emphasised that the
statistics for households below average income show a growth in ownership of
consumer durables among the poorest section of the population. Prof Townsend
dismisses this point as 'really rather absurd', saying changes in material
circumstances have occured throughout history and that definitions of
poverty must take this into account.
The issues which concern Prof Townsend and his colleagues at Bristol
university are debated with equal intensity at the Single Parent Action
Network in Eastville, a voluntary project in an inner-city district a few
miles away.
Poverty is not only a political or an academic issue here, it is a practical
one.
Maria, a single parent, brings up two daughters aged one and eight on social
security support of between Pounds 60 and Pounds 70 per week plus housing
benefit. She says she would prefer to work but that the high cost of
childcare makes this economically impossible.
Ms Sue Cohen, the project co-ordinator, says examples of single parents
going without proper nourishment to feed their children are not unusual.
Prof Townsend believes a mechanism to tackle 'extreme inequalities in the
wage structure' would have to form part of a successful attack on poverty.
He says: 'Politicians on all sides shrink from this, but the fact is that
pay developments have got out of social control. Extremes of inequality in
the wage structure have social outcomes which have enormous costs to the
quality of our lives. It is all very well trying to justify low pay and
unemployment as the necessary ingredients for competition, but I believe we
are losing some of the possibilities of being competitive by allowing
inequalities in the wage structure to become so extreme.'
Women at the Single Parent Action Network say an attack on poverty would
require strong, positive government policies to support the family -
recognising that families often contain only one parent. They regard the
government's plans to pursue absent fathers who fail to support their
families as a blind-alley approach which will increase pressures on some
mothers.
'Many women who come to the network display tremendous potential. But they
have little chance of realising it without adequate childcare and training
provision aimed at the particular needs of single parents,' says Ms Cohen.
'People very quickly get drawn into the culture of poverty. And the really
alarming thing is how quickly their children get drawn into it as well.'
