FT  06 AUG 92 / International Company News: US Steel may build plant to
rival mini-mills
US STEEL, the largest integrated steel manufacturer in the US, is
considering building a new steel plant to combat America's fast-growing
steel mini-mills on their own ground.
If it went ahead, the investment would represent an important change of
strategy which other integrated manufacturers would be likely to follow.
US Steel, a division of the USX steel and energy group, yesterday confirmed
reports it was investigating the construction of a mini-mill as one of its
business options.
However, the company said that while the issue remained 'under active
study,' no specific proposals had been developed.
Mini-mill steel companies - small, non-union businesses using less
capital-intensive technology than America's vertically integrated
manufacturers - have captured more than 20 per cent of the US market during
the past three decades and are now invading Big Steel's last bastion, the
market for flat-rolled products.
Nucor, the most successful of the mini-mills, is producing 1m tons of
commodity grade flat rolled steel at a plant in Crawfordsville, Indiana, and
is about to open a second plant, with similar capacity, at Hickman,
Arkansas.
The plants use a new technology - thin slab casting - which saves time,
energy and labour costs. It allows steel to be cast into two inch slabs and
then rolled directly into coils.
However, some analysts question whether this technology can ever produce
steel of sufficient quality for the more demanding markets.
The current method employed by Big Steel involves creating a slab nine to 12
inches thick, cooling it, transporting it to another site and then reheating
the slab before it is rolled into coil.
US Steel, which previously considered and rejected the method being used by
Nucor, may be mulling investment in another new technology, strip casting,
which some analysts believe may produce steel of superior quality to the
thin slab method.
Many analysts argue that the route US Steel is considering is the path other
integrated steel companies will have to take if they are to beat back the
challenge from the mini-mills, which may bring on 10m tons or more of
flat-rolled capacity over the next decade.
However, the integrated companies will face delicate negotiations with the
United Steelworkers union over the labour flexibility needed to compete
successfully at new plants against the non-union mini-mills.
