FT  31 OCT 92 / Sport: Dreamers go back to work - The new season facing the
Olympic stars / Basketball
REMEMBER the 'Dream Team'?
The superstar American basketball players who dazzled the world on their way
to a gold medal in the Barcelona Olympics are back at work. The 'Dream' is
just a distant, if happy memory of three weeks in Spain, and the 'Team' is
no more, just a collection of individuals preparing to face the rigours of
the 82-game National Basketball Association season that opens this week.
The memory of the Olympic gold has faded fast.
The way the Dream Team has been treated since the Games suggests that the
Olympics and professionalism remain awkward bedfellows.
The swimmers, divers and gymnasts who captivated audiences in August are
still celebrated. In contrast, after a brief flurry of chat-show
appearances, the basketball stars returned to their traditional summer
pastimes of golf, fishing and more golf.
For amateur competitors, Barcelona was the peak of their careers. The same
cannot be said for the Dream Team, for whom the Games were as much about
spreading the basketball gospel and selling sneakers as they were about
personal athletic achievement.
It is too early to tell if the Olympics will effect the performance of Dream
Team players. The Olympics meant they had barely two months' rest, so
fatigue could be factor later this season: perhaps in the playoffs next
spring.
A few players enter the season carrying injuries from their Spanish
adventure. Patrick Ewing, the towering star of the Knicks, is suffering the
most. He damaged his ankle at the end of last season, carried the injury
through the Olympics and has yet to recover fully. A weak ankle is not
something a 7ft, 240lb athlete wants to nurse through a long season that
gives teams little more than 24 or 48 hours' rest between games.
Ewing has other problems - such as remembering his teammates' names. The
Knicks' management was busy during the off-season. Only two of last season's
starting five have survived the shake-up, and nearly half a dozen back-up
players have been replaced.
The key signing is Rolando Blackman. He is reknowned for his defensive
qualities, Michael Jordan - the league's best player - says Blackman is the
toughest defender he has ever faced, and he is a scoring threat from long
range. Ewing's strength means opponents have to pack their defence under the
basket to stop him. The one thing the Knicks lacked last season was someone
who could exploit the space Ewing created and score with shots from
distance. Blackman could be the missing ingredient to turn the Knicks into
the championship contender New York has dreamed of since the early 1970s.
Two others who will have to learn the names of new teammates are Christian
Laettner, the Dream Team's token college player, who is starting his
professional career with the lowly Minnesota Timberwolves, and Charles
Barkley, who has moved from the under-achieving Philadelphia 76ers to the
Phoenix Suns.
True to form, Barkley was the bad boy of the Olympics. He elbowed a tiny
Angolan opponent and then joked that he was scared his victim might have
been carrying 'a spear somewhere'. In spite of his thuggery, Barkley is a
great player and could make the Suns contenders.
At the time of the move Barkley was unusually restrained. He said: 'Phoenix
is not a bad place. I could play golf every day.'
But he sounded a note of caution: 'The only thing that worries me is the
people out in Phoenix. They are so excited. They're already ordering
championship rings. Slow down]'
Barkley started his Phoenix career in typical style: thrown out of his first
exhibition game for excessive violence.
Among the other Olympians, Larry Bird, the lanky, lumbering genius who
played for Boston, has retired because of a bad back. Jordan returns to lead
the champion Chicago Bulls, chastened only by the embarrassing experience of
being called as a witness in a drug and money laundering trial, and
admitting to the court that over the course of one weekend a year ago he
lost Dollars 57,000 at golf and poker to the defendant.
Probably the biggest short-term impact of the Dream Team, was the lift it
gave to Earvin 'Magic' Johnson. Delighted as he was to win a gold medal,
Johnson won something more in Barcelona - the confidence to return to the
NBA after retiring last year when he found he was HIV positive.
Although there are still doubts over his ability to cope with the physical
demands of the league's schedule, Johnson will once again lead the Los
Angeles Lakers this season. He has, however, agreed to take it relatively
easy. If all goes well, he should appear in 50 or 60 games, bringing that
special magic which the NBA missed so much last season.
