FT  14 AUG 92 / Red Cross appeals for humanity
THE International Committee of the Red Cross yesterday issued a solemn
appeal to all the warring parties in Bosnia-Hercegovina to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law.
The rare public appeal by the Geneva-based organisation, which normally
works confidentially behind the scenes to help individual victims of
conflict, reflects concern over the scale and depth of human rights
violations in Bosnia and its failure privately to persuade the parties to
respect basic humanitarian principles laid down in the Geneva Conventions.
Urgent measures are needed to 'guarantee the physical and moral integrity of
detainees', the statement says, adding that the ICRC has had only limited
access to regions of Bosnia while repeated requests for complete lists of
detention centres and detainees have yet to be met.
The ICRC has so far visited 11 camps in Bosnia-Hercegovina holding up to
6,000 people, three controlled by Serbs, six by Croats and two by Muslims.
Among specific targets of the appeal, the ICRC called for an end to forced
transfers of population, immediate steps to improve living conditions in
detention centres, immediate notification of all places of detention and
detainees, and full and secure access for ICRC delegates.
Reuter adds from Banja Luka: Later yesterday International Red Cross
officials said they had now been promised access to all prisoners held in
the Bosnian conflict.
They said a team of 20 had already visited prisoners in the Serb-run
detention centres of Omarska, Manjaca and Trnopolje, among the most
notorious of the camps.
'The (Red Cross) now has access. We are in there. It has lots of experience
and is doing its job,' said Mr Beat Schweizer, head of the office of the
ICRC in Banja Luka.
ICRC officials said Serbian, Croatian and Moslem authorities had all
promised let them visit all their detention centres. Whether they will fully
carry out there promise is unclear but the ICRC is hoping to be able to
provide the first comprehensive figures on the numbers of prisoners at the
end of next week.
