FT  11 MAR 92 / MPs may rebuke Maxwells
A COMMITTEE of MPs may decide today to rebuke Mr Ian Maxwell and his brother
Kevin for impeding a Commons inquiry into the Maxwell pensions scandal - but
any action is expected to be postponed until after the general election.
The cross-party social security committee will meet to agree its reaction to
the brothers' refusal to answer even a written questionnaire on the affair.
One other trustee of a Maxwell company pension fund is also believed to have
refused to answer the questionnaire.
Many MPs on the committee have been angered by the Maxwells' refusal, saying
it has prevented a complete investigation of how the brothers' father, the
late Robert Maxwell, was able to take more than Pounds 400m from the pension
funds of companies he controlled. However, other MPs on the committee may
try to dilute the report.
Lawyers acting for the brothers have said they have 'a precious
constitutional right and a historic one' to remain silent.
The closeness of the general election is understood to have persuaded MPs on
the committee there is no hope of the affair being debated by the whole of
the Commons until the next parliament. The committee could, however, make
suggestions for a successor committee to pursue.
On Monday, in response to the Maxwell affair, the committee recommended
sweeping reform of the UK pensions industry, including a new pensions act.
Its report said the financial institutions which bankrolled Robert Maxwell
had a moral obligation to help pensioners defrauded in the affair.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, said yesterday that the government would
need 'some time' to consider the report before responding. He told the
Commons at question time that it raised a number of 'very complex and
inter-related matters' for the pensions industry, banks, actuaries, auditors
and regulators as well as the government.
He said the cause of Maxwell Group pensioners' problems was 'all too clear'.
He added: 'There appears to have been a massive fraud perpetrated under the
very eyes of the trustees.'
