FT  17 SEP 92 / Arts: Hamlet - Theatre
There is a sense of excitement about a new production of Hamlet that does
not attach to any other English play, for every Hamlet is different and
there is no such thing as a definitive performance. Alan Rickman looks,
speaks and moves as if he has been waiting to play the part all his life. He
has come to it at the right time. His Hamlet looks genuinely youthful.
Ophelia's speech about the 'observed of all observers' has him absolutely
right. He is better educated, better looking, more sensitive and more
civilised than any one else in the Danish Court. The more modern English
phrase is 'effortless superiority'.
Rickman plays the role very quietly. There are few histrionics and no
gimmicks. The moment of real passion comes when he sees Ophelia's burial.
Here he erupts, but it is the madness of grief rather than that of an
unhinged mind. He does not behave so alarmingly even in the bedroom scene
with his mother, where the madness is plainly feigned. This Hamlet loves
Ophelia.
Rickman's simple approach is abetted by an equally simple set. There are few
props - not much more than the odd chair. There is, however, a spare metal
balcony running across the top of the back of the stage and abbuting
T-shaped high into the centre. It also allows a marvellous use of space.
Characters can enter high up on the balcony. Claudius and Gertrude watch the
Murder of Gonzago from this elevated position. Hamlet is sitting with
Ophelia on the T while the players perform beneath. Again Hamlet is tempted
to kill the king with his sword from above in his soliloquy 'Now might I do
it pat'.
There is a lot of space on the ground, allowing Hamlet to walk about. Plenty
of room, too, for the gravediggers and the final fight. The impression is
more of a mixture of desert and prison than a formal court. The unobtrusive
use of lighting by Giorgi Meskhishvili, who also designed the set, has
moments of sheer brilliance.
If Rickman is a quietly convincing, almost conventional Hamlet, the
direction by Robert Sturua has its surprises. Osric is played not as a
precious young fop, but as a fussy middle-aged man with foppish tendencies,
bowler hat and spats. Laertes is different from any previous conception
known to this reviewer. He wears spectacles, is much smaller than Hamlet
and, whether in sports jacket or old leather and jeans, looks like a student
who would genuinely prefer to be at the Sorbonne rather than the court of
Denmark.
Sturua's main coup is to cut the formal fencing at the end to the bone.
There are just enough exchanges between Hamlet and Laertes for the fatal
wound to be inflicted: none of that phoney business where we are asked to
believe that the actors are equally handy with the epee.
One weakness is Polonius. English productions have tended traditionally to
play him as a buffoon. Modern east European productions have portrayed him
as a state bureaucrat. This Polonius falls between all stools and is nothing
in particular. I also wonder whether it is wise to have David Burke playing
both Claudius and Ghost, since one of the points of the play is meant to be
Hamlet's perception of how different his uncle and his father were.
Among the strengths are Geraldine McEwan's Gertrude who shows to perfection
the harrowing experience of ageing overnight. Also Julia Ford's Ophelia who
demonstrates that she has learned from Hamlet's brutal sexual teasing by
doing a mock rape of Cladius. Among the smaller parts Steven Crossley is an
outstanding first player.
Riverside Studios until October 10
