FT  16 JAN 92 / Ministers under fire in Gulf war report
THE government faced acute embarrassment yesterday after the disclosure of
an internal armed services report strongly criticising interference by
ministers in the conduct of Britain's role in the Gulf campaign a year ago.
The report, leaked to the Press Association news agency on the anniversary
of the expiry of the UN deadline signalling the start of the offensive
against Iraq, comes amid a sustained three-day Tory offensive against Labour
as a party lacking genuine commitment to strong defence policies.
It says the government showed a 'preoccupation with money and politics',
'excessive ministerial influence' and 'a frustrating loss of cohesion'
during the campaign.
As Downing Street talked down the report's significance, Mr Martin O'Neill,
chief Labour defence spokesman, insisted it raised 'very serious questions'
about the government's handling of the military side of the Gulf crisis.
Responding, officials suggested the paper was merely part of an extensive
re-evaluation of the conduct of the war ordered by Mr Tom King, the defence
secretary and now the chief target of opposition attacks.
In a statement, Mr King acknowledged there had been disputes over 'details
within the decision-making process', but added that these had not interfered
with 'the overall team effort and the success that that achieved'.
Later he said: 'It is clear that some mistakes were made, there were
disagreements between different people and some failures of communication.'
But it was his responsibility during the crisis 'not to accede automatically
to every request' from the forces.
The report, understood to have been written by a naval officer, highlights
friction between the services and senior civilians about the forces
committed to Gulf operations. This included ministers' refusal to send the
aircraft carrier Ark Royal into the Red Sea despite US requests for it to
assist in enforcing the embargo against Iraq.
The report says Air Chief Marshal Sir Patrick Hine, the UK-based joint
commander of the campaign, and Marshal of the Royal Air Force Sir David
Craig, then chief of defence staff, pressed the government to send the Ark
Royal.
The navy's anxiety to take a higher profile in military operations was seen
by civil servants as partly reflecting worries about impending cuts.
The report says senior civil servants were 'hell-bent on committing as
little as possible' to the Gulf because of the cost-saving review.
Mr King flies to the Gulf on Saturday to help boost UK arms sales in the
region. He plans to visit Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Oman and the UAE where big
British defence sales are expected this year.
Gulf war anniversary, Page 4
