FT  28 AUG 92 / Czechs and Slovaks set divorce terms: Two prime ministers
finally see eye-to-eye over ending a 74-year-old union
CZECHOSLOVAKIA will be divided into two separate republics linked by a
customs and currency union when the federal state is dissolved at the end of
this year. This was agreed by Czech and Slovak leaders after their sixth
round of constitutional talks in Brno this week.
Mr Vaclav Klaus, the Czech prime minister and Mr Vladimir Meciar, his Slovak
counterpart, also outlined the constitutional steps needed to prepare the
Czech and Slovak republics for formal independence by January 1,1993.
The agreement in principle to create a customs union and a currency zone in
which future Czech and Slovak currencies would be linked by a fixed exchange
rate, is aimed at reducing the economic dislocation involved in dividing the
74-year-old Czechoslovak state. No timetable has been fixed for introducing
separate currencies which would be issued at a one-to-one exchange rate.
'For the time being, we will effectively maintain one currency, but at the
same time put in place a mechanism which allows for realignments if they
prove necessary,' Mr Karel Dyba, Czech industry minister, told the FT.
In Bratislava, the Slovak capital, Mr Ludovit Cernak, Slovak economics and
industry minister, said 'the Slovak government is prepared to co-ordinate
its economic policies with its Czech neigbour to ensure that the one-to-one
exchange rate is maintained indefinitely.'
Negotiators have been discussing ways to resolve the fate of the
Czechoslovak federation since last June's elections brought nationalist
leaders to power in the smaller Slovak republic. While seeking international
recognition for their republic, Slovak leaders have insisted that some form
of economic union be maintained with the wealthier Czech republic which
traditionally takes the bulk of their semi-finished products.
The exact details of the custom and currency agreements will be contained in
two documents which are being prepared by the federal government. The
documents will then be passed to each republic for approval.
Monetary co-ordination is expected to be managed by the existing Financial
Council which includes finance ministers from both republics and the
governor of the central bank. The institution met occasionally over the past
two years to discuss significant economic policies affecting both republics.
The formation of a customs union reflects the desire to ensure that
dissolution of the federation does not jeopardise the country's obligations
towards the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the trade association
agreement signed with the European Community last year.
The constitutional divorce, meanwhile, will be achieved through a law being
prepared by the federal government for approval by the federal assembly by
the end of the year. It provides four alternative methods of legitimising
the dissolution: through an agreement between the two republican
parliaments, through a vote in the federal assembly, by means of a
referendum, or unilateral secession.
The latter option now appears unlikely. The Slovak constitution, due to be
voted on in the republic's parliament next week, and which could have
brought an early de facto end to the federation, is now expected to have a
clause suspending its introduction until January 1, 1993.
