FT  10 NOV 92 / The CBI at Harrogate: Government challenged to fulfil
pledges
SIR Michael Angus, president of the CBI, challenged the government to use
Thursday's Autumn Statement to prove it is ready to convert its pledge to
support British industry into practical action.
He told the conference that ministerial recognition of the need to stimulate
economic growth had been widely welcomed.
He was finally able to say he really believed the government was on
industry's side after a period of apparent indifference to its problems.
Sir Michael welcomed the recent cuts in interest rates, and echoed the CBI's
calls for further reductions.
He said it was already clear that the CBI's calls to protect public
expenditure had been heard and there was a case for increasing capital
spending at national and local authority level to provide new jobs and
encourage longer-term competitiveness.
Sir Michael emphasised that the total public-sector pay bill should not be
raised, and that any pay rises should be funded out of productivity. He said
the private sector had to restrict pay pressures to stay competitive, and
the same principle had to apply to the 'shop floor, the office and the
boardroom'. He criticised the proposed 4 per cent rise in MPs' pay.
Sir Michael welcomed the arrival of Mr Michael Heseltine at the Department
of Trade and Industry as 'a breath of fresh air', but said the CBI expected
a clear definition of Mr Heseltine's pledge to intervene in industry when he
addressed the conference today.
He said: 'We are not seeking hand-outs, winner-spotting or soft options. We
are seeking understanding and selective help based on a desire to restore
and enhance the manufacturing base of this country'.
Sir Michael said the government had to negotiate robustly in Europe to
remove unfair competitive advantages.
He said Britain needed to be a powerful and central part of Europe, able to
attract internal and inward investment. But it also had to fight 'petty
bureaucracy from Brussels, combined with arrogance and rigidity'.
He added: 'We have infuriating interference with local decisions and
national customs. We have trendy, well-meaning do-gooders threatening to
overburden industry with social projects which we just cannot afford'.
