FT  28 MAR 92 / Demand for tax advice up sharply
DEMANDS ON accountants for tax-planning advice far exceed those received at
this time in previous years, many in the profession said yesterday.
Labour's tax proposals mean that a married man on a Pounds 100,000 salary is
contemplating a loss of Pounds 13,000 a year, a fall in after-tax income of
20 per cent.
Many people in the UK are adopting 'tax-efficient' measures so that they
receive income in the current financial year. Some financial institutions,
such as James Capel, the stockbroker, have brought forward the payment of
bonuses to employees.
The real question is whether investors will be sufficiently panicked to take
their money offshore.
A UK resident is liable to be taxed on all his or her worldwide income.
There were reports yesterday in offshore centres such as Gibraltar and the
Isle of Man reflecting nervousness that stopped short of capital flight.
One leading Gibraltar lawyer said yesterday: 'What we have been getting in
recent days is quite a number of accountants coming to us who are
anticipating capital flight and who want us to be ready for it. But the
capital from the UK hasn't arrived yet.'
For individuals, the safest way of avoiding British tax involves removing
oneself as well as one's money.
Mr Keith Kerruish, chartered surveyor and partner in Chrystals Royal Life
Estates in the Isle of Man, estimates that between 20 and 30 people may have
moved to the island in anticipation of a Labour government.
Meanwhile, the Inland Revenue is ready for any British taxpayers seeking to
place assets offshore to avoid UK tax liability.
Mr Dennis Parrett, principal inspector of taxes from the Revenue's
compliance and collection division in London, said: 'It isn't worth evading
tax. You could end up paying more than Pounds 1 in the pound.'
Numerous Revenue staff are involved in tracking people and companies seeking
to conceal untaxed assets overseas, from district tax inspectors in local
offices around the country to Section 739 in Hinchley Wood, Surrey, which
specialises in examining transfers of assets overseas by individuals.
For those caught in tax evasion, the penalties include full repayment of all
tax plus interest, and a further sum up to the value of the tax evaded,
depending on the level of co-operation given to inspectors.
There is nothing illegal in creating an offshore trust, if either the assets
it controls are no longer under the control of the taxpayer placing them
there, or those assets are disclosed to the Inland Revenue.
If they are disclosed, though, recent legislative changes mean there is no
longer any tax advantage in holding them offshore.
If the assets sit offshore untouched they may often go undetected. They may
not come to light until the taxpayer dies and heirs attempt to take on the
inheritance. But many people do need access later to money they have hidden
away.
However, there is evidence that clauses in the 1991 Finance Act closed most
options for UK-resident taxpayers to create offshore vehicles for their
assets. It will in any case be some months before the Revenue is able to
track and measure evasion conducted in the run-up to the election.
