FT  02 MAR 92 / Apathy puts Tsongas ahead: Two Democrats in the race for
presidential nomination have their best chance to shine in primaries
tomorrow in Georgia and Maryland
MARYLAND promoters portray their state as a microcosm of the US. Neither
northern nor southern, it has a population of 4.7m spread over mountains,
swamp, seashore, cities, and suburbs.
It has farmers, fishermen, blue collar and high technology workers, a large
number of government employees and professionals, minorities and ethnics -
the common thread being that most will not vote in next Tuesday's
presidential primary.
In fact, most do not know there is a primary.
The beneficiary of the voters' apathy and ignorance is likely to be former
Senator Paul Tsongas, a self-styled pro-business liberal and the Democrats'
winner of the New Hampshire primary. Ahead in the polls, he sees the state
as his best opportunity to demonstrate appeal outside his native New
England. Marylanders, who have paid attention enough to know him, perceive
him as a straight-talker - even if the message he carries is one of gloom.
('The Cold War is over; Japan and Germany won.')
Mr Tsongas promises to rebuild the country's manufacturing base and curb
government give-aways. He has also attracted hundreds of committed campaign
workers, like Mr Jeffrey Cohen, a realtor, driven into campaigning for the
first time in his life by the 'lousy' business conditions.
'I like his whole perspective,' says Mr Cohen. 'The country has to make
basic, structural changes, and he understands that. Tsongas is credible. He
worked in the private sector six years. He served in the Peace Corps. That
represents a certain type of mentality you have for life.'
In large states, where campaigns must be conducted mostly by television,
charisma may sway the voters. Not in Maryland, where forthright pragmatism
comes over well at a time when politicians are greatly distrusted.
Mr Keith Haller, a Maryland pollster, believes only about 15 per cent of the
2.1m registered voters will cast ballots. The economic pain and anger which
brought out more than half the eligible voters in the New Hampshire primary
is muted in Maryland, the fifth richest state per capita, where unemployment
is below the national average.
The national job trends have created an amorphous insecurity and pockets of
real hardship, but that has only translated into political awareness among
affluent and older voters and party activists. The former are expected to go
for Mr Tsongas. The latter will be mobilised by party organisations,
political clubs, labour unions, and churches and many of them will go for
Governor Bill Clinton, who is particularly strong among black voters, who
make up 25 per cent of the state.
The 'character issue' which so absorbs the political pundits in their
endless debates over Governor Clinton's rumoured womanising and alleged
draft dodging means little in a community devastated during the 1980s by
low-skilled job losses, crime and drugs.
Mr Clinton has won the support of the black churches and at a recent rally
he was endorsed by the popular Baltimore Mayor Kurk Schmoke. 'We want a man
who gives us hope. The nation cries out for leadership that is concerned and
caring,' intoned the Rev Marion Bascom, one of the city's most influential
ministers at a recent Clinton rally.
Mr Clinton responded with appropriate fervour, calling for a 'new covenant'
between disheartened Americans and their government.
He has been urged to devote more resources to Maryland to challenge Mr
Tsongas, who would then have difficulty winning elsewhere. But Mr Clinton -
and the voters - have been distracted by an increasingly nasty turn in the
campaign which has forced him to focus his energy on his base of support for
the March 10 'Super Tuesday', when most of the southern states will hold
primaries.
There he must respond to charges by Nebraska Senator Bob Kerrey that the
'character issues' have made him un-electable against President Bush. There
he must win big before the campaign surges north a week later into Michigan
and Illinois.
