FT  02 JAN 92 / Finns fearful for Baltic joint ventures
FINNISH companies account for most of the investment in joint ventures in
neighbouring Estonia, but some businesses fear that chaos in the rest of the
former Soviet Union could hamper further foreign projects.
Of the roughly 250 joint ventures established in the former Soviet republic
in the past four years, 120 are of Finnish origin. Only a handful, though,
are up and running so far.
Estonia is better placed for foreign investment than neighbouring Latvia and
Lithuania because of close linguistic, cultural and geographic ties with
Finland and consequently with the rest of the Nordic region.
'Considering how expensive production and labour costs are in Finland, it is
only natural that many Finnish companies like ourselves are keenly seeking
to set up production units in Estonia,' says Mr Christian Grondhal, senior
vice- president of Novera, a Finnish construction and agricultural machinery
group which owns 51 per cent of Estonia Engineering, a Finnish-Estonian
joint venture.
However, Mr Grondhal warns that if labour and production costs rise sharply,
Estonia will lose its attractiveness to foreign investors.
Salaries are low in Estonia by western standards, in some cases between
Dollars 10 and Dollars 20 a month. But many Estonians are already offering
office rent at prices similar to Helsinki's, although one foreign company
has been reported as paying Dollars 4 a month for office space in the centre
of Tallinn.
Apart from Novera, which plans to build a prefabricated bathrooms production
unit in Tallinn, other Finnish companies are also setting up similar
facilities in Estonia. Ahlstrom a Finnish boiler group, will build a
glass-wool plant in eastern Estonia, and Partek and Lohja, two construction
groups, will begin to fabricate building materials.
New trade agreements between Finland and Estonia, which will be ratified
this year, are expected to encourage such a development. If approved by the
Finnish parliament, Estonian manufactured goods should be able to enter
Finland without any tariff restrictions.
But the process of rebuilding Estonia's obsolete industry will be an
expensive endeavour. Last October, Imatran Voima and Vattenfall,
respectively Finnish and Swedish utility groups, and the Estonian Ministry
of Industry and Energy signed a co-operation agreement to begin the process
of modernising Estonia's ageing power sector.
Some analysts say the task of modernising Estonia's energy sector to meet
western standards will the require investments of billions of Finnish marks.
According to Mr Grondhal, trading has been the most important activity of
Estonia Engineering, a medium-sized joint venture by Estonian standards. Its
turnover has increased from FM10m (Dollars 2.4m) in autumn 1989-1990 to an
estimated FM13m-FM15m this year.
'Even if we offer the expertise and, most important, solve the financing
problem for Estonian dairies, fisheries and slaughterhouse through complex
barter arrangements,' said Mr Grondhal, 'these trade arrangements in some
cases may take a year to work out.'
One recent example was a fishery in eastern Estonia, on Lake Peipsi. Through
Novera Group's European contacts, Estonia Engineering helped the local
fishery to acquire a FM3.5m cold-storage space with a capacity of 500
tonnes, through the sale of fish. The local fishery paid the fish to Estonia
Engineering, which in turn sold it for hard currency in the west.
Other items which Estonia Engineering has been able to sell from Estonia in
the west through barter and cash deals are hides, powdered milk, cheese and
butter.
Mr Aarne Rapp general manager of Estonia Engineering, believes hardships
await his country as it attempts to shake off the vestiges of half a century
of Moscow rule. 'Chaos in Russia and chronic shortages of commodities in
Estonia can become strong disincentives for Finnish and foreign firms to
invest in this country,' he concludes. 'Such a situation would spell
disaster.
