FT  08 MAY 92 / UK Company News: You take the work road and I'll the
litigious road - James Buxton on Rodime's redefinition of recovery
FOR A company whose latest balance sheet shows negative net worth of Dollars
27m (Pounds 15.2m) and which has abandoned the main purpose for which it was
founded, the recent annual meeting of Rodime was a surprisingly cheerful
affair.
Rodime was a disk drive manufacturer which was once regarded as a rare
example of a successful UK high technology start-up company. Founded by some
Scots and an American who spun out of a US multinational in Scotland in
1980, it produced the world's first 3 1/2 -inch hard disk drive, now
standard equipment on most personal computers, from a plant in Glenrothes,
Fife.
Last August, however, it finally gave up the struggle to continue
manufacturing and commenced what Mr Peter Bailey, the English-born but
US-based electronics industry specialist who came in to rescue Rodime in
1989, calls 'an orderly build-down' of the company.
The crunch came after the last-minute failure to conclude a manufacturing
joint venture with a Taiwanese company, which was unable to come up with the
necessary Dollars 90m to finance the project. By that time a series of
disasters had exhausted Rodime's working capital. Its shares, once a star of
the US over-the-counter market, were suspended on the London Stock Exchange
at 4p.
Yet the AGM, held in a Glasgow solicitor's office, was far from gloomy
because the directors believe there is a good chance that Rodime will
eventually return to solvency as it pursues companies which have infringed
its patents, and as it issues new licences. It has already recovered
virtually all its recoverable assets, apart from the sale (at a likely loss)
of a building in Boca Raton, Florida.
In the year to September 30 Rodime lost Dollars 24.3m on turnover that had
shrunk to only Dollars 12.4m, taking account of provisions and interest. In
the balance sheet the company had net liabilities of Dollars 26.9m. That
included Dollars 37.8m owed to Bank of Scotland (which also owns 18.4 per
cent of almost worthless equity of the company), and Dollars 7.9m owed to
other creditors. Debtors, including amounts recoverable from subsidiaries,
totalled Dollars 18.8m.
Since then Rodime has sold its manufacturing operations in Singapore, which
it had put into receivership, to Myrica, a Taiwanese company, which also
acquired Rodime's engineering development team in Glenrothes. Rodime sold
its disk drive repair company in Scotland to Memec, the electronic servicing
company.
When Mr Bailey came to Rodime he believed it could have been made into a
company with Dollars 1bn turnover (in reality its turnover in its entire
history never exceeded Dollars 120m, yet it operated in Scotland, the US and
Singapore). But even when banks, creditors and investors agreed a rescue
package worth Dollars 68m in 1989, Rodime never had the financial resources
to produce the innovative products its engineers designed.
He admits that if he had carried out more due diligence Rodime would have
taken a restructuring charge twice the size of the Dollars 12m it actually
allowed. But he also acknowledges that if the true value of the inherited
inventory had been known, the rescue might not have gone ahead at all.
However, one decision he took then is paying off. 'We were spending a
fortune on legal fees pursuing International Business Machines for patent
infringement. I decided to continue that action'. This was based on a
favourable 1988 ruling of the US Patent Office.
The pay-off came in late 1990 when IBM paid Rodime Dollars 13m in an
out-of-court settlement. Rodime then went on to pursue other companies,
beginning with Conner Peripherals, the big US disk drive maker, from which
it received a 'material' payment in settlement last May.
'It is very difficult to produce a multi-disk 3 1/2 -inch disk drive without
infringing one or more of our patents,' says Mr Bailey. The patents do not
expire until 2004, and although companies are now moving to smaller disk
drives, Mr Bailey believes the 3 1/2 -inch will be coming out in large
volumes until about 1997.
Since last spring Rodime has reached licensing agreements with companies
including Alps Electric, Fujitsu, Matsushita Electric, Hitachi and Teac of
Japan, and Hewlett-Packard of the US. Rodime is now targeting about 25 other
companies which it claims are infringing its patents, including NEC, Sony
and Toshiba of Japan, and Seagate and Quantum of the US.
Although Rodime is a litigious company it is not currently in litigation
with any company as it pursues amicable settlements. Speed is not
necessarily of the essence any more. 'The longer a company takes to settle,
the longer it will have been infringing our patents and the more it may have
to pay,' says Mr Bailey.
What Rodime, which now employs only five people, will not reveal is how the
balance sheet looks now, but Mr Bailey says that although cash flow is
positive, it is not yet in the black. 'However, I'm confident that the value
of our patents exceeds the level of our debt.'
Although Mr Malcolm McIver, the Glasgow solicitor who became chairman of a
slimmed board earlier this year, warns that the company's new strategy is
'by no means assured of success', Rodime believes it may accumulate positive
net worth next year. This could eventually mean a pay-out to shareholders.
'Our patents were supposed to be the icing on the cake - we never meant to
live off them,' says Mr Bailey. But he is not apologetic about the somewhat
uncreative role that this former pioneer has now adopted. In fact he sees
further possibilities for it.
'There are not many small companies that have beaten IBM,' he says. 'Several
companies have already approached us for advice on how to protect their
intellectual property. There may be business to be done in advising them.'
