FT  02 MAY 92 / Property: Opportunity knocks across the Channel - The
post-UK election market for French properties
YOU NAME it, and someone, somewhere in France, wants to sell it to you. The
range of properties is as wide as the spread of prices in a country which
must offer some of the cheapest and most expensive homes in Europe. It also
provides some interesting opportunities.
Has the British election cleared the air and brought cross-Channel buyers
back in force? Many estate agents say it has not; exceptions are at the
extreme ends of the market. One agency, which had been getting remarkably
few calls about middle-priced properties, advertised a Pounds 3m villa at
Vence and inquiries came in right away. Conversely, an agency offering what
it frankly says is 'little more than a pile of stones' from Pounds 7,000 has
had a very busy phase. But further delay on the Channel tunnel - now not to
open until late summer 1993 - may have made the urge to comb the Channel
coast for last-gasp bargains seem less urgent. If you want rock-bottom
prices, Normandy &amp; Brittany Cottages, a London agency, will arrange for you
to visit one of its associates in northern France, which might have
something in at a four-figure sterling price. Those prices, like some wines,
do not travel. The agency, which says that its French properties are more in
demand than most, admits that it is the cheapest that attract most
attention. From its lists Normandy and Brittany Cottages (071-381-4433)
picks a farmhouse at Pounds 15,000. This has a kitchen/dining room with
beamed ceiling and an ancient galleried adjoining barn that would make an
'atmospheric' living room. The upper floor of the house could become two
bedrooms and a bathroom. There is a courtyard, garden and an open barn.
About Pounds 16,000 would buy a terrace cottage in a secluded hamlet. There
is a living room, kitchen, ground floor bedroom and shower room. The attic
has been partly converted to make two rooms. A large farmhouse with
adjoining barn that could be turned into a total of three properties costs
Pounds 19,500, An orchard would probably come with it.
If you plan a major restoration, and that sort of work is not your normal
one, are you sure you can cope? Half-completed conversions are a market in
themselves. Nicholas Masters, a Briton settled 40 miles from Toulouse in a
large old house in farmland, has plenty of experience of renovating
property. He is well aware of the difference between visualising and
actually doing such work, and now runs a small business helping others to
realise their dreams.
Those unversed in the skills of renovation can spend a week at his property
to practice such arts as rendering, tiling and plumbing. People who would
like to see if they can render a wall, tile a floor or handle plumbing can
go along and see what they make of working on a French building. Craftsmen
will advise them, show them the tools to use and the techniques required. It
is not an easy week, warns Masters, but it is rewarding. Working clothes and
warm sweaters are essential. The Pounds 150 he charges for a work-experience
week with full board might be worth every penny, if it saves you going any
further with such a project. For masochists, the number for more information
is 0634-250473.
Should you hanker for an old property, but not the renovation work, Domus
Abroad, a London agency is carving a niche for itself by offering units in
period properties which various keen young British developers are dividing.
Jeremy Harris and Ben Burke, combining architectural and interior design
experience, are about to turn an 18th century stately home north of
Perigueux, in the Dordogne, into 20 apartments which will sell from Pounds
72,000 to Pounds 97,000. There are 12 acres of grounds, with river frontage,
and there will be tennis and boules courts and a swimming pool. Early buyers
can have their apartments tailored to suit their needs. There are bank
guarantees and a ten-year building warranty. Details from Domus Abroad
(071-409-0571).
Numerous chateaux, some elegant, some forbidding, regularly turn up on
agents' books, with creative if impractical suggestions for their use.
Vineyards, too, are a prolific crop. An example includes farmhouse and
picker's cottage, 16 acres of grapes and 50 acres of farmland for Pounds
160,000 (0892-852449).
Money? Just slip into any office of the Woolwich building society in the UK
or its estate agent, Woolwich Property Services, for details of its mortgage
arrangements for property in France. Your inquiry will go straight to Banque
Woolwich in Paris.
How about grants? The French Government Tourist Office in London might be
able to help: write to its Leisure Investment Department, at 178 Piccadilly
W1V OAL. Benefits would, of course, be linked to properties or developments
providing tourist accommodation.
A section of the northern French coastline, running for 65 miles mostly
south from the Channel tunnel opening, is still ripe for leisure projects.
Diana Madoux (who is English) of the Comite Departmental de Tourisme,
Pas-de-Calais (21.83.32.59), says that for small-scale investors the main
area of interest is probably in the purchase of farm buildings and country
cottages for improvement and subsequent rental. She cites schemes where
Gites de France, the French government-sponsored agency, has - subject to
conditions - given grants to British applicants.
Perhaps you just want something new to walk into, for your own use. Not all
French housing developments suit British tastes, but those adjoining golf
courses are usually geared to the international market.
Pont Royal, near Aix-en-Provence, plans to open its Seve
Ballesteros-designed course in June, with the official opening in September.
A cluster of show homes is completed and furnished for inspection, and work
is in hand on more of the planned 850 properties. The project is in a
pretty, rural setting, half an hour from Marseilles airport. Prices are from
Pounds 72,000 for apartments to Pounds 295,000 for a four-bedroom,
four-bathroom villa. L &amp; M Project Management, joint developers with Resort
Group, says the scheme is 'making good progress in a very tough market'.
(Tel: 081-332-0033.)
An hour from Marseilles, along the coast near Bandol, is Golf de Fregate,
where the 18-hole Ronald Fream-designed clifftop course will be playable
from July. One of the development's two 60-unit 'villages' of local-style
villas and apartments has show properties ready and should be completed by
the end of the summer. Agent Hamptons (071-493-8222).
