FT  07 DEC 92 / Long recession knocks stuffing out of south-east: How a
traditionally prosperous area has been coping
MARTIN PASLEY struggles to hold on to a twisting, screaming toddler as he
scans the vacancy cards in Hemel Hempstead's busy Jobcentre.
There is little to delay him. 'Thank God this won't take long,' he sighs, as
son Todd savages the board displaying Christmas bar staff vacancies at
Pounds 2.91 an hour.
Mr Pasley is not unemployed. But he is convinced that the hard-pressed
printing company for which he has worked since 1985 will make him redundant
before Christmas.
If it does, he will join the swelling ranks of Hertfordshire's 40,000
registered jobless - six times the number recorded before the economic rot
gnawed away at a county that in the 1980s boasted one of Europe's lowest
unemployment rates.
Mr Pasley has never been in a Jobcentre before. He is not alone in finding
the experience unnerving. The impact of lasting recession has knocked the
stuffing out of the south-east.
The enduring, if over-simplified, images of a 'depressed north' and
'prosperous south' may not have been overturned in the past two years, but
conventional notions about the distribution of prosperity across the nation
are under scrutiny.
The 1980s saw the south-east economy overheat, fanned principally by the
rapid expansion in service industries and aided by a revival in
manufacturing activity. The 1990s have ushered in the big freeze.
Southerners, already saddled with high rates of personal indebtedness,
exploited what proved to be an unsustainable rise in house prices to borrow,
spend and borrow more. The party ended with a cocktail of collapsing asset
values and mounting job insecurity.
The statistics of recession in the south are stark. In London, where the
unemployment rate stands above the national average, 72 people are chasing
every vacancy, twice the rate elsewhere.
Less than three years ago, the unemployment rate in northern England was
three times that of the south-east; now the differential has almost
disappeared. An analysis in the National Institute Economic Review suggests
unemployment in the south will exceed the national average for the first
time by the end of 1993.
The annual benefits bill for the jobless in Tottenham, north London, is
running at Pounds 107m; in Mr John Major's Huntingdon constituency it is
Pounds 38m a year.
East Sussex has a higher unemployment rate - 11.5 per cent - than most parts
of the north and Scotland. In traditionally more prosperous West Sussex,
1980s boom towns such as Crawley are in intensive care.
Earnings in some parts of the south-east are lower than on Merseyside and
Teesside. Seven out of 10 companies in the region, the highest proportion in
the country, have shed staff.
Business failures in the region, reflecting the decline in manufacturing
activity and the contraction of the service industries that were supposed to
replace it, are running at twice the rate of a year ago.
House prices in the south have fallen on average by more than a quarter in
three years. Four in 10 people who bought property in greater London after
1987 have mortgages exceeding the value of their homes.
Three years ago Britain's most expensive housing - located in and around
London - was on average 140 per cent more costly than in the north. Today,
the gap is down to 45 per cent.
While new car sales over the last six months rose in much of the north, they
fell by up to 15 per cent in parts of the south-east.
Hertfordshire, like Mr Pasley, is in uncharted waters, faced with a severely
weakened local economy and forced to seek Pounds 700,000 in EC regional
funds from Brussels; every bit helps.
The announced closures of Rolls-Royce and British Aerospace factories in the
county, with the loss of up to 5,000 jobs, are helping to decimate a highly
skilled workforce facing both structural changes to the local economy
brought about by a decline in aerospace activities, and deep recession.
Mr Brian Briscoe, chief executive of the county council, says: 'We
desperately need to keep our engineers and computer scientists. If these
people are not redeployed, they will go to the US and the Far East. We have
to show them there will be a dawn after the darkness.'
The area's woes have also forged a promising partnership with the community
aimed at stimulating retraining and reversing the 1980s strategy of fending
off new inward investment from an already overheated local economy.
Mr Briscoe says: 'We spent most of the last decade trying to slow things
down to prevent unacceptable pressures on our environment. Now we have to
try and stoke things up.'
The same pattern is emerging in the Thames corridor to the west of London,
in the so-called economic 'golden triangle', which led Britain's
high-technology revolution in the 1980s.
From Slough to Swindon, moves are afoot to attract businesses back to areas
that did not always make them feel welcome.
In Slough, some improvement in optimism is mingled with continuing
dissatisfaction with the government's economic policies.
Over lunch at the Thames-Chiltern Chamber of Commerce, local business
leaders are impatient for progress. 'Orders have picked up but the vital,
missing ingredient is confidence,' Mr Geoff Day, managing director of
Flexello Castors, from the nearby Slough Estate, says. 'That's the
government's job.'
Outside, vacant office blocks line the Bath Road. Mr Richard Cross, deputy
chief executive of the chamber, says, 'The buildings are monuments to the
1980s. When they start to fill up we will know the worst is over. Don't hold
your breath]'
There are some signs, however patchy, of improving business activity and
rising optimism along the Thames Valley, confirmed in a survey published
today by Henley Management College.
According to the authors, 'lean times have made business in the area fit and
focused'.
But there will still be difficulties when the upturn arrives, Mr Ray
Sinclair-Smith, principal of East Berkshire College, says: 'Despite the
recession, there are skill shortages, which will come back with a vengeance
when things pick up. We need much more government investment to boost
engineering training; there have been no new machine tools in some local
colleges since the 1970s.
Further down the M4, in Swindon, agents for one business park offer a free
BMW with every unit rented. The local chamber of commerce and the borough
council are jointly preparing a promotional push to attract investors.
According to one participant: 'The council has frustrated big potential
investors in the past. Now it will have to be much more accommodating.'
The same can be said of stockbroker Surrey and Kent, where the
anti-expansion sentiment of the 1980s has also given way to a new initiative
between councils and business to lure jobs.
'The tight planning regime of old will now have to be more relaxed. A new
attitude towards incoming business will be critical,' according to Mr Julian
Gregory, a Confederation of British Industry spokesman based in Sevenoaks.
Up the hill from his office, the town's high street has lost many old names,
replaced by '99p' retailers on short leases. Hamptons, the estate agency,
says local house prices have fallen by 20 per cent but may have touched
bottom.
Mrs Eileen Toombs, an auxiliary nurse, peers at properties in the window:
'Who will ever again assume that buying a house is a one-way bet?'
Nowhere has the recession hit harder than in East Sussex, where Brighton,
Hove and Hastings are petitioning the government for the assisted-area
status granted only the worst economic blackspots.
In spite of its proximity to the markets of Europe, East Sussex is the
Cinderella of the south-east. Without a mile of motorway to call its own,
communications are bad. There is little manufacturing activity and the area
is largely dependent upon service industries primarily supplying the local
economy.
Another combined community effort is under way to attract broad-based,
incoming investment. Mr Peter Masters, the county's deputy planning officer,
says one idea is to exploit good links with towns across the channel: 'If
the British won't invest here, perhaps the French will.'
Mrs Ann Crichton, chief executive of the Federation of Sussex Industry and
Chamber of Commerce, says the recession has set back efforts to catch up
with the rest of the south-east: 'The gap was beginning to close but the
downturn has set back the process.'
Next door in Kent, also seeking assisted-area status, unemployment has
reached 16 per cent in blackspots such as Sheppey. Although the opening of
the Channel tunnel should bring a net gain in jobs, most of the benefits
might be felt further afield.
Throughout the region, signs of improvement in the economy remain patchy and
unimpressive. The personal debt burden and the prospect that any eventual
upturn in employment will initially help manufacturing, rather than
services, means recovery is likely to be unspectacular; only when it gets
under way can it become clear whether the traditional disparities in
regional economic performance will reappear.
Meanwhile, Kent strives to look on the bright side. Leeds Castle, near
Maidstone, romantically perched on its island, is preparing for Christmas.
Mr Graham Jackson, managing director, says his Christmas Kentish evenings
are solidly booked. The New Year's Eve banquet, at Pounds 83 a head, is
almost sold out.
Perhaps, for a few weeks at least, the recession-hit south is preparing to
shrug off its problems and planning to party.
