FT  10 JUL 92 / Parliament and Politics: Tory MP takes early attacks
personally
THE USE of parliamentary early-day motions to broadcast personal attacks on
public figures without risk of being sued for libel has come under question
at Westminster - through the vehicle of . . . an early-day motion.
Mr Richard Shepherd, the Conservative MP for Aldridge-Brownhills, has used
the facility to express regret at his colleagues' tabling of motions 'for
the purposes of disseminating defamation'.
Like all proceedings in the Commons, early-day motions - and reports of
their content - are covered by parliamentary privilege, protecting their
authors from libel proceedings, to which they could be subject if they
repeated their assertions outside the House. However, early-day motions are
very seldom debated in the Commons chamber.
Mr Shepherd has linked his remarks to a motion tabled by Mr Rhodri Morgan,
the Labour MP, relating to the affairs of Mr John Birt, BBC director-general
designate, and Mr David Frost, the television interviewer.
That, though, is just one of several motions containing pointedly personal
allegations to have been tabled in recent months.
Targets have included Mr Peter Walker, the former Tory cabinet minister, and
senior figures in the Lloyd's of London insurance market. The number and
also the aggressiveness of such attacks has placed a question mark over the
legitimacy of the procedure.
Mr Shepherd and Mr Morgan are equally adamant that their actions are
justified.
According to Mr Shepherd, the use of early-day motions in this way 'denies
the ordinary citizen the right to defend themselves properly'.
'Our restrictions on press reporting are very severe in some ways but this
is now being used as a process for putting out any old junk.'
Mr Morgan argues that MPs are under oath to tell the truth in the same way
as witnesses in court but that Britain's libel laws mean individuals 'cannot
afford to fight' court cases even if they think they will win them.
The late Robert Maxwell was 'able to get a non-investigative coverage of his
affairs by scattering writs like confetti', he says. 'The rich and powerful
have one last thing to fear: that is what MPs say in the House of Commons.'
