FT  06 NOV 92 / German health bill raises temperature: Dentists and doctors
are preparing to defy rare party consensus
GERMANY'S opposition Social Democrats call it 'an historic opportunity'.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl has praised it as one of the great success stories of
his otherwise lacklustre administration.
Mr Horst Seehofer, his health minister, describes it as 'the most
far-reaching reform in the history of the statutory health insurance
scheme'.
The object of their rare mutual admiration is the remarkable political
compromise between all four big parties - the three in the ruling coalition
and the Social Democrats (SPD) - on a health reform plan to curb the soaring
costs of medical and dental care in Germany.
The bill was given a first reading in parliament yesterday. Thanks to the
agreement between the parties, it seems certain to become law in record
time, and is supposed to start saving DM11bn (Pounds 4.4bn) a year from
January.
It proposes a combination of a drugs price cut followed by a two-year price
freeze, a fixed list of drugs that may be publicly prescribed, and penalties
for doctors who over-prescribe.
There is also to be a reduction in fees for dentists, a limit on the number
of doctors who may be registered in the state-backed health scheme, a
compulsory retirement age (68) for doctors and dentists, and increased
contributions from patients for hospital care and drug prescriptions.
Overall, it provides for a complex series of controls on medical care - down
to the number of false teeth installed on a bridge or the number of pills in
a medicine packet - in order to cut costs.
Despite the political consensus on the issue, virtually the entire health
industry has denounced the reform as irrelevant and illogical: a political
compromise which simply bears no relation to reality.
The only ones in favour are the state-backed health insurance institutions,
which are desperate to reduce a deficit which stands at DM5.5bn this year.
Without the planned savings, in 1993 the deficit will nearly double.
Perhaps it is inevitable that the 'industry' is protesting: the doctors,
dentists, drug companies and hospitals will in effect be financing DM8.2bn
of the cuts, and the patients only about DM2.8bn.
The 43,000 dentists are threatening to walk out of the statutory health
service en masse, and in future provide treatment privately. They claim the
reform amounts to creeping state control of an independent health system.
The pharmacists claim that up to 30 per cent of medicines will no longer be
available to public health service patients. And they say they will
challenge the deal all the way to the constitutional court.
The 75,000 public health service doctors have described the scheme as
'disguised euthanasia'. The drugs companies have been more reserved, saying
it is a 'missed opportunity for a more comprehensive reform of the health
service'.
Mr Seehofer says that the whole system has become extravagant: that Germany
has too many doctors, too many hospital beds and consumes far too many
medicines. The price, he maintains, has increased disproportionately:
insurance contributions have been rising inexorably as a proportion of
individual wages, reaching 12.2 per cent in 1990, 12.6 per cent today, and
by next year probably 13 per cent.
The doctors say that he is missing the point, and that behind the financial
crisis lies a classic demographic dilemma: Germany's population is rapidly
ageing, and the birth rate is dropping.
In 1950, the over-60s accounted for just 14.5 per cent of the population. By
1975 that had reached 20.4 per cent and by by 2020 it will reach 26.7 per
cent, or more than one in four of the population,
'The pensioners pay a very small insurance contribution, but they are
getting older all the time, and their incidence of illness is growing very
sharply,' says Mr Klaus Noldner, chief executive of the Hartmannbund, the
doctors' lobby group.
While the volume and value of medical treatment is increasing, the number of
wage-earners paying for it is stagnating. The proportion of GNP devoted to
health care has remained at around 5.5 per cent since 1975, Mr Noldner
insists. But wages as a proportion of national income have declined,
providing a second reason why the proportion of wages going on health care
has increased so steadily. What the latest health reforms fail entirely to
do is tackle that underlying problem, he says. 'We need a completely new
financing system. If the law says that wage contributions must be fixed,
financing must be found outside the system.'
The doctors believe one answer is to impose a proportion of all health care
costs on the patient - a direction in which the Seehofer reform package
moves very cautiously. Patients will in future have to pay DM3 or DM5 or DM7
towards medicines, depending on their expense and the quantity prescribed.
Another possibility is a two-tier system of basic treatment - financed by
the health insurance scheme - and voluntary treatment, privately financed.
The dentists believe the two-tier system is also inevitable. They are
particularly furious because they say the reform, which would see them take
a 10 per cent cut in fees for false teeth and bridge treatment, follows a
slight decline in their own income and turnover since 1980. The dentists'
association is collecting sworn statements from those ready to quit the
public system. It will call out members if 75 per cent agree to go.
With the entire political establishment versus the health lobby, the
temperature is still set to rise.
