FT  16 OCT 92 / Money Markets: Rate signals ignored
STERLING cash and futures markets remained bullish about the prospects for a
cut in UK base rates, despite the Bundesbank's decision not to alter
official rates at its council meeting yesterday, writes James Blitz.
The Bundesbank decision had been priced into the market earlier in the week,
but the news still affected European markets. The December Euromark contract
fell 7 basis points from its opening level, to a low of 91.57, recovering
later to 91.64. It priced in a 60 basis point reduction in the cost of three
month
D-Marks before the end of the year.
Sterling cash and futures markets were even more ebullient, however, despite
plenty of official indications that no rate change is forthcoming.
The Bundesbank's decision alone should have depressed sterling markets. So
should the Bank of England's recent signals that near-term credit policy
will remain unchanged. The chancellor also emphasised on Monday that the
exchange rate must be supported to reduce inflation.
However, the December short sterling contract rose 19 basis points to a
close of 92.04 yesterday, implying that base rates will be at 8 per cent or
less before the end of the year. Three-month sterling cash closed unchanged
at around 8 5/8 per cent. One-year money closed a full percentage point
below base rate, at around 8 per cent. One discount house trader said this
was the first time he could remember seeing the 'one year' so cheap compared
to such a high base rate.
These prices reflect a growing belief that the government will not hold to a
tight credit policy for long. Yesterday's jobless figures, showing a 5-year
high of 2.84 million unemployed, will put pressure on the government to cut
rates. 'Whatever the Bank of England does can still be trumped by the
government,' said one discount house dealer.
The Bank forecast a shortage of Pounds 1.3bn and purchased Pounds 36m of
Band 1 bank bills and Pounds 16m of Band 2 bank bills at 8 7/8 per cent, and
Pounds 25m in a repurchase agreement ('repo') at 8 15/16 per cent. In
further operations, the Bank purchased Pounds 410m of Band 1 bank bills and
Pounds 651m in a 'repo'. In the afternoon, the Bank purchased Pounds 51m in
Band 1 bank bills and provided late assistance of Pounds 30m.
