FT  29 SEP 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (29): Weekend papers have
the edge
WHERE DOES the intelligent Briton in the street look for guidance about
money? The UK's specialist press is notably less powerful than the
corresponding publications in the US, where Barron's, Forbes, Money and a
variety of other periodicals command large circulations.
The main reason for the weakness of the financial magazine sector in Britain
is the unusually influential role of the weekend newspapers, both Saturday
and Sunday. Britain's uniquely strong and numerous national daily and Sunday
newspapers have blotted out various sectors which are powerful in other
countries, such as weekly newsmagazines, and they make life very tough in
the financial category too.
Exactly why the Saturday papers, in particular, should have been able to
seize the high ground of consumer financial advice is not clear, but at the
right season of the year and in a good phase of the market cycle the Daily
Telegraph on Saturday can carry anything up to a dozen pages on family
finance, packed with lucrative advertising.
Our own Weekend FT, of course, runs 'Finance and the Family' pages each
Saturday. The Daily Mail, however, prefers to run its Money Mail on a
Wednesday.
In the face of this competition the specialist magazines are forced into
niches. The Pounds 1.50 weekly Investors Chronicle (owned by the FT group)
has long focused upon private shareholders who want to keep track of the
companies they have invested in. Really enthusiastic amateur investors can
subscribe to a much newer monthly called Analyst, which at a thumping Pounds
240 for an annual subscription seeks to provide something close to a
personal advice service for private shareholders.
More specialist still are the numerous small circulation newsletters and
tip-sheets which reached their peak of prosperity back before the 1987 stock
market crash, when they could still boast in their advertising of how they
had picked Polly Peck at 8p and seen it climb to 800p. In much leaner times
the boastful ads have all but disappeared. The problem for the Penny Share
Guide and its like came to be that too many shares fell to a penny.
The mid-1980s also brought brief prosperity to the monthly finance magazines
such as Money (now Moneywise) and What Investment, the latter notable for
its extraordinary content of reply-paid coupons.
These publications cashed in on the unit trust boom but since 1987 have
found life much harder as money has shifted to building society accounts and
life and pension policies (which are aggressively sold through
intermediaries rather than advertised in the press).
But given a decent bull market the financial magazines could be packing the
newsagents' shelves once again.
