FT  07 DEC 92 / Race to unchain the dragon: Economic reform is the priority
for the winner of next week's elections in South Korea
When South Korea's military rulers backed down in the face of mass protests
and granted free elections in 1987, the country faced two big questions.
Could it achieve the transition to democracy? And could it do so while
maintaining the economic success which had made it one of the most dynamic
of east Asia's dragon economies?
Next week's presidential elections are proof of progress on the political
front. Mr Roh Tae-woo, the outgoing president who is constitutionally barred
from standing again, will be the first leader to preside over a peaceful
transfer of power since the republic was founded in 1948. For the first time
in almost 40 years all of the principal candidates are from outside the
military elite.
The race between the three leading candidates is turning into a cliffhanger.
There is a ban on publishing opinion polls, but private polling by the
political parties suggests that Mr Kim Dae-jung of the main opposition
Democratic party is closing the gap on the frontrunner, Mr Kim Young-sam of
the ruling Democratic Liberal party (DLP). The third candidate, Mr Chung
Ju-yung, founder of Hyundai which is South Korea's largest conglomerate, is
winning votes at the expense of Mr Kim Young-sam. He could tip the election
in favour of Mr Kim Dae-jung.
In terms of policy, there is little to separate the candidates. All would be
regarded as centre-right by western standards, although Mr Kim Dae-jung - a
veteran opposition leader who was imprisoned under the military government -
is regarded as closer to the labour movement than his rivals. Mr Kim
Young-sam was also a leading opposition figure during the 26 years of
military rule which ended in 1987. He joined the ruling party in 1990. Mr
Chung Ju-yung, meanwhile, unlike his opponents is a political novice. He is
the first industrialist to campaign for the Blue House, the presidential
office in Seoul.
But whoever becomes the next president, he will face a big economic
challenge. Korea's competitiveness and growth have fallen sharply since
1987. Reversing this trend will require economic reforms as extensive as the
democratic changes Korea has undertaken.
The reforms are necessary to guide Korea from a dirigiste economy controlled
by five-year plans to a competitive and deregulated free-market system. They
are also needed to achieve the country's transition from a maker of
labour-intensive, low-quality products, to a high-tech industrial power.
The introduction of democracy has encouraged economic change by loosening
some government controls, such as suppression of the trade unions, which had
kept wages low and supported the country's rapid push to industrialise since
the 1960s. Reforms have become increasingly necessary, because the expansion
of Korea's economy has made it much more difficult to manage by bureaucratic
fiat.
'We need to build a new economic structure appropriate to democracy. Our
economy is still geared to the authoritarian past,' says Mr Park Jae-yoon,
economic adviser to Mr Kim Young-sam.
The fact that the economy is the main election issue indicates the healthy
state of Korean democracy. The survival of political reforms is no longer an
issue as it was in the 1987 presidential election.
The fundamental support for democratic development is in place. The rise of
an affluent, educated middle class is an important factor, and Koreans have
grown accustomed to exercising their democratic powers: at least 80 per cent
are expected to vote in the election.
The possibility of a military coup is remote. 'Direct military intervention
is now virtually impossible,' says a western diplomat. 'The army has become
more democratic and the mood of the populace would make it difficult for the
military to govern again.'
Nonetheless, Korean democracy has some rough edges. Political corruption is
widespread. Personalities, rather than ideology, dominate politics, which
means that parties are subject to factional infighting.
'Korea's current system of democracy is far from perfect. But the country
will remain stable politically. The system is still evolving, but the major
issues have been settled,' says Ms Christine Hill, a political analyst for
the Seoul office of stockbroker W I Carr.
The progress of democracy means that Korea's new president can devote more
attention to the economic rather than political reform. The economy has
fluctuated sharply in the past five years: growth in real gross national
product fell from 13.1 per cent in 1987 to 6.8 per cent in 1989, rebounded
to 9.3 per cent in 1990, before slowing again. In the third quarter of this
year, GNP rose by just 3.1 per cent, the smallest quarterly increase since
1981, when Korea was reeling from the slowdown in the international economy
prompted by the Opec oil price shock.
There are several factors behind the erratic performance. One is the growth
of the previously suppressed trade union movement and the strong negotiating
power that workers have in an economy where the unemployment rate of just
2.4 per cent has created labour shortages. Between 1988 and 1991 wages
increased by an average annual rate of 20 per cent, eliminating Korea's
advantage as a source of cheap labour. The rise in labour costs was not
matched by productivity gains.
The result was a sharp fall in competitiveness. Export growth fell from 28
per cent in 1988 to 3 per cent in 1989. The current account, which hit a
peak surplus of Dollars 14bn in 1988, fell into a deficit of Dollars 8.7bn
last year.
Faced with this downturn, the government panicked. It launched the biggest
infrastructure programme in the nation's history, including the construction
of 2m housing units, in an attempt to compensate for falling exports with
stronger domestic demand. But this caused the economy to overheat by
creating inflationary shortages of labour and construction materials.
Inflation climbed from 5.7 per cent in 1989 to 9.7 per cent in 1991,
prompting another rethink in policy. The result was a decision to cool the
overheated economy earlier this year by squeezing the money supply and by
postponing public expenditure projects. This caused the current slowdown in
growth.
The government and most private economists believe that the economy is now
showing signs of sustainable improvement. Growth in average wages is
expected to slow to about 10 per cent this year and unit labour costs to
fall next year as productivity improves. As a result, the Bank of Korea, the
country's central bank, predicts that inflation will slow to 6 per cent this
year.
On the trade front, too, there are grounds for optimism. Import growth has
slowed to a single-digit rate, while exports are this year expected to rise
by almost 10 per cent. Part of this improvement reflects a depreciation of
the Korean currency, the won, and a shift by exporters away from the markets
of the US, Japan and Europe to faster growing markets in south-east Asia and
China. The current account deficit is expected to narrow to Dollars 4.5bn
this year and the government forecasts a surplus by 1994.
Although most economists in Seoul expect that it may take another year for
Korea to return to steady growth, the new president will then have a more
secure base to tackle the main structural challenges confronting the
economy. These include:
Strengthening industry's technological capability. Korea's export success -
which has made it the world's 11th largest trading nation - has been based
on the mass production of low-technology, high-volume goods. But the
increase in the costs of production, particularly labour costs, is forcing
Korean companies to produce higher quality, more sophisticated products.
To achieve this, industry needs to spend much more on developing technology.
Total annual corporate research spending in Korea amounts to Dollars 4.5bn,
about the equivalent of research investments made by General Motors or IBM,
according to the Korea Development Institute, the government policy centre.
Only a handful of companies, such as Samsung Electronics, one of the world's
largest manufacturers of memory chips, and Hyundai Motors, the country's
largest car manufacturer, have large research budgets at present.
The government wants to raise research spending from 1.7 per cent of GNP to
5 per cent within the next decade. To achieve this target it is offering tax
incentives to encourage corporate research. It is also giving funds to joint
government-business projects, such as plans to develop advanced memory chips
and high definition television systems.
Financial liberalisation. Government control of the banking system, in
particular its setting of borrowing rates, has resulted in an inefficient
distribution of capital. Interest rates are 5-7 percentage points higher
than international borrowing rates, depriving companies of the capital
necessary for investment in research and machinery and placing a heavy
burden on their balance sheets. This puts Korean industry at a competitive
disadvantage with regional rivals where the cost of finance is much less.
The government has drawn up a plan for deregulating the country's capital
markets, but implementation of the most important reforms has been delayed
until 1997. This is largely the result of pressure from the economic
bureaucracy, which jealously guards its control of credit, and from the
commercial banks which are vulnerable to the competition which would result
from financial liberalisation.
There is agreement among the presidential candidates that government
intervention - in particular of the financial system - is hindering economic
development and that reform is necessary. 'The government likes to keep its
fingers in the economy, but it is running out of fingers as the economy
becomes more advanced. It can no longer manage the economy as it once did,'
says Mr Yoo Jong-keun, economic adviser to Mr Kim Dae-jung.
Whether any of the presidential candidates will have the commitment to
tackle the bureaucracy remains to be seen. 'Every candidate says he wants to
deregulate. But politicians have similar mind-sets to bureaucrats, they want
to keep power,' argues Mr Lee Hahn-koo, president of the Daewoo Research
Institute.
Keeping power may mean exercising a lighter grip on it. The next president
will be judged by his ability to rekindle the economy. He may well conclude
that loosening the government's control of the allocation of financial
resources is the best way to achieve this. Deregulation would not only
improve the country's industrial performance, but also transform Korea into
a more democratic state by diluting bureaucratic power.
