FT  03 NOV 92 / Yeltsin imposes N Ossetia emergency
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin, struggling to keep Russia free of the small wars
which have broken out just over its borders, yesterday declared a one-month
state of emergency in the region of North Ossetia in his first military
clampdown within the country.
Parliament, setting aside its usual antagonism towards the government, threw
its weight behind the president's decision to ban local political parties
which 'hinder a settlement', order rebels to surrender their weapons, and
censor local media. The decree is to be implemented by an emergency
administration appointed by Moscow and backed up by thousands of elite
troops and ordinary conscripts flown into North Ossetia at the weekend.
Full-scale fighting erupted last week when the Ingush ethnic minority began
an unofficial military campaign against the Ossetians to regain lands
confiscated from them by Stalin.
Authorities in Moscow said yesterday the situation was under control but
local Ossetian officials declared that heavy fighting was in full swing. At
least three Russian servicemen have already been killed and nine injured in
attempts to fend off the Ingush onslaught, with much higher casualties among
civilians.
Last autumn, parliament rescinded a presidential decree declaring emergency
rule in Chechnya, another section of the mainly Moslem northern Caucasus
region, which declared independence from Moscow.
But at a time of much greater political division, Russia's rulers are under
pressure to show they can maintain order. Some politicians would even like
Mr Yeltsin to impose similar emergency measures on the rest of Russia.
'Russia is not going to lose the Northern Caucasus. It is going to take
military and diplomatic steps to keep it,' said Mr Sergei Stepashin,
chairman of parliament's defence and security committee. 'We will do
everything to avoid a Nagorno-Karabakh type situation.'
Turning to strained relations with another Moslem enclave, Russian deputies
urged Tatarstan to refrain from adopting a constitution which implicitly
declares independence from Moscow until a bilateral treaty is concluded.
Uzbekistan, the largest central Asian republic, yesterday gave up claims on
Soviet assets in return for Russia taking on its share of the country's
foreign debt.
The decision marked a victory for Russia's campaign to take on sole
responsibility for the debt but it still has to strike a deal with Ukraine,
the second-most populous republic. Mr Peter Aven, the foreign economic
relations minister, said yesterday he still hoped to reach a full
rescheduling agreement with western creditors by the end of this year.
