FT  01 MAY 92 / Arts: Stephen Oliver - Obituary
Stephen Oliver, who has died at the age of 42, was an English theatre
composer of extraordinarily profuse gifts. By the time he was 20 he had
written a Duchess of Malfi opera, a number of other operas, and an even
larger number of pieces in various smaller musico-dramatic forms. The
remainder of his tragically short life he devoted to pouring out an
abundance of music of every sort - not just to serve dramatic purposes,
though this tended to bulk large in his work-list, but also for orchestras,
chamber ensembles and singers of all sorts.
He was a choirboy at St Paul's Cathedral before going on to Oxford, where
his Duchess of Malfi first attracted wide attention. Thereafter, his ability
to produce works of both effortless practicality and immediately attractive
character in every style and form drew him to the notice of television, film
and theatre companies. The scores for the celebrated RSC adaptation of
Nicholas Nickleby and for the musical Blondel (written by Tim Rice) stand
out among a vast number of others.
In the purely operatic field, apart from the early Duchess of Malfi and the
1976 Tom Jones staged by the now defunct English Music Theatre, he will
probably be best remembered for the various adaptations that he made for the
Musica nel chiostro Festival at Batignano in Italy, and for the beautifully
elegant, well-made Beauty and the Beast opera (1984) commissioned by the
same source.
Last year's ENO commission, Timon of Athens, proved to be an attempt at a
large-scale work that failed, perhaps because of its insistence - so
uncharacteristic of Oliver - on aiming at a 'big statement' opera rather
than a practical, purposeful vehicle for singers. (No doubt this was because
Oliver wrote it when he was already an advanced Aids sufferer.)
The works of his that one guesses will last are those in which his
imaginative light touch, witty approach to word-setting and profoundly (but
never self-consciously) civilised musicianship found a just balance. As well
as being a musical performer of many parts, he was a gifted writer and a
splendidly ebullient conversationalist who regularly took part in radio
discussion programmes.
