FT  04 JUN 92 / Call for probe into financial services rules
A GOVERNMENT review of the regulatory structure for the financial services
industry has been called for by Sir David Walker, departing chairman of the
Securities and Investments Board, the City's chief watchdog.
Sir David, in the SIB's review for the 1991-92 year, said that the structure
is too fragmented and the splintering undermines its effectiveness.
'It is doubtful whether the present system of fragmentation of
responsibilities would be built in if the system were now being designed
afresh, and I believe that present arrangements for regulation of
market-related problems merit early review,' he said.
In particular, he singled out difficulties in investigating market
manipulation or insider trading in securities markets by individuals or
entities not covered by the Financial Services Act as areas where the
oversight of several bodies complicated investigation.
Besides the SIB, responsibility for those areas falls to the Treasury, the
Department of Trade and Industry, the Bank of England and the Stock
Exchange.
The SIB has previously found its investigations slowed down by the need to
consult all supervisory bodies on each new development.
'That this system works as well as it does in these respects reflects good
working relationships among the individual regulators concerned,' Sir David
said.
While Sir David did not specify any particular investigation which had been
hampered by regulatory fragmentation, he noted that the prosecution of the
Blue Arrow and Guinness affairs and the investigation into the collapse of
Mr Robert Maxwell's empire all involved oversight by various regulatory
bodies.
On other matters, Sir David noted that public expectations about the
standards to be expected of financial services regulation have been rising,
possibly causing investors to relax their caution and rely too heavily on
government to protect them. 'Regulation is designed to set a framework for
the raising of standards and for ensuring their compliance, but it cannot
guarantee them or substitute altogether for the application of good sense by
investors,' he said.
On the subject of regulation of retail financial services, Sir David said
that new rules aimed at improving the information for potential customers
have created some dissatisfaction among 'interested parties'. Both consumer
groups and the insurance industry have complained about the new structure,
with the former saying it does not require enough disclosure and the later
saying it requires too much. Sir David said he believed the conclusions
represent 'a good overall balance.'
The SIB has incurred a Pounds 2.36m charge in connection with its former
leased premises. The lease expires in 1995 and the offices are largely
unlet.
