FT  18 JAN 92 / Small ships that face a future on the rocks: Keith Wheatley
braves a winter gale to sail cross-Channel on a British coaster with its
owner-skipper, one of a rapidly-vanishing breed
THE SPLENDID Georgian sea-front of Weymouth, a small port in Dorset on
England's south coast, was hardly visible as the final 32-tonne lorry tipped
its load of builders' sand for the Port Soif. Winter dusk had descended.
Wind shrieked through the crane wires. On the bridge of the 429-tonne
coaster there was a gloomy print-out: 'Gale warning. 0925 Dover.
South-westerly gale expected soon.'
Owner-skipper Derick Goubert, 44, expected to meet the gale just south of
Portland Bill. He was right. With the Dorset cliffs barely a mile astern,
the little ship began to roll heavily in the considerable swell. Green seas
and spray obscured the bow and cargo deck for much of the time. Goubert
needed to be alert, crossing the main west-bound Channel shipping lane at a
bare seven knots. Guernsey, our destination in the reef-girdled Channel
islands, was 10 hours distant.
In his cabin below the bridge, mate Dave Lower grabbed a few hours' sleep.
Next door, in the battered but spotless galley, the Port Soif's two
Portuguese able seamen, Alex and Mario, prepared an excellent spaghetti
bolognese.
Goubert ate enthusiastically, his round, mobile features animated by the
welcome change of having a guest for supper. He faced a long night of bad
weather and heavy shipping traffic. Next morning we would be unloading,
followed by some cash-flow work and dealing with the bank and insurance
company fallout from a near-catastrophic engine breakdown late in the
summer. By tea-time, the ship would probably be loading general cargo for
nearby Alderney.
Every economic statistic shows that the past decade has inclined towards the
small business, the self-motivated entrepreneur. Perhaps. Yet, in one sector
traditionally strong in individualists, British coastal shipping, the
owner-skipper has turned from being the norm to a vanishing species in less
than a generation.
The National Union of Marine, Aviation and Shipping Transport Officers
(NUMAST) published a report recently quantifying the decline. British-owned
and registered ships of the category into which Goubert and his Port Soif
would fit had dropped from 546 in 1975 to 249 in 1983 and just 42 in 1991.
'These skippers are now a rare and unusual breed,' said Weymouth
harbourmaster Captain Peter Tambling as he signed-off the Port Soif's
paperwork. 'If Derick was a house, he'd be a listed building.'
Goubert's little coaster, capable of carrying a 600-ton load, is worth
perhaps Pounds 150,000 - about the same as a semi-detached house in one of
the leafier London suburbs. She was built by a Dutch yard 20 years ago and
Goubert bought her at the beginning of 1990, run-down and neglected. Since
then she has been spruced-up, re-engined after the major breakdown (luckily
the insurance company paid, or the Pounds 60,000 bill would have sunk the
Port Soif) and, most noticeably, re-painted.
'I am fond of orange,' Goubert said, with a chuckle. He is a long way from
anyone's idea of a sea-dog. 'People say I must have got a job lot cheap but
you have to order the paint specially from Denmark.' The hull is dented and
battered but liveried immaculately in jaffa. The two company vans in St
Peter Port are in the same shade.
'Being the owner of the ship, you do take more care about the whole
operation,' said Goubert, snuggling deeper into a chair in the port corner
of the bridge. In mid-Channel, at midnight, the weather was abysmal.
'Everything operates from here because I'm here. We haven't had a holiday in
three years. The one we'd planned for August was lost when the engine fell
down.
'Regrets? Every day. You think you'll sell up, give the money back to the
bank and go and work for somebody else. But it wouldn't be the same. At
least I'm doing what I want to, even if it doesn't make any sense.
Everything I've earned since the day we bought Port Soif has gone back into
the ship, bar wages and so forth.'
Goubert is not wealthy, or even comfortably off. He lives in a modern
semi-detached house on Guernsey but sleeps in his cabin more often than his
own bed. A coaster makes no money tied up to a jetty.
Sailing 52 weeks of the year, the Port Soif earns around Pounds 175,000
gross. Wages for skipper, mate and two seamen come to around Pounds 50,000
annually: lean enough for any management analyst with a warm office and a
6pm finish. Overheads are high, though. On top of a large bank loan at 15
per cent, insurance alone costs Pounds 16,000 a year.
At present, the Port Soif is on time charter. It means regular money and no
commissions to pay. If Goubert was back tramping the North Sea - which he
has done plenty of times - relying on agents and sub-agents to find the next
cargo, then total commission can run to as much as 10 per cent of the ship's
income.
With freight rates dropping and less work around in a major world-wide
recession, it is small wonder that many coastal trade ship-owners have
forsaken British registration and chosen to fly the ensigns of Panama,
Liberia or Gibraltar from their sterns.
'The surveys are less rigorous, there are no restrictions on the areas of
trade and wage rates are lower,' explains Arnold Williams, now a NUMAST
industrial officer but once a coasting skipper. 'They are usually older
ships and the salaries that they can afford don't attract British officers.
Anyone operating a single ship is likely to be under considerable financial
pressure nowadays.'
Flagging-out is not an option that appeals to Captain Goubert. 'There are
only three reasons, really, for doing that,' he says. 'Lower standards,
cheaper insurance, less tax. This ship will always be up to survey while I
own her. I'm not interested in running a rust-bucket.' Nevertheless, Goubert
knows personally of only one other owner-skipper trading, as he does, under
a London registration.
Before the second world war, owner-skippers were the norm, wives and kids
often aboard, moving millions of tons of freight around Britain's coast.
Now, they seem only a year or so from disappearing altogether. But who,
apart from anthropologists, should care? Cargo will still be moved, albeit
in bigger ships owned by bigger companies. It will also come in through
bigger ports, although some have regrets about that.
'I'm a great believer in small ports. They feed local economic
infrastructures,' said Tambling, watching the sand pour into the Port Soif's
hold. 'Weymouth is extremely competitive, with some of the lowest rates on
the south coast. This loading will cost the ship about Pounds 200, a quarter
of what it would be at Southampton.'
Some weeks, Tambling sees only a single coaster. Without revenue, the
wharves have no future. In 1947, Weymouth handled more than 1m tons of
freight; the present volume would be less than 5 per cent of that.
The progress to ever bigger ships and ports seems inexorable. The smallest
coasters now built are over 1,000 tonnes. Ships that size and bigger often
cannot use the smaller ports; even when they can, conglomerate owners often
prefer bigger harbours where they have negotiated rates on a yearly basis.
'Take a harbour like Colchester, in Essex, that you just can't get these
bigger ships into,' says Arnold Williams. 'A terrific little cargo facility
and well-liked on the east coast, but a lot of these little ports are
starting to close down.'
Derek Goubert is in no doubt that his competitors for business are not other
coasters but bigger ships, ferries and road transport. 'The smaller the
ship, the more you're competing with lorries.' he said. 'And I'll tell you -
ships are a lot more environmentally friendly than lorries.'
The only small ships are old ships - Goubert reckons that nothing as small
as the Port Soif has been built since 1974. Bigger companies want to run new
ships, which are cheaper to operate through economies of scale but which
cannot enter the myriad small ports around Britain's coast. So, the harbours
close and each year it becomes harder for the minnows to survive.
'The biggest worry is not today but tomorrow,' said Goubert. 'If I sell this
ship, I've got to buy another or I'm going backwards. New building rates are
about Pounds 2,000 a tonne, so any ship of around 1,000 tonnes (the smallest
now available) that is under 10 years old is going to cost over Pounds 1m.
Bernard McCall, author of several books on the coasting trade, agrees that
the days of the owner-skipper are fast running out. 'As coasters get bigger
and more specialised, they're increasingly beyond the pocket of an
individual owner/skipper. There are, literally, only a handful left and
there won't be any more,' he says.
Goubert is resigned to enjoying the twilight of a nearly-extinct species. 'I
left school at 16 and bullied the skipper of a little tanker into giving me
a job,' he recalled. 'I went to sea because I was interested in ships. Now,
you don't see any coasters and the big ships all look the same.'
Outside the bridge windows it was dark, wet and cold. The Channel was doing
its considerable worst. John Masefield would have understood our situation
when he wrote: 'Butting through the Channel in the mad March days.'
Unfortunately, there aren't too many 'dirty British coasters' left.
