FT  07 JUL 92 / Jordan legalises political parties after 36-year ban
JORDAN's parliament has authorised political parties for the first time
since they were banned by King Hussein 36 years ago.
The law passed late on Sunday represents a further move to democratise
Jordan's political system under the Hashemite monarchy, in a process
launched by King Hussein in 1989.
The new law states that parties must have at least 50 founding members and
can be open to anyone over 18 years of age. All parties must agree to work
within Jordan's constitution.
The law was backed by 43 of the 52 members of Jordan's lower house present
for the vote. The king's turn-about over political parties reflects his
hopes of containing opponents of the peace talks with Israel and of
undercutting the influence of Jordan's Moslem Brotherhood.
The Brotherhood emerged as the most influential organised group in the 1989
elections, the first for more than two decades, winning a third of Jordan's
parliament's 80 seats.
The king is trying to weaken the hold of Islamic groups on political life by
offering secular political movements a chance to organise for the next round
of elections, due later this year.
The government also hopes that a potential coalition of liberal, leftist and
nationalist groups could help absorb a popular outcry if the peace process
led to a compromise unacceptable to Palestinian and Jordanian nationalists.
King Hussein is thus reversing a pattern he started himself in 1957 when he
forged a de facto alliance with the conservative Moslem Brotherhood to
counter his radical Arab and Palestinian rivals. As a result the Brotherhood
was tolerated, while other parties were forced to go underground.
The government and secular politicians have recently concluded that allowing
political parties could help prevent the sort of turmoil threatening
Algeria.
'We do not want to be forced to sacrifice democracy to prevent the Islamists
from taking over,' said one Jordanian official, referring to the Algerian
authorities' decision to annul general elections last January in the face of
a certain victory for the Islamic Salvation Front.
The law stipulates that parties may not receive funding from abroad.
