FT  10 FEB 92 / Mayhew's key role in corporate deals: Special arrangement
allowed broker to operate while facing Guinness charges
MR David Mayhew, the Cazenove broker charged in connection with the Guinness
affair, has played a leading role in some of the UK's largest corporate
transactions, in spite of not being fully authorised under the Financial
Services Act.
The three remaining charges against Mr Mayhew were dropped by the Serious
Fraud Office on Friday after he had presented new evidence which satisfied
the prosecution he had no case to answer.
In the four years since he was charged over his role in the Guinness
takeover of Distillers in 1986, Mr Mayhew - the only Guinness defendant to
retain his job after charges had been brought - has continued to play a key
advisory role in a number of transactions.
He was a leading figures in the BAT 'war cabinet' during the tobacco group's
defence against Hoylake, he advised Grand Metropolitan on its takeover of
Pillsbury, and he masterminded substantial 'bought deals' like ICI's sale of
its stake in Enterprise Oil and General Cinema's disposal of shares in
Cadbury Schweppes.
However, throughout this period he has been refused membership by the
Securities and Futures Authority (formerly The Securities Association), the
self-regulatory organisation set up under the Financial Services Act.
SFA's membership committee declined to pass him 'fit and proper' while the
charges against him were outstanding.
Although the Financial Services Act only requires firms to be authorised the
SFA requires individuals who give investment advice to be registered.
A special arrangement allowed Mr Mayhew to operate while being 'shadowed' by
other Cazenove partners. Senior partners of the UK corporate stockbroker
promised to ensure his work met regulators' rules.
The arrangement owed much to the regard in which Cazenove is held in the
City of London. One senior SFA staff member yesterday commented of the
Cazenove promise to supervise Mr Mayhew: 'From them, it meant something:
from lesser firms, it might not have carried such weight.'
Merchant bankers and senior corporate figures who have worked with Mr Mayhew
since he was charged said the SFA's restrictions had not prevented him
continuing as before. 'He has been extremely active, and all credit to him,'
one leading merchant banker commented.
The chairman of a large public company advised by Mr Mayhew, who declined to
be named, said: 'He has continued to be a very important operator in the
City. The reason he is important is that people trusted him - they didn't
believe these charges.'
