FT  26 AUG 92 / Carrington resigns as EC peace envoy to Yugoslavia
LORD Carrington resigned yesterday as the European Community's peace
mediator in the Yugoslav conflict on the eve of today's opening of the
EC-United Nations conference in London on the former republic's future.
His departure, indicating the failure of his year-long peace mission, served
as a grim reminder of the obstacles to ending the feuding between Serbs,
Croats and Moslems in the former Yugoslavia.
Mr John Major, the British prime minister and current EC president, is
proposing that Lord Owen - like Lord Carrington a former British foreign
secretary - take his place.
The nomination was expected to be discussed at a meeting of EC foreign
ministers last night. But the choice of the often controversial former
leader of the UK's now-defunct Social Democratic Party might encounter
opposition from some of Britain's EC partners. Last month, Mr Major publicly
rejected a call from Lord Owen for military action against the Bosnian Serbs
to stop human rights abuses.
British officials made clear that there was no likelihood of the London
conference - chaired by Mr Major and Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN
secretary general - bringing an immediate end to the conflict.
Fighting has intensified ahead of the conference, with Sarajevo, the Bosnian
capital, yesterday suffering its heaviest mortar and artillery fire in more
than a month. Four UN peacekeeping troops and the BBC television reporter
Martin Bell were wounded by shrapnel.
British officials stressed that the conference was just the start of a fresh
chapter in the peace process, intended to act as a 'turning point' and to
build new diplomatic machinery that might achieve a lasting settlement.
This process will be directed by a central strategy committee, initially
planned to be chaired by Lord Carrington and Mr Cyrus Vance, a former US
secretary of state and the UN's special envoy to the former Yugoslavia.
The committee will oversee the work of six steering groups to be appointed
today that will form the focal points for long-term negotiations in Geneva.
The six subsidiary committees will deal separately with the war in Bosnia,
rights of the ethnic minorities, economic issues, states seeking successor
status to the former Yugoslavia, humanitarian questions and
confidence-building measures.
Western diplomats conceded that it was as yet unclear how the conference
could stop the fighting in Bosnia, the deportation of people from the
republic and the Serbs' bombardment and siege of Sarajevo and other Bosnian
towns and cities.
But it was made clear that factions which failed to observe minimum
standards of 'civilised behaviour' would face toughened sanctions imposed by
a united international community.
Although Serbia has repeatedly denied involvement in the war in Bosnia, a
British official said that many countries rejected Belgrade's claims.
Nonetheless, direct military intervention was again ruled out as this would
jeopardise the UN's peace-keeping and aid efforts.
UK officials stressed, however, that the conference would tackle 'most
urgently' such issues as detention camps, 'ethnic cleansing' and the plight
of tens of thousands of Bosnian refugees.
Separately, British and US officials insisted that any partition of Bosnia
was 'quite out of the question', since it was opposed by at least one of the
three interested groups involved.
Where Community went wrong, Page 2
Too little and perhaps too late, Page 12
Observer, Page 13
