FT  20 FEB 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Stamp of authority
on election addresses - Candidates have discovered the value of direct mail
Over the next few weeks you can expect more newspapers, letters and
pamphlets to be pushed through your letter boxes than ever before.
The candidates in the general election have discovered junk mail, and this
year's batch is going to be far more copious and more sophisticated than in
any previous contest.
For one thing, it will be slickly and imaginatively produced, in some cases
laid out like a tabloid newspaper, with fun little stories to catch the
readers' attention.
It will also be accurately targeted, aiming to get maximum 'bang for the
buck'. For example, material regarding a local maternity home might be
addressed only to young couples. Greville Janner, Labour MP for Leicester
West addresses the Asian voters in his constituency in four different
languages - Hindi, Urdu, Gujarati and English - to make sure that the right
message is getting across.
And one Scottish MP aspires to send a personally-addressed letter to each of
the 5,000-6,000 self-professed Scottish Nationalist Party supporters in his
constituency.
The days when an MP's mind turned to direct marketing only once in an
electoral cycle - in order to exploit the free campaign mailshot to which
all candidates are entitled - are over.
There are a number of reasons for the rapid strides which have been made
since the last general election nearly five years ago.
First and possibly foremost is that typesetting and printing equipment
capable of producing material of quite high quality is increasingly
affordable.
According to Nigel Griffiths, the Labour MP for Edinburgh South, an entire
package of printing equipment can be bought these days for less than Pounds
4,000.
Griffiths, one of Westminster's most diligent direct marketeers, undertakes
'a great deal' of target and mass mailing 'to show people I am not a blank
slate'.
Despite the additional expense, he says the Royal Mail has the edge over
hand delivery in cases where guaranteed speed of dispatch or blanket
constituency coverage is important.
Commercial advertisers discovered direct marketing a long time ago; now MPs
 -especially those with connections in the the public relations and media
fields - are realising how far they lag behind, and are starting to catch
up.
In 1990, advertising expenditure on direct mail rose by 29 per cent to
Pounds 979m, in a year when other forms of advertising were static.
The direct marketing industry has begun to sell itself to the political
parties. During the last two autumn conference seasons, it has mounted a
road-show, designed to demonstrate how the principles which underlie good
commercial direct marketing techniques can be applied to politics.
At these events, politicians and would-be candidates can become well-versed
in the intricacies of Royal Mail discounts and list brokers, from whom
directories of people with specified characteristics may be acquired.
'We explain how candidates should scientifically target their efforts by
going to the waverers,' says Jennifer Buhaenko, one of the road-show
organisers. 'Targeting is fundamental to good direct mailing.'
In terms of content, the advice is to address the voter 'as the person
sitting opposite you' and to engage their attention by focusing on 'what
people are saying on the doorstep'.
Effective use of the medium can be labour-intensive, Buhaenko admits. But,
she adds, general elections are a period when candidates can draw on the
assistance of 'lots of volunteers' for collating and delivery purposes.
