FT  28 JAN 92 / Socialists suffer in French by-elections
FRANCE'S governing Socialist party took a hammering over the weekend in six
by-elections which also saw a sharp increase in the vote for the extreme
right-wing National Front.
The results of the by-elections (one national and five local) indicate that
the Socialists are in deep trouble despite a recent small reduction in the
record unpopularity of President Francois Mitterrand and his prime minister,
Mrs Edith Cresson. The party also faces the prospect of serious losses in
nationwide regional and local elections in March.
The National Front, by contrast, appears likely to make significant strides
in those elections, since in each of the weekend's by-elections its
candidate won between 13 and 16 per cent of the vote. This represents a
large advance over the 9.6 per cent gained nationally in the 1988 general
election. Moreover the consistency of these latest results suggests that the
Front is becoming increasingly established throughout France.
The party's weekend showing is still well short of the 20 per cent which the
Front claims is its national target for the March elections. But few
observers would now dismiss this target as absurd, and in some regions with
large immigrant communities, like Marseilles, it could be quite plausible.
The pattern was most striking in the first round of voting for the
by-election to the National Assembly seat near Lille in northern France.
Support for the Socialist candidate collapsed to under 13 per cent, compared
with more than 31 per cent in 1988; the National Front surged to second
place with 15.7 per cent, compared with 10.4 per cent in 1988. The Front
candidate thus qualified for the run-off in the second round against a
centrist, who won nearly 47 per cent.
In the first round of voting in the local election at Bischwiller near
Strasbourg, two candidates - from the National Front and a dissident extreme
right-wing party - shared more than 22 per cent of the vote. The Socialist
candidate came fifth.
The Socialist party was forced into fourth place at Quesnoy-sur-Deule in the
Nord, behind the National Front and the Greens, and it lost the cantons of
Lons-le-Saunier in the Jura, and of La Verpillere in the Isere.
French unemployment stabilised at 9.8 per cent last month, holding out hopes
that the government is starting to bring its most serious economic problem
under control, adds William Dawkins.
The number out of work rose slightly by 0.05 per cent month-on-month, to
2.82m, representing an 11.7 per cent rise in those seeking a job over the
past year. This was a 'positive result' said Mrs Martine Aubry, labour
minister.
However, the outlook for industry continues to be dull, according to a poll
of senior executives published yesterday by Insee, the state statistics
body. In the six-monthly poll 17 per cent believed their profits were poor
or unsatisfactory at the end of last year.
