FT  29 JUL 92 / The Barcelona Olympics: The compleat guide to drug abuse -
The insidious spread of new-generation performance enhancers
LIKE other journalists sitting around the breakfast table each morning at
the Barcelona Press village, I keep my ears open for the subject that turned
the Seoul Games on their head four years ago - drug disqualification. So far
things have been very quiet.
Canada's Ben Johnson is keeping his head low. It is one of the great ironies
of these Games that while Johnson will once again be running in the 100
metres, his great rival, Carl Lewis of the US, is for the moment only a
reserve member for the US 100m relay team, though he is in the long jump.
There was a sprinkling of drug disqualifications before the Games began.
Canadian sprinter Cheryl Thibedeau was banned for life for failing a steroid
test in June. Nigeria has withdrawn six athletes, including women's long
jump and 100m medal hopefuls. Six South Koreans were also withdrawn for
failing tests.
Here in Barcelona, there were minor rumblings on Sunday when US 100m
freestyle silver medallist Jenny Thompson complained that the bulky,
well-muscled winner of the event, China's Yong Zhuang, had not been tested
afterwards.
None the less, among Olympic veterans in Barcelona there is consensus that
performance-enhancing drugs continue to play a significant role in Olympic
sport. Some who have attended half-a-dozen Games have run out of enthusiasm.
It is not because they have lost their love of sport. On the contrary, it is
because they no longer know which sporting achievements are real and which
are not. Some even question the value of attending the next Games in Atlanta
in 1996.
On the other hand, I might make it to Atlanta. Not as a meek and mild
reporter, but as a record-smashing, medal-grabbing Olympian.
I am overweight. I smoke. I drink. My arms are like pins, my thighs are
jelly. I am 38. None of this, however, worries me in the slightest, for I
have managed to get hold of a copy of the Underground Steroid Handbook -
Update 1992, which promises me I could get away with a trip to Atlanta. Such
is the world of performance-enhancing drugs these days that I can believe
it.
The handbook is written by one Daniel Duchaine, an inhabitant of Los
Angeles. Duchaine has been in the cheating business a long time. His first
underground steroid handbook, published in 1981 and sold perfectly legally,
proved highly popular: 40,000 copies went like hot-cakes.
My own edition is a special commemorative one; it was written by Duchaine
after release from prison on an anabolic steroids charge and published this
year, presumably to coincide with these Olympics.
Times are changing fast. Anabolic steroids - previously the athlete's drug
of choice - have not only become illegal. They are becoming obsolete. In the
last few years a new generation of performance-enhancing drugs has evolved,
and Duchaine sees it as his duty to guide a new generation of athletes
towards them.
'We now can't rely on stagnant, decades-old technology,' he writes, and sees
steroid illegality as something of a boon. 'We will now be legally and
ethically forced to look for truly effective steroid alternatives ..It's my
job to help athletes ..I believe in ten years' time we'll see athletes
 .bigger, faster, stronger, and (at last) socially acceptable.'
If you can stomach Duchaine's morality, the modest price of Dollars 19.95
will buy you all the information you ever wanted on performance-enhancing
drugs, old and new. The handbook is a detailed step-by-step guide on how to
become a successful drug-enhanced athlete. As a publication of Britain's
Sports Council magnificently understates the case, this 'puts the medical
profession and coaches in a most difficult position.'
It does not put athletes in a difficult position, for the handbook bends
over backwards to let them know exactly what they can get away with and how
to do it. One chapter, for example, lets American readers know how to get
around US Food and Drug Administration laws and import banned substances
'legally' through various deceptions. If all else fails, there is advice on
smuggling.
A much bigger problem, it seems, is simply getting hold of the real thing.
Banned sports drugs have become so sought-after that a multi-million dollar
industry of counterfeit drugs has sprung up - about 90 per cent of all black
market steroids, for instance, are fakes. Is your injectable Stanozolol
cloudy? In fact, the suspended particles in real Stanozolol have an
irridescent sheen. Hundreds of drug scams are being perpetrated.
There are also untold ways of beating a drug test. You can insert a catheter
tube into your urinary tract and fill your bladder with someone else's
drug-trace-free urine. You can use testosterone and, because it exists
naturally in the body, get away with it with careful calculation. Or you
could try Probenecid, a masking agent that hides drug traces in urine. Like
many athletes, you could stop steroid use at a specific time prior to a
competition drug test so no traces remain.
Or, like Daniel Duchaine, you could use a blocker that jams the tubules of
the kidneys for a few hours so that banned substances do not get into the
urine. 'This blocker works on many steroids, all amphetimines, narcotics,
uppers, downers, you name it: this stuff blocks it,' he crows. 'It always
works. So far it has not been banned, as it has not been detected. If they
ban it, I'll just find something else. I like drug testing: it's a
challenge, it advances the state of the art of performance enhancement.'
What about the newest of up-and-coming non-steroid performance enhancers?
Drugs wizards such as Duchaine are not at a loss. Personally, he favours
anti-catabolics: synthetic analgesics such as Cytadren that prevent adrenal
hormones from arresting protein synthesis in muscles. It adds to muscle size
and strength, and - some predict - is the drug of the future.
Alternately there is Clenbuterol, which magically burns off body fat and
promotes rapid muscle development, exercise or no exercise. Unfortunately,
there is no magic in the work of men such as Duchaine. He is real. His book
is real. The drugs he promotes are real. And they are a worry to everyone
concerned about the future of high-level sport.
I spoke to David Cowan, director of London's Drug Control Centre. His
greatest worry is not banned drugs for which tests exist, but the large grey
area of new sports drugs for which no international legal consensus on tests
exist.
Red blood cell-producing EPO, testosterone-stimulating HCG,
aggression-developing DHT, growth promoting HGH - all are banned, all are
detectable, but so far, despite growing concern over their use, the
International Olympic Committee has failed to take crucial decisions on
testing procedures.
Dr Cowan estimates that currently only about 10 per cent of drug testing is
random, out-of-competition testing. Most authorities agree that such testing
is the only way that the growth of Olympic performance-enhancing drugs can
be controlled. Until this happens, Daniel Duchaine's athletes will continue
to become bigger, stronger and faster.
