FT  25 APR 92 / Books: Twinkling Star of the Enlightenment - An examination
of Diderot's life and deceptions
DIDEROT by PN Furbank Secker &amp; Warburg Pounds 25, 523 pages
WHAT IS the English for the 18th century French word philosophe? Thinker?
Ironist? Satirist? Wise man? Nothing quite works but it is at least clear
the philosophes were not philosophers pure and simple, in the sense that
they formulated a complete system of thought. In this respect they are not
like, say, Descartes, Locke or Hume; yet to understand their work in any
kind of depth you have to engage with a great deal of hard-core
philosophical argument. Their most cogent British interpreters have tended
to be professional philosophers or political scientists, Ayer on Voltaire
(1986) and Cranston on Rousseau - in a major biography of which the final
volume is still awaited.
PN Furbank is the exception in that he is a literary critic and biographer
with previous books on EM Forster, Samuel Butler and Italo Svevo to his
credit. Yet happily Furbank is more than capable of presenting with clarity
the main philosophical issues that abound in the work of Diderot. The
sub-title - 'a critical biography'  - is here an exact description of the
book. Furbank deals comprehensively with the life and the work of this
liberating writer in roughly equal parts.
Diderot, son of a cutler, was a wonderfully entertaining, radically
subversive genius. He was, above all, brave; never afraid to risk his neck
in publicly proclaiming his violently anti-clerical views with immense
vigour in spite of having suffered a period of harsh imprisonment in his
youth on account of them. If Diderot is best known to us as the architect of
the Encyclopedie, as an early champion of the notion of the Tree of
Knowledge, and more generally as a protagonist of the Enlightenment (a term
about which this book has some sharply corrective things to say), we are
reminded by Furbank that Diderot's total output also included many polemical
essays and treatises, regular art criticism, pieces of theatre, and some
brilliant fictional dialogues.
A sense of virtuosic performance typifies Diderot's life as much as it did
his work. He was greatly in demand socially, and would entrance his
contemporaries by his flow of sparkling discourse even when he was embattled
in furious argument with them. He had long love-hate relations with both
Rousseau and Voltaire, less stormy ones with his other collaborators on the
Encyclopedia, D'Alembert, Holbach, Naigeon, and with Baron Grimm (not to be
confused with the folklorists of the same name). One of Diderot's greatest
fans was Catherine the Great, who supported him financially for much of his
career and persuaded him at an advanced age to go to St Petersburg as her
adviser on how to run her empire; though she does not seem to have acted on
his voluminous advice.
Furbank paints vivid portraits of Diderot's shrewish wife, Nanette, and of
his intellectual mistress, Sophie Volland. Diderot was torn apart like any
typical honnete homme or pere de famille in a boulevard farce. Unlike
Rousseau he accepted the burden of parenthood but did not allow it to impair
his career. Nothing in his life ever could or did. He was unceasingly
industrious. His surviving child married a businessman who prospered and she
provided Diderot with two grandchildren upon whom he doted. Angelique, his
daughter, also wrote the earliest life of Diderot.
Furbank places Diderot's novels within the tradition of European fiction in
the 18th century and highlights their relevance and readability today. This
is his most useful service for the lay reader. He draws an interesting
distinction between novelists like Jane Austen, Balzac and Dickens, and many
other mainstream writers of fiction, who rely on giving their readers an
illusion of reality, and those like Diderot who practise a kind of deception
or con trick on them. In Diderot the reader is deceived into believing that
the events described actually occurred. Diderot much admired the work of
Richardson, where this kind of deceptive technique is apparent in the way
the events of the novel are viewed at one remove through a sequence of
authentic-seeming letters, all of them carefully dated.
Diderot's deceptions took many devious forms. His novel about the horrors of
conventual life, The Nun, derived from a case of an unwanted illegitimate
female child who was forced to take nun's vows at the age of 16, and then
when she had grown to self-awareness found it impossible to renounce them.
In other instances, too, Diderot grafted the fiction onto an episode in the
life of a known individual. The composer Rameau, for example, happened to
have a nephew who was a mediocre composer and a layabout. In his fable
Rameau's Nephew Diderot takes him as an example of the social parasite and
engages with him in a dialogue that examines the role of genius in society.
In D'Alembert's Dream Diderot used another real person, his chief assistant
on the Encyclopedia, the mathematician D'Alembert, to initiate a
dramatically conveyed discussion of materialism.
The obscurity nowadays of the real people deployed by Diderot in such works
has prevented them reaching many British readers outside the universities.
If we are ignorant of the French naval officer Louis-Antoine de
Bougainville, who in 1771 wrote an account of a Voyage around the world
(except perhaps through the purple plant named after him), why should we
read Diderot's Supplement to that Voyage? Yet the Supplement is a
masterpiece of irony, hilariously arguing the case for polygamy and the
economic virtues inherent in a state of nature.
These strategies of deception also include direct addresses to the reader
whom Diderot invites to join in the argument. His most elaborate performance
of this kind was the posthumous Jacques the Fatalist, to which Furbank
devotes a concluding chapter. It is a book that defies summary, a running
dialogue inverting the relations between master and servant; in part a
parody of Cervantes, also an essay on determinism, and a landmark in the
history of the anti-novel. It appeared in a readable English translation in
the Penguin classics in 1986. After Furbank it should acquire many more
British admirers.
