FT  21 JAN 92 / Survey of Egypt (1): The fruits of moderation - Egypt's
finances and its international standing are now stronger than for several
decades. But it still faces chronic economic and social problems and its
rulers, constantly challenged by Islamic radicals, cannot afford to rest on
their laurels
PRESIDENT Hosni Mubarak permitted himself some justified self-congratulation
last October. He had weathered 10 difficult years in office that began so
unpromisingly with the assassination of Anwar Sadat by Islamic militants.
Few people at the time of Sadat's assassination gave the then relatively
unknown Hosni Mubarak much prospect of remaining in power for very long.
Ten years later Mr Mubarak appears firmly in command, although recent events
in Algeria, where the democratic process was aborted by the military to
prevent fundamentalists gaining power through the ballot box, show that in a
volatile region nothing can be taken for granted.
For an Egyptian leadership, which is engaged in promoting its own slow
process of democratisation, the lessons of Algiers will be pondered
carefully. Indeed, Mr Mubarak had been privately critical of what he
regarded as Algeria's hasty transition from one-party rule to putative
multi-party state.
In impromptu remarks to the Financial Times last June he revealed that he
had warned his friend, Algerian President Chadli Bendjedid, of the dangers,
but his warnings had not been heeded.
The implication of Mr Mubarak's observations then were clear: Egypt would
continue to proceed cautiously with its own democratisation. It would not
bow to outside pressures to hasten political liberalisation. The danger in
the wake of Algeria's troubles is that a president, known and often
criticised for his gradualism in all things, will be even more cautious
about economic and political reform.
Egypt has its own restless militant tendency to contend with, and there have
been signs recently of the government bowing to Islamic pressure by
prosecuting authors and banning publications frowned on by the radicals.
If it were not for concerns about a fundamentalist trend that appears once
again to be entering one of its periodic upswings, Egypt's leadership could
view the future with optimism after a successful year on various fronts.
Among all regional states, Egypt perhaps gained most from the Gulf crisis.
Its commitment of about 20,000 troops, including a tank division, to the
liberation of Kuwait and its role in holding together the anti-Iraq alliance
in Arab forums were handsomely rewarded.
About half Egypt's foreign debt of Dollars 50bn was either forgiven outright
or rescheduled on favourable terms. Its balance of payments is healthier
than for several years thanks to increased oil revenues, stronger exports
and a post-Gulf crisis rebound in tourism, its main currency earner.
After living from hand to mouth for most of the past decade with the Central
Bank barely able to fund grain imports on occasions, Egypt is now in a much
healthier position financially: according to IMF/World Bank estimates
reserves stood at about Dollars 3bn at the end of 1991, sufficient for six
months of imports. One effect of Egypt's much improved balance of payments
was that the value of the Egyptian pound stabilised after falling some 60
per cent against foreign currencies in the past five years. Late in the year
the pound was floated well ahead of a February, 1992 IMF deadline - a
further sign of confidence.
The unifying of the foreign exchange market coincided with a favourable IMF
review of progress in Egypt's implementation of a May, 1991 reform
programme. The IMF granted Egypt a second tranche of a SDR 272m standby in
recognition of it having achieved interim monetary growth and budget deficit
targets. By the end of the year inflation, driven by IMF-inspired price
increases, appeared to have abated somewhat. There were also anecdotal
indications that the Egyptian economy, burdened by a lingering recession,
had begun to grow again, although it was too soon to assess the strength of
the pickup in economic activity.
While Egypt won praise from international lending institutions and aid
donors for adhering to IMF monetary reforms, it was censured for slow
progress in implementing a Dollars 300m World Bank sponsored structural
adjustment programme. Critics worried that the benefits of the combined
IMF-Bank reforms would be squandered.
Tardiness in pressing ahead with the liberalisation and rationalisation of
the state sector, including a process of 'de-nationalisation', is seen by
both western economists and the local business community as slightly
worrying. Fears are being expressed that Egypt might falter in its reform
efforts after having cleared the first, namely the IMF, hurdle.
In the past the country's rulers have tended to rest on their laurels after
imminent economic disaster had been averted by further injections of aid
money or another round of debt rescheduling. But even at this moment of
singular good fortune, Egyptian policymakers cannot afford to be complacent.
Any optimism must be tempered by the size of the country's manifest
problems, including a chronic overdependence on imported foodstuffs, lack of
real economic growth and huge populations pressures. A critical shortage of
managerial talent is not the least of the problems besetting the structural
reform programme.
The authorities are right to be nervous about the consequences of reforms
that bring further hardship to an already hard-pressed populace. Steep price
rises for many basic commodities, as Egypt seeks to comply with IMF
requirements for reductions in subsidies, have provoked fairly widespread
grumbling, although no serious public disturbances.
The question is how much more people can tolerate before general unhappiness
spills over into public agitation. Memories of the 1977 bread prices riots
are still relatively fresh in the minds of the leadership and go some way
towards explaining its innate caution.
Egypt has been lucky that the large unofficial economy (many Egyptians have
two, three or even four jobs) has helped cushion the most painful effects of
reform. According to some estimates the so-called underground economy
accounts for as much as 25 per cent of GPD.
While Egypt's image in the West remains extremely positive, it has been
tarnished somewhat by continuing reports of human rights abuses under the
emergency laws that have been in force since President Sadat's
assassination. These laws allow detention without trial for protracted
periods, and have been used mercilessly against Islamic extremists.
While Egypt's efforts this past year to bring about economic reform and at
the same time improve living standards have met with mixed results, its
foreign policy achievements have been impressive. The election of Dr Boutros
Boutros-Ghali as the new United Nations secretary-general crowned a highly
successful year that saw the return after a 12 year absence of the Arab
League headquarters to the banks of the Nile, and the installation of an
Egyptian, Dr Esmat Abdel Meguid, as the League's secretary-general.
Egyptian diplomacy was also active and effective in efforts to bring about a
Middle East peace conference in Madrid, and in continuing attempts to
promote a settlement. Cairo has used its close relations with Damascus and
with Riyadh to good effect in this regard. Few would argue that the
diplomatic focus of the Arab world has returned to Egypt, and Egyptian
diplomats are once again playing their traditional consensus role at the
heart of Arab politics.
It is not the smallest of paradoxes that while Egyptian officialdom
continues to show an aptitude for diplomacy, the reverse is the case with
economic management.
