FT  23 DEC 92 / Letter: National lottery - a means to fund a better quality
of life (2)
Sir, Your leader writer seeks to be more in love with financial principles
than with the quality of life. The reason we proposed a national lottery was
to fund those areas of British life which are dramatically underfunded. Our
board defines quality of life objectives as those which make available to
the individual, from all walks of life, the widest possible range of healthy
and vital leisure activities, so that all may enjoy fuller and richer lives.
On the advice of some of the best economists in the UK, our board has
proposed that the National Lottery should be mounted as a charitable
foundation, with specific purposes. Thus it would increase the current
Pounds 17bn turnover of charities to an estimated Pounds 18bn. The
foundation, an idea first put forward by Sir Robin Day, would be out of the
reach of government manipulation and thus in a position to make a genuine
contribution to new ventures, with participation in arts, sports and the
environment as particular aims.
The most successful business in Norway is its lottery, which is untaxed.
Britain would be wise to follow this example. Residual funds, after prizes
and expenses are accounted for, would go into the foundation, rather than to
the Treasury as direct tax. The funds that will flow back to Treasury as a
result of the lottery's operation will increase, because of its 'feel good'
effect on the public. In the Irish Republic both the top 20 charities'
income and the betting duty have increased since the lottery started to
function.
Were the UK lottery market to be opened up to a variety of competitors as
you propose, no single lottery would be able to offer the large prizes
which, throughout the rest of the world, attract massive and regular
participation. So the total funds available for the regeneration of life
throughout the country would be considerably reduced.
Denis Vaughan,
executive director,
Lottery Promotion Company,
21 Floral Street,
London WC2E 9DG
