FT  03 MAR 92 / Israel's opposition hopes to gain from Likud feuds
ISRAEL'S opposition Labour party, re-unified under the new leadership of Mr
Yitzhak Rabin, yesterday seized on bitter feuding within the ruling Likud
party of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir to fuel its increasingly confident
campaign for the June 23 general election.
A complex internal - but very public - contest for top places in the list of
election candidates has led to a prolonged struggle between senior Likud
leaders that has given party hardliners prominence.
A furious Mr David Levy, the foreign minister who has been the most
enthusiastic advocate of Middle East peace talks in the government, accused
Mr Shamir of assisting in 'a conspiracy' against him in the party elections.
After coming second to Mr Shamir in the election for leader, Mr Levy, the
incumbent deputy, was outflanked in the separately-polled race for the
number two spot when Mr Moshe Arens, the defence minister, and Mr Ariel
Sharon, the housing minister, combined forces to ensure they both finished
ahead of him.
'The results express a move toward the extreme in Likud positions,' said Mr
Rabin, who is promising to move quickly to an agreement with the
Palestinians on the occupied territories and mend relations with the US if
Labour is elected.
Mr Shimon Peres, who has greatly enhanced Labour's new-found unity by
graceful acceptance of being ousted as party leader by Mr Rabin last month,
said the Likud feuding would benefit Labour.
'The minute they take out the swords and point them at each other, they are
making a mistake and sooner or later the Likud will pay for it,' he said.
Mr Levy's humiliation at the hands of Mr Arens - a close ally of Mr Shamir -
and Mr Sharon enraged his supporters in the Likud who are largely drawn from
the less well-off Sephardic, or Oriental Jewish communities. They have
previously been assiduously cultivated by Likud leaders as a bedrock of the
party's success over the past 15 years.
Recently, however, leading Sephardi Likud members have become increasingly
critical of Mr Shamir's leadership. Some went so far yesterday as to
threaten to switch to Labour. They are especially concerned at the state of
the economy, which Labour argues has been neglected by Mr Shamir in favour
of his commitment to settlement in the occupied territories.
