FT  04 DEC 92 / Hanson turns in decline of 2% for year
HANSON, the Anglo-US conglomerate, yesterday reported a 2 per cent fall in
pre-tax profits for the year to September 30, its first ever year-on-year
decline.
Profits fell from Pounds 1.32bn to Pounds 1.29bn, on increased sales of
Pounds 8.8bn (up from Pounds 7.7bn) mainly because of the increase in
borrowings after it acquired Beazer, the aggregates and building products
company, last year.
Operating profits increased by 12 per cent to Pounds 1.07bn and earnings per
share were up 2 per cent to 22.2p (from 21.7p).
Mr Derek Bonham, Hanson's chief executive, said: 'There is no magic wand; we
do not walk on water and therefore cannot buck trends.
'But we are pleased that the businesses we are in are outperforming our
competitors.'
After integrating the subsidiary's Pounds 1.5bn borrowings the group
reported net debt of Pounds 774m, giving gearing of 18 per cent. Last year
the group had net cash of around Pounds 400m. Interest income fell from
Pounds 188m to Pounds 46m.
The third quarterly dividend was increased to 2.85p (from 2.75p) which is
equivalent to a annual dividend of 11.4p compared with last year's total of
11p.
The move to quarterly dividends, partly introduced for the benefit of the
group's US shareholders used to quarterly dividends, resulted in a tax
charge of Pounds 197m, down from Pounds 258m.
After recently dropping its bid for Ranks Hovis McDougall - which was
superseded by a higher offer from Tomkins, another conglomerate - Mr Bonham
said the group was continuing to look for another core business in the UK.
However, he added: 'We are not going to overpay for any company. If that
means we stay out of the market then we will.'
Mr David Clarke, chief executive of Hanson Industries, the group's North
American arm, said the group would continue to sell some of its smaller
businesses.
'If the price is right we are sellers.'
Hanson's results reflected the new accounting rules which mean that one-off
profits (or losses) on disposals are included above the line in the pre-tax
figure for the first time.
Last year's figures have been restated to reflect this.
Lex, Page 22; Details, Page 24
