FT  06 APR 92 / Last-ditch Arab move to solve Libya crisis: Foreign
ministers to seek compromise in Cairo
ARAB foreign ministers are to meet in Cairo early this week in what may
prove a last-ditch effort to find a compromise in the Libyan affair before
United Nations sanctions come into effect on April 15.
Arab League officials, speaking after Colonel Muammer Gadaffi, the Libyan
leader, had bitterly denounced the 'Crusader West' in a defiant speech, said
the seven-member committee of Arab foreign ministers charged with defusing
the Libyan crisis will meet in Cairo tomorrow.
The committee, which groups Egypt, Algeria, Tunisia, Syria, Libya,
Mauritania and Morocco, was formed several weeks ago to seek a face-saving
end to the crisis, but its efforts have proved ineffectual.
Col Gadaffi said at the weekend Libya would never surrender its 'sons' to an
'enemy country'. He repeated his outright rejection of Security Council
resolution 748, which set the April 15 deadline for an air and arms embargo
against Libya for its refusal to yield two men accused of the 1988 bombing
of a Pan Am airliner over Lockerbie, Scotland.
The UN is also pressing Libya to make available four of its citizens,
including Col Gadaffi's brother-in-law, for questioning by the French
authorities over the 1989 downing of a French UTA jet over Niger. A total of
441 people were killed in the destruction of the two aircraft.
The US meanwhile repeated its instruction to its nationals to leave Libya
immediately after Col Gadaffi's furious outburst on Friday in a speech
marking the end of the Moslem fasting month of Ramadan.
The Libyan leader called on Moslems to close ranks against 'western
Christian crusading forces'. 'We too have to beat the drums and close ranks
and sharpen our swords and get ready for the confrontation.'
Col Gadaffi's 45-minute oration came a day after the Security Council
condemned Libya over attacks last Thursday against foreign missions in
Tripoli. Venezuela's embassy was virtually destroyed in what were believed
to be officially sanctioned demonstrations.
Libya has appealed to the International Court of Justice to rule that it can
try the suspects in its own jurisdiction; but this avenue has been rejected
by western states, who believe the terrorist attacks were ordered by the
Libyan leadership in retaliation for the 1986 US bombing of Libya, in which
Col Gadaffi's adopted daughter was killed.
