FT  27 JUN 92 / BP shares fall 14% on fear of a possible dividend cut
BRITISH PETROLEUM shares fell by 14 per cent yesterday in the wake of
Thursday evening's boardroom coup which ousted Mr Robert Horton, the
chairman and chief executive. The shares closed at 209p, a loss of 34p on
the day, taking them to their lowest point since autumn 1986.
The sharp fall was prompted mainly by fears that the company's new
management, headed by Lord Ashburton, the chairman, would be forced to halve
the dividend to ease BP's strained balance sheet. There were also rumours of
a Pounds 1bn-Pounds 2bn rights issue.
In New York, where the shares are traded as American Depositary Receipts,
they suffered a Dollars 5 1/4 fall on Thursday but declined only 75 cents
yesterday to close at Dollars 48 3/8 , equivalent to about 213p a share.
Despite anxiety at the sudden change in leadership at the UK's third-largest
company by market capitalisation, the City of London was generally positive.
Analysts welcomed an end to the frictions caused by Mr Horton's management
style.
They also reacted favourably to the appointment of Mr David Simon as chief
executive. His financial background and diplomatic manner were seen as
positive attributes in the oil company's current difficult situation.
'He's more financially oriented and BP's problems are financial,' said Mr
Paul Spedding of Kleinwort Benson Securities.
It also emerged yesterday that the prime movers behind the coup were the
non-executive directors from the business community on BP's board.
Lord Ashburton, a former chairman of Barings merchant bank, Sir Patrick
Sheehy, chairman of BAT Industries, Dr Carl Hahn, chairman of Volkswagen,
and Mr Charles Knight, chairman of Emerson Electric, were said to be among
those most anxious to remove Mr Horton.
BP called large shareholders yesterday to say it would be in contact shortly
and that Mr Simon would be available to answer questions.
Institutional shareholders were concerned that the boardroom coup might have
been carried out with no alternative strategies in mind. The dominance of Mr
Horton's personality and the concentration of power in his dual role as
chairman and chief executive would have made it difficult for the new
management to prepare any new measures to deal with BP's difficulties.
Analysts said there had been recent signs that the second quarter's earnings
prospects had deteriorated. Some factors out of BP's control, such as the
weakness of the dollar, are likely to affect earnings, while
larger-than-expected redundancy costs in its US operations will also result
in a charge to earnings.
Mr Horton refused to comment. He was at his home in South Stoke, Oxfordshire
early yesterday. He bought the morning papers and later left by car with his
wife for Oxford.
Top-level coup, Page 6
Lex, Page 22
