FT  06 MAR 92 / Rogue PC virus starts to spread a day early
FOR millions of personal computer (PC) users around the world, turning on
the familiar desktop machine this morning could be a moment of truth. The
widely feared Michelangelo computer virus is set to strike today, wiping out
data files on infected computers. It was already reported yesterday to have
hit some US companies.
The level of concern over Michelangelo, however, varies from country to
country. While anxiety is muted in the UK, it is widespread Germany and in
the US where data files in PCs at more than a dozen companies were yesterday
reported to have been destroyed.
'Users have come in and turned their systems on and everything's gone,' said
Mr John McAfee, chairman of the Computer Virus Industry Association, a US
monitoring group. An Argentine newspaper, the Bariloche, was reported to
have lost computer data files.
In the UK, Mr John McIntosh of PC Security, a consultancy specialising in
antiviral software, played down the risks. He said he expected a few victims
today but not a flood. The level of infection was about equal, he thought,
to the notorious 'Friday the 13th' virus which wiped out records at the
National Institute for the Blind last year but did little other damage.
There can be little cause for complacency, however. Viruses have caused
damage - in time and trade lost - measuring in six figures.
Those who have yet to take precautions against Michelangelo face the choice
of risking destruction of files stored on computer hard disks, or giving up
an essential business tool for 24 hours. Only when the computer is turned on
is the virus activated. Michelangelo is triggered by the 'clock' inside a
personal computer.
The Michelangelo virus is the latest in an epidemic of rogue programs
created by computer hackers.
It is set to attack today, on the anniversary of the Italian Renaissance
artist's birth.
Computer stores have been overwhelmed in the past few days by demand for
'disinfectant' programs designed to eradicate the virus. But just how
widespread the infection may be is unknown.
Supercomputer market, Page 7
