FT  28 NOV 92 / Markets: Odds in favour of fixed-rate offers - Serious Money
NOW IS the time to get a fixed rate or capped mortgage while you can.
Depending on the term, you can get a fixed rate mortgage charging anywhere
between six and nine per cent. These represent very low rates by the
standards of the past 20 years.
While Britain was in the exchange rate mechanism, one could have argued that
the experience of the past 20 years was irrelevant; a new era of low
inflation and low interest rates had dawned. But now Britain has left the
ERM, it seems likely that the 'good old days' of stop-go economics, higher
inflation and volatile interest rates will be back.
In a sense, you are gambling whether you opt for a fixed or a variable rate
mortgage; in the former case, you take the risk that interest rates might
fall further; in the latter, you will lose out if rates subsequently rise.
There is never a perfect answer, since no one can predict the future level
of interest rates with any certainty. All homeowners can do is compare the
potential downside with the upside.
It is hard to imagine, even on the most extreme assumptions, that UK
mortgage rates could fall below five per cent. We can take that figure as
the bottom of the potential range. For argument's sake, we could take the
15.4 per cent which most building societies were charging in 1990 as the
highest level which rates might reach.
On that basis, current fixed rate offers are close to the bottom of the
potential range. The most you might miss out on, if rates fall to historic
lows, is two or three percentage points.
But if one looks back to September 1990, Nationwide was offering a five-year
fix at 12.9 per cent. That rate was a lot nearer the top of the 'range' than
the bottom, and thus the downside risk was greater than the upside
potential. And the bad news for those who opted for that deal is that there
is a redemption penalty of six months' interest. So the odds are far more in
favour of those opting for fixed rate mortgages now than they were in 1990,
or earlier in 1992, when rates were still over 10 per cent.
But when you do opt for a mortgage, make sure that the lender does not tilt
the odds too far in the opposite direction. Look at the arrangement fee; is
it substantial and how many months of interest saving (compared with the
current variable rate) does it represent? This is most important with very
short term fixes.
A second factor is to check for the 'extras' on which lenders frequently
insist. Is the loan available on repayment or interest-only terms, or are
endowment or pension policies required? And if the latter, can existing
policies be used, or must the borrower take out a new plan?
IS contents insurance via the lender a condition of the loan and, if so, is
the premium far in excess of that you would pay elsewhere? It is also
important to discover whether the loan is 'portable' - whether you can take
it from house to house, if you need to move. And portability needs to be
carefully defined; few people need a loan of exactly the same size when they
move house. So what happens if the loan needs to be increased?
If there is no portability, check the redemption penalty carefully. A
penalty of three or six months' interest could be very hefty if, for
whatever reason, you need to stop the loan.
Then there is the status of the lender. The fixed term will eventually end,
and then you will find yourself stuck with a variable rate. If you have
chosen a high street name which is committed to the mortgage business for a
long time, then you have a greater chance of being offered a competitive
deal at the end of the fix.
And finally, there is the term of the loan. Given that the odds are
currently in the borrower's favour, the longer the term of the fix, the
better. However, the rate for a longer term loan will be higher than those
available short term.
So how do the current offers stand against these principles? Unfortunately,
the Halifax's capped deal, which offered rates no higher than 9.29 per cent
until the year 2000, has sold out. But the society is now offering a fixed
rate of 8.65 per cent until January 31, 2000.
The application fee is a modest Pounds 175; the loan is available on
repayment, as well as other types of mortgage; the lender is a well-known
name; and the loan is portable (after 1994). If you move house and increase
your loan, then the fixed element can remain; any excess will be charged at
the standard variable rate. Should you stop the loan for any reason, the
redemption penalty is three months' interest.
A lower rate deal, but for a shorter term, is on offer from Cheltenham &amp;
Gloucester - 7.99 per cent for five years. It is available on all types of
mortgages, and no other policies are needed. The application fee is Pounds
250, and the mortgage is portable on the same basis as that from Halifax.
Redemption penalty is six months' interest.
NatWest has a ten-year offer on the stocks, at 8.99 per cent, but this is
only available on endowment and pension mortgages (although existing
policies are acceptable). The arrangement fee is Pounds 250, but is waived
for first-time buyers.
Many fixed rate deals are being snapped up within days of launch. Other
deals are coming out all the time, so do not despair if you miss out on a
particular offer. But do consider the option seriously; as Black Wednesday
showed, you never know when the market might change for the worse.
