FT  16 OCT 92 / Leading Article: Slip sliding away
THE BRITISH economy is like a battered car on a steepening descent. Mr
Norman Lamont, and his weary Treasury co-drivers, seem unable to appreciate
how fast it is accelerating away from them. Even if they could catch up with
reality, there is no indication that they have any idea how to stop the
slide. But stop it they must. The longer this continues, the greater the
long-term damage will be.
Yesterday's unemployment figures confirm past pains. The post-election
recovery in spending failed to materialise; manufacturers cannot sell their
stocks either at home or abroad; so manufacturing output has resumed falling
and the rise in unemployment has accelerated.
More disturbing, the recession is now set to intensify over the coming
months. Job vacancies, a reliable lead indicator, stabilised over the
summer. But they have since fallen sharply, by 11 per cent in September
alone. This, and the latest spate of redundancies, ensure that there is much
more bad news to come.
Little wonder, with the economy still deteriorating and real interest rates
still painfully high, that consumer confidence has fallen like a stone.
There are many more bleak months ahead before Britain's consumer recession
will have run its course. The troubles in the banking sector will persist
for longer still, dampening any signs of recovery that do appear.
Yet the government's current drift and indecision are only adding to the
sense of malaise that is gripping the country. It needed to keep its head
while all around - industrialists, trade unionists or back-benchers - were
losing theirs. But it appears increasingly headless.
There is still time for the government to flesh out an alternative economic
strategy, now that sterling has left the exchange rate mechanism. But to do
so it must provide answers to a number of questions that a credible policy
framework must address:
How can the government take advantage of its new freedom outside the ERM and
allow real interest rates to fall without prompting a collapse in the
exchange rate, stoking up inflationary pressures, and eventually repeating
the mistakes that ERM membership was supposed to prevent?
How can it persuade the markets that its finances will be brought under
control, other than through more over-optimistic growth forecasts, without
employing some combination of capital spending cuts, more job losses or tax
increases?
How can it claim that inflation is under control, or indeed controllable
without government intervention, while average earnings in manufacturing are
still rising at more than 6 per cent a year? This means that real earnings
are rising at 2 per cent a year in the midst of a recession, while pay
settlements are twice as high as they need to be if the competitiveness
gains of the devaluation are not to be squandered.
At root, the government must show how it will close the gap between what
Treasury ministers and officials say and what the markets and wage-setters
are prepared to believe. Until these questions are answered satisfactorily,
the malaise will persist.
