FT  06 OCT 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Green light for
environmental issues
Businesses are under increasing pressure to take account of environmental
issues, from the pressure groups, their customers, regulators, the public
and shareholders. Yet many companies do not know how to respond, writes
Charles Batchelor.
A Measure of Commitment - Guidelines for Measuring Environmental
Performance* provides practical advice on how to implement measurement
systems and to assess performance. The guidelines have been drawn up by
Business in the Environment (BIE), an offshoot of Business in the Community,
and accountants KPMG Peat Marwick.
Some larger companies have begun producing environmental reports but there
is a growing demand for more precise information. Environmental reports
lacking concrete detail will become as unacceptable as unquantified
financial reports, said BIE.
Environmental questions are also likely to become of more concern to smaller
companies, BIE said. Most of the 14 case histories used to illustrate the
guidelines are of large companies but BIE is seeking to make the same
techniques available to small and medium sized enterprises.
They are starting to come under pressure from their customers and are also
likely to be affected by the growth of formal environmental standards, such
as British Standard 7750, covering environmental management systems, and the
European Commission's draft proposal for what would be known as Eco-Audits.
A company may have already drawn up an environmental policy and have set
objectives, in which case it may need to move on to setting comprehensive
performance measures. Alternatively, it may just be starting to design a
policy and only want performance measures in priority areas, BIE said.
Companies should, however, be wary of choosing 'soft' areas which may be
viewed by the outside world as merely a public relations exercise.
Measurement systems may need to cover a wide range of areas including
processes or operations, suppliers, emissions into the air and of effluent
into sewers, solid waste, energy use and impact on natural resources.
Companies need to decide which areas should have priority. They may need to
set targets to reduce effluents, emissions and solid waste. They may wish to
eliminate hazardous materials from their products by a set date or improve
their ability to be recycled. In the corporate relations field, they may
want a procedure for public disclosure and consultation on environmental
matters or provide backing for environmental programmes.
The smallest company profiled in the guidelines, Hydro Aluminium Metals,
with 35 employees, concentrated on energy efficiency. It had previously
based its measures of gas and electricity consumption on suppliers' invoices
but moved to calculating consumption per tonne of aluminium processed and
measuring the percentage of waste heat re-used. A study of its melting
furnace revealed significant heat losses which could be reduced.
In a separate initiative BIE is working with Peat Marwick and the Institute
of Purchasing and Supply to draw up a voluntary code of practice to assess
supplier performance in environmental terms. It will consult business and
professional organisations before publishing its code in May, 1993.
*BIE, 5 Cleveland Place, London SW1Y 6JJ. Tel 071 321 6430. 86 pages. Pounds
15.
