FT  08 FEB 92 / Arts: Ambitious figures - William Packer admires the work of
Sarah Raphael
THE IDEA of the wunderkind is as irresistible as it is to be resisted. How
we long for the young genius lately discovered in his attic to be already
mature and working at full stretch. What allowances we make for our students
when out of college on their own, and how many prizes and generous
sponsorships there are to help them on. Did the rot set set in with David
Hockney and his chums in the 1960s, or was that only the latest setting of
the rule: that not to make it by 30 is not to make it at all? ''Tis
opportune to look back on old times, and contemplate our Forefathers', said
Sir Thomas Browne: '. . . Simplicity flies away, and iniquity comes at long
strides upon us.' Jealousy of the young, the 'oldie' syndrome, is as old as
art.
Take Sarah Raphael, for example, whose latest show of her recent paintings
and drawings fills the upper gallery at Agnew's (43 Old Bond Street, until
March 6) - her second here, and again a conspicuous success. She is now in
her early thirties, but the success that came to her early was no less than
her right.
The simple case is that she is one of the most interesting artists of her
generation, a figurative artist lucky enough to emerge at a moment when the
figurative was again become a legitimate preoccupation, but talented enough
to deserve her luck. Her work is ambitious both in its scale and the
technical and formal problems it takes on. If here certain critical doubts
arise, they are a measure of the seriousness of her engagement, ever pushing
her work into areas of difficulty and uncertainty.
Her large works on paper, with their exaggerated beasts and figures and
their theatrical, almost nightmarish light, tread a very narrow line between
merely mannered and decorative illustration of an essentially literary idea,
and an image of which the justification is truly visual. The space is
flattened, the view as high as a bird's, the composition laid out like a
map. Her figures are at times consciously grotesque, her incidents engaging
and diverting. Will those naughty boys who run in step ever catch their
squirrel? Who is that on the grass by the netting, watching, waiting, hoping
to escape? And where on earth is that strange landscape, described with such
febrile clarity, at once familiar and quite other-worldly?
And yet Miss Raphael gets away with it, convincing us that her other world
of the imagination is known and real enough. She does so in two quite
contradictory ways. The very scale on which she sets these larger
imaginative compositions, and the materials she chooses - acrylic paint or
graphite on huge sheets of paper - together present her with real technical
difficulties. To sustain any imagery across such a surface when the mark is
so much more limited and small, and the surface itself, whether painted or
drawn, inclined to be flat and uninflected, is difficulty enough.
This self-imposed material wrestling reminds us constantly that painting and
drawing are physical activities: the work is no figment of the imagination,
a mere description of something else, but an object to be realised and
understood for what it is. So the realisation comes through that the work is
closely based in direct and intense observation of the model and the
particular landscape. The small landscape studies in oil on scraps of
canvas, done on the spot, are as powerful in their presence as any of the
larger, ostensibly more ambitious works. Who knows where they might lead?
It is, too, in the nature of oil paint, as opposed to acrylic which seals
itself off within its own surface in a matter of minutes, to remain active
longer, the engagement so much more physical and direct. It is Miss
Raphael's chosen medium for the mass of tiny portraits of her friends, heads
and seated figures alike all cast onto scraps of used canvas, with their own
internal histories. They reveal that she is as good a painter of the
portrait study from life as any artist - certainly in her generation, which
seems hardly to know the meaning of objective observation. They are the
fruit of long, close scrutiny and an ever-growing understanding of what is
seen, to be rendered in paint on canvas. For me they are the most beautiful,
as they are the most exciting works in the show.
