FT  28 NOV 92 / Markets: The sweet side of Tate's investment - The Bottom
Line
THE Biblical tag that appears on Lyle's Golden Syrup tins 'out of the strong
came forth sweetness' might be reversed when applied to Tate &amp; Lyle itself.
Out of the sweet came forth strength could be its motto.
In spite of a disastrous year in a couple of its main activities, the
company increased its dividend by 7 per cent to 12p. This show of confidence
by the directors should indicate to investors that the sugar and sweeteners
group will endeavour to increase its payout come what may.
That will mean that in the good years dividend increases may not match rises
in earnings per share. But a smooth dividend progression makes up for a lot
from a company subject to the vagaries of the weather as well as business
cycles.
That said, the fall in profits for the year to September 30 from Pounds
230.8m to Pounds 189.5m, reported this week, was the first drop in 14 years.
The wide range of countries in which Tate operates protects it from most of
the swings.
But in the past year Tate's Staley business in the US, which makes
high-fructose corn syrup, a sweetener used in soft drinks, was faced with an
unusually adverse combination of events.
New capacity brought on stream by others made the market for HFCS
particularly competitive just when the US was suffering the second coldest
summer weather this century, dampening demand for soft drinks.
Lower volumes and lower prices have a powerful effect on profits in such a
high fixed cost business.
Profits from Staley dropped by more than Pounds 30m to Pounds 65.3m before
interest. Market circumstances cannot have been entirely to blame. Tate has
appointed a new chief executive in the division with experience in the corn
milling industry.
The group appears confident that volumes will recover filling surplus
capacity in the industry and helping prices.
The other problem area was US sugar beet processing, and profits in the US
sugar division were down nearly Pounds 20m despite a good performance by the
cane sugar side. Again the weather was to blame. Beets dug up and stored in
the fields awaiting processing first froze and then thawed unseasonably,
making them hard to process.
In spite of these reverses, and a number of one-off costs relating to
redundancies and write-downs, the group was still able to cover an increased
dividend more than twice. And it continued to invest at a high level,
despite gearing of 89 per cent. While this level of borrowings would be a
concern in many companies, Tate's strong cash generation should prevent it
from becoming a problem.
Tate's investment should turn it into a worldwide player in the sugar and
sweeteners industry. Long established in the UK, and for some time in North
America, Tate moved into Australia in 1991, and is expanding in Eastern
Europe.
While sugar might be regarded as a mature, commodity-type business in the
developed world, consumption in places such as Russia is much lower than in
the decadent west. Neil Shaw, Tate's chairman, is fond of remarking that the
growth in the world sugar market is equivalent to a new market the size of
the UK opening every year. This gives Tate opportunities to expand.
Decent returns from these businesses are likely to be some years on.
Meanwhile, a full recovery in earnings is expected in the current year. The
shares have risen 34p since the results were announced on Wednesday, closing
yesterday at 390p. A rebound to 33p of earnings gives a prospective p/e of
under 12, which is still on the cheap side.
