FT  19 MAR 92 / International Company News: Hewlett, Convex in technology
pact
HEWLETT-PACKARD has signed an extensive technology-sharing pact with Convex
Computer, a leading manufacturer of mini super-computers. To cement the new
relationship, Hewlett-Packard will take a 5 per cent equity stake in Convex
for Dollars 18m.
Convex will also adopt Hewlett-Packard's Reduced Instruction Set Computing
(RISC) microprocessor technology for use in a new range of massively
parallel processing super-computers. Convex will purchase the microprocessor
chips from HP.
HP and Convex will also exchange software technologies, including HP's RISC
compiler technology and Convex's supercomputer compiler technology.
Massively parallel supercomputers combine the power of hundreds, or even
thousands, of microprocessors to reach very high processing speed.
HP and Convex also plan to reach an agreement to offer each others products
for sale on a bilateral original equipment manufacturer basis.
The agreement represents a win for HP, which is competing with Sun
Microsystems, Digital Equipment, International Business Machines and others
to establish its RISC technology as a broadly-used industry standard.
Hewlett-Packard is the third largest US computer manufacturer with 1991
revenues of Dollars 14.5bn. The company was an early leader in RISC, which
is emerging as a key technology in all types of computers.
Convex is a 10-year-old company, based in Dallas. Microsoft said yesterday
it would launch a new version of its widely-used Windows personal computer
program next month and expects to sell 1m copies within 30 days.
The announcement appears designed to pre-empt International Business
Machines' expected introduction, later this month, of a competing operating
system for personal computers.
The former partners are gearing up for a marketing battle. Microsoft will
for the first time use television advertising to promote Windows. IBM is
also planning a publicity blitz.
Price competition is also expected to be fierce, with Microsoft offering a
Windows upgrade package to current users for Dollars 50. At issue is control
over the direction of personal computer software.
Windows provides personal computer users with a graphical interface, similar
to the Apple Macintosh.
