FT  19 NOV 92 / Tables a roll-call of relative affluence: National exam
rankings have been published for the first time and contain few surprises
THE MOST striking feature of the exam results tables released yesterday for
England is that they are the first ever published by the government.
For decades, most schools and local education authorities have fought to
keep their results under wraps. As late as this summer the Financial Times
found strong hostility, even among leading private schools, to giving their
results to the press.
It is difficult to see what most of the fuss was about. There is nothing
unexpected in the national picture. The depressing statistic that barely one
in three 16-year-olds in England gains five or more GCSE passes at grades A
to C - generally the bare minimum for proceeding to A-levels - is
well-known.
Nor does the regional breakdown offer many surprises. When England's 108
education authorities are ranked by the proportions gaining five or more
GCSEs at grades A to C within each, the bottom 35 are cities or inner-city
boroughs. Tower Hamlets in east London stressed yesterday that in a third of
its schools English was the second language of virtually all those taking
GCSEs; in only two schools were more than four-fifths of candidates native
speakers.
By contrast, every English county south of Birmingham comes in the top 50
except the Isle of Wight and Leicestershire. The top table is a roll-call of
relative affluence and includes Harrow, Kingston-upon-Thames, West Sussex,
Sutton, Bromley, and Surrey.
At the local level the tables are more revealing. The variation in the
performance of schools in the same locality is graphic, and socio-economic
factors do not explain everything.
Consider Oxfordshire, which ranked 14th in overall GCSE attainment.
Excluding its special schools, the tables give results for 35 comprehensives
and nine private schools. The county average for the proportion gaining five
GCSE passes at grades A to C - 41.2 per cent of the 15-16 age group -
disguises wide variations.
In all but two of the nine private schools, all selective, 85 per cent or
more of the pupils gained five-plus GCSEs at A to C. In the top state school
 -Chiltern Edge, near Henley-on-Thames - 60 per cent achieved that, with
five other schools, all in largely middle-class areas, at or above 55 per
cent. At the other end of the spectrum, in three schools, two of them
drawing largely from council estates, fewer than than one in five came out
with five or more at grades A to C.
Between those extremes, though, wide variations do not appear to be easily
explicable in socio-economic terms. The town of Didcot has two
comprehensives drawing on an almost identical 'priority area'. In the girls'
school 52 per cent of pupils gained five GCSEs at grades A to C whereas at
the boys' school only 30 per cent did so. Similarly, Bicester's two
comprehensives, with comparable 'priority areas', gained starkly divergent
results.
The worst GCSE performance in the county was achieved by Milham Ford Girls
School, in Oxford, only 15 per cent of whose 15-16 year-olds gained five
GCSEs at grade A to C. The authority tried to close the school in 1989, but
was refused permission by Mr John MacGregor, then education secretary. It is
the only secondary school in the county balloting on opting-out for
grant-maintained status. For the government, league tables are a
double-edged sword.
Whatever the advantages of grant-maintained status, better exam results do
not appear to be among them. Lincolnshire's 18 opted-out schools perform on
a par with their counterparts controlled by education authorities, eight are
below the national average and ten above, of which six are selective grammar
schools with results similar to those those of grammar schools in the county
which have not opted-out. The county's top school, Kesteven and Sleaford
High School for Girls - 97 per cent of whose pupils gained five or more
GCSEs at grade A to C - is still under the control of the education
authority.
Now that suppression is not an option, education authorities, teachers and
educationalists will have an incentive to devise meaningful 'value-added'
analyses. With the national tests for 11 and 14-year-olds starting, there
will soon be ample material with which to do it.
Yesterday's argument about the value of the tables took a predictable turn.
Mr John Patten, education secretary, welcomed them as a 'datum line' against
which parents could judge their local schools, while Mrs Ann Taylor, his
Labour shadow, condemned them as 'another government obsession'.
But Mr Patten is not letting up. Next year come tables of school truancy
rates and achievement in the standard assessment tasks. Primary schools will
be in on the act, too - adding a further 21,000 names to the lists. By then,
lists of schools in newspapers will be a way of life.
