FT  25 NOV 92 / Opel offers reward for arrest of firebombers
OPEL, the German subsidiary of General Motors, yesterday offered a DM100,000
(Pounds 41,000) reward for information leading to the arrest of arsonists
responsible for an attack in which two Turkish girls and their grandmother
died.
The company, which also offered DM50,000 to the family of the victims, said
its action was intended as 'a small symbol of solidarity with all foreign
citizens living in Germany, and with the company's Turkish employees'.
The offer by Opel follows a wave of national revulsion at the weekend
firebombing at Molln, near Lubeck. Underlining the contribution of some 1.8m
Turkish migrant workers and their families to the German economy, the
company said that 'without their help, the achievements of the German
automobile industry over the last several decades would not have been
possible'.
The move coincided with a call from President Richard von Weizsacker for the
destruction of 'rightwing radical cells'.
During a state visit to Mexico, he appealed to all Germans in a TV interview
to 'wake up and help (to combat xenophobia) by paying attention to their
neighbours and their own households'.
There were spontaneous demonstrations against racism in several towns, and a
minute's silence in the German parliament to mourn the victims.
There was also continuing sharp criticism of the lack of official action to
clamp down on violence against foreigners, voiced by leaders of both the
Turkish and Jewish communities.
Action against radical rightwing groups is expected before the end of the
week, as the latest killings appear finally to have galvanised the
government.
Until now, the parties in the ruling coalition have concentrated on how to
curb the soaring numbers of would-be immigrants entering Germany under its
liberal political asylum laws.
As two further attacks by skinheads on Turkish workers were reported, the
Turkish government and Turkish community leaders demanded increased
protection. Some 40 Turks occupied the party offices of Mr Helmut Kohl's
ruling Christian Democratic Union in Hanover, accusing the party of
'co-responsibility for a fascism-related murder'. Turkish businessmen warned
they would withhold tax payments unless Germany improved protection of
foreign residents.
Mr Ignatz Bubis, leader of Germany's 40,000-strong Jewish community, called
for demonstrations against the government.
A German Jewish writer, Mr Ralph Giordano, claimed that Jews were starting
to arm themselves in self-defence.
Strangers in unified land, Page 2
GM to cut output, Page 26
