FT  19 FEB 92 / UN aims to redraw border of Iraq and Kuwait
KUWAIT looks certain to be given several Iraqi oil wells and part of a naval
base as a result of a United Nations border proposal.
Western diplomats in Kuwait said Baghdad would be infuriated by the
demarcation but there was little Iraq could do beyond complaining. Mutual
agreement on the new border 'is just something else which will have to wait
until the regime changes in Iraq', one diplomat said.
The United Nations Commission, established as part of the Gulf war ceasefire
agreement, is not expected to present its findings until April. However,
officials say the team has already decided on 'parameters' for the border.
These will lie several hundreds - in some cases thousands - of metres north
of what has previously been accepted as the border.
The demarcation will place in Kuwaiti territory between five and seven oil
wells in the Iraqi portion of the Rumalia oilfield. The UN experts have also
decided that the point at which the border meets the coast is virtually
certain to run through Iraq's main naval base at Umm Qasr.
The new border will anger Baghdad for a number of reasons. Iraq revived its
disputed claim to the entirety of Kuwait as justification for its August
1990 invasion. Iraq also claimed some southern portions of the Rumalia
oilfield, which dips into Kuwait, and had expressed irritation about its
limited access to the sea.
Umm Qasr has virtually been Iraq's sole serviceable port since the Shatt al
Arab waterway was closed in September 1980 by the outbreak of the Iran-Iraq
war. Iraq's president Saddam Hussein launched the war in part to gain full
sovereignty over the Shatt al Arab.
The commission's findings have been based on exhaustive research into maps
and documents held largely in British Foreign Office archives. These date
back as far as the early 1900s, when the modern states of Iraq and Kuwait
were shaped out of the crumbling Ottoman empire.
Once the decision is announced, the 120-mile (200km) common border will be
marked with border posts and will also receive formal UN sanction.
Common borders are finally a matter of bilateral consent between
neighbouring countries, but US officials say they will insist the new
boundary be respected as Iraq's southern border.
The present border is monitored by the UN Iraq-Kuwait Observer Mission,
which patrols a demilitarised zone running 10km north of the accepted border
and 5km south. Iraqi trespass over this border is considered an infringement
of the Gulf ceasefire terms.
The UN Security Council yesterday warned Iraq to start co-operating fully
with UN weapons inspectors or face grave, though unspecified, consequences,
AP reports.
The council decided in closed meetings to send Mr Rolf Ekeus, who heads the
special commission monitoring elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction, to Baghdad at once to demand compliance with UN resolutions.
Diplomats say that economic sanctions could be tightened if Iraq does not
fall in line.
Iraq repeatedly has tried to conceal the extent of its nuclear weapons
programmes and other arms projects. It also has refused to co-operate in the
long-term monitoring and destruction of arms.
Shifting sands, Page 4
