FT  13 MAY 92 / Leading Article: France's road to Euro-union
MR MICHEL VAUZELLE, the French justice minister, was right to tell the
National Assembly recently that, in ratifying the Maastricht treaty, France
will not irrevocably be giving up sovereignty. It will simply be
transferring 'competence' to supranational EC institutions such as a
European central bank. Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the prime minister, meanwhile
has reminded his compatriots that the Maastricht path represents a way in
which France, far from losing independence, can regain a degree of control
over monetary affairs at present largely ceded to the Bundesbank.
Despite these weighty statements of reassurance, the French classe politique
is churning an extremely ragged furrow as it ploughs through the task of
approving the European union treaty. A 'yes' vote in the National Assembly
to the constitutional change has never seriously been in doubt. But the
Gaullists in the right-wing opposition have shown far more hostility than
expected to plans for a common visa policy and national voting rights for
non-French citizens, as well as to the single EC currency. Even in France's
loamy soil there exists a vein of Euro-scepticism which many had presumed
existed only in the clay of Britain. Though the French debate on Europe is
arguably overdue, it is healthy that these doubts should be fully aired
before the treaty passes to the statute books. The intensity of the debate
has underlined that the French parliament must be consulted far more closely
in later stages of the Maastricht process.
Soul-searching
Even after yesterday's final exchanges in the National Assembly, the French
ratification carousel will continue to turn. The constitutional amendment
has to pass before the Senate, and then to a congress of both houses of
parliament at Versailles. A national referendum on the treaty may still be
necessary later this summer.
Maastricht soul-searching is not confined to France. The different points
along the route towards European integration, particularly the 'convergence'
road towards economic and monetary union, will bring considerable stress for
national democracies and institutions. Although the journey is worth
undertaking, the strains must not be underestimated.
Each country presents its doubts in a slightly different way. A majority of
Danish voters is presently telling opinion pollsters that they will vote
against the treaty in the country's referendum on Maastricht on June 2.
Germany frets over whether the mooted new currency should be called the Ecu
or the Euro-Mark.
Queen's speech
Britain's particular Angst centres on whether the Queen, in a speech in
Strasbourg, was allowed excessive latitude to make light of differences in
national parliamentary traditions. The semantic formulae eventually agreed
for the monarch's address yesterday, in which she hailed the 'diverse
personalities' of the 'European family', however represented a successful
compromise; phrases suggestive of Europe des patries these days are likely
to win approval in Bonn, not just Westminister.
Much national wrangling over Maastricht may prove to be heavily exaggerated.
While the Germans are worrying that they will lose national monetary
control, right-wing commentators in Paris are complaining that Maastricht
will bring France under the heel of the D-Mark. This is an amusing but
absurd contradiction. Ironically, the French ratification discussions are
coming to a head when Germany's difficulties give its partners more leeway
to cut interest rates than they earlier had. The more perceptive members of
the French Gaullist party realise that, even if the treaty is ratified by
all, the move to Emu cannot yet be considered irreversible. National
parliaments will inevitably have the final say before exchange rates are
irrevocably fixed.
Through its success in strengthening the franc by bringing inflation below
the German rate, France has invested more political and economic capital in
the project of European union than any other EC member. The pain suffered
while securing that achievement explains why the French debate on Maastricht
has been so grudging; it also explains, however, why France, of all EC
members, can least afford to allow the Maastricht process to fail.
