FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of Vehicle Manufacturing Technology (4): A technology
which is still developing - Castings
ALTHOUGH cast iron is one of the oldest engineering materials, it still
plays a big role in vehicle engine manufacture. The majority of vehicles on
the road today use cast iron cylinder blocks, and many of them use the
material also for crankshafts. The only alternative material of
significance, and the most widely used for cylinder heads as well as for
transmission (gearbox and final drive) casings, is cast aluminium alloy.
It follows that casting technology remains a key factor in the production of
vehicle drivelines; it may also gain greater importance in other areas.
The two main driving forces in the development of casting technology today
are the desire to automate production as far as practicable, and to achieve
further improvements in the accuracy and consistency of the castings
produced. The greatest attention has been devoted not to the actual
materials used for casting, these having already been optimised over many
decades (centuries, in the case of cast iron) but to the techniques of the
process and the materials used for the core-making.
The basic technique of casting is to form a mould by assembling several
'cores' of some suitable material, and then to pour in the molten metal.
When the metal has cooled, the cores are removed to leave the rough casting
ready for machining and assembly.
The traditional core material is compacted sand, which has the twin virtues
of resistance to the high temperatures involved, and of (relatively) easy
removal afterwards. Its principal disadvantage is, of course, the inability
to form cores of complex shape, or of great dimensional accuracy.
Modern casting methods for complex components are increasingly based on the
'lost material' process, which finds its origins in the 'lost wax' process
long used by dentists to form dentures, and later adopted by the aircraft
gas turbine industry as the most accurate way of forming turbine blades. In
this process the core material, whether conventional sand or some more
advanced composite of sand and stabiliser, is inserted around an accurate
blank reproduction of the component itself. The blank is made from a
material which melts or vaporises at molten metal temperatures (polystyrene
foam is most widely used) and is expelled from the mould having performed
its task of ensuring dimensional accuracy.
Another aspect of casting now closely studied is the means of filling the
mould. Simple pouring has been complemented in some cases by vacuum
assistance, used for instance by Toyota in the manufacture of large cylinder
blocks, or by positive pressure, widely employed by the French car
manufacturers for the production of aluminium alloy cylinder blocks and
heads. Pressure die-casting is an expensive process, calling for massive
investment in production machinery, but it produces extremely accurate and
'clean' components which need a minimum of fettling and subsequent
machining. Even where such techniques are not used, it has become
commonplace to study metal flow into a mould by computer simulation, using a
combination of hydrodynamic and thermal transfer calculations, to achieve
the quickest filling and the most satisfactory grain flow in the final
component.
Accuracy of production has become an important factor in all modern casting.
The engine designer is under pressure to save weight, and is greatly helped
by being able to depend on thin walled castings of sufficient consistency.
The smaller the production variation from the intended wall thicknes, the
thinner the walls can be made, and the lighter the block becomes (with a
useful complementary saving in material and process energy costs). The order
of magnitude improvement achieved, mainly in the USA, in the accuracy of
iron casting during the 1950s enabled the material to remain competitive
when for a time it seemed its position would be almost completely usurped by
aluminium alloy.
Modern production techniques marry advanced core technology with accurate
core placing, often now carried out by robot, and the 'back to back'
production of several components at a time, as practiced by PSA's main
cylinder block foundry in France. Techniques and materials are selected on
the basis of close financial scrutiny; nobody uses an expensive method where
 cheaper one will suffice, and reinforced sand cores still give good results
especially where component design has been carefully considered to ease
casting problems. The fundamentally simple design of modern cylinder blocks,
helped by the removal of the camshaft to the cylinder head, has been a
blessing for the foundrymaster.
Aluminium alloy castings may also soon find a place in body engineering,
which has hitherto been the reserve of welded sheet steel pressings.
Research carried out by Alcoa has resulted in castings which are relatively
ductile, and avoid the brittleness which until now has been a characteristic
(due to porosity and gas inclusion) of all cast materials. Alcoa now
suggests that car body 'skeletons' could be built up from precision extruded
beams slotted into cast 'junction boxes", with substantial weight savings.
The company has already established a German factory to manufacture
sub-assemblies on this basis, its first customer being Audi. If the venture
succeeds and the technique becomes widespread, casting could become an even
more significant technology for the motor industry of the future.
