FT  07 JAN 92 / German asylum accord falters
GERMANY'S four leading parties have called new talks tomorrow to deal with
the soaring numbers of asylum-seekers in the country, amid signs that their
previous compromise is falling apart.
The issue threatens once again to explode politically, with an arson attack
on a refugee hostel in the Black Forest on Sunday night leaving a Lebanese
immigrant critically ill.
At the same time, publication of statistics for 1991 showed the number of
asylum-seekers in Germany reached 256,112, almost 33 per cent higher than a
year earlier. The figures were boosted by a sharp increase in the number of
refugees fleeing the civil war in Yugoslavia, and those from eastern Europe.
The latest cross-party talks between the ruling coalition and the opposition
Social Democrats (SPD) come amid reports that their previous agreement, to
protect refugees by gathering them in large camps and to accelerate
procedures for dealing with asylum applications, cannot be put into effect
for months, if at all.
The Christian Democrats (CDU), senior partners in the ruling coalition,
maintain the vast majority of asylum-seekers are, in reality, economic
migrants seeking work. They want an amendment to the German constitution to
allow immigration officials to stop such applicants at the border and send
them home.
The SPD and the Free Democrats in the ruling coalition reject changes in the
constitution as too drastic and insist the problem can be dealt with by
improving procedures to process asylum-seekers.
Only one federal state - Baden-Wurttemberg - has adequate capacity to house
refugees in the proposed 'collection camps,' according to a spokesman for
the Interior Ministry.
There are still not enough legally trained personnel to process the flood of
asylum applications within six weeks, as the parties had agreed. And legal
amendments are still required to the asylum law to speed up application
procedures from the current average of about 12 months to only six weeks.
The asylum issue remains acutely sensitive at a time of rising discontent
over higher taxes to pay for German unification, and the inflow of
immigrants of both German and non-German origin.
The latest attack was on a hostel housing some 40 refugees at Waldkirch in
Breisgau, near Freiburg in the country's prosperous south-west.
Both entrances to the hostel were on fire when the police and fire-brigade
arrived at 1am, and the inmates had retreated to the third floor. Twenty
were taken to hospital suffering from smoke inhalation, and one man was
reported yesterday still to be in a critical condition.
Skinhead gangs have carried out a string of attacks on immigrant hostels
over the past six months, although they have been condemned by all political
parties except the extreme right.
Yesterday saw a spontaneous demonstration by about 400 people in Waldkirch,
protesting against 'hostility to foreigners.'
Publication of the latest asylum statistics seems certain to heighten
debate, however. They show that almost 77 per cent of applications were
rejected as unfounded, another 16 per cent were withdrawn, and only 6.9 per
cent were deemed to be genuine cases for political asylum under Germany's
liberal laws.
Of the total, 74,854 came from Yugoslavia, 40,504 from Romania, 23,877 from
Turkey and 12,056 from Bulgaria.
