FT  16 JUL 92 / Parliament and Politics: Maxwell committee probe to broaden
THREE members of the House of Lords are expected to be asked to give
evidence to the Commons' cross-party social security committee as it reopens
and broadens its inquiry into the disappearance of Maxwell company pension
funds, Alison Smith and Ralph Atkins write.
Lord Walker, who was briefly a director of Maxwell Communication
Corporation, and Lord Donoughue and Lord Williams of Elvel, who were
directors of Maxwell investment companies, are likely to be invited to
attend the committee as the renewed investigation is stepped up in the
autumn.
The committee is also planning to hold a special session in September -
during the parliamentary recess - to take evidence from the liquidators and
administrators of the Maxwell companies.
Meeting yesterday for the first time since the general election, the
committee also re-elected Mr Frank Field, Labour MP for Birkenhead, as
chairman.
The renewal of its investigation into the plight of the Maxwell pensioners
is likely to focus on three areas: the liquidators and administrators; the
key companies, including London and Bishopsgate International Investment
Management, and Bishopsgate Investment Management; and the role of the
banks, including Goldman Sachs and Bank of America.
Separately, the Treasury and Civil service select committee decided to
consider resuming investigations into the collapse of Bank of Credit and
Commerce International.
A final decision will depend on Treasury and Bank of England responses to
the committee's earlier report on BCCI and on the official inquiry under
Lord Justice Bingham.
Mr John Watts, the Tory MP for Slough who two years ago declined to endorse
UK membership of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism, has been elected
chairman of the Treasury committee.
MPs on the Treasury committee are to invite Mr Anthony Nelson, economic
secretary, to give evidence in the autumn on his new responsibilities for
City regulation. A wider investigation into City regulation may follow.
Mr William Waldegrave, public services minister, is also expected to be
called to discuss the Citizen's Charter.
