FT  14 MAY 92 / Survey of World Electricity (6): Small steps for mankind -
Clive Cookson reviews progress towards the ideal power source
OF ALL technologies currently under development for generating electricity,
nuclear fusion offers mankind the best prospect of clean and limitless
energy in the 21st century.
Or so supporters of fusion research say. Critics point out that the
commercial reality of nuclear fusion power always seems to lie about 40
years in the future.
In the 1950s when the Soviet, US and UK governments set up laboratories to
develop peaceful uses of fusion - the process that fires the sun and the
hydrogen bomb - many physicists believed that fusion power stations would be
delivering cheap electricity in the 1990s.
As it turned out, scientists achieved controlled fusion for the first time
last November, in a doughnut-shaped experimental reactor, the Joint European
Torus (JET) at Culham near Oxford. The ring of superheated gas reached a
temperature of 200m deg C - 10 times higher than the middle of the sun - and
generated almost 2MW of power in a two second pulse.
The JET experiment produced triumphant newspaper headlines, along the lines
of 'Science Tames the Power of the Sun'. And it was indeed a technical
triumph. But the output was only 10 per cent of the power put into the
reaction.
Several more decades of development, costing tens of billions of dollars,
will be required truly to replicate the power of the sun and make fusion
into a reliable energy source.
Even enthusiasts do not envisage a full-scale demonstration fusion plant
operating before 2030, with widespread commercial application in the 2040s.
The scientific case for fusion power seems irresistible. The process forces
together the nuclei of light atoms - in practice two isotopes of hydrogen:
deuterium and tritium. This releases energy in the form of radiation and
heat that could be used to raise steam and run a turbine-generator, as in a
conventional power station.
Fusion is the opposite of fission, the basis of nuclear power today, which
releases energy by splitting heavy nium. The theoretical advantages of
fusion are that it uses virtually inexhaustible raw materials (deuterium
extracted from sea-water and tritium made inside the fusion reactor from the
light metal lithium), it produces far less radioactive waste than fission
and it is inherently safe because the reaction stops as soon as anything
goes wrong.
The nuclear energy locked inside just 10 grams of deuterium and 15 grams of
tritium would be enough to generate a lifetime's electricity for the average
inhabitant of an industrialised country today. But formidable technical
obstacles must be overcome before that energy can be extracted under
controlled conditions.
The reaction cannot start until the deuterium-tritium fuel is heated to
become an electrically charged gas, known as a plasma. The reaction stops as
soon as the plasma touches the sides of the reactor because it then becomes
too cool to sustain fusion. JET and similar research reactors in the US,
Russia and Japan aim to confine the plasma inside a 'magnetic bottle'.
Powerful electromagnets loop around the torus, keeping the plasma away from
the walls for as long as possible.
Other approaches have been tried on a smaller scale, for example focusing
laser beams on to the fuel, but most fusion scientists believe in the torus
reactor - invented in the Soviet Union about 50 years ago.
(The highly publicised 'cold fusion' technique, announced in 1989 by
Professors Martin Fleischmann and Stanley Pons, allegedly offered the
benefits of controlled fusion on a test-tube scale at a tiny fraction of the
cost of hot fusion. The Fleischmann-Pons work has been largely but not
entirely discredited. Experiments with cold fusion are still going on in
several laboratories, and EPRI, the collaborative research arm of the US
electric utilities, continues to support some research on it.)
Fusion research is one of the most expensive forms of 'big science'. JET has
cost 14 European countries about Pounds 1bn to build and run over the last
decade. And the next stage of development will cost much more than that. So
the four 'fusion powers' - Europe, US, Japan and Russia - are beginning to
design it jointly as a global project: the International Thermonuclear
Experimental Reactor.
Planning ITER will take at least five years and cost an estimated Dollars
1bn. There will be three design centres (San Diego, US; Garching, Germany;
and Naka, Japan). Then, if the participants can agree on the design and a
site for ITER and find Dollars 5bn to build the reactor, construction could
start in 1997-98.
On present plans, JET is due to have a final series of experiments in 1996,
which should generate about 10MW of power. That will leave a gap of at least
eight years for European fusion research until ITER starts to operate - in
2004 at the earliest. However Japan and the US are planning to build interim
reactors to gain more information about plasma physics in the meantime.
Even if the world's fusion scientists manage to build ITER on schedule and
operate it successfully, at least one more stage - a demonstration power
plant - will be needed before utilities can contemplate constructing fusion
reactors.
By then more than Dollars 100bn will have been spent developing fusion
energy over 80 years. Compared with the Dollars 1,000bn a year which the
world spends on energy today, that is a modest investment in our long term
future.
