FT  24 JAN 92 / Survey of FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance - Personal
Equity Plans (24): There may be some nasty shocks ahead - Investment Trusts
/ They will become apparent when the spate of new issues saturates demand.
So private investors should ask four crucial questions
THE PERSONAL equity plan has been the driving force behind the
revitalisation of the investment trust market over the past few years.
Investors' freedom to place the full Pounds 6,000 Pep allowance into a
stock-market new issue has given investment trusts an important marketing
advantage over their unit trust rivals. Unit trusts are not quoted
companies, and do not qualify as 'new issues' - they are thus limited to the
normal Pounds 3,000 maximum on Pep investments in collective funds.
A further factor in the success of investment trusts is the chance that
investors have to earn a tax-free, and growing, income. M&amp;G Income, which
raised Pounds 246m on its launch last year, offered a yield of 6.55 per
cent, the equivalent of a gross 10.9 per cent for higher-rate taxpayers.
Normally, a problem with investment trust launches is that investors need
some persuading to buy shares which might quickly drop to a discount to net
assets. The beauty of a Pep, from the manager's point of view, is that the
one-off chance to get a Pounds 6,000 diversified tax-free investment
balances the discount fear. And trust managers have added a further layer of
protection by launching, in the main, split-capital trusts, which rarely
trade at a discount - and, indeed, often achieve a premium.
In an election year, the clinching argument, as far as those selling
investment trust Peps are concerned, has been: 'buy now while stocks last'.
The Labour party seems likely to abolish Peps (although existing plans would
remain in place).
Given that investment trusts have traditionally produced good performance
and that, until recently, they have been unjustly neglected by private
investors, there is much to welcome about this Pep-led boom.
But there are also dangers. The first is that, when the spate of new issues
eventually saturates investor demand, as it inevitably will, the sector's
discount to net assets will suddenly widen. The value of investors' shares
will drop, even if the stock market is stable or moving slightly ahead. That
could be a nasty shock for private investors.
The second danger is that new issues inevitably have higher costs, and these
will affect investment performance. Additional charges can be imposed on Pep
investors, which can outweigh the tax advantages. Fidelity's European Values
Trust, for example, offered only a minimal yield, which meant that, as a
Pep, it would be worthwhile only to those few people who were likely to use
up their capital gains tax allowance.
Another potential problem is that trusts launched on a high-yield basis, to
attract income-seeking Pep investors, might find that yield is achieved only
at the expense of capital growth.
County NatWest's investment trust team, in its 1991 annual, report suggested
four key questions for private investors to consider about investment-trust
new issues.
Be selective: 'Just because there's a new trust issue advertised all over
your favourite Sunday paper, or being thrust under your nose by some
independent financial adviser, this doesn't mean that it's necessarily for
you.'
Know what you're buying: This applies particularly to split-capital trusts,
where investors may not be aware that some 'income' shares have negligible
repayment values, and are thus effectively annuities.
Ask which investor is getting what: County NatWest warned that, with some
issues, institutions were given the sole opportunity to buy the safest
shares, with private investors left with the riskier securities.
Look beyond tax advantages: 'Don't let IFAs seduce you into a 'Pepable' new
issue without putting it through an expenses check, a management check and a
comparability check against existing investment trust Pep products.'
This last point should remind those who do not have Pounds 6,000 to invest
that many long-established trusts have Peps attached. SG Warburg's guide for
private investors lists 68 existing investment trust Peps, from Aberforth
Smaller Companies to Witan.
In the last Budget, the government changed the rules which determined where
trusts could invest in order to qualify for Pep status. In future 50 per
cent of assets will have to be in the European Community, rather than simply
in the UK. The new regulations were not issued until very late in 1991,
however, so there may yet be a rash of European plans early this year.
Even the new regulations were too strict for the largest investment trust,
Foreign &amp; Colonial, which sensibly decided not to restrict its investment
policy to meet such artificial regulations.
The government's arcane rules mean that F&amp;C qualifies as an overseas trust
for Pep status, and thus the maximum investment is just Pounds 1,500. But in
its Pep launch, F&amp;C 'topped up' its plan to Pounds 6,000 by adding blue-chip
shares - BT, BTR, BAT, Lloyds Bank and Shell - to cover the remainder.
F&amp;C also added an unusual flat-fee charging structure - to encourage
investors to put in the maximum Pounds 6,000 - and incentives for other Pep
holders to transfer their plans.
The scheme is an ingenious way to get round the absurdities of the current
Pep rules, but it would be far better for everyone if the next budget simply
allowed investors to put Pounds 6,000 into all trusts, including F&amp;C.
