FT  18 MAY 92 / Scots given clues on constitutional future: Ian Lang talks
to James Buxton about possible change in the system of government north of
the border
MR Ian Lang, the Scottish secretary, says that just over a month ago the
Scottish Conservative party was being portrayed by opponents as 'the pariah
of Scottish politics, an alien force with no public support, which was going
to be wiped out at the general election'.
As we know, Mr Lang had the last laugh. His face, desperately gaunt in the
days leading up to polling day, broke into smiles from the moment he kept
his seat. He retains the confidence of a man whose party was the only one in
Scotland to increase both its seats and its share of the vote.
Admittedly, the Tories won only two extra seats - taking them to 11 - and
their vote went up less than 2 points to 26 per cent. Yet in Scotland's
four-party system, where they are in second place, they have the political
advantage, and the question is what they plan to do about Scotland. Mr Lang
provides clues rather than answers.
His first move after the Tories were returned to power was to call for a
'change of tone' in Scottish politics. That, he says, was partly a request
that his party be treated more reasonably, and that it be recognised 'that
we had a valid point of view that deserved to be addressed on its merits'.
For the government's part, 'we decided that the tone from us would change as
well - we would be seeking a note of reconciliation in Scottish politics,
which had become too confrontational'. Policies would remain the same, 'but
the pace and flavour of them will be tempered'.
Although he does not say so, the shifting by Mr John Major of Mr Michael
Forsyth, the combative former Scottish health and education minister, to a
post in Whitehall was crucial. Mr Forsyth was replaced as health minister by
Lord Fraser of Carmyllie and at education by Lord James Douglas-Hamilton,
who swiftly published a remarkably warm letter to the teaching unions.
Mr Lang admits there has been 'very little response so far' to the request
to the opposition for a new tone.
Even so, is it enough to be nice, or must the government tackle the issue of
Scotland's constitutional future? Although the Tories won the election,
almost three quarters of Scots voted for parties offering sweeping
constitutional change.
The unfathomable question in Scotland is how much people really want
constitutional change and how far they are prepared to go in support of it.
Mr Lang says: 'People do not put constitutional change high in their
priorities' - a view supported by opinion polls - and he believes he 'called
the opposition's bluff by fighting the election on the constitution'.
He continues: 'We were able to turn the tide that seemed to be running in
favour of a Scottish parliament and it became clear that the electorate,
when it addressed the issue, did not share the views of the chattering
classes.'
Now, he says, the Labour party is rapidly abandoning the scheme for
unilateral devolution to a Scottish parliament on which it fought the
election, with some MPs accepting that Scotland could not have its own
tax-raising parliament except as part of a federal structure for the whole
UK, and others veering towards independence. 'Labour are now the
multi-option party.'
Does that mean the government will do nothing? No, says Mr Lang. 'We are
willing to look at change of a constitutional nature within the parameter of
a United Kingdom that would be strengthened rather than weakened by such
change. We are now looking at a range of mechanisms.'
But what does change which does not weaken the UK mean? For Mr Lang it means
doing nothing that jeopardises Scotland's 'present arrangements at
Westminster - our access to resources, to have members of the UK parliament
with equal rights to those from other parts of Britain, ministerial
positions in all parts of the government . . . '
Does that rule out a Scottish parliament? 'It almost certainly does, because
the sovereignty of the UK parliament has to be paramount. It rules out any
separate legislative body with entrenched powers that are not retrievable by
Westminster.'
So what are the 'mechanisms' for improving the governance of Scotland that
the government is most likely to favour? Mr Lang points in the direction of
Westminster. 'Westminster is not being used to its full extent. It's a much
more flexible, adaptable place than has been recognised.'
For example, he says, the Scottish grand committee, the committee of all 72
Scottish MPs, which meets occasionally at Westminster and in Edinburgh,
could be exploited more. Currently it only discusses Scottish issues, rather
than deciding anything.
Some people have suggested that it should be given power to approve Scottish
legislation, at least the non-controversial issues. It is not something Mr
Lang is to be drawn on - but it looks as though Westminster committees are
be the 'mechanisms' the government is focusing on. The question is whether
that will be enough.
Letters, Page 17
