FT  28 NOV 92 / Christmas Food and Drink: Best of the year's book vintage -
Edmund Penning-Roswell's selection of books for wine buffs
SOME of the greatest dry white wines in the world come from the village of
Puligny, a few miles to the south-west of Beaune. Yet, as Southwold wine
merchant Simon Loftus Puligny-Montrachet (Ebury Press, Pounds 19.99, 304
pages) shows in penetrating detail, its prosperity has not produced the
joie-de-vivre that we outsiders might expect.
Instead, it is rather sad, with a declining population, vineyards 40 per
cent owned by growers and companies elsewhere, fewer and fewer small
independent viticulturists, no school, no cafe - and a bitter rivalry with
Chassagne next door.
But this does not make the inhabitants, the petits vignerons and the owners
of the big domaines such as Leflaive, Chartron and Sauzet any the less
interesting or agreeable; and, over a series of prolonged investigatory
visits, Loftus has produced a fascinating picture, sharply delineated and
with a fine turn of phrase.
The book's core is of course the vintage (1988), of which he gives a vivid,
engaging account based on Olivier Leflaive's, with whom he has close
personal connections.
Even among keen wine amateurs there is often a surprising lack of historical
and viticultural interest in the grape varietals from which their favoured
wines are made, but Harry Eyres is editing - and Viking is publishing - a
useful, well-organised series of Guides to Grape Varieties (each Pounds
13.99) of which there are four new volumes: Chardonnay by Tim Atkin (366pp);
Pinot Noir by Andrew Barr (278pp); Sauvignon Blanc and Semillon by Stephen
Brook (255pp); and Syrah, Grenache and Mourvedre by Weekend FT colleague,
Giles MacDonogh (228pp).
Written to a common pattern, each contains an introductory chapter in which
the historical background and vinification of each grape is fully described,
with a section on the appropriate food to accompany it. It includes a
gazetteer, listing the countries or regions where the variety is grown, with
detailed notes on leading growers, holdings and output, a one-to-five
quality rating and relative price range.
Chardonnay is the world's most fashionable grape grown in 25 countries, yet,
20 years ago, was virtually unknown in the New World. Atkin is by no means
uncritical of the frequent heavy oaking of this grape. He quotes a typical
American grower as saying: 'We can't make Meursault in the United States,
but we can buy new barrels'.
Pinot Noir is obviously dominated by red burgundy, and Barr's gazetteer
includes more than 100 of the most notable growers and merchants, all
examined critically. He also pays close attention to the US north-west,
which provides the best opportunity to rival burgundy.
Giles MacDonogh's three varieties are grapes of the hot south. Syrah
originated in the northern Rhone, the other two in Spain. Less space is
given to production description as, apart from Syrah, the grapes are parts
of varying blends, but the 50 pages allotted to the Australian Shiraz will
be particularly helpful to its followers in the UK.
In Portugal's Wines and Wine-Makers (Ebury Press, Pounds 19.99, 229pp),
Richard Mayson says: 'Among the wine-making countries in western Europe,
Portugal has more untapped potential than any other.' However, as is clear
from his detailed, critical account of the table wine regions, they are only
now emerging slowly from a peasant viticulture, based on a large number of
local varieties and high-yielding hybrids banned by the EC.
In the Vinho Verde region, 80,000 growers are farming 25,100 hectares. Yet
there are growers and merchants with more advanced techniques and they are
identified and described. He also deals with port and madeira, delicious
wine which, he believes, may be facing terminal decline. This is certainly
the most comprehensive, well-written guide to the mostly unfamiliar,
inexpensive wines of the world's seventh largest producer.
Port Wine Quintas of the Douro (Sotheby's, Pounds 25, 232pp) is not just
another book about different ports and their shippers but a detailed account
of almost 100 quintas (farms) that line the mountainsides of the Douro
Valley which Alex Liddell visited. Although an ample index supplies all the
technical data, he mostly writes about the history, the farm buildings and
the way of life - until recently very primitive if not degrading for
inhabitants and workers, paid about one fifth of French estate vignerons. At
a time when single quinta wines are on the increase, this is an attractive
and agreeable read. There are 71 outstanding photographs by Janet Price, who
caught the severe valley between the excessive heat of summer and winter's
bitter cold.
After a century of post-phylloxera and economic devastation, the Midi, which
contains a third of France's vineyard area and produces up to half the
national output, is now beginning to look up. For it has 37 AOC and VDQS
wines and 63 local vins de pays - between them nearly 50 per cent of the
total.
Increasingly, a proportion of these 100 varying wines, all subject to
official regulation, will be found in shops, and Liz Berry's The Wines of
Languedoc-Roussillon (Ebury Press, Pounds 19.99, 179pp) is a timely work of
reference. Numerous grape varieties are described, and full technical
details given of the AOC/VDQS wines, the grapes employed and the average
output of each of the vins de pays. It also makes useful recommendations for
the growing number of visitors to the world's largest vineyard area.
The democratic way of life and EC membership has spurred Spain to develop
its huge wine resources: in vineyard size the largest in the world, but in
output a poor fourth. Few Spanish wine drinkers here have any knowledge of
the wines other than Rioja and Penedes but Hubert Duijker's Wine Atlas of
Spain (Mithell Beazley, Pounds 25, 240pp) covers the 39 districts delimited
on the Fench model. Excellent detailed maps are provided, backed by
comprehensive information on leading bodegas, as well as travel information
about sights and recommended hotels and restaurants. The illustrations, at
least one to a page, form encouraging appetisers.
As I published three issues and contributed to eight of the original 12 of
Cyril Ray's Compleat Imbiber, I should perhaps declare an interest in
reviewing The Compleat Imbiber, No 16 (Mitchell Beazley, Pounds 16.99,
192pp). Almost completed before his death last year, to the end, Ray
retained his skill as a selector of widely differing items relating to food
and drink. Wit has always been prominent in the series, and there are
several examples of his witty verse.
Together, the contributions marry to conclude a multi-volume gastronomic
anthology of which the earlier volumes are in steady demand.
