FT  30 JAN 92 / Arts: Good Rockin' Tonite] - Strand Theatre
Cliff was there in the audience, and Lonnie, and Marty and genial Joe Brown.
And there they were on stage, too, or rather the young musicians given the
thankless task of impersonating the old rockers of the 1950s, who have now
become old rockers in their fifties. Of course by the end everyone was on
stage for 'Good rockin' tonite', including Jack Good who was credited with
devising and writing a show which is all about, well, Jack Good.
Good was the Balliol man who in 1956 was given the job of producing the
BBC's first television programme aimed at that new social group, teenagers.
Ignoring pleas for vignettes on mountaineering and fashion he rounded up the
skiffle groups and first rockers, who were surfacing in Soho, and gave the
world Six Five Special. It was such a success that Good was sacked. He moved
to ITV and repeated the trick with Oh Boy. After that there were 30 years of
relative obscurity before this, his last public engagement. In the summer he
enters a monastic order in Texas.
Anyone expecting a coherent plot, witty dialogue, and perceptive insights is
in dreamland. What you get is a re-creation of the shows, in particular Oh
Boy, from a likeable cast, better at evoking the music than the charisma.
Through it all Philip Bird, as the young Jack Good, plays the overbearing
egoist, desperately hamming Shakespeare at times of crisis.
The only moments of hard core reality in this escapist evening were when the
old rockers in the audience happily booed when the character playing that
managerial Svengali, Larry Parnes, came on stage and when Michael Dimitri,
as Gene Vincent, burst the zip on his leather trousers. The show was also
slow on the litmus test of getting them dancing in the aisles: it needed
Bird at the finale to grab a girl from the stalls to get the joint bopping.
Tim Whitnall was convincing as Eddie Cochran and endearing as Cliff, and
Gavin Stanley made Billy Fury (who died nine years ago to the night) more
interesting than he managed to be in life. But as an insider's view of a
musical revolution it was a non-starter. As a party it was fine, and anyone
mindful of 'Move it', 'Run around Sue', 'Be-Bop-a-Lula' and scores more of
those artless paeons to pure teenage love, will enjoy themselves
tremendously for the knock down price of Pounds 10 a ticket, and for eight
weeks only.
My nostalgia for the era suffered two setbacks: at the end, when
Anna-Juliana Clare, one of the under-used women in the cast, belted out a
song of the '60s, 'Respect', which exposed the shallowness of '50s rock; and
at the beginning, when the tucked and tanned celebrity audience eased into
their seats, I realised that the years had shrunk to nothing the generation
gap between 'Good Old Days' celebrations of 'Olde Tyme Music Hall' and 'Rock
and Roll' revival nights. Both satisfy the natural reverence of oldies for
the innocent music of their youth.
