FT  01 AUG 92 / Travel: A dark and mysterious Irish ritual
AS DUSK falls at this time of year, a group of men dressed in camouflaged
jackets and hats regularly gathers on Inchy Bridge, a peaceful spot on the
Argideen river about 20 miles south-west of Cork in southern Ireland.
There is an almost clandestine ritual about these meetings. Names like
Connemara Black, Bloody Butcher, Silver Teal, Keyhole, Strawberry Ivy and
Big Flat crop up like codewords in the conversation.
Then, as it gets dark, heads are counted. There is discussion as to whether
lots should be drawn. Most of the dozen that have gathered are locals, but
one is a Welshman who has arrived with his teenage son. 'Ye look as though
you've done this bifore,' says a voice in a West Cork brogue. The Welshman
nods agreement. There are grunts of approval. A few sidelong glances are
cast at my denim jeans and shiny, new Wellington boots.
'Yer man here is new. It's his forst time. Maybe he should go down by the
Metal,' says another. They decide to draw lots. There is a distant rumble of
thunder. Below the bridge, above the steady gurgle of the river, a splash is
preceded by the silver flash of a fish as it leaps from the water.
These people are fly-fishermen. From now until October, the sea trout which
is their prize return from their winter ocean habitats to spawn in the
upstream pools where they themselves began life just a year or two before.
The sea trout is renowned as one of the shiest fish to take a bait, and then
usually only at night.
Connemara Black, Silver Teal and Bloody Butcher are the artificial flies
that are painstakingly assembled by the enthusiast to resemble the real
flies the discerning trout will, on occasion, rise to. I was there, an
impressive two hours' instruction in the art of fly casting behind me, to
try my luck with the veterans.
The Argideen river is now one of the best sea trout rivers in Ireland,
especially since the collapse of sea-trout angling on west coast rivers,
which has been blamed on sea-lice infestations spreading from salmon farms.
In May a fishing lodge opened for business on the river, the first and only
one of its kind, as permits are jealously controlled by the local anglers'
association.
It is owned and run by Tim Severin, the travel writer, explorer and author,
who has lived in the area for 20 years. The lodge consists of four cottages
built from the converted granary of an old mill. They offer self-catering
accommodation for up to six people in each, though only one rod permit is
available per lodge. The lodges are fully-equipped and tastefully decorated
with a view to attracting not just fly fishermen but their families as well.
Nearby attractions include horse riding, hill walking and boating.
For the anglers, though, the Inchy Bridge ritual is the focus and start of
each night's sport. It is at Inchy Bridge that the fishing spots along the
two-and-a-half mile fishery are assigned for the night. Big Flat, Keyhole
and Metal are the names given to various deep pools which the sea-trout
frequent on their journey upstream. Then, armed with a whippy piece of
carbon-fibre, 20 yards of thick, rubbery line at the end of which is tied
the fly, and a map for newcomers, the anglers step gingerly along the river
bank.
The sea-trout taunt the fishermen. Swirls and splashes in the water confirm
their presence. Flies are cast and drawn back across the pools and current
and then patiently recast time and again.
A few yards down the river bank there is a murmur of excitement. 'Have you
caught one?' whispers an excited voice. 'To be sure I have. It's 25 ft long
and full o' leaves,' came the reply from an angler grappling with a tree
behind him in the darkness.
As the night wears on, the leaps of the trout disappear as they tire of the
game. Only the swish of the rods can be heard. As night stretches into the
early hours, only the optimists remain by the riverbank and even they head
for their beds a few hours before dawn. As I grope for the path back to the
lodge, there is a swirl of water behind and a loud splash. Then another. I
seriously start to believe that sea-trout have a sense of humour.
Not all of them have the last laugh, though. An average of 400 per year have
been caught in the Argideen over the past 10 years. In 1933, one man fishing
at Inchy Bridge caught 53 sea-trout weighing 135 lbs, says a leaflet of the
Argideen Anglers Association. A donkey and cart was used to carry them away.
Such stories undoubtedly help to enrich a sport that is arcane to most but
an obsession to a few. Yet there is an infectious and intriguing appeal
about attempting to lure one of these cunning creatures onto the hook, even
if you return it to the water again.
Prices range from IPounds 145 per week per lodge at either end of the
May-October season to IPounds 310 per week in July and August, and are
remarkably good value.
Argideen Fishing Lodges, Inchy Bridge, Timoleague, Co Cork, Ireland. Contact
Tim Severin, tel: (353)-23-46127 or fax (353)-23-46233.
