FT  24 DEC 92 / Books: Altar-wise in hindsight
THE STRIPPING OF THE ALTARS
by Eamon Duffy Yale
University Press Pounds 29.95, 740pg
WHAT IF Queen Mary I - 'Bloody Mary' - had lived to be a septuagenarian like
her sister, Elizabeth, instead of dying at 42? Would there have been no King
James' Bible, no empty niches in our churches . . . and no women priests?
For some Anglicans, this is a more than usually poignant moment to be
asking: 'What if . . .' The conventional view, of course, is that the
English Reformation was unstoppable and Mary's bishops were hopeless
obscurantists. But not according to Eamon Duffy in The Stripping of the
Altars: Traditional Religion in England 1400-1580.
We are still, Duffy argues, prisoners of a Protestant triumphalist viewpoint
which teaches that the forces behind religious reform had been gathering so
long that, by Mary's accession in 1553, they blew with hurricane force. On
the eve of the cleansing Reformation, the Catholic Church resembled a
pedlar's cart piled with the detritus of centuries: mass books, candles,
vestments, indulgences, holy images and charms. From Wycliffe to More,
historians are spoilt for choice looking for denunciations of a tawdry
religion distasteful to many of the elite and also to an increasingly
literate lower laity.
Duffy hardly bothers to target the scholars ranged on the other side save
for Sir Keith Thomas whose Religion and the Decline of Magic, published 20
years ago, is one of the most influential books on English history this
century. Its discussion of Catholic belief concentrated on 'popular
religion,' the prodigious variety of 'parasitic' pagan and magical
practices. For Thomas, orthodox religion in 1500 had only 'a weak hold upon
the English.' In his view, resentful churchgoers were interested in the
Eucharist principally as something they smuggled home to improve the milk
yield.
The Stripping of the Altars portrays a devout majority sharing in the body
of Christ. Far from late-medieval religion being increasingly 'privatised,'
corporate piety was more evident than ever: in congregations on Good Fridays
creeping painfully to the Cross, in guild plays celebrating the novel
devotion to the Feast of Corpus Christi. Duffy is not the first historian to
reject the term 'popular religion,' but none has argued with greater finesse
against the view that the Church was split into one religion for the rich
and cultivated, another for the common man and woman.
Duffy shows what it meant to be pious; to put a faggot on the burning pyre
beneath a heretic in order to win an indulgence, or to pray 'The Fifteen Oes
of St Bridget.' Thomas mentions these widely used prayers on the Wounds of
Christ (each beginning 'Oh . . .') only in passing as an example of how
popular Catholicism had confused prayers with magic. For Duffy, on the other
hand, these prayers reveal a theological sophistication and wealth of vivid
imagery which makes nonsense of the idea of a 'spiritual elite.'
Charting the radicals' assault on the fabric of traditional religion means
Duffy must explain why his devout parishioners acquiesced in whitewashing
walls and unpicking vestments. Out of pragmatism and fear, he suggests,
convincingly. In any age, martyrdom is a minority taste and, besides, the
imposed changes had to be paid for.
Yet, conformity must not be confused with Protestantism, as is shown by the
memorable experience of Morebath on Exmoor. Under Edward, the priest and his
devout congregation hid the vestments and shifted the candles. Then, to
their dismay, altars, candlesticks and the rest had to go. Mary's reign
meant the great cope could be redeemed from the pawnbroker, and the youth of
the parish subscribed to repaint the ceiling. Nor were the Morebathers
peculiarly pious: 'In the majority of English villages . . . men breathed
easier for the accession of a Catholic queen.'
The closing pages present a gripping account of Elizabeth's commissioners
rooting out the externals of Catholic religion with horrid meticulousness.
They were right; a sacring-bell hung round a sheep's neck did not seem the
same. By the '70s and '80s, reformed religion had triumphed. The Stripping
of the Altars is a magnificent scholarly achievement, a compelling read, and
not a page too long to defend a thesis which will provoke passionate debate.
