FT  07 OCT 92 / Dutch disaster a grim reminder of risks to insurers:
Difficult negotiations are in prospect, over the setting of new rates in a
competitive market
THE DEVASTATION of apartment blocks on Amsterdam's Bijlmermeer estate is a
grim reminder to aviation insurers of the potential risks to which they are
exposed.
It forms a grisly backdrop to the round of negotiations under way between
insurers and brokers acting on behalf of the world's airlines, 75 per cent
of which renew their insurance programmes in October or November.
Following last week's loss of a Pakistan International Airlines A-300 in
Nepal, Sunday's crash of the El Al cargo aircraft is the latest in a series
of losses this year that could make 1992 one of the worst ever for aviation
insurers.
The hull of the El Al aircraft which pitched into the Bijlmermeer estate was
insured for Dollars 62m (Pounds 34.80m). But the cost of clearing the
debris, lost cargo and compensating relatives of victims may increase the
overall claim to more than Dollars 100m.
Mr John Westcott, underwriter with Wren syndicate 800 at Lloyd's and
chairman of the Lloyd's Aviation Underwriters Association, says that the
final reckoning might even reach Dollars 300m: 'Who knows what the liability
will end up as. We are certainly looking at Dollars 200m.'
For 1992 as a whole, London underwriters and brokers say overall claims from
hull damage, day-to-day minor accidents and liability awards could exceed
Dollars 1bn, the highest since 1985. That would put further pressure on
insurers to increase premium rates, which, after six years of intense
competition, are only about 50 per cent of 1986 levels.
However, world overcapacity continues to depress rates and reduce the scope
for increases. Willis Corroon Aerospace, the world's largest aviation
insurance broker, says that there remains more than twice the capacity as
needed, despite the departure from the market of companies such as Orion,
the subsidiary of the Dutch insurance giant, Internationale Nederlanden.
Underwriters at Lloyd's of London imposed rate increases last year of
between 100 and 200 per cent, but market leaders have been forced to abandon
this year's plans for similar rises. Brokers cite as a reason the threat of
further competition from insurers in Europe and the US.
'Over the last 12 months there has been a gradual weakening of the markets'
ability to restore profitability,' Willis said in a note to clients.
'Competitive forces have prevented underwriters from raising rating
thresholds.'
Insurers renewing policies on the first of October achieved average rate
rises of only around 10 per cent. Some European airlines with good safety
records, whose business is particularly sought after, escaped without any
increases. Two Asian airlines, both of which suffered losses in the previous
12 months, paid increases of between 20 and 40 per cent.
Mr Westcott criticises the attitude of some of his fellow underwriters as
'totally irresponsible,' saying that 'a lot of people are not aware of the
disparity between premiums and claims.' Many companies, especially outside
the London market, had seen aviation insurance as a high-profile
loss-leader. Referring to potential losses from liability claims (paid to
meet court awards to victims or relatives), he says that many underwriters
have 'not recognised the full extent of the losses that are in the
pipeline.'
The death toll from aviation accidents has mounted, especially recently,
with the casualty list including the more-than-250 people killed in Sunday's
disaster, the 167 in the PIA disaster, the 113 in August's Nigerian air
crash and the 116 in the crash of a Thai Airways A-310 in July.
The level of court awards is also rising sharply, especially in the US,
where insurers expect the average wrongful death to produce a claim of
Dollars 1.7m. Mr Westcott says that one US air accident victim was recently
awarded Dollars 25m.
In London, the recent losses will increase the pressure for further rate
increases and could lead to tough negotiations for airlines renewing their
programmes on the first of November.
'The PIA and El Al disasters are further reminders to people that losses are
mounting,' Mr Westcott says. 'You can't keep selling a two dollar bill for a
dollar. Some insurers will be losing an awful lot of money by the time the
day of reckoning comes.'
