FT  21 NOV 92 / Travel: Lost in the mists of freedom in Budapest -
Raffishness is out, commerce is all-apparent
THE most vivid image I have of my first visit to Budapest was of being
awoken suddenly in the small hours. Obscure silent figures, swathed in heavy
winter clothing, removed the floor boards under my bed at 4am and gathered
sheaves of closely typewritten pages before disappearing into the night. My
host, a university professor, apologised profusely the morning after, but
explained that he was running a secret printing press, or samizdat, and that
he was afraid of a police raid.
In spring, three years after the fall of the communists, I returned to meet
old friends and to see how the atmosphere had changed.
Linden seeds floated softly down the wide boulevards by the Danube and the
city looked its best under a bright spring sky. The scent of lilac blossom
filled the air as the taxi climbed into the steep hills of Buda which
overlook Pest and the rich Hungarian plains beyond. At the same book-lined
spacious flat, my friends were waiting. They looked well, and after hugs and
kisses we toasted each other in palinka, a fiery Transylvanian spirit.
No longer a teacher at the university, my friend told me that after the
communists' fall he had started running his samizdat as a legal business.
But free market forces are not quite what he thought. Dependent on
state-owned book shops, which were still to be privatised, his company was
being strangled by cash flow problems.
'We opened stalls on the streets, and sales of our books went well, but then
the police dug out some ancient communist bye-law and the stalls were
closed. So we are now really stuck'. Banks were unaccustomed to bailing out
ailing companies and the future looked bleak. He had also borrowed money to
buy his flat from the council, but would soon be unable to meet the
repayments.
When I gently explained that it was a familiar story for a westerner, he
laughed ruefully. 'It's true, but at least you had a boom before the crash -
many of us are going bankrupt before we've even made a profit.'
In the centre of Budapest, the change of political climate was clearly
apparent. The dark forbidding squares I remembered from the winter of 1987
were now liberally decked in advertising hoardings and anything that moved
seemed to convey some commercial message, from trams proclaiming the joys of
Marlboro cigarettes to the incongruous sight of a gipsy carrying a sandwich
board picturing voluptuous nudes for a nearby nightclub.
Before, drab state-owned department stores and brown painted corner shops
offered little other than bizarre arrangements of goods piled dustily on
each other. Now, elegantly dressed shoppers crowded the wide pedestrian
precincts, where windows displayed western clothing.
Nyugati station, where I had made many anxious dawn departures for Romania
laden with Hungarian books banned under Ceausescu's stifling regime, is a
graceful building of yellow brick and glass designed by Eiffel in the l870s.
It came as a shock to see the elegant filigree of Victorian iron work
adorned with the yellow and red of McDonalds.
As the week progressed, I made contact with friends, and found a similar
story. In the old days we would meet in the Caravanserai, a raffish basement
dive in Budapest's 8th district where many of the city's gipsies live.
Fights were common, but the police seldom went there and the gipsy band was
excellent. When I suggested to a friend that we meet there, he laughed and
said: 'You're really out of touch. It's a topless bar now'.
It seemed that the leisurely pace I remembered under the communists had
evaporated. The night-long sessions of cards and discussion were no more -
luxuries to be discarded under the pressure of coping with the new system.
Most people are now busy struggling to make ends meet, or immersed in the
engaging new sport of making a fast buck.
I had last met one friend, a striking Transylvanian girl, when we rattled
through Romania in a battered Trabant delivering the highly illegal
Hungarian books. If we had been caught, I would have been expelled, but she
faced the possibility of a long prison sentence with admirable equanimity.
Now the Trabant has been replaced by a Golf and she is a partner in a highly
successful chain of small boutiques. 'My dear', she said, puffing on her
king-size cigarette, 'we really have to move with the times'.
Not everything has changed. Hot springs still boil out of the Buda cliffs
overlooking the Danube where for centuries numerous invaders from east and
west washed off the mud of their journeys in piping hot mineral-rich waters.
My favourite, the Rudas baths, was gratifyingly gloomy and untouched since
my last visit. Inside the domed stone building, built by the Turks 400 years
ago, pot-bellied Hungarians wallowed contentedly while shafts of sunlight
filtered through the steam from star-shaped blue glass lights.
The same masseur still made the usual conversation about English football
teams, but when I asked him how life had changed under the new system, he
became stern. He was paid, he said, only about Pounds 80 a month. Inflation
was running at about 30 per cent. How could he keep a family under such
conditions? As if he held me personally responsible, the massage was more
than usually rough, and as I gingerly eased myself from the table I felt
like a spineless capitalist lackey.
On the eve of my departure, I finally asked one friend whether there was
nothing he missed from the communist years. To my surprise, he looked
slightly shame-faced. 'You know', he said, 'it's rather like my military
service. I hated every minute, yet looking back it was one of the biggest
laughs of my life. You knew where you were, where you could kick and how
hard. Now . . . well, I think we're all a bit lost'.
Nick Haslam flew to Budapest c/o British Airways. For reservations tel:
081-897-4000. Apex return fares from London Heathrow start at Pounds 268.
