FT  04 AUG 92 / Technology: Chilling the chips - Andrew Baxter describes why
engineering in sub-zero conditions is becoming a hot topic
In the public imagination, cryogenics conjures images of astronauts frozen
for science fiction's interstellar voyages or of rich Californians put on
ice until the secret of eternal life is discovered.
Cryogenics - engineering at extremely low temperatures - is a serious
business, however, with a range of applications in space and at a more
down-to-earth level.
Inside one of Carrier's air conditioning factories in Syracuse, upstate New
York, is a tightly-guarded prototype manufacturing laboratory where the
final touches are being made to a 'cryocooler', confidently expected to win
a distinctly frosty reception.
Carrier is among a number of companies and universities which have been
developing cryocoolers during recent years. Much of the work has been based
on adaptations of the Stirling cycle engine patented by the Rev James
Stirling in 1816, which can be used as a refrigerator if the direction of
rotation is reversed.
Other advances in cryocooling were made by Philips of the Netherlands after
the Second World War, while Oxford University's Department of Engineering
Science has been developing cryocoolers for the past 14 years and was the
first to produce a long-life maintenance-free cryocooler about 10 years ago.
Oxford's Stirling cycle cryocoolers are used almost exclusively for cooling
infra-red detectors to give clearer images - two of its machines are
installed on satellites - and its machines are now licensed to four
companies in the UK and US, with a fifth deal in prospect.
The phenomenon that has galvanised Carrier into developing cryocoolers is
slightly different. At extremely low temperatures, computer chips work much
faster, because the resistance in the copper interconnects is reduced and
the signals can travel more quickly. For reasons not yet clear,
superconductors do not work at all unless kept very cold.
At 77 Kelvin or - 321 deg F - CMOS (Complimentary Metal Oxide Semiconductor)
chips used in mid-range computers are twice as fast as when used in a
standard air-cooled environment. The 77 Kelvin benchmark is the boiling
point of nitrogen, used because nitrogen has always been an inexpensive,
convenient refrigerant, although the working gas in cryocooling is normally
helium.
The challenge for widespread commercial use of cryocoolers in electronics
has been in getting them to work unattended for a long period and in making
them cheaply, says Brian Hands, a research lecturer at Oxford.
In conditions of some secrecy, Carrier, part of United Technologies (UTC),
has been working with the computer industry and with the multi-disciplinary
United Technologies Research Centre at Hartford, Connecticut, to solve the
problem. In the past few weeks, it has unveiled the first 250W cryocooler
with an estimated 'initial maintenance-free power-on time' of 50,000 hours.
The Carrier cryocooler is designed to fit on the standard electronic
equipment rack at the bottom of a computer unit. The CMOS chip sits on the
cryocooler's six-inch copper plate cool head.
Carrier has spent some tens of millions of dollars on its cryocooler, says
Charles Lockerby, business development director of the Transicold division's
advanced electronics cooling unit.
Much of the effort has gone into improving reliability and reducing noise
and vibration down to a total of 45 decibels, but Carrier has also had to
work hard, says Lockerby, convincing computer manufacturers 'that it was
going to be OK putting something mechanical inside the temple of the
computer'.
Carrier's hope is that mid-range computer manufacturers will buy the
cryocooler in place of all the extra components currently used to make
computers run faster. Once in volume production - which may not yet be for a
year or two - the machines will cost about Dollars 20,000 (Pounds 10,500)
when bought in quantity.
Lockerby sees a market of at least 10 to 15 years for cryocooled CMOS chips.
The big question, however, is whether conventional developments in chip
design will yield the faster speeds anyway.
Hands sees more potential for cryocoolers in superconductors, where the
availability of reliable, inexpensive systems will assist in the development
of high Tc (critical temperature) applications. The availability of
mass-produced cryocoolers may well depend on their success in the much
bigger computer market.
There are many other possible applications. Carrier is beginning to develop
a cryocooler for magnetic resonance imaging machines which use low Tc
superconductors - MRI is used widely in medicine as an alternative to X-rays
 -and also sees uses for cryocooled superconductors in space and defence.
At very low temperatures, superconductors have zero resistance, but they can
also repel an external magnetic field, in such a way that a spinning magnet
can be held in a levitated position. Known as the Meisner effect, this
creates opportunities for cryocoolers in magnetically levitated transport
(Maglev) and for levitating flywheels to store cheap energy for electric
cars, says Lockerby. 'We'd love to put one in every electric car,' he adds.
At Oxford, there is particular interest in developing Stirling cycle 'green'
refrigerators - using nitrogen rather than ozone-damaging CFCs as the
refrigerant. The cool head of a cryocooler is very localised, requiring a
fan to distribute the cold and thus necessitating a complete redesign. 'The
biggest problem,' says Hands, 'is persuading the fridge manufacturers that
it's a good idea. They want a 'drop-in' replacement to CFCs.'
Carrier's forthcoming entry into the emerging, fragmented market for
cryocoolers could be very significant, although mass-production will have to
wait until the computer industry is ready to incorporate the machines in
their designs.
The project has been given a high priority within Carrier and UTC, and
Carrier wants to use its global marketing and distribution network to
support what is eventually intended to be a very broad range of cryocoolers,
says Lockerby.
