FT  01 OCT 92 / Government Bonds: Traders maintain pressures on lira, peseta
and franc
PRESSURES on the lira, the peseta and the French franc continued to take
their toll on government bond markets in Italy, Spain and France, where
yesterday's budget forecasts failed to instil any confidence among investors
or traders.
'The monetary chaos in the exchange rate mechanism is overshadowing any
fiscal measures,' said Mr Steve Major, an analyst at Credit Lyonnais.
THE Italian financial system was subjected to further turmoil yesterday, as
the lira lost 5 per cent of its value against the D-Mark in early trading as
rumours of exchange controls, new taxes or a freeze on bank deposits
prompted a wave of cash withdrawals from banks.
Worries about the government's ability to steer the budget through
parliament further undermined the currency, as the wage agreement reached
earlier this year came under threat.
Despite the turmoil, Italian bond prices ended only slightly weaker. But a
series of Italian government bond auctions starting this week, totalling
L12,000bn, continues to unsettle the market.
Mr Juoni Kokko, international economist at SG Warburg, said: 'Against this
background, it will be very difficult to raise those funds. In the last
quarter, as much as L250,000bn in gross issuance is needed. With talk of
capital controls and taxes one has to wonder where the money is going to
come from.'
SPANISH bond prices fell a further  1/2 point yesterday, and suffered a
further setback after hours, following the announcement that Spain's foreign
debt rating had been placed under review for downgrade by Moody's.
Speculation that the Spanish authorities will soon be forced to devalue or
to leave the ERM mounted yesterday.
FRENCH government bonds fell more than half a point yesterday, as the
authorities struggled to defend the franc with high money market rates.
BUND prices rose nearly half a point, as the German market continued to
benefit from its safe-haven status as expectations of a fast-track ERM fade.
The rally went ahead despite declining expectations of any reduction in
interest rates at Friday's Bundesbank council meeting.
The bund future on Liffe ended at 90.94, up from 90.50 at Tuesday's close.
THE gilts market shed a further  1/4 point at the long end, remaining steady
at the short end, as the yield curve continued to become more positive. The
long gilt future on Liffe ended at 97.08, down from 97.17 at Tuesday's
close.
US Treasury prices weakened slightly in light trading yesterday as many
investors stayed on the sidelines ahead of tomorrow's important employment
figures.
In late trading the Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond was  7/32 lower at 98
3/8 , yielding 7.379 per cent. The two-year note was down  1/32 at 100 3/8
to carry a yield of 3.787 per cent.
The market's attention is now firmly focused on the September employment
report, which some investors hope will be bad enough to prompt another
interest rate cut from the Federal Reserve. Analysts are expecting the
report to show a decline of about 120,000 in non-farm payrolls, with the
civilian unemployment rate rising from 7.6 per cent to 7.8 per cent.
NATIONALBANK, the Danish central bank, announced yesterday that it is
opening a new Treasury note programme from today, writes Hilary Barnes in
Copenhagen.
The series will be larger than earlier programmes. The intention is to
create a more efficient market.
In future, there will be only two series a year, compared with four until
now, and the maturity of the notes will be 2 1/2 years, compared with two
years on present series.
The coupon will be set at one per cent below the effective interest rates on
government paper with maturities of one to four years, said the bank.
The first series will be offered today with a coupon of 9.75 per cent.
THE gilts market was the best performing government bond market in local
currency terms during September, according to figures compiled by Kemper
Investment Management, writes Richard Waters.
The 6.2 per cent gain contrasted sharply with the 2.4 per cent fall by Irish
gilts, prompted by heavy foreign selling over the past fortnight.
The worst performance came from Canada, where renewed fears over the
country's constitutional position pushed bonds down by 2.6 per cent on the
month.
