FT  29 MAY 92 / Arts: Venus Observed
Christopher Fry's play must have seemed pretty odd even in 1950,when first
produced by Laurence Olivier, with Olivier in the key part of Hereward, the
Duke of Altair.
On one level it is remarkably erudite: there are literary and classical
allusions all over the place, as well as some science as the Duke surveys
the stars and the planets from his observatory. At another level there are
some very funny lines and marvellous opportunities for stage effects like
the eclipse of the sun and the Duke's country house catching fire. There is
a good plot to go with it.
Yet even in an age when verse drama was more fashionable than it is today,
audiences may have been deterred by the occasional ramblings off into poetic
monologues. The piece does not quite fit together.
And so it is at Chichester, where Donald Sinden has stepped comfortably into
the role once played by Olivier. The Duke is an ageing seducer who brings
back his lady friends to watch the eclipse with the intention of settling
down with one of them for good. The trouble is that his son, Edgar, is cast
in his father's mould. Both father and son fall for the unexpected guest
Perpetua, who is the daughter of the embezzling estate manager, Reedbeck.
Sinden is a most accomplished seducer and an actor who delights in esoteric
lines as much as the bawdy. On the first night he looked a bit nervous, as
if wondering how such an extraordinary play would go down at the Chichester
Festival. He need not have worried unduly. He was applauded on his first
entry and Venus Observed has enough good things in it to make it succeed.
Chichester is an excellent place for it. The semi-circular stage reaches out
into the audience and, with lighting all round, is just the setting for an
eclipse. Curiously this is the one area where James Roose-Evans' production
does not rise to the challenge. The eclipse is partial; the lights never
quite go out. It would be much better if the audience and the cast could be
given a frisson by temporary total darkness. On the other hand, the fire in
the second act suggests the entire stage may be in danger of burning down.
There is a curiosity about the verse. Sometimes it is only barely
detectable. It comes out most strongly in some of the lines spoken by
Perpetua, played by Heather Stannard. Some of Sinden's speeches are also
strikingly poetic. I find these changes of gear rather pleasing; others may
think them confusing and even archaic.
Literary flourishes abound. The Duke tells Perpetua that she must try to use
longer sentences. She then speaks what must be the longest sentence in the
history of the English theatre, although there is a slightly questionable
use of a colon in the middle. The audience is applauding her home as if
egging on an athlete towards the end of a middle-distance race.
The primary influence on the play appears to be Shaw, perhaps because we
have recently seen Heartbreak House revived at the Haymarket. There is a lot
of Captain Shotover in the Duke of Altair. Fry also has Shaw's fascination
with language and his ability to make sudden jokes like the lines about how
to spell 'epidemic' and how many children had the Roi du Soleil.
Again, as in Shaw, some of the characters are more developed than others.
Apart from Sinden, outstanding here are Denis Quilley as the estate manager
and Valerie Taylor as Rosabel, the old flame whom the Duke decides to settle
for, once she has done her spell in prison for arson.
