FT  15 JUN 92 / Financial reporting of banks criticised
MANY LARGE banks around the world use hidden reserves to conceal their true
results and provide poor examples of financial reporting, according to an
analysis conducted by accountants KPMG Peat Marwick and Lafferty Business
Research.
Australian and Canadian banks provide the best quality information in their
annual accounts while their German and Austrian competitors the worst, the
study concludes.
Only eight of the leading 100 banks worldwide are considered to have
financial reporting of notably high quality in their accounts, while 20
score less than 40 per cent in ratings devised by Peats, auditor to more
than one third of the banks described.
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group, the Bank of Montreal and the Royal
Bank of Canada are among the highest rated. The lowest score was given to
Zentralsparkasse und Kommerzialbank in Austria, now part of Bank Austria.
The ratings awarded three-quarters of total points for the provision of
financial information such as statements on accounting policies and
information on non-performing loans, and one quarter for other information
like employment practices and strategy statements.
Many banks outside the Anglo-Saxon world make use of hidden reserves or
excess general provisions which are not disclosed and cannot be quantified
by users of accounts.
Most banks do not reveal sufficient information on their provisions for bad
debts, and only 14 reported the interest written-off on non-performing
loans.
'The Swiss have improved their reporting in the last few years, but Germany
is still pretty abysmal,' said Mr Michael Lafferty, one of the authors.
British banks ranked about average in the survey, with Bank of Scotland and
Barclays performing best. But few provided much information on their
directors or employment practices.
Eleven received a qualified report from auditors, expressing doubts about
information in the accounts. The Bank of Taiwan does not contain an
auditor's report at all.
Bank annual reports. 1992 world survey. Lafferty Publications, 4th floor,
Diana House, 33-34 Chiswell Street, London EC1Y 4SE. Pounds 545
