FT  24 NOV 92 / London Tube strike called off
RAIL UNION leaders agreed to call off strike action on London's Tube network
yesterday, 12 hours before it was due to start.
Both sides claimed victory, but London Underground will now press ahead with
introducing flexible working practices and restructured pay scales, as the
RMT rail union, which represents 11,000 of the network's 21,000 workforce,
appeared to climb down over the planned overhaul of pay and conditions.
The action was called off after a special meeting of the RMT's left-leaning
ruling executive committee, which accepted a formula agreed between
management and union leaders during 25 hours of talks with the Acas
conciliation service at the weekend.
The RMT said it had secured important commitments from the company, although
it accepted that the management had not made concessions on the main changes
to pay and conditions. London Underground said its position had not shifted.
Under the plan, all 21,000 employees will switch to salaried status, with 30
per cent losing financially after three years and 70 per cent gaining
immediately. About 5,000 jobs will be shed in the next two to three years.
The link between promotion and seniority will end and some workers will have
to reapply for their jobs under new training schemes. Many allowances, such
as compensation for travelling time, have been consolidated.
In 1989, strike action by rail unions and some unofficial groups forced
London Underground to abandon a less ambitious plan to restructure pay and
introduce flexible working.
Paying tribute to Acas, Mr Jimmy Knapp, general secretary of the RMT, said:
'London Underground claimed there was no place for Acas in the negotiations,
yet 24 hours later they were involved.'
He said the issue that provoked the dispute was the company's refusal to
continue talks. The union had been assured of further negotiations in
working parties.
London Underground said the working parties formed part of long-standing
plans to aid the change of working practices, and would discuss local
details only.
The company denied guaranteeing no compulsory redundancies but said it would
seek to avoid them. It would not jointly refer any issue relating to the
changes to Acas for binding arbitration, but would expedite any union
approach to Acas 'unilaterally' on a non-binding basis.
