FT  25 MAR 92 / Survey of North Wales (2): It's now or never - Profile,
shadow Welsh secretary Barry Jones
IN two weeks, Barry Jones could be sitting in Gwydyr House, with its views
down London's Whitehall towards the cenotaph, as secretary of state for
Wales.
If it were left to votes within Wales alone, the post would be his for the
asking. His constituency, Alyn and Deeside, returns him to the House of
Commons with a comfortable, though not by Welsh standards large majority,
and at the last election Labour scooped most of the rest of the 38 Welsh
seats.
But Mr Jones's future will not be decided in Wales alone. And as he
canvasses his constituency and lends support as shadow spokesman on Wales to
his colleagues around the rest of the country he must wonder whether the
crown is going to slip once more from his grasp, possibly for the last time.
For nine years, ever since he was elected to the shadow cabinet, he has been
Welsh secretary-in-waiting. He has watched Mr Nicholas Edwards, now Lord
Crichowell, and two English implants, Mr Peter Walker and Mr David Hunt, sit
in the office that is so near his grasp.
Indeed, for most of his 22 years in parliament he has sat on one or other of
the two front benches. Within two years of reaching Westminster, as MP for
the then East Flint, he became parliamentary private secretary to Denis
Healey.
Two years on, in 1974, he was actually in Gwydyr House where he spent five
years as parliamentary secretary to John Morris, Welsh secretary in the last
Labour government. Although in opposition after 1979 he remained on the
frontbench, first as an employment spokesman during the early years of the
Thatcher government and then as senior Welsh spokesman, the disarray that
blighted the Labour party has since kept the door to Gwydyr House, and the
Welsh Office in Cardiff, firmly closed in his face.
He would be less than human if he did not think 13 years of waiting for the
big prize, a seat around the long table in No 10 Downing Street, was enough.
Mr Jones was born and brought up in Flintshire, where his father worked in
the local steelworks before becoming a full-time agent in Bexley Heath.
There he got to know an up-and-coming young man called Ted Heath. Mr Heath
was to remember Jones senior years later when, as prime minister, Barry
Jones led a deputation to No. 10 Downing St and was courteously greeted by a
man not noted for treating juniors with grace.
For Barry Jones the links with Clwyd have never been cut, and he continues
to keep his main base in the constituency. He went to school in Hawarden,
not far from Gladstone's home, and then on to college in Bangor, before
returning to teaching near home. After one abortive attempt at getting to
Westminster, across the border at Northwich in 1966, he succeeded former
Welsh Office minister, Eirene White, in East Flint.
The apprenticeship to Mr Healey points to his political philosophy. He is a
pragmatist, a doer rather than a thinker. 'I see my role as managing
change,' he says. 'We have to make society work properly and fairly.' He is,
in other words, like Healey, on the right of the Labour party.
He is as neat in his dress as in his politics, a slim man whose dark hair
belies his 54 years. In 15 years he has seemed not to change at all and it
is possible to believe he will not over the next 15 years.
The slim line may come from his addiction to walking. He and his wife Janet
spend as much time as they can watching cricket during the summer at
Eastbourne and walking along the South Downs. He finds the Downs softer,
perhaps unconsciously more in keeping with his character, than the harsh
outlines of Snowdonia in his native land.
Another clue to his character may lie in his affection for cricket, a game
redolent of old-fashioned British virtues. As he sits over the fissiparous
group that comprises the Welsh parliamentary party it is easier to see him
as umpire than a mercurial Botham.
His willingness to compromise, to draw strands together, and to negotiate,
has been construed as a weakness among those of his party who would rather
fall at the barricades than abandon an ounce of principle. Mr Jones is
dismissive of those who wear their hearts on their sleeves, believing it is
better to get things done and improve the lot of a lot of people than to
posture.
Labour has indicated it will not radically alter the economic approach to
Wales being pursued by the Conservatives. It will continue to support the
Welsh Development Agency, the Development Board for Rural Wales and the
Wales Tourist Board. There will almost certainly be changes, but probably a
change of emphasis rather than direction.
The big difference between the parties lies in the larger matter of
constitutional reform. Labour in Wales is being swept along on the tide of
Scottish nationalism, especially that advocated by the Scottish Labour
members. That demand for reform has infected many of Mr Jones's Welsh
colleagues, some of whom want to go faster along the road to an assembly
than he would prefer.
Labour has promised an assembly during its first parliament, though not
necessarily at the same time as the Scots get theirs. To achieve that Mr
Jones would have to work hard because little real thought has been given by
the party to just what an assembly would mean or involve.
If Mr Jones passes through that door in Whitehall after election day and
gets the question of an assembly right, however, he will in the fullness of
time be able to look back on the 20th century and tell himself that his
contribution to Wales was as great as that of any of his predecessors in
Gwydyr House.
