FT  13 JUN 92 / Property: Developers target golden oldies - But don't call
them that, these days, if you're retired or getting close, then you're in
the third age
and then what? Not old age, but the marketing people's latest euphemism:
third age. At least, that is what Commercial Union is calling it.
Those who think that getting old brings health and financial problems may be
surprised that CU sees the third age as 'the age of independence and
contentment. The age of living. The age of doing all the things you've never
had time to do.'
With 9m retired people in Britain and nearly 12m in the pre-retirement stage
of 45-plus, this is the fastest-growing sector of the population. As far as
CU salesmen are concerned, the retired and pre-retired are big spenders on
financial and health-related products.
So, after two years' research, CU has launched its Third Age Initiative,
with new insurance policies for 'well-being,' 'health-wise' and the
intriguingly named 'life-plus,' which does not actually guarantee
resurrection but does provide long-term care as well as life cover.
CU, which owns 49.9 per cent of Haven Services - the company that manages
retirement developments for Anglia Secure Homes (in which CU also has a 12.2
per cent stake) - also is backing Anglia in a new venture to develop nursing
homes for regional health authorities.
Anglia has set up a joint-venture company, Haven Healthcare, with Nash Sells
&amp; Partners, to provide three nursing homes for North-East Essex Health
Authority at Clacton, Colchester and Halstead, and others at Wokingham,
Reading and Maldon. Talks are also being held with other health authorities,
and another six 50-bed nursing homes are likely to be built over the next
four-five years.
Haven Healthcare will provide and operate these homes, and the health
authorities have contracted to take at least 70 per cent of the beds at
Pounds 300-400 a week for each resident for at least five years. 'There is
far less risk in this than in developing sheltered housing,' says Peter
Edmondson, chairman of Anglia. (Its annual report, due out next week, will
show pre-tax losses of Pounds 16.9m for the year to September 30 1991, in
which sales fell from 443 to 293 units).
'If we had done nothing but build sheltered housing for the past three
years, I don't think we would be here now. We have survived by
diversification, by developing our service and care side.'
Haven Services is now providing care services and products to more than
5,000 residents in about 100 developments (including those of other
companies). These include home helps for cleaning, washing, cooking and
other tasks; meals on wheels; lifeline emergency telephones linked to a
monitoring centre; and home carers for the infirm.
Anglia is now looking to develop more care centres on the lines of its
Little Holland Hall near Clacton, Essex, where conventional sheltered
housing is developed alongside close-care accommodation and a nursing home,
enabling the elderly to lead independent lives in their own home within a
caring community for as long as they can.
After two disastrous financial years, Anglia still has 341 units for sale in
29 English developments, but it has resumed work on the second phase of its
schemes at Ferndown in Dorset, King's Lynn in Norfolk, and Hitchin in
Hertfordshire.
Earlier this year, to take advantage of what he saw as bargains in the
sheltered housing field, Edmondson and a group of private investors set up
another company, Jaygate, to buy developments from receivers at substantial
discounts. So far, Jaygate has bought four schemes - at Bishop's Stortford,
Faringdon, Chertsey and Bognor Regis - from the receivers of Sovereign
Retirement Properties.
These have been re-branded as Anglia developments, and 78 of the 110 unsold
flats have been bought. Jaygate is paying Anglia full professional fees for
its sales and marketing services, and it is meeting 75 per cent of
Edmondson's Pounds 100,000 salary as chairman of Anglia, so the public
company makes profits with no risk. 'Banks and building societies should
talk to us about selling their sheltered housing schemes under our banner
instead of appointing receivers,' he says.
In fact, Haven Services already has been brought in by Cork Gully,
Nationwide Anglia and the Halifax Building Society to act as selling agents
for sheltered housing schemes in Essex, Hertfordshire and Bristol.
'Receivers do not have the sales and marketing teams to handle sheltered
housing schemes,' Edmondson adds. 'One we are talking to at the moment has
sold only eight units on 12 sites in the past two years.'
In the worst housing market anyone can remember, Anglia is expecting to sell
200-250 units in this financial year. If the market picks up in the second
half of the year, the company could soon find itself without sufficient
stock.
