FT  25 MAR 92 / Dynastic hopes fall flat in France: The Agnellis' failure in
the battle for Perrier reveals tactical errors in a changing business
climate
Rarely since the early days of oil wild-catting has the ownership of holes
in the ground excited as much high passion and low intrigue as during the
tortuous four-month-old battle for France's Source Perrier, the world's
largest mineral water company, which ended with an agreed settlement
yesterday.
Nor has any recent takeover struggle exposed more clearly the complex forces
at work in a Europe where long-established continental models of capitalism,
with their tribal loyalties and inter-locking networks of power, are forced
to confront the rude imperatives of international markets.
To the Agnellis, Italy's foremost business dynasty, whose efforts to win
control of Perrier have been defeated by a coalition between Nestle, the
Swiss food group, and powerful French backers, the message seems clear.
Though they have made a handsome capital gain, it cannot compensate for
their belief that they were victims of a French business establishment bent
on showing that it controls entry into its backyard.
There is some truth in that view. However, it is far from the whole truth.
Indeed, one of the many paradoxes of the Perrier affair is that it seems
more likely to promote than to retard the modernisation of national capital
markets and the erosion of barriers designed solely to protect special
interests.
The affair is bound to be compared with the storm created by Mr Carlo De
Benedetti's raid on the large Societe Generale de Belgique four years ago.
That bid, too, was foiled after an anxious local business establishment
turned for salvation to a foreign white knight, France's Suez group - which
also happened to be a leading adversary of the Agnellis in the Perrier
battle.
However, there are important differences. One is that while Mr De Benedetti
unleashed a shock assault on SGB from outside Belgium, the Agnellis had
hoped to win Perrier by means of patient and friendly negotiation from the
inside.
That approach enabled them in the past five years to become France's largest
foreign investors and cement close ties there. None more influential than
with Lazard Freres, the investment bank and BSN, France's biggest food
group, in which Lazard helped the Agnellis acquire a 5.8 per cent stake.
Mr Giovanni Agnelli, chairman of the Fiat motor group, sits on Lazard's
board, and his younger brother Umberto is a director of BSN, which the
Agnellis have helped to expand in Italy. Meanwhile, Mr Michel David-Weill
and Mr Antoine Riboud, chairmen respectively of Lazard and BSN, are
directors of several Agnelli-controlled companies, in some of which BSN is a
minority shareholder.
With friends like these, how could the Agnellis go wrong? The answer lies in
a succession of tactical errors, which led them to trample on traditional
French sensitivities while also ignoring important changes in the business
climate.
Initially, the Agnellis moved stealthily, acquiring control of 34 per cent
of Exor, the publicly quoted holding company which owns 35 per cent of
Perrier, the Chateau Margaux vineyard and some Paris property. But after
they launched a takeover bid for two-thirds of Exor in late November, things
started to unravel.
Partial bids are still legal in France: indeed, they were enshrined in stock
market legislation only three years ago at the insistence of French
industry, which argued that it could not otherwise match well-heeled
international acquirers in takeovers. However, the mood has changed
radically since, as evidenced by the French finance ministry's recent plans
to make 100 per cent bids mandatory.
An early clue was the protests by minority shareholders in the Au Printemps
department store chain that they were disadvantaged by a partial bid by the
Pinault conglomerate last year. The Agnellis stirred up a much more
troublesome dissident in Suez, which objected that their FFr1,320 bid
undervalued its 10 per cent stake in Exor.
Though they hastily raised the bid to 100 per cent, that was not enough to
mollify Suez. It approached Nestle, which began buying shares in Exor and
Perrier.
The Agnellis, meanwhile, compounded their error by alienating BSN and
Lazard, which has long used its formidable network of government and
business contacts to dominate the French merger scene. Mr Riboud was uneasy
that the Exor bid would prompt the Agnellis to challenge BSN's position in
mineral water. He grew still more alarmed when the Agnellis hinted that
their longer-term target was BSN itself, where the 73-year-old Mr Riboud has
no clear successor.
That prompted Mr Riboud to co-operate closely with Nestle and Lazard to
thwart the Agnellis' designs on Perrier. After efforts to persuade the
Italians to surrender their claims on the mineral water company failed,
Nestle and Suez launched a bid for it.
Though Lazard had advised the Agnellis on earlier French investments, they
did not involve it in their overtures to Exor, apparently believing that
they were well-enough established not to need help. Spurned by the Agnellis
and confronted with a threat to the interests of BSN, with which Lazard has
intimate ties, the bank aligned itself with the Nestle-Suez camp.
In spite of these setbacks, the Agnellis might still have hoped to soldier
on. With French allies, notably the Saint Louis paper and sugar group and
Worms, a family-run holding company, they controlled 48.8 per cent of
Perrier shares and 49.5 per cent of the voting rights. However, three other
factors were working against them.
One was the high-powered public relations campaign mounted by the BSN/Lazard
camp, which effectively branded the Agnellis as menacing interlopers and
Nestle as the acceptable face of French capitalism. That was despite the
fact that the management of Exor and Perrier regarded the Agnellis'
approaches as friendly and the Nestle-Suez bid as hostile.
Just as remarkably, the campaign succeeded in portraying Nestle, a company
from a non-EC country not renowned for respecting minority investors, as a
shining champion of disfranchised French shareholders. Furthermore, Nestle's
explicit proposal to break up Perrier was magically transformed into a
virtue, while the same intent was imputed to the Agnellis - on the basis of
dubious evidence - and used to discredit their bona fides.
The second element was the Agnellis' misplaced confidence in Mr Jacques
Vincent, president of Exor and Perrier. Not only is Mr Vincent poorly
regarded by France's business establishment, but his illicit transfer of
13.8 per cent of Perrier shares from the company's treasury to Saint Louis
inadvertently led to his allies' nemesis. Challenged by Nestle, the transfer
was annulled by a Paris commercial court last week, depriving the Agnellis
of almost a third of their Perrier votes.
That crucial defeat highlights the central importance of the third element -
the role played by France's takeover rules, which were repeatedly put to the
test during the battle. Dating only from 1989, the rules are still immature,
while the organisations charged with implementing them - notably the
Commission des Operations de Bourse (COB) and the Conseil des Bourses de
Valeurs (CBV), have yet to achieve the standing acquired over many years by
Britain's Takeover Panel.
None the less, the regulations provided a framework of a kind completely
absent in Belgium at the time of the SGB battle. Not only were they enforced
throughout the Perrier battle; they were invoked energetically by Nestle's
allies in the French business establishment, who strove to present
themselves as the upholders of transparency and the rule of law, while
stigmatising the Agnelli camp as exponents of dubious double-dealing.
Intentionally or not, support from such influential market operators can
only serve to entrench the legitimacy of regulatory reform. At the very
least, the Perrier affair seems likely to become a benchmark against which
the conduct of future takeover battles will be judged.
That said, the French market for corporate control is still a long way from
the standards of openness of the Anglo-Saxon world. Not only does state
ownership envelop a wide swathe of the productive economy, but
publicly-quoted companies remain better protected against takeover than
their Anglo-Saxon counterparts. Extensive cross-shareholdings encourage
corporate solidarity against external attack, while regulatory reform has
yet to eliminate a number of poison pill devices.
More than in any other European country, the system is bound together by the
cultural affinities of a powerful technocratic elite. Straddling the
commanding heights of the public and private sectors, its members still
possess a formidable capacity to coalesce in support of the perceived
national interest - above all, when 'strategic' industries are at stake.
That the government did not seek to intervene directly to keep Perrier in
French hands owes much to the fact that powerful members of the elite
favoured its acquisition by Nestle. Significantly, when the Agnellis'
opponents were casting around for white knights, they specifically excluded
US soft drinks companies including Coca-Cola and PepsiCo on the grounds that
they would not be considered 'legitimate' bidders in France.
Equally, few knowledgeable observers in Paris doubt that if an external
threat were posed to the independence of a blue-chip company with an
influential chairman - such as BSN - strenuous efforts would be made to
arrange a 'French solution'.
How far they would succeed, however, is an open question. The efficacy of
such defences is being gradually eroded by time and the logic of the
government's own policies. It can no longer legally block takeovers by
bidders from other EC countries, while its ability to influence state-owned
companies will diminish, as their need for fresh capital forces
privatisation.
Perhaps the most important agent of change, however, is the government's
declared ambition to transform Paris into a truly international capital
market and a more important source of finance for French industry. That will
depend heavily on attracting foreign investors, who are unlikely to
participate enthusiastically if they suspect that protection of local vested
interests remains a priority.
These divergent impulses are bound to create tensions and unpredictability.
The many peculiar features of the Perrier battle make it an imperfect test
of current French attitudes. Perhaps the safest verdict is that France is a
less open country than the Agnellis hoped when the affair began, but less
closed than they believed when it ended.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
PERRIER'S SPARKLING SETTLEMENT
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Nestle and Suez to increase offer for Perrier from FFr1,475 to FFR1,700
per shar.
Exor and Societe Gererale agree to sell their Perrier holdings to
Nestle-Suez at the new bid price.
Ifint, an Agnelli investment company which holds 39.8% of Exor, agrees
to bid jointly with BSN for Exor at FFr1,450 per share. Ifint to pay for
first 51% of shares tendered, with the rest divided between Ifint and
BSN in ratio of nine to one.
Exor and Societe Generale to pay Saint Louis, an Agnelli ally, FFR153bn
plus interest for its Perrier stake and FFr210m for agreeing not to
pursue court appeal.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
