FT  05 AUG 92 / Move on Scottish water criticised
CONSULTANTS have been appointed to look at the future of the Scottish water
industry, including the possibility of privatisation, the government
confirmed yesterday.
Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish secretary, said in appointing Edinburgh-based
consultants Quayle Munro: 'I have not yet decided on the future structure of
these services but I want the consumer to get the best possible water at the
lowest possible cost.'
The announcement, which followed weeks of speculation, drew sharp criticism
from opposition MPs, who have targeted it as one of this autumn's political
battlegrounds. Mr Tom Clarke, shadow Scottish secretary, said: 'This marks
the start in earnest of the war against the tap tax. We are totally opposed
to plans to privatise water.'
Water and sewage in Scotland are currently managed by the regional councils,
whose own future is uncertain pending the government's plans for reform of
local government.
Mr Lang said yesterday 'high and increasing levels of investment' in
Scottish water supply would be necessary to bring it up to European
Community standards, but added that Scottish water bills were likely 'to
rise significantly in future years as investment continues to meet the new
standards'. The average household bill for water and sewerage in Scotland is
about Pounds 108.
Scottish water services will invest about Pounds 221m in 1992-93, about 30
per cent more than last year. They plan to spend a further Pounds 482m in
the following two years.
Water customers in England and Wales have already seen steep increases in
their bills because of their water companies' commitment to spend Pounds
28bn by the end of the decade.
Mr Clarke said: 'The English experience is a stark reminder of what lies
ahead - charges have risen by up to 50 per cent.'
Quayle Munro will report by early autumn to the Scottish Office, which will
then issue a consultation paper calling for public comments. A consultation
paper on the future of local government will also be published about then.
The Scottish Office said last night the consultants had been asked to
consider several structures for the industry 'on the assumption that the
structure of local government will change'.
The Scottish Trade Union Congress yesterday pledged to fight privatisation
proposals, 'tooth and nail'.
