FT  24 MAR 92 / Survey of Employee Ownership (5): US link worth grasping -
Esops boost corporate performance
IN THE caring, sharing 1990s, the concept of employee share ownership sits
comfortably in the US. Recent research shows how much of a financial
interest American workers now have in their own companies' futures. In the
US employees are estimated to own Dollars 150bn worth of company stock.
Combined, they control an average of 12 per cent of the 1,000 largest US
companies whose employee shareholdings exceed 4 per cent. The trend to wider
employee ownership will accelerate if companies pay attention to the spate
of recent studies which appear to show a firm link between employee
ownership - and the use of Employee Share Ownership Plans (Esops) in
particular - and corporate performance. The Institute of Management and
Labor Relations at Rutgers University in New Jersey last year showed how the
stocks of public corporations with meaningful employee ownership beat the
main market averages in 1991. The Rutgers team compiled an 'employee owners'
index' made up of 205 publicly traded US companies with a stock market value
of Dollars 50m or more and with employee holdings of at least 10 per cent,
well over half of them through Esops. In 1991 the Rutgers index rose 35.9
per cent excluding dividends, a superior performance to the S&amp;P 500, which
gained 26.3 per cent. The theory that employee ownership benefits companies
and their employees is also supported by a recent study by the University of
Baltimore, which reviewed 2,776 public companies with Esops, and found that
as an investment, they produced a higher return than comparable mutual
funds. Even the recession seems not to have dulled the success of many Esop
companies. A poll by the Washington DC-based Esop Association asked its
members: 'How did your company perform in 1991 compared with 1990?'.
Sixty-five per cent of the respondents answered 'better, or the same'. It is
hard to gauge the value of an Esop for a company struggling to survive a
recession. It has been argued that Esops restrict a company's flexibility in
restructuring its way out of trouble, especially in small worker-owned
concerns that may be reluctant to cut jobs or take drastic action. It has
also been said that the large amounts of debt taken on with Esops pushes
companies closer to failure. Yet Esop-led leveraged buy-outs, where the
debt-load is likely to be most onerous, have fared well in recent years. A
study in 1991 by the National Centre for Employee Ownership (NCEO) in
California found that Esop LBOs were much less likely to file for
bankruptcy, default on loans or need major restructuring than conventional
LBOs.
Mr Joseph Blasi of Rutgers University and co-author of 'The New Owners'
(published in the US by HarperCollins), cautions against assuming a strong
link between ownership and performance. 'All the studies show that
employee-owned companies don't perform any worse than comparable
non-employee owned companies. But there is also no evidence that
employee-owned companies automatically perform in a superior fashion.'
Detractors of Esops have argued over the years that employee-owned companies
use profits to boost workers' pay in the short term instead of putting them
into long-term capital investment. Yet, says Mr Blasi, 'there is absolutely
zero evidence that this is true.'
Similarly, Mr Blasi has found nothing to back claims that employee-owned
companies reduce dividends to shareholders to pay for increased wages, or
that employees in such companies undermine the management hierarchy and
hamper the decision-making process.
In fact, the evidence reveals that there is not enough employee
participation in the management of employee-owned companies. Mr Blasi found
that employees were the dominant shareholders in half of the 1,000 companies
identified as significantly employee-owned, yet employees had a place on the
board as non-management representatives at just three of them.
This dismays those who believe the full potential of employee ownership is
not being exploited. 'Most managers are unwilling or unable to institute
organisational changes in their companies that would ensure employee
ownership really made a big difference,' says Mr Blasi.
One criticism of Esops and employee ownership that is harder to refute is
the argument that they create too much risk for workers, whose entire
retirement savings may be tied up in the fortunes of one company.
Whereas in the past workers retirement savings were housed in defined
benefit plans that were highly diversified and insured by the government,
Esop company employees are putting all their eggs in one basket. If a
company goes under, and there is no back-up for employee funds in the form
of another savings plan, employee holdings can be wiped out in one go.
Despite the risks, however, workers appear fixed on a course towards
adopting more flexible forms of retirement savings. This, says Mr Blasi, is
because of changes in society and business culture. He claims that as
workers increasingly favour, or are being offered by employers,
entrepreneurial forms of retirement savings plans, the fixed wage and
benefits system of the post-war era is collapsing.
Esops continue to play a big part in the collapse of that system, and today
there are about 10,000 Esops in the US, covering more than 11m employees.
The rate of growth in new plans, however, has dropped sharply. According to
Morgan Stanley, Dollars 2bn went into the plans last year, compared with
Dollars 10bn in 1990 and Dollars 18bn in 1989.
Yet 1989 and 1990 were probably aberrations, with many companies creating
Esops as a defence against unwanted takeovers, or as part of a share
repurchase programme. Since last year the takeover binge has died, and
because of buoyant stock markets companies have issued more equity, rather
than bought it back.
Esops do not represent the entire picture of employee ownership in the US.
In fact, less than half of companies that are significantly employee-owned
have an Esop. Other routes to employee ownership include employee benefit
schemes, savings plans, deferred profit sharing plans that own company
stock, employee share purchase plans, broad-based stock option plans (such
as those in place at Pepsi-Cola and drugs group Merck), and even retiree
medical plans funded with stock.
The growth of all forms of employee ownership has important implications for
the way businesses in the US are run, and it cannot be long before
employee-owners will want a greater say in management.
