FT  03 NOV 92 / Leading Article: Around the UK houses
IF AN ENGLISHMAN'S home is his castle, then an ever increasing number of
British citizens have found their castles are built on sandy foundations.
The downward spiral in house prices helps explain why confidence remains
depressed and economic recovery elusive. Yet the government must not bow to
the clamour from mortgage lenders and the construction industry by adopting
one of the schemes intended to bail out indebted consumers. Government
action should be more selective.
The building societies and banks have rarely been slow to offer advice. In
the mid- and late 1980s they advised many young first-time buyers to take
advantage of the government's misguided tax breaks to buy houses with hefty
mortgages. In so doing they helped raise the proportion of owner-occupying
households to high levels by international standards, while pushing house
prices and consumer debts to high levels by historical standards.
The housing bubble has since burst. Average house prices have fallen by 27
per cent in real terms since July 1989 and by an unprecedented 12 per cent
in nominal terms. A million or more homeowners have found themselves owing
more in mortgage debt than the depleted value of their homes; almost 200,000
homes have been repossessed; the building societies have quadrupled their
bad debt provisions over the past four years; and housing market
transactions have dried up.
Clear interest
The building societies and banks are now offering yet more advice. Abolish
stamp duty on housing market transactions and raise mortgage tax relief
either for first-time buyers or all mortgage holders, cry some; offer a tax
credit of up to Pounds 10,000 to people selling their homes to cover any
loss of value, say others. Their interest is clear: while, in the early
stages of the property collapse, the losses were borne by the insurance
industry, prices have now fallen so far that this cover for their mistakes
has run out.
The government should be wary of these schemes. They are invariably designed
to ease the pressure on indebted consumers by preventing house prices from
falling further. The aim is to minimise negative equity and keep bad debts
off the banks and building society books. Yet the UK does not need a
recovery now which is bought at the price of economic distortion in the
future. The rise in UK home ownership over the past decade represents just
such a distortion. It resulted in a less mobile and more debt-ridden
society. The thrust of UK housing policy in recent years has rightly been to
reduce the tax incentives for house purchase, while increasing the
incentives for the rental sector to expand.
Sensible step
The government is right to search for ways to revive housing market activity
in order to encourage mobility. Its recent decision to increase the amount
of unsecured borrowing that borrowers with negative equity can take on was a
sensible step. It should also try to remove the remaining obstacles to sales
of repossessed homes by banks and building societies to housing associations
for rental purposes.
Yet first-time buyers will only return to the market in quantities when
house prices are seen to be really cheap. That may well require further
declines. Relative to average earnings, house prices remain quite high by
historical standards. But a further fall in house prices risks deepening the
fears of indebted homeowners, while raising the burden of bad debts on
balance sheets.
The government can ease the burden of servicing those debts through a
further reduction in interest rates. If the balance sheet problems of the
lenders remain a serious constraint on new business lending, then the
government may, as a last resort, need to investigate ways in which their
balance sheets can be cleansed of bad debts.
The government should not bail out indebted consumers, either via inflation
or tax hand-outs. Schemes which offer more tax relief to indebted homeowners
will only increase the incentive to invest in housing while encouraging the
myth that a housing investment is a one-way bet. A balanced recovery would
enable indebted consumers to repay their debts the hard way.
