FT  24 SEP 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Men in white coats
present a caring image
Boots chemist shops yesterday stocked their shelves with a home cholesterol
testing kit which the company hopes will help reduce the alarmingly high
incidence of heart disease in the UK - as well as making money for
shareholders. The simple kit, which requires shoppers to prick their thumbs
and test their blood using a simple meter, delivers accurate results in 20
minutes. It costs Pounds 7.99.
The launch at the Ritz Hotel in London is part of a Caring for Your Heart
campaign aimed at helping to meet the government's target of reducing deaths
from coronary heart disease by 40 per cent by the end of the decade. Boots
is also issuing leaflets on diet and lifestyle changes and has set up a free
telephone enquiry line for those needing further information.
Peter Shotter, general manager of Boots' healthcare business, says:
'Awareness of cholesterol levels is about 9 to 13 per cent in the UK,
compared with 70 per cent in the US. But about 150,000 people are killed by
coronary heart disease each year. Cholesterol is a key factor.'
Although Boots hopes that the kit will record strong sales in its own right,
the product's launch symbolises a shift of marketing emphasis that has taken
place within Boots in recent years.
The company, long famed for its pharmaceutical services, has rediscovered
that there are significant market opportunities in its own backyard -
especially at a time when the government is trying to shift the burden of
healthcare provision towards individual responsibility and preventative
medicine.
'The company's strategy in the 1970s and 1980s was to expand substantially
its merchandise offering. But I would say there is now a greater focus again
on the core healthcare business,' Shotter says. 'It is partly a recognition
that this is what we are best at doing but also that there is enormous
market potential.'
Extensive market research suggested that the public had great trust in
Boots' 'men in white coats'. The company believes it can do more to exploit
that commercial strength by moving into related healthcare areas.
Boots recruits just under one-third of all pharmacy graduates in the UK and
almost all the company's 1,078 store managers are qualified pharmacists.
The company is currently experimenting with offering a wide range of health
screening services, such as cholesterol, blood, pregnancy and urine testing,
together with full medicals at two stores at Bromley and Lincoln. 'It is
early days and we are just scratching the surface at the moment,' Shotter
says.
But a graphic example of the lucrative business opportunities lying at the
periphery of the NHS is provided by Boots' move into the nursing homes' drug
supply market in recent years. The company now supplies the pharmaceutical
needs of 80,000 patients at 3,600 homes.
It is a sign of the evolution of business attitudes at Boots that Shotter
was recruited from outside the company following a marketing career with
such fast moving consumer goods giants as Procter &amp; Gamble and PepsiCo.
'There has been an injection of new ideas by deliberately going out into the
marketplace and bringing in people with different experiences,' he says.
The concept of turning Boots' stores into a chain of mini-healthcare centres
is clearly attractive for potential patients and hard-pressed health service
managers, but as yet it remains an unproven prospect.
But Gordon Hourston, managing director of Boots the Chemist, stresses that
while there are great potential opportunities in developing its primary
healthcare business, he first has to be convinced that it would be in the
best interests of shareholders.
Boots is a commercial enterprise; profits generated from the provision of
healthcare services will have to be every bit as productive as the returns
from selling soaps or photographic film.
