FT  16 MAY 92 / Markets: Trafalgar's promises spoilt by today's reality -
The Bottom Line
TRAFALGAR House is no longer a conglomerate. On Tuesday, Sir Eric Parker,
chairman, gave a presentation, along with his line managers and senior
executives, to unveil the face of the new Trafalgar: a construction and
engineering company.
However, the transformation from shipping to construction combine to
specialist high-tech engineering company was too breathless for most
analysts and fund managers to accept.
Those contacted by the FT said that they understood where Sir Eric wanted to
take Trafalgar - they just differed over his analysis of what had already
taken place.
Mike Smith, conglomerates analyst at Robert Fleming Securities, said: 'There
was nothing in the seminar that made me want to say 'here is a changed
company which is likely to make good profits in the long-term'.'
The problem for Trafalgar is that today's reality is significantly different
from tomorrow's promise. Too much capital is tied up in unprofitable areas
away from the the construction and engineering core. Consider the following:
The hotels are presently unsaleable. There was a time when the group turned
up its nose at offers of about Pounds 150m for the Ritz which it bought for
just Pounds 3m in 1976. Those were the days.
Unfortunately for Sir Eric those days have long past. There have been no
sales in the five-star category for two years which is why Sir Eric was able
to scotch rumours that imminent disposals were likely.
The Cunard fleet of five-star ships poses similar problems. There have been
trade buyers but the only real rival in the five-star market is Vard,
Norwegian owner of Kloster Cruise, which also owns the Royal Viking Line at
the luxury end of the market.
If Sir Eric could sell the fleet he would probably do so. Since this is not
a practical solution he would like to upgrade the two four-star ships but
admits that this is not likely in the short-term.
Gearing by the September year-end is likely to be between 60 and 70 per cent
and heading higher - in part because of working capital demands for
construction and engineering.
That is a surprise, given the cash generative nature of the core businesses.
Advance corporation tax remains a problem, although the halved dividend has
cut the first half tax rate from 47 to 35 per cent. However, if UK earnings
remain poor, the tax rate is likely to prove higher than for most comparable
companies.
Sir Eric admitted that Trafalgar had a lot of assets in properties and
leisure. 'There is no quick fix but I think the analysts and fund managers
thought we gave a good presentation and know where we are heading,' he said.
Trafalgar's credentials as an engineering and construction operator do look
impressive. Its order book is a shade under Pounds 4bn and construction and
engineering now accounts for the bulk of its pre-tax profits and turnover.
So why not compare it to Bechtel or Fluor in the US, asks Sir Eric. David
Ireland, conglomerates analyst at Hoare Govett, says that while they are
similar in scale - Bechtel had revenues of Dollars 7.5bn last year while
Fluor is projected to have engineering and construction turnover of Dollars
6bn - big differences which makes comparisons difficult.
Bechtel is private, while Fluor derives 90 per cent of its profits from the
US (Trafalgar has a significant Asian and UK presence in engineering and
construction).
Nor is there any word from Sir Eric on how Trafalgar's margins relate to
those of its competitors.
There is also a nagging feeling among some of its shareholders that the
'free wheeling-dealings' days of the conglomerate of old are not over.
One institutional shareholder said: 'Trafalgar's presentation on its
corporate strategy made me wonder whether it had learnt that too many of its
deals of past ended up with it setting aside provisions. That has to stop.'
If Trafalgar wants to be accepted as a successful construction and
engineering company with good prospects of long-term growth it will need to
disclose more than just its good intentions.
