FT  04 NOV 92 / Israeli Jews' birthrate falls to its lowest level
THE BIRTHRATE among Israel's Jewish population has fallen to its lowest ever
level, but mass immigration from the former Soviet Union has sustained the
politically sensitive level of the Jewish majority in the country, latest
government figures show.
Jews accounted for 82 per cent of the 5m population living within the
pre-1967 borders of Israel and both parts of Jerusalem in 1991, despite a
fall in the birthrate per Jewish woman to 2.6.
The rate among Moslem women rose slightly to 4.7. But the difference was
offset by Jewish immigration of 170,000, most from former Soviet
territories.
Demographics are an integral part of the Arab-Israeli dispute. Israeli
governments have long feared that the proportion of Arabs in the population
would rise to levels that would threaten the Jewish character of the state.
They have looked to immigration as the way to bolster the Jewish majority.
Ironically, the latest fall in the Jewish birthrate was attributed to very
low birthrates among the immigrants, partly because of a high proportion of
the elderly among the newcomers. But demographers say the overall Jewish
majority is unlikely to alter much over the next 20 years if immigration
continues at present rates.
However, they say immigration has only postponed by a few years projections
that the balance of Arab-Jewish populations within Israel and the occupied
West Bank and Gaza Strip will be equal within 25 years.
At present there is a 60 to 65 per cent Jewish majority. This likelihood is
a factor behind the Labour-led government's willingness to cede most of the
West Bank and Gaza to the Palestinians.
Within pre-1967 Israel, recent immigration has made former Soviet citizens
the biggest ethnic group, overtaking those of Moroccan origin.
This, too, may have a political effect as support from recent immigrants was
seen as a big factor in Labour's June election victory over the hardline
Likud party, which tends to draw much of its support from North African
communities.
