FT  18 APR 92 / Novices who pay for a voyage into danger - 120 sailors who
will race around the world
THIS weekend, an extraordinary fleet of 10 ocean-going yachts will converge
on the Solent and dock at Southampton. The 67ft boats are big, powerful and
conventional. The idea behind them is not. Volunteer crews, who signed up
not knowing a halyard from a half-nelson, have spent two years training to
race these sleek cutters 28,000 miles around the world.
There are 120 of these individuals. Each has raised Pounds 14,750 to pay for
the trip, often through enormous sacrifice.
'It seemed like such a huge sum at the beginning,' reflects Lisa Wood, 33,
formerly deputy superintendant at the Royal Cambridge Home for Soldiers'
Widows. 'Now, I think about what value it's already been to me.'
Wood, admitting cheerfully that she has already sold nearly all her
possessions to pay for her berth, is a fund-raising legend in the project.
She once auctioned the spotlights off her Mini to pay for petrol to get to
the next training course. The car itself has now gone.
From the outset, the British Steel Challenge was designed by its originator,
Chay Blyth, to put the oomph back into yachting - and to do it for anyone
with the courage to carve an adventure out of ordinary life.
Any resemblance to the Whitbread round-the-world race or the America's Cup
is entirely accidental. Blyth has little time for the bronzed gods who flit
from regatta to regatta, milking sponsors of sums adjacent to the national
debt.
'The more elite and exclusive they keep that end of sailing, the more we
benefit,' chuckles Blyth.
In fact, this ex-sergeant from 3 Para, who in 1966 rowed across the
Atlantic, has more than a streak of leveller in him. Blyth is to boating
what John Major is to class warfare.
'I remember the first time I went to a yacht club - barriers all the way,'
he growls in a Scots accent untouched by received pronunciation. 'I hate
every second of yacht snobbery. It's not required.'
Very few among the 120 volunteer crews have any regular sailing background.
'The odd time I've been out on the Solent with friends, I've had the
distinct feeling of walking into a club of which I was not a member,' says
Adrian Rayson, an expatriate agricultural consultant who works mainly in
Nigeria.
The yachts will start from Southampton in September and race the global
course in four legs, stopping at Rio de Janeiro, Hobart and Cape Town before
finishing in the Solent. At least half the course is in the freezing
isolation of the Southern Ocean, where shipboard life is at the very least
uncomfortable and often dangerous.
'People want risk,' says Blyth, cherubic face aglow. 'They buy fast cars, go
skiing - it's all to do with adrenalin. But it's their choice; we're not in
the army now. Anyhow, sailing is a very safe sport. If you want real danger,
look at hunting or rugby.'
To people in the industry, Blyth's plans to raise Pounds 1.8m out of his
crews seemed lunatic. He never doubted, maintaining that there is nothing
clever about enlarging a business sector that already contains flotilla
holidays and chartering.
When his announcement came at the 1989 Boat Show, the 120 berths were sold
out within three weeks. 'I've a waiting list God knows how long,' adds
Blyth. He looked for enthusiasm and commitment among the doctors, shop
assistants, solicitors and crane drivers that he eventually picked. 'Bloody
marvellous people who just wanted to do something a wee bit different for a
year or two,' he says.
One particular story shows the vein of untapped fire Blyth has found. Bill
Vincent is a carpenter at Bath University; a gentle, placid man of 46
married to Pauline, a schoolteacher. They have two teenage sons. On a
winter's night in 1989, he watched Blyth talk about the challenge on
television. Saying only 'I'd love to do that,' Vincent went to bed, trying
to sleep.
Next morning, a day off, he was unable to contain the itch. He instructed
his son: 'Tell your mum I've gone to London to find Chay Blyth,' and set
off. He found sailing's Svengali at the Boat Show, handed over his Pounds 75
deposit and signed up. It was all the cash he had with him.
'On the M4 back to Bath, the reserve fuel light was on the whole way and I
didn't have any money left for petrol,' Vincent laughs. 'I was so worried
about running out, it took my mind off what my wife would think about it
all.' Like so many spouses, Pauline has backed him morally and financially
100 per cent.
Yet, for all the individual struggles to raise Pounds 15,000, the crew
contributions would not even have paid for the 10 identical boats worth
around Pounds 250,000 each. They were designed by David Thomas, father of
the successful Sigma family of racer/cruisers, and built entirely of steel
at the former Devonport dockyard in Plymouth.
Each one is identical in hull shape, weight, sails, layout and handling
arrangements, ensuring that they will compete on exactly level terms without
handicapping. Seeing them alongside in the Prince William marina at Brixham
last week, they looked a fleet for which any medieval prince would have
given his daughters.
Not the least of their appeal was visual. Each of the hulls has a startling
individual paint job reflecting a corporate sponsor. The backers range from
Hofbrau Lager through Nuclear Electric to the Heath insurance group.
Blyth has an exceptional record in finding commercial support for his
projects. At present, for instance, none of the dozen or so British groups
hoping to compete in the Whitbread race starting in 18 months' time has
found corporate support.
'I've never seen myself as a yachtie,' says Blyth. 'What I'm good at it is
raising the money and giving the companies what they want. This is all about
people, publicity and business. There's nothing new in any of it. Queen
Isabella sponsored Columbus.'
Nevertheless, one has a sneaking feeling that Blyth - who says he would have
shot himself if Labour had won the election - is engaged in a
semi-altruistic redistribution of fun. Giving little people with big hearts
a chance to do something extraordinary.
'We've spread the cost as far and as wide as possible,' is the furthest he
will go on this point, fearing for his boardroom cred. One crucial point is
that no individual contribution is for more than about Pounds 250,000.
'These people who go about saying they need Pounds 5m for a yacht race have
obviously never had to go and raise it,' he snorts. 'My motto is to only
offer any company a deal they can accept.'
Some of the sponsoring companies are also sending staff on the race as crew.
Phil Streeter is an engineer who works in British Steel's stainless division
in Sheffield. He'll be racing on the first leg.
'I'd never sailed before in my life but I knew that if I didn't take the
opportunity I'd regret it for the rest of my life,' says Streeter, who had
completed the London marathon the day before our meeting.
'I wouldn't say I'm frightened. The training has convinced me that there is
no serious danger. Let's say I'm looking forward to it with nervous
anticipation.'
Each of the 10 yachts is skippered by a professional, recruited and paid by
the challenge. Adrian Donelly was running American charter yachts in the
West Indies before taking charge of Heath Insured. His background is in the
merchant navy and sailing schools.
'I'm very keen on the seamanship aspect of what we're teaching the crews.
It's missing from such a lot of yachting now,' Donelly says. He also
admitted that he is looking forward to the 'chess game' between rival
skippers as the race progresses. With equal boats and equipment, clever
strategy and crew-work will make the difference.
And after the excitement of two years' preparation, the race, and all the
media attention, comes re-entry to everyday life. The more thoughtful crew
members are already a little concerned. Will Bill Vincent be able to return
to sawing wood in Bath?
'I'm worried about how well I'll be able to fit back in,' he admits. 'I was
so happy before. It was lovely - then this came along.'
