FT  23 NOV 92 / Ozone hole rescue moves lead to a tussle
INTERNATIONAL agreements to prevent damage to the earth's ozone layer have
been one of the past decade's most successful responses to environmental
threats. Today in Copenhagen representatives of some 100 countries meet to
try and tighten safeguards further - but critics fear the new measures may
represent a weakening of the rules.
The 1987 Montreal Protocol committed 91 countries to phasing out by the year
2000 all production of chemicals that could damage the ozone layer, notably
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) used in aerosols and airconditioning.
Since then consumption of ozone-depleting chemicals has fallen, largely
because aerosols use substitutes.
Industrialised countries saw consumption of CFCs and halons, a second
regulated class of chemical, fall by 33 per cent between 1986 and 1990. But
consumption rose by 50 per cent in developing countries in the same period,
although total levels are still more than 20 times less than the total in
developed countries.
The protocol's signatories are wrestling with three main ways of tightening
commitments further at the meeting:
Accelerating the phase-out dates. This is likely to be agreed, with the
phase-out of CFCs, trichloroethane and carbon tetrachloride production
brought forward from January 2000 to January 1996, and the phase-out of
halons from 2000 to either 1996 or 1995.
Unlike the present form of the protocol, the new commitments will make
exemptions for 'essential industries', and those will not be defined until
the next meeting in 1994. Environmental groups have been concerned that
although the measures appear to represent a tightening of the rules, the
'loophole' will allow much production to continue.
Adding new chemicals to the controlled list. This is proving more
controversial. HCFCs, increasingly used as a less-damaging substitute for
CFCs are one target, but environmental groups are concerned that the
permitted levels will be set too high. Proposals to freeze production of
methyl bromide, a pesticide widely used in preserving and transporting fruit
and grain, look set for an even rougher ride. Developing countries and
others who export a lot of fruit have questioned the evidence for its
damaging effects.
Establishing on a firmer basis the fund to pay for developing countries'
adaptation. This is likely to be the biggest area of controversy.
There is general consensus that the present interim fund of Dollars 200m for
1991-1993 has not been working well. Some countries, such as the UK, have
been criticised for not paying up their full commitment. They in turn have
criticised the fund, which is implemented by the United Nations' development
and environment programmes (UNDP and UNEP) and the World Bank, for its
slowness in finding projects.
