FT  02 OCT 92 / BR 'victim of industrial espionage': Fresh allegations in
bribery case
PLASSER Railway Machinery GB, the rail maintenance suppliers charged with
bribing British Rail staff, benefited from industrial espionage committed by
someone inside BR's civil engineering department, an Old Bailey court heard
yesterday.
Police who raided Plasser's London offices in September 1988 found two sets
of confidential documents belonging to BR in the desk drawers of Mr Norbert
Jurasek, Plasser managing director, and Mr Michael Brooks, company
secretary, the court was told.
Mr Michael Worsley QC, prosecuting, said the documents included engineering
drawings submitted to BR as part of a tender by NEI, a rival of Plasser, and
confidential details of future BR policy. One sinister aspect was that
identifying features had been removed from the documents.
Plasser, Mr Jurasek, and Mr Brooks all deny nine charges of offering bribes
to Mr David Currie, a former head of BR's civil engineering department. Mr
Currie denies nine charges of accepting bribes. All four deny a single
charge of trying to bribe other BR staff.
Mr Worsley said there was no evidence that it had been Mr Currie who had
stolen the documents. However, the only sensible conclusion was that the
documents had been stolen by somebody in the civil engineering department.
The person responsible would not have passed them on unless it was
worthwhile.
'You may think it is an example of bribery working,' Mr Worsley told the
jury.
Earlier, the court heard how Mr Currie had denied to police ever breaking
BR's guidelines on accepting gifts from companies BR did business with.
The code of conduct, introduced when Sir Peter Parker was chairman, said
that to preserve BR's integrity, only 'trifling' gifts such as diaries and
calendars could be accepted. More substantial gifts had to be refused and
clarification sought from superiors when staff were in doubt.
Mr Currie, though, had accepted air tickets from Plasser worth thousands of
pounds along with other gifts, Mr Worsley said. Sir Robert Reid, a former BR
chairman, once accepted a Christmas present of a case of wine from Plasser,
but refused to accept more substantial gifts, he went on.
Another BR executive was given a case of wine after he asked Plasser to stop
sending him gifts. He poured the wine down a sink and protested to the
company, Mr Worsley said.
On one trip to a Viennese night club called Eve's, staff from BR's civil
engineering department ran up a bill of more than Pounds 3,000 - which was
paid by Plasser.
The case continues on Monday.
