FT  24 OCT 92 / How To Spend It: It'll be blue and white on the night -
Lucia van der Post treads - delicately - through the china shops
THERE ARE those for whom the fad for blue and white china seems just that -
faddish, a modish sort of cult, promulgated by interior decorators who are
fond of placing elaborate pieces against strategically-chosen backgrounds. I
will nail my colours to the mast. I love it. I collect it. I could never
have enough of it.
I understand why the English went wild when they first caught sight of those
delicately hued pieces from China and Japan, how they marvelled at the
Persian mosaics and beat a steady trail to The Hague to collect Dutch Delft
ware. No wonder the Staffordshire potteries soon started to experiment with
their own versions of the ancient glazes.
Not so long ago anybody with an eye and enough energy to scour the markets
could have picked up considerable collections of blue and white for quite
affordable sums. Those days are long gone.
A single dinner plate in a good blue Minton, Spode or Worcester will not
leave much change out of Pounds 80 - which means one thinks several times
before producing it to serve the lasagne. Some companies, most notably
Spode, do produce contemporary versions of 18th century patterns, but most
lack the subtlety and depth of their 18th century counterparts.
However, three designers, each influenced by the subtle charm of traditional
blue and white and each wanting to explore the traditional glazes in their
own way, have produced new versions of age-old charmers.
The ranges are not cheap - but then they never were, the rarity and
costliness of the blue and white pigments played no small part in their
desirability in the 18th century - but all are beautiful and the sort of
china that you would want to guard carefully and hand on to your children.
William Yeoward, who already runs a painted furniture business in London's
Chelsea, has just set up a company to reproduce 18th and 19th century dinner
services and creamware with the simple old English shapes that used to be so
prevalent and are now so hard to find.
'I wanted to reintroduce all those generously sized plates and bowls, those
lovely tureens, complete with their lids, and to do for the dinner services
what Divertimenti and Tricia Guild have done for earthenware. '
Pavilion, photographed here (bottom), is the blue and white version he has
produced. Inspired by Delft ware, all the pieces are hand-painted on a pale
blue background and, if you look carefully, you will see that each piece
sports one of eight pavilion motifs.
Each piece has a cartouche of an 18th century urn at the top. There are two
sizes of serving tureen, one for soup, the other for vegetables, both with
lids. There are four different sizes of plate. It took at least two years to
get the designs right as ) old moulds had to be resurrected to get the
shapes he wanted.
For the first collection there are seven sets - some breakfast, some
dessert, and some running the gamut. In my view Pavilion is the nicest but
Housekeeper's and Creamware Service also has a gentle appealing Englishness
about it - lovely plain cream pieces with rust-coloured edges and a simple
central motif. Tureens and serving dishes are gorgeous.
Prices range from Pounds 30 for a tea plate, to Pounds 35 for other plates
while a soup tureen is Pounds 110 and a vegetable tureen Pounds 93.
The complete range of Braithwaite and Scott china is at 336 Kings Road,
London SW3.
Deborah Sears is the driving force behind Isis Ceramics which specialises
almost exclusively in blue glazes on white earthenware and now offers some
seven different patterns. Word of her work has already got out, collectors
are beginning to home in on each new piece and top stores such as Bergdorf
Goodman in New York and Takashimaya in Tokyo sell it.
Deborah's painterly background can be seen clearly in the delicacy of the
designs on the pieces photographed here. She produces pieces in the
authentic English Delftware tradition and uses only original glazes and
pigments such as cobalt and tin. All the pieces are hand-painted.
Besides the tableware there are also decorative pieces such as lamp bases
and the lidded jar and vases shown in the photograph. Besides Landscape, the
pattern pictured above, there is the enormously popular English Garden,
based on a 17th century theatrical garden, as well as tulip and animal
motifs.
Prices for the bigger pieces may seem expensive - Pounds 60 for a large
platter, Pounds 50 for a colander bowl (which, incidentally, makes a most
wonderful piece for arranging flowers as well as fruit or vegetables) - but
there are smaller things, such as the hugely popular flower bricks which
sell for about Pounds 30 each.
Readers are welcome to go to Deborah Sears' studio, an old Victorian
workshop, at The Old Toffee Factory, 120a Marlborough Road, Oxford 0X1 4 LS
(tel: 0865-722729) to see and buy the work. She is open on weekdays from 10
am to 4 pm but during December will be open on Saturdays as well. A good
range of Isis Ceramics can be seen at The General Trading Company, 144
Sloane Street, London SW1, Thomas Goode, 19 South Audley Street, London W1,
The Oxford Collection in Oxford and Flemings of Richmond.
Joanna Howells came to love ceramics in general - and blue and white in
particular - when training to be a doctor at Cambridge. She used to wander
around the Fitzwilliam museum and came upon the collection of Song
porcelain. She, too, makes all her pieces individually - each is thrown and
then hand-painted.
Her work is less delicate, more richly hued than the subtle pieces of
Deborah Sears. So far there are just a few patterns - Heavenly Bodies, which
besides its deep blues also has 18 carat gold and burnished platinum,
Hibiscus, which is more delicately hued, Seahorses and Lilly.
Prices range from about Pounds 60 for a lamp base to Pounds 49 for a
standard bowl. A spectacular 18 in bowl would be about Pounds 140. Joanna's
work is stocked by: the V &amp; A shop at The V &amp; A Museum, Brompton Road, South
Kensington, London; Preston &amp; Buller of Wimbledon, and New Moon of Hatfield,
Hertfordshire. She can also be contacted at her workshop, 2 Albion Square,
London E8 4ES. Tel: 081-341-7306.
