FT  04 JAN 92 / Political battle over education intensifies
THE government and the Labour frontbench rushed out rival plans to improve
reading standards in schools yesterday as the political battle over
education intensified.
Details of Pounds 3m in funding for pilot projects to help poor readers were
released by the government just hours before Labour was due to announce
plans for a Pounds 42m national reading recovery programme.
The renewed interest in education follows the publication last month of the
results of the first nationwide tests of seven-year-olds in England and
Wales, which showed that more than a quarter had difficulty reading.
Mr Jack Straw, Labour's education spokesman, blamed 12 years of Conservative
government, while Mr Kenneth Clarke, the education secretary, declared war
on 'progressive' teaching methods.
Both parties are endorsing an approach developed in New Zealand by Dame
Marie Clay of Auckland University. Her reading recovery programme gives
intensive one-to-one tuition to six-year-olds who fall behind in reading.
Despite agreement between Mr Clarke and Mr Straw on how to help children
with reading difficulties, any prospect of political accord was lost in
claims from each party that it had adopted the idea first, and that the
other was trying to spoil the initiative.
Mr Straw had planned to set out Labour's proposals for a similar programme
in the UK yesterday, at a fringe meeting at the North of England Conference.
His speech included details of a programme to ensure that every child could
read by the time he or she left primary school.
Mr Straw pledged to spend Pounds 42m on providing teachers and training so
that 10 per cent of six-year-olds could benefit. He contrasted the cost with
the similar amounts spent on the assisted places scheme to send children
from low-income families to independent schools, which Labour says it will
end.
The government, however, acted first, releasing details of Pounds 3m of
grants for reading improvement projects which Mr Tim Eggar, the education
minister, had been due to announce next Wednesday. Rumours that Dame Marie
would be recruited to run the scheme were denied, but she is expected to act
as an adviser during a two-year teaching contract at London University.
Mr Straw accused ministers of a 'panic reaction' in bringing forward the
announcement to coincide with his speech. He added that the Pounds 3m for
the programme - less than the government was spending on the parents'
charter - showed that this was no more than a 'token commitment'.
The growing importance of education in the general election battle will be
highlighted later today, when Mr Clarke announces plans for a radical
shake-up of teacher training.
Taking a leaf out of Dame Marie's book, Page 4
