FT  04 JUN 92 / Gwent (2): A milestone for Newport - Robin Reeves looks at
the town's regeneration plans
NEWPORT recently passed a small but significant milestone in its economic
fortunes. For the first time in living memory, the town's level of
unemployment registered below the national average.
The current unemployment rate in Newport is 9.4 per cent, compared with an
average of 9.5 per cent for Britain as a whole. This performance is all the
more surprising in view of recent setbacks suffered by companies which in
the early 1980s were hailed as the key to Newport's future prosperity.
The most spectacular example is Inmos, which went to Newport in 1980 amid a
blaze of publicity. With substantial government financial backing (it was
said to be Britain's last chance to establish a stake in the international
semi-conductor business), the company built a state-of-the-art microchip
manufacturing plant to take on the rest of the world. Politicians and
economists alike insisted this would be the kind of sunrise industry that
brought secure, well-paid jobs to Newport, replacing those being lost in
traditional industries, such as steel and coal.
But it has not worked out that way. At its peak, Inmos employed some 1,100
on two sites in the town. But, with the onset of the recession and the sale
of Inmos by its parent company, Thorn-EMI to the French Thomson electronics
group, the company's fortunes have plummeted. The workforce is now down to
450 and there is talk of the remaining plant closing outright unless Thomson
finds a purchaser.
Other companies which expanded in Newport in the 1980s, but which have more
recently had to make lay-offs of workers include AB Electronic Products and
Marconi; though the latter cutback is due more perhaps to the ending of the
cold war than the recession. Another 1980s incomer, TSB's insurance
division, while it employs 450 and has not suffered cutbacks, no longer
talks of creating 2,000 jobs - as it promised initially.
On the other hand, the Patents Office, a recent government agency relocation
from central London, has given a significant boost to white-collar
employment. The number of staff has built up to 1,000 in a year. There are
also two major plants under construction. Northern Telecom is relocating
part of the former STC defence systems production operation in Newport to a
new site at Queensway Meadows, a move which is being interpreted as a strong
vote of confidence in Newport by STC's new owner. The same is true of Bisley
Office Equipment, which arrived from Surrey three years ago, bringing 100
jobs, and has now embarked on a second phase of expansion, creating a
further 60 jobs.
Hopes are also high that new scientific business projects will quickly be
attracted to Celtic Lakes, Wales's most significant science park-style
development to date, which lies on Newport's western outskirts. Some 50
acres of the 200-acre development, a joint venture between the council, the
Welsh Development Agency, Trencherwood Commercial and the Bassaleg Group,
has already been earmarked for R&amp;D business activities 'spun out' from
Imperial College, London.
The WDA is just putting the finishing touches to Imperial House, an advanced
communications unit on the Celtic Lakes site with direct links to London and
plans to launch an international marketing campaign very shortly. But in the
meantime - and somewhat ironically in view of what was being said a decade
ago - it is steel production and fabrication, and ancillary steel activities
which are proving to be among Newport's most stable employment sectors
during the current recession.
In 1980-82 thousands of jobs disappeared in the steel industry and there was
even talk of the Llanwern steelworks closing altogether. Yet in spite of the
massive shake-out at that time, the key role of steel and aluminium
production in the local economy - Alcan also has a major European rolling
facility at nearby Rogerstone - has not been eclipsed. Metal manufacturing
activities still employ some 7,000 people or 13 per cent of the Newport
workforce, compared with an average of 3.2 per cent occupied in this sector
in the economy as a whole.
Llanwern now has a reputation for being one of the best steel plants in the
world. Managed by British Steel in tandem with Port Talbot, its productivity
and operating efficiency will probably be enhanced even further by the
closure of Ravenscraig since the doomed Scottish plant's orders can be
switched to Wales.
Another sign of the times in steel is a recent merger between British
Steel's Orb works and SSAB, Sweden's state-owned steel producer, to create a
Pounds 100m company, European Electrical Steel, specialising in magnetic
steels for transformers and electrical motors. The new company is
headquartered in Newport.
For all the brighter spots in the local economy, Mr Brian Dunford of Newport
Borough Council's economic development team stresses there is no sense of
complacency. It remains the case that a high proportion of the employment
growth over the past decade has been in female, part-time jobs whereas those
being created have tended to be relatively well-paid unskilled male jobs.
This in turn has given rise to concern that Wales in general, and Gwent in
particular, may gain a reputation for being a low-wage, low-skill economy
which will rebound to the detriment of the growth in the services economy.
Newport recognises that it suffers from a 'doughnut syndrome' - the tendency
of new investment to be attracted to the periphery of the town, close to the
motorway, and not the centre. To counter this, the council has brought
forward a town centre regeneration strategy in conjunction with the Welsh
Development Agency which will involve pump-priming Pounds 8.5m over the next
four years. A similar regeneration scheme has been drawn up for the Pill
area of the town.
But the most ambitious regeneration scheme by far is the construction of a
Pounds 73m tidal barrage to impound the waters of the River Usk and create
the conditions necessary for the waterside redevelopment of the river banks
now strewn with 100 years of dereliction. The bill necessary to build the
barrage has been laid before parliament and is expected to enter its
committee stage in October.
Meanwhile, Newport council has already spent over Pounds 1m on feasibility
studies and environmental monitoring. Some of that has gone on assessing the
possible impact on ground water levels to avoid the kind of opposition which
occurred when such questions were raised about the Cardiff Bay barrage. If
all goes according to plan, construction of the Usk barrage will begin in
1995 and be completed in 1998, giving Newport new development sites, a new
river crossing, new housing and - its protagonists insist - new confidence.
But Newport Borough Council cannot finance the barrage itself. The project
is due to be paid for from a cocktail of sources, including government and
EC grants. Which comes back to the relative improvement in Newport's
economy. The borough treasurer's current nightmare is that this will used as
an excuse to strip the town of its assisted development area status under UK
regional policy and exclude its from Objective 2 EC regional development
grants. Lobbying to ensure that London and Brussels understand such
precipitate action would torpedo Newport's regeneration plans is already
under way.
