FT  12 SEP 92 / Cookery: What's good for the goose - Seasonal accompaniments
LAST December, I received a parcel by special overnight delivery from
Worcestershire. Opening it was as much fun as unwrapping a Christmas
present. Inside was a neatly trussed bird from Goodman's Geese, nestling
under folds of waxed paper between fragrant layers of rosemary and sage -
fistfuls of them, not a few puny sprigs.
Rarely has meat looked more appetising. The skin of the bird was not clammy
but dry, not sickly white but pale honey, sure signs of a healthy outdoor
life ranging free in grassy pastures, guzzling corn and pecking at straw.
And alongside the bird were two little boxes, one containing the giblets,
the other filled with solid wodges of rich and delicious goose fat.
The proof is, of course, in the eating. This bird tasted every bit as good
as it looked. Killed in its prime and hung properly it was rich, firm,
gamey, and exactly as Christmas goose should be, nicely matured after
feasting on grain and having put on its 'liberty vest,' a little layer of
fat between skin and flesh to protect against winter chills.
Slightly younger goose, the autumn bird which is said by some to be goose at
its peak, is flavoured a little more delicately. It is less gamey and the
meat is juicier. This so-called Michaelmas goose, once even more popular
than Christmas goose, was the bird that many tenant farmers traditionally
presented to the landlord when paying their quarterly rent in the hope that
they could perhaps dissuade him from increasing it.
I have never eaten Michaelmas goose but I will this year: the memory of last
Christmas's goose has convinced me that this is a bird worth feasting on
more than once a year, and I like the idea of tasting it at different
stages.
Judy Goodman, of Goodman's Geese, has been at the forefront of the
resurgence of interest in geese, a vital fighting force in reinstating goose
on our Christmas menus. Having achieved a good level of Christmas sales, she
now aims to put Michaelmas goose back on the culinary calendar as well.
This year is her 10th growing geese. She began in 1982 after a
gastronomically sad Christmas (in other words, one without goose on the
menu), by growing just a few birds for family and friends. This year,
Goodman's Geese will grace 2,000 tables.
Judy Goodman is the most practical, down-to-earth and business-like farmer
you could hope to meet, a homely, middle-aged woman fairly fizzing with
energy, good humour and marketing ideas.
She admits to a surge of pride at the sight of her geese in the food halls
of Harrods and the Army &amp; Navy stores, and in top-notch butchers such as
Millhouse of Clifton in Bristol; and she rejoices in a gratifying ratio of
repeat purchases and standing orders among personal customers who buy at her
farm gate or by overnight delivery.
The date of Michaelmas seems to be a moveable feast, so why not choose
whatever suits you. September 29 (or the Saturday after) is popular in many
areas; October 11 remains traditional in Norfolk; while the goose-eating
autumn feast in northern Europe is celebrated on Martinmas, November 11. Or
perhaps Hallowe'en or bonfire night commends itself to you.
Given that goose has different eating qualities at different stages of the
season, I like the idea of varying the accompaniments accordingly. Early
autumnal fruits would seem the most appropriate choice for goose in
September - and nothing is flourishing more furiously this September than
plums.
So, I shall probably serve my Michaelmas roast goose at the end of the month
with sloe and apple jelly or perhaps a compote of prunes - the smallest and
bitterest of the plum family, or the largest and sweetest.
The other thought that appeals to me is making a goose-neck pudding. I have
sometimes considered doing so at Christmas but there never seems to be
enough time then. Michaelmas, minus the same pressures, seems a good
opportunity to have a go.
When I mentioned this to Goodman last week she agreed, obligingly, to supply
the goose I was ordering with the whole goose neck in one piece and still
encased in its skin. (It is said to be best to delay stripping the skin from
the neck until you are ready to use it.)
She also expressed willingness to supply Weekend FT readers with whole goose
necks in the same way if so requested - providing she is given good notice
and the orders are for geese to be sent by overnight delivery in September,
October or November. In December she is, unsurprisingly, too busy to prepare
necks in this way.
SLOE AND APPLE JELLY 2 1/4 -2 1/2 lb sloes depending on how plump and juicy
they are;  3/4 lb crab or cooking apples (windfalls will do providing soft
spots are cut out before weighing); granulated sugar; a few bay leaves.
The traditional thing is to delay picking sloes until after a frost, or to
prick them with a silver fork. Modern cooks simply freeze the fruit briefly:
the skins will split as they thaw and so encourage the release of the
juices.
Put the sloes into a pan together with the chopped apples, a couple of bay
leaves and just enough water to cover. Simmer gently until fruit is very
soft. Tip the contents of the pan into a jelly bag suspended over a bowl and
leave to drip overnight.
Measure the juices and reheat them gently, adding warmed sugar at the rate
of 1 1/2 lb per 1pt of juice. When the sugar has melted, fast-boil until
setting point is reached. Pot in small jars adding a bay leaf to each one.
COMPOTE OF PRUNES
When fresh chestnuts are available a little later in the year, 1 lb of them,
roasted and peeled, make a splended addition to this compote - but do not
mix them in until ready to serve.
14 oz large prunes; 1 pt tea (Earl Grey or Lapsang Souchong for preference);
2 star anise; 3 allspice berries; 2 cinnamon sticks; 5 cloves; curls of peel
shaved from an orange; 5 tablespoons of rum or armagnac.
Bruise the spices. Put them into a pan with the tea and bring to a simmer.
Away from the heat, add the prunes, orange peel and spirits. Stir well and
push the fruit well down into the liquid. Cover tightly and leave in a cold
larder for 48-72 hours, stirring occasionally if passing.
When the goose is roasting, strain the prunes, discard the spices and bring
the prune liquor to boiling point. Boil for one minute. Pour the scalding
liquor over the prunes, cover and place in the plate warmer so the fruit is
gently and thoroughly warmed through by the time the compote is served.
Goodman's Geese, Walsgrove Farm, Great Witley, Worcester WR6 6JJ. Tel:
0299-896-272.
