FT  08 SEP 92 / The answer might just be blowing in the wind: The long
search for a cure to 'sick buildings'
DUST from insulation used in most air-conditioned offices has been strongly
linked to 'sick building syndrome', the flu-like symptoms which afflict
thousands of office workers.
US scientists claim to have found a significant link between a single
physical factor and the problems reported by staff. The factor is said to be
a particular type of man-made mineral fibre used in non-domestic insulation
products.
The World Health Organisation estimates that 'sick building syndrome'
affects a third of offices in Europe and north America.
Dr Alan Hedge, who led the study of nine large private-sector buildings at
the design and environmental analysis department of Cornell University in
New York said: 'It is now clear that there is a link between mineral fibres
in ceiling tiles and ventilation ducts common to air-conditioned buildings.'
Construction analysts say products which use man-made mineral fibres account
for 65 per cent to 70 per cent of the insulation market in Europe and that
the figure is likely to be higher in north America.
However, Mr Charles Rossiter, London University's emeritus professor of
occupational health, said: 'I have serious reservations about the
conclusions in the paper based on the information in the working draft.' All
non-domestic insulation products which used man-made mineral fibres would
contain some superfine man-made mineral fibres. The proportions could vary
from as much as 40 per cent or 50 per cent to less than 1 per cent.
Several large manufacturers of non-domestic insulation denied that their
products use man-made mineral fibres and questioned the scientific basis of
the study.
Dr Hedge said man-made mineral fibres were unlikely to be the sole cause of
the symptoms of the syndrome, which include eye, nose, throat and skin
irritation, as well as coughing, sneezing and breathing difficulties.
Dr Leslie Hawkins, director of the occupational health service at Surrey
University's Robens Institute, said the study may have identified an
important factor. But he stressed that identifying a single cause or cure
for the syndrome was unlikely.
Man-made mineral fibres are produced by spinning molten rock or glass into
fine fibres which are then woven into thick insulating 'blankets'. These are
used to line ceiling tiles and ventilation ducts.
Dr Hedge says: 'Only when the fibres are mechanically disturbed is there a
danger of fibres being released into the air. As the building starts to age,
and work is done on the building, the problem begins.'
He said the identification of insulation fibres as strongly linked to 'sick
building syndrome' fitted the history of the syndrome which was first widely
reported in the 1970s. He pointed to the introduction of computer terminals
and changes in the design of air-conditioning which allowed minerals into
ventilation systems.
Computer operators report 'sick building syndrome' more often than other
workers. That may be because terminals attract dust which settles on the
faces of the operators.
