FT  15 DEC 92 / Pits face rise in power charges: Electricity costs review
for British Coal deepens controversy
BRITISH COAL is facing significant increases in its own electricity charges
at a time when the bulk of the coal it sells to generators is due to fall in
price.
Disclosure of proposed price rises by National Power and PowerGen, the two
main electricity generators for England and Wales, will increase controversy
surrounding electricity pricing and negotiations for coal-fired power
supplies.
British Coal believes early talks with the generators on its electricity
supplies indicate it may face rises of twice the rate of inflation from
April.
In common with other industrial concerns using more than 1MW of electricity
a year, British Coal negotiates directly with suppliers, rather than paying
charges fixed by electricity companies in talks with the industry regulator.
Many other large users are facing similar significant rises.
In an initial offer to British Coal, PowerGen has outlined a deal for the
Nottinghamshire area which British Coal officials have estimated will add
7.5 per cent to electricity prices from April.
National Power is thought to be considering higher offers for other British
Coal regions, though in many cases its current prices to British Coal are
lower than those of PowerGen. In the case of both companies, the offers
would be for supplying the electricity and exclude distribution costs.
The negotiations come in the wake of a report last week by Professor Stephen
Littlechild, the electricity regulator, which questioned whether National
Power and PowerGen were passing on to the consumer the effect of next
April's predicted coal price cuts.
National Power and PowerGen said yesterday the cuts were being passed on.
They pointed out, however, that the reduced-price coal was used in the
'franchise' electricity market.
Large customers, such as British Coal, were not affected. They already pay
much less per unit of electricity than domestic and small industrial
customers.
This is because coal for sale in the non-franchise market is bought at world
prices which are lower than British Coal's.
Some large users of electricity are suggesting that the fall in British Coal
prices should enable prices to large, as well as small, customers to fall
and are putting pressure on the regulator to allow this to happen.
National Power said it had made no formal offers to British Coal. PowerGen
said it could not comment while talks were in progress.
Row flares over pit repair, Page 6
Coal gets boost from Eastern Electricity, Page 6
