FT  12 SEP 92 / Stitch-up treatment: Alan Pike asks whether private UK
patients get value for money
After a five-day stay in a private hospital, a seriously ill patient died.
When the hospital's Pounds 24,000 bill reached the health insurer, it
included a Pounds 430 item for the patient's late discharge.
Such stories about private hospitals are sometimes laced with exaggeration.
Mr Julian Stainton, managing director of Western Provident Association and
the most vocal critic of lax cost-control in the private-health sector,
insists this one is not. Western Provident, the insurer involved, is
currently in dispute with the hospital over the bill.
This week's announcement that the Monopolies and Mergers Commission is to
investigate private medical fees raises a wider question. Do purchasers of
private healthcare get value for money in Britain, a country with - in spite
of the debate over whether it is adequately funded - one of the most
impressive 'free' health systems in the world?
The existence of the National Health Service means that, unlike in other
countries, the private sector can be selective, and does not have to provide
a service aimed at the entire population. But recent increases in insurance
premiums, loss of business during the recession and growing competition are
all forcing the private sector to become far more concerned about value for
money.
More than 70 per cent of private hospital treatment is financed from
insurance, which covers about 12 per cent of the population. In their
marketing material, insurers play heavily on the fact that private-health
cover helps take the worry out of being ill.
If you are ill, however, the worry may be over whether your policy will pay
for treatment. This is particularly likely to be a problem if worry made you
ill in the first place - private psychiatry is one area where insurers are
tightening up on claims.
In a bid to contain costs and win a broader social base of customers,
insurers are offering more competitive budget schemes. A single person aged
30 to 34 would pay Pounds 60.18 a month for the fullest cover from Bupa, the
biggest private healthcare group. Norwich Union Healthcare this year
introduced a scheme with exceptionally extensive cover, but it costs a
healthy 30- to 34-year-old more than Pounds 1,000 a year for a scheme
covering areas normally excluded such as infertility, long-term renal
dialysis and pregnancy.
Budget schemes provide much cheaper options than these. But, although paying
less means getting less, customers sometimes fail to appreciate this fully
until they make claims and find they face restrictions on things like the
hospitals they can use.
Expensive advances in medical science are adding to the pressure on the
private sector to control its costs. A third of all operations in private
hospitals are classified as major or complex. PPP, the second-largest
insurer, last year paid out 3,000 claims of more than Pounds 10,000 each,
including one of more than Pounds 100,000.
Critics such as Mr Stainton, however, say that a cavalier attitude towards
charges by some hospitals is also part of the problem. 'You get more
consumer protection when you buy a sandwich on a train than when you enter a
private hospital. British Rail displays a price tariff and will give you an
itemised bill. Don't take it for granted that private hospitals do the
same.'
Mr Stainton scrutinises charges for early admission or late discharge
particularly carefully. Although these are often medically necessary, they
are alleged to be used sometimes by hospitals as a device to top up profits.
Mrs Christine Boardman, from Elgin, Scotland, queried a Pounds 198
late-discharge item on a bill with her insurer, Bupa. She had asked the
hospital if she could remain in her room until her husband collected her
after treatment. 'The room was not serviced and was not needed again that
night,' says Mrs Boardman. 'But Bupa decided that the item was justified and
paid the bill.'
The monopolies commission's investigation arises from fee guidelines for
private work reissued this month by the British Medical Association. These
are only advisory, says the BMA, and Mr Stainton supports them. 'They
provide us with a yardstick for what is reasonable and it is one of the few
areas where we have some basis for cost-control,' he says.
Mr Richard Marcus, a surgeon and member of the BMA council, believes costs
may rise if the guidelines have to be abandoned. He says the private sector
has proved itself too timid at controlling 'maverick' doctors who charge far
above the average.
A study by Laing and Buisson, the healthcare consultant and publisher,
showed that the highest-earning 20 per cent of consultants averaged Pounds
95,000 a year from private practice in 1990. Doctors say such figures are
distorted by the fact that a relatively small number within the 20 per cent
have exceptionally high earnings.
While there is more competition in the health insurance market than for many
years, the delivery end of private healthcare is not subject to normal
competitive pressures. Mrs Boardman sums up the difficulties: 'The choice of
consultant is made by your general practitioner. If that consultant does
private work at only one hospital, that is where you will go.'
Private medicine is a tight world where hospital operators, insurers and
doctors know, even as they squabble, that they depend on each other. There
may, however, be ways of opening up the market to more competition.
Some NHS trust hospitals, for example, plan to use their new independence to
revamp the public sector's rather down-at-heel private-patient facilities
and challenge the independent hospitals.
A next, more significant step would be for NHS managers to encourage their
consultants, who staff the independent hospitals on a part-time basis, to do
all private work on NHS premises. Private hospitals might find it cheaper to
employ their own full-time consultants - under the current arrangements,
some London consultants receive half their income from the private sector in
return for a relatively tiny investment of time.
A still more radical view comes from critics - including a number of junior
doctors - who believe the root of the problem is Britain's medical
establishment, which operates the profession's entry and promotion system in
favour of the status quo.
The government and General Medical Council, the profession's regulatory
body, currently face legal challenges aimed at making it easier for
EC-qualified specialists to practise in Britain. Advocates of the move say
that, if this happened, it would prove the first step towards a more open
market in which the present consultant system would collapse, specialists be
allowed to advertise, and patients approach them directly rather than
through GPs.
Perhaps the most immediate worry for the private sector is survey evidence
that people take out private medical insurance for a single, overwhelming
reason - to avoid having to wait for treatment.
NHS waiting times are often shorter than people realise. If trust hospitals,
prompted by the demands of the Patient's Charter, get this message across
before the private sector can control its costs, there may be difficult
times ahead.
