FT  11 JAN 92 / Gardening: This is the year for planting heavy metal
TO DATE, this year's weather has claimed no casualties in the garden: some
of the half-hardy plants are still with us, an unexpected setting for 1992.
In this dry spell, my plans for the year are ambitious, a short cut to early
arthritis.
I want new flower beds, new plantings, new hedging experiments and swathes
of garden where at present there is only muddle.
The experiments are straightforward, but they need some lengths of heavy
metal. Three years ago, I planted a young yew hedge during one of the dry
spring seasons. The soil is stony everywhere, but especially stony where the
yews have to sit: it was hard enough to plant them in holes of friendly
compost and it would have been even harder to put in a barrier to contain
their hungry roots. It seemed cruel to both of us to block them in at any
depth during dry weather. Like the yews, my plans have grown and I have to
correct this short-cut.
In front of the hedge, I want a new border. I do not merely want it: I have
made it and one end is already planted with the recurrent pink rose Jacques
Cartier, a modern Dianthus called Widdecombe Fair and a promising small
sorbus called koehneana which has white berries.
If you want a proper flower bed in front of a yew hedge, you have to curb
the hedge's roots because they will exhaust the soil. The best method is to
take some strips of corrugated sheeting from a rubbish tip or unwanted shed
and bury them about two feet from the yews to a depth of two or three feet.
The yews will grow strongly, but they will be unable to penetrate the border
in front of them. You will realise your photographic dream, a border of
flowers against an ideal background of dark, living green.
Further along, I also want a hedge of roses. They too, need a heavy metal
treatment. Their great vice is that they go bare at the base unless they are
tied down to a length of plain wire, set just above ground level and
stretched tightly between metal uprights. Several of the best old-fashioned
roses will then make a thick hedge if they are planted about three feet
apart and their shoots are stretched ruthlessly sideways on a low wire as
soon as they are planted.
Once again, I have a local boulder problem, but my present plan is to wire
up an old Edwardian beauty called Mrs John Laing and enjoy her continuous
roses of strong pink in a hedge of wires, broken up by small standard
Pteleas, round-headed trees with scented flowers. Expect reports on
progress: the likeliest enemy is the usual black spot which affects roses on
my light soil.
Elsewhere, my plans are for permanencies which ought to have been finalised
three years ago. One of the consequences of making a new garden is the
realisation that the principled advice of books is seldom obeyed in
practice. Authors always tell us to place the long-term features first, but
new ideas intrude and new possibilities emerge as the site is progressively
tamed.
I have long-term designs on a low sweet-scented hedge of sarcocca which
flowers in winter. I want to imitate the wooden pergolas in the French rose
garden at Bagatelle; I want a serious Magnolia which will survive on lime in
the Cotswolds and allow its flowers to hang down like lids on a rare white
dish. The likeliest candidate seems to be Magnolia Wilsonii, which is said
to tolerate lime and is selling locally at a decent height for only Pounds
10.
These features would all have been better placed three years ago, but I had
not realised that I wanted them. It is the same story with one edge of the
lawn which runs into rough grass under trees and now badly needs a garden in
keeping with the rest of the design.
Nothing will happen in 1992 to change my non-green approach to clearing a
wilderness. There is no substitute for sensible use of a weedkiller which
does not affect the structure of the soil: I use Round-up, because it is the
strongest form of killer with glyphosate on the market. On a site which has
been rounded up, I can then think of gardening, beginning with hellebores in
February, flowering Ribes in spring and then forms of shade-tolerant rose
alba in high summer and cyclamen for autumn.
There will also be more room for my latest little-known weapon. In the 17th
century, the double-flowered forms of our native Soapwort were popular in
gardens, but you have to hunt for them hard in your Plantfinder nowadays
under Saponaria. In 1989 I acquired a tiny scrap of the old double white
form. By 1990, it had run all over the place, killing a nearby daphne and
asking to be moved out of a special flower bed as soon as possible. It
belongs in a wild setting where it will spread happily, and continue to
produce double white flowers about a foot high from July until the frosts.
On cool days and in the evening its scent spreads wonderfully, sweet and
rich in an unexpected way. It is much too strong for a small flower bed but
it will be my nap for 1992, weed-proof in a border at that awkward point
where mown grass runs into the undergrowth of trees.
