FT  16 NOV 92 / Italy plans bank privatisations: Government aims to raise
Pounds 13bn in wide-ranging sell-offs
THE Italian government is planning a radical reduction in state control of
the Italian banking and financial system as the central feature of a
far-reaching privatisation programme submitted to parliament at the weekend.
The programme is intended to raise L27,000bn (Pounds 13.1bn) over the next
three years through divestments by ENI, the state oil concern, Enel, the
electricity authority and INA, the insurance institute. In August these
groups became publicly quoted companies owned by the Treasury
The plan, prepared by six prominent economists and bankers in conjunction
with the Treasury, will be the most extensive privatisation undertaken in
continental Europe. Until now the 4 1/2 month old government headed by prime
minister Giuliano Amato has only announced two firm privatisations - Credito
Italiano, the sixth largest commercial bank, and Nuovo Pignone, ENI's
turbines subsidiary.
The funds going to the Treasury will be separate from those raised by IRI,
Italy's state holding company, which will be used to pump fresh capital into
subsidiaries and reduce its debts of more than L60,000bn. All banking
interests held by IRI - Credito Italiano (67 per cent), Banca Commerciale
Italiano (55 per cent) and Banca di Roma (35 per cent) - will be sold within
two years. The stake in Credito alone could raise L7,000bn.
The Treasury will also seek external funding for L2,500bn-L3,000bn to
recapitalise BNL, Italy's second largest commercial bank, while selling off
its subsidiary, Efibanca. Plans are being drawn up for the sale of the
Treasury's 50 per cent stake in IMI, the financial services group, valued by
Warburgs at L4,000bn.
The state controls directly and indirectly two-thirds of the banking and
financial system. If parliament endorses the plan, the state will by 1996
have largely withdrawn from this sector and substantially reduced its
presence in others. Under the plan the Treasury would hold 'significant. . .
minority' shareholdings in the advanced engineering, air transport, banking,
chemicals, civil engineering, electricity, insurance, large-scale retailing
and telecommunications sectors.
It is intended that these residual stakes would eventually be placed in a
new publicly quoted company, with the Treasury retaining 51 per cent of the
stock. This means that IRI, Italy's largest holding company since the 1930s,
would eventually cease to exist. Mr Amato wants parliament to approve one of
three suggested methods of supervising the privatisation process.
The aim is to make extensive use of the bourse in the sell-offs. In the past
two weeks, there has been feverish speculation in several of the
state-controlled companies already quoted, prompting accusations of insider
trading.
Where necessary, the government would guarantee control through a 'golden
share'. Those interests easiest to sell off would be first, with longer
periods for companies requiring restructuring. The INA sale could begin
within six months.
The plan, leaked in part 10 days ago, has been the subject of fierce cabinet
debate. Mr Giuseppe Guarino, industry minister, argued for the government to
create one or two 'super-holdings' to retain a strong state presence. But he
was ultimately isolated and may resign.
The old guard in the ruling Christian Democrat and Socialist parties also
fought to ensure they kept political influence over the state sector. This
battle is likely to continue in parliament.
