FT  17 DEC 92 / International Company News: Volkswagen plans further
cutbacks
VOLKSWAGEN, Europe's biggest carmaker, is expected shortly to announce
another round of restructuring, including heavy job cuts, following
yesterday's announcement of a slide into loss in the last quarter of this
year.
The plans are expected to be agreed at an extraordinary meeting of the
supervisory board on January 13, which will also approve sharp cuts in the
new year's investment programme.
According to Mr Dieter Ullsperger, finance director, heavy fourth-quarter
losses would make a considerable dent in the full-year earnings, and he
repeated an earlier warning that the dividend might be cut. The group made
just over DM1bn (Dollars 637m) profit in 1991, and paid out DM11 on ordinary
and DM12 on preference shares.
He also forecast further trouble in the new year, when, he said, the German
car market would shrink by 20 per cent and deliveries to Europe would fall
10 per cent.
The motor trade had deteriorated 'suddenly and dramatically' since
September, he said. Other factors included the recent appreciation of the
D-Mark, which would cost the company DM200m. Extraordinary pension
provisions during the quarter had drained a further DM485m, compared with
DM85m in the comparable part of 1991.
Mr Ullsperger, who gave no details of expected losses, said the group had
also lost DM250m because of the forced closure of its Sarajevo plant in the
former Yugoslavia. An illegal strike in Mexico had cost DM100m.
Economies already made this year included a reduction of almost DM3bn in
planned capital spending.
Cost-cutting action already taken this year included cuts of DM1bn in
spending plans for the Seat subsidiary in Spain, DM1.2bn at the German
parent company - including DM250m in its plant in Mosel, eastern Germany -
and DM400m in other overseas operations.
In the spring, before the extent of the current downturn was suspected, VW
announced plans to reduce its German workforce through natural wastage by
12,500 over five years. Around 6,800 domestic jobs have already gone this
year and short-time working has been introduced in all its plants.
Analysts said the company was now preparing its employees for even more
dramatic action. They suspected the extra pensions provisions, necessary for
the early retirement component of the payroll reductions, had been loaded
into the fourth-quarter result to underline the need for greater economies.
Mr Ferdinand Piech, who formally takes over as group chairman on January 1,
is already having a profound influence on management thinking, according to
analysts. He is an eng-ineer, known as a hard man to please, and dedicated
to increasing productivity.
VW produces 12 cars per employee each year compared with more than 17 at its
rival Opel, owned by General Motors.
Despite its problems, the group claimed to have increased its European
market share from 16.4 per cent to 17.5 per cent this year. Group turnover
was likely to rise 13 per cent to DM86bn and unit sales were expected to be
up about 6 per cent at 3.5m vehicles.
Volkswagen shares, which peaked at DM410 in May, dropped a further DM9 to
DM235.50 on the news. Daimler-Benz, parent of Mercedes-Benz, also lost
DM6.40, falling to DM506.60 after the group further reduced its production
forecasts for 1992.
Short-time working at the turn of the year would cut total output of cars to
529,000, compared with 578,000 in 1991. Mr Edzard Reuter, group chairman,
said on Tuesday night that 1992 had been 'an annus horribilus although our
house has not burnt down'.
The group, which is currently reducing its workforce by almost 50,000, had
made an early start on dealing with its difficulties, he said. Daimler
expects full year profits to fall to around DM1.5bn after DM1.9bn last time.
See Lex
