FT  31 JAN 92 / Arts: Gormenghast - The Oxford Playhouse
Mervyn Peake's classic Gormenghast trilogy sprawls over 1500 pages and took
13 years to write (1946-1959). A two-hour stage version seems almost beyond
the scope of ambition. Yet The David Glass Ensemble is now touring with a
play based on Titus Groan and Gormenghast. It is a brave, bold, exciting
stab at the impossible.
Peake knew the stage. His plays, The Wit to Woo and The Cave were produced
in his lifetime; he developed Gormenghast the musical, for which Benjamin
Britten wrote the score; his illustrations for the trilogy witness his dark
draftsmanship (he was a war artist at the liberation of Belsen). So he was
far from being a closeted novelist.
However, his arbitrary world works best in novel form: private imaginings
build an architectural vision rivalled only by JRR Tolkein's middle-earth
mythologies. The play condenses the first two novels of Peake's trilogy,
Titus Groan and Gormenghast. The crumbling Earl Groan and his Countess
Gertrude preside over a decaying castle; Titus, their son and 77th Earl, is
subject to the mad dictates of Gormenghast 'law', and prey to the plottings
of Steerpike the machiavel. The Groans have a Master of Ritual, a Chief
Retainer and Master Cook. An unknown Wild Thing haunts the castle's
corridors.
John Constable's script translates the frustrations of Peake's world without
the compensations of his style. The result is an evening in which moments of
excitement emerge from periods of boredom. In Peake, slabs of adamantine
prose bridge the gaps where nobody speaks, but the theatre has to show
rather than tell. Director David Glass, designer Rae Smith and choreographer
Sally Owen have opted for mime; there are breathless chases, fires and
storms delivered by slick, inventive staging.
The equivocal virtue of the production is that one needs to have read the
Gormenghast trilogy to make sense of it. Peake's characters survive, to the
last snap of the Retainer's cracking joints and the oozings of sweat from
the Cook's fetid brow. The plot, always a distraction in Peake, remains
faithful to the books. But without these pleasures of recognition, it can be
hard work to maintain contact with the stage characters.
The Ensemble acts with great poise and energy, negotiating tricky mines,
whether climbing up stairs or falling off cliffs (Sally O'Donnell as the
Wild Thing is particularly striking). John Eacott's music is a constant and
welcome support to a difficult evening's theatre.
The tour, which began last week in Bradford, reaches London (Battersea Arts
Centre), on March 17 via Cambridge, Swindon, Hexham, Worthing, Brighton,
Newark, Darlington, Glasgow, Leicester, Horsham, Carlisle and
Berwick-Upon-Tweed.
