FT  02 FEB 93 / International Company News: Furlaud named to head American
Express board
THE board of directors of American Express, the troubled US travel and
financial services group, yesterday named Mr Richard Furlaud as its new
non-executive chairman, replacing Mr James Robinson, who resigned at the
weekend.
The election of the 68-year-old Mr Furlaud, a former president of Bristol
Myers Squibb and a member of the American Express board since 1972, caps a
week of internecine boardroom politics at the company.
Mr Robinson said he would sever all ties to the company last Saturday, only
five days after he had staged a counter-coup by having himself re-confirmed
as group chairman and taking over the same role at Shearson Lehman, the
lossmaking investment banking and brokerage arm.
Mr Robinson's departure and the swift election of Mr Furlaud followed
protests from institutional shareholders to Mr Harvey Golub, the man who
last Monday took over as group chief executive from Mr Robinson.
American Express stock rose by Dollars 1 5/8 yesterday in unusually heavy
trading before closing in New York at Dollars 24 3/4 .
Mr John Keefe, an independent financial services industry analyst in New
York, said the stock market was expressing its approval for the latest turn
of events.
American Express, which is still suffering from shattered morale and the
damage to its reputation caused by last week's management upheavals, sought
yesterday to reassure the market by defining Mr Furlaud's responsibilities
as clearly as possible.
It said that, as chairman, Mr Furlaud would be responsible 'for ensuring
that appropriate issues are identified for the directors to consider,
determining the agenda for board meetings and seeing that significant
matters of interest to shareholders are reviewed by the board'.
Mr Furlaud said he would work with Mr Golub 'to implement the strategies in
place to build the American Express brand franchise, restore Shearson Lehman
Brothers to profitability and strengthen the company's balance sheet'.
Uncertainty remains about the leadership of Shearson. Investors were
outraged last week when Mr Robinson pushed aside Mr Howard Clark Jr, the
Shearson chairman, and assumed the twin roles of both chairman and chief
executive.
It is not known whether Mr Clark might be re-instated at Shearson. American
Express said Mr Golub would work with the board at Shearson on a succession
plan 'to deal with the longer-term executive management structure of the
firm'.
Mr Furlaud was president of Bristol-Myers from 1989 to 1992 and was chairman
and chief executive of Squibb before its merger with Bristol-Myers.
At American Express he serves as chairman of the board's compensation,
benefits and nominating committee and as a director of Shearson.
