FT  24 JUN 93 / Survey of France (9): Transitional Stage - The Bourse has
been transformed
IN THE past decade the Paris stock market has been radically changed. Reform
after reform has swept aside the old rules and regulations in an attempt to
create a new system to secure its future in the 1990s.
The market is still in a transitional stage. Most anachronisms have been
abolished, but it has yet to make a complete break with the past so that it
can move forward. The appointment of Mr Edouard Balladur's centre-right
government will - French financiers hope - mark the final stage in the
transformation of Paris into a thoroughly modern financial centre.
After all, it was Mr Balladur who, in his earlier guise as finance minister
in the Chirac government of the mid-1980s, initiated the first reforms which
were to replace the old, protected Paris market with the deregulated system
of today. The Balladur initiatives were continued in the late 1980s by his
socialist successor, the late Mr Pierre Beregevoy.
The result of their efforts was the abolition of the old agents de change
who had dominated French equities for decades, and the creation of a modern
market using the state-of-the-art Relit settlement system and operated by
the securities subsidiaries of the big French banks and global financial
groups.
But the reforms of the 1980s did not go quite far enough. Despite the best
efforts of Mr Balladur and Mr Beregevoy, some of the old Gallic
idiosyncrasies have lingered on. The French rules on 'block' trading, or
large transactions, are still so strict that it is cheaper for most
securities houses to execute such deals in London rather than Paris.
Similarly the survival of l'impot de bourse, the tax levied on the turnover
of shares in Paris, does little to stem the flow of business away from
Paris.
These anachronisms have aggravated the fundamental problem of the Paris
stock market: lack of liquidity caused by a shortage of equity and
investment.
One reason for the equity shortage is that so many large French companies
are controlled by the state. Despite the Chirac government's privatisation
drive and the socialists' partial privatisation policy, at least 20 per cent
of French output comes from public sector companies.
Another factor is the nepotistic structure of the private sector, where many
big companies, such as Michelin and L'Oreal, are still controlled by the
founding families, and where there are so many 'sweetheart'
cross-shareholding deals that most of the remaining groups are not only
bid-proof, but have relatively small amounts of equity in public issue.
This dearth of equity has undoubtedly made the Paris market less attractive
to investors. Meanwhile the state's stranglehold over the pension system has
deprived France of the private pension funds that provide such useful
sources of capital for the US and UK stock markets. At the same time, the
combination of high interest rates and tax breaks has encouraged personal
investors to plough their savings into SICAV money market funds rather than
into shares.
Mr Beregevoy did his best to resolve these problems. However, his hopes of
abolishing l'impot de bourse, accelerating the partial privatisation
programme and introducing private pension funds, were stymied by the
opposition of the socialist traditionalists and the unions.
So far it looks as though the new Balladur government will have better luck,
not least because, as a centre-right administration, it is less vulnerable
to union pressure. Mr Balladur has already abolished l'impot de bourse on
small transactions. Mr Edmond Alphandery, his free marketeering economy
minister, has also tabled proposals for a privatisation drive which could
include the sale of up to 21 companies over the next two years. Pension
reform is in the pipeline and, as soon as the government budget can cope
with the loss of revenue, l'impot de bourse is expected to be scrapped.
It will take time for these measures to have a tangible effect on the
market. The government will not be able to sell off all its privatisation
candidates within the two-year lifespan of the present parliament. Pension
reform will be fraught with problems and, even when private pension funds
have been introduced, it will be years before they provide a substantial
source of capital.
But Mr Balladur has shown every sign of being determined to complete the
reforms he began in the mid-1980s and to prepare the Paris stock market for
the next century.
