FT  01 MAR 93 / No longer a superficial wound: The profits squeeze is
forcing Japanese companies to rethink how they do business
Japanese companies are admitting an unpalatable truth. Their success in the
late 1980s was partly a mirage, which disguised some strategic misadventures
and a lack of discipline about costs.
Last week, corporate Japan made its realisation public. Nissan, the
carmaker, announced plans to shut a domestic production plant in a drive to
save Y200bn (Pounds 1.2bn) in three years, with a cut of 5,000 in its
workforce of 53,000. NTT, the telecommunications group, plans to cut 30,000
jobs by 1996.
Restructuring has become publicly acceptable. Nissan and NTT have opened the
way for other companies to announce plans to halt a three-year slide in
profits.
That fall was set off by the slowdown in economic growth after the the rapid
acceleration of the late 1980s. But Japanese companies face more than simply
a cyclical slump in demand.
They are starting to acknowledge a deeper malaise. Operating profitability
for all industrial companies declined in the 1980s, owing to a steady rise
in costs. In addition, the car and electronics companies, which have been
the industrial engines of Japan's growth, face saturated domestic markets.
So as companies start cutting costs, they are facing more troubling
questions about the way they do business. Have they reached the limits of
their traditional methods of management? Will their profits improve only if
they retreat from what they have stood for - lifetime employment, a wide
array of trend-setting products and a constant effort to expand market
share?
The problem stems from the costs left over from the high growth of the late
1980s. The increase in investment between 1986 and 1990 has left behind a
depreciation charge which has risen to 4.5 per cent of manufacturing
industry's sales. Personnel costs have increased, because white-collar
employment in manufacturing has expanded by almost a fifth since 1985.
Labour costs per head last year were 25 per cent higher than in 1988.
Japanese companies were able to carry these costs on two conditions: high
rates of growth and cheap capital. With the collapse of the speculative
bubble economy of the late 1980s, those conditions have evaporated. The
result has been a severe profits squeeze. Total profits earned by the
industrial sector in Japan this year could be half the level they were in
March 1990, according to Mr Peter Norton, chief strategist at Baring
Securities.
Until this winter the corporate response to the profits squeeze was
superficial. Cuts in executive salaries of up to 15 per cent at companies
such as Omron, the electrical machinery maker, have been commonplace. Nippon
Steel started locking its doors at the weekend to reduce overtime. The
elimination of new-year cards saved the company about Y3m.
Job reductions were confined to workers on the fringe of companies'
full-time workforces. JVC, the electronics group, shed about 1,500
part-timers. Kanebo, the textiles and cosmetics group, is retiring 300
workers over the official retirement age.
Deep cuts in investment are widespread and more than superficial. But they
will not yield big short-term savings. Nissan is cutting investment by 15
per cent, but its depreciation charge will rise from Y96.9bn in 1990 to
Y160bn next year to pay for its past investment.
Until this year most companies had limited themselves to measures such as
these. But last month something changed. Companies began to recognise that
the downturn would be protracted. A new phase of restructuring began, which
typically involves a combination of:
Changes in senior management. The president of Matsushita, the ailing
electronics giant, last week resigned to take responsibility for its poor
performance. Bridgestone, the tyremaker, has taken the unprecedented step of
appointing as president an executive from its highly decentralised chemical
division who has extensive overseas experience.
Much deeper staff cuts. Iseki, which makes rice-planting machines, plans to
cut its workforce by a fifth to 2,300 by November 1995. Mazda, the carmaker,
has transferred 5,000 administrative staff to its production lines.
Retreating from new businesses. Taking advantage of cheap credit in the
1980s, many companies entered the high-growth electronics markets. Now
chemicals group Ube Industries, for example, is withdrawing from making
floppy discs.
Companies are cutting product ranges to make production simpler and reduce
development costs. Nissan plans to cut the number of options it offers with
its models - such as styles of steering wheel, or interior design - by 35
per cent in three years.
The proliferation of products in the past decade often generated large costs
but little revenue. Ajinomoto, the food group, plans to halve its product
range to 2,500 items after finding that 40 per cent of its products
contributed only 3 per cent of its sales.
Revising corporate structure. Sanyo, the electronics group, has replaced its
centralised divisions with eight business units, each responsible for its
own profitability under the slogan 'No excuses'.
Reducing such costs is a quick way to boost profitability. A 5 per cent cut
in administrative costs at the average manufacturer would improve operating
profits by more than 25 per cent, said Mr Norton.
But cost-cutting on this scale may not be enough to help manufacturers
respond to the longer-term pressures they face: more expensive capital; a
decline in prices for electronic goods; mounting competition from low-cost
Asian producers, especially in traditional industries such as textiles; and
the prospect that Japan's maturing economy will grow only slowly in the
1990s.
These pressures mean further restructuring to come.
International strategies are likely to be reassessed. More companies may
follow Shimizu, the construction group, which is pulling out of the UK and
Australia. Japanese companies may start to retreat from their ambitious
investment plans for the US and Europe, in favour of investment in low-cost
production plants in the high-growth economies of south-east Asia.
Within Japan, there is likely to be consolidation in whole sectors of
industry. A 30 per cent fall in paper prices since 1989 has already forced
Kanzaki Paper Manufacturing, the seventh largest paper-maker, to merge with
Oji Paper, the largest. That followed plans for a merger between Jujo Paper
and Sanyo Kokusaku Pulp.
The car industry, with nine manufacturers competing over a slowing market,
is another candidate for consolidation. There may have been room for nine
manufacturers in the 1960s, when automobile ownership in Japan was growing
at an annual rate of about 37 per cent. But in the next few years most
analysts expect ownership to grow by about 3 per cent at most. That may not
be enough to sustain them all. The tie-up between Honda and Isuzu announced
late last year could be the first step in a wider rationalisation of the
industry.
The heavily overpopulated electronics industry could also consolidate. One
senior executive admitted: 'We will no longer be able to make the profits we
need just from making hardware. No matter how efficient we are, it just
cannot be done.'
For the electronics companies, cost-cutting will not be enough. They need
new strategies to take them further into high-growth areas, such as
software.
As Japan's companies embark upon such changes, they have large resources to
draw upon: highly educated workforces employed in efficient, modern
factories. They also have a big incentive: the large productivity gains to
be reaped from cutting into bloated administrative and office divisions.
Moreover, the financial pressure upon them is unlikely to ease. Since
previous periods of restructuring in the 1970s and 1980s, the relationship
between the Japanese finance sector and industry has changed significantly.
In the 1970s, when companies restructured after the oil shock, they relied
upon the patient support of their banks. In the 1980s, large companies
turned to capital markets for their finance.
Now the banks have their own problems with mounting bad loans. The Tokyo
stock market is in the doldrums and Japanese investors are wary. The
international capital markets will provide funds, but they will demand that
Japanese companies make an internationally competitive return on investment.
That will maintain the pressure for improved profitability.
As Japan's companies start stripping themselves down to their competitive
core, many appear to be introspective and uncertain. When they emerge, in
three or four years, however, they may be more competitive than ever before.
