FT  18 FEB 93 / Unemployment in the UK: Training schemes are no panacea
IS there any point in training the longer-term unemployed? As the number of
people out of work for more than one year creeps up towards 1m again the
employment establishment is sticking as firmly as ever to the training
creed.
The government appears to accept the argument that training is of limited
use, especially to the well-qualified, white-collar unemployed. It is now
allowing Training and Enterprise Councils to choose who they train more than
ever before.
Money saved on training could go towards make-work schemes such as the
popular Community Programme, scrapped in 1988, which at its height employed
250,000. Or it could go to improving counselling by the Employment Service.
Experts say the service is amateurish at assessing people and needs to
establish a proper audit of the skills and aptitudes of each person as they
become unemployed.
But when the economy is simply not generating jobs, better assessment and
placement cannot do much. The apparent success of the compulsory Restart
interview for the long-term unemployed was partly based on diverting people
to the kinds of benefit support that takes them off the unemployment
register, such as disability.
The main training scheme for adults, Employment Training, was launched in
1988 at a time of skill shortages and worries about a shortage of
youngsters. This year it will cost Pounds 920m and train 200,000 people.
Critics say it is training too many electricians to become bricklayers and
bricklayers to become electricians. They also point out that a person who
has been on ET, who must have been unemployed for more than six months, has
only a 25 per cent chance of getting a job. Someone who has merely gone
through the Employment Service counselling service does better than that.
Counselling costs Pounds 275 for each successful job placement - ET costs
Pounds 10,000.
Supporters of training and make-work schemes see a lack of real conviction
by the establishment.
'Schemes for the unemployed have always been regarded as temporary things,
which is very damaging, and has meant that we have never really had a
worthwhile scheme,' says a senior civil servant.
The training lobby takes issue with the official figures for training versus
counselling. They say that ET has to deal with a more difficult client group
while the Employment Service creams off the best. Further, they say, ES
figures are not properly audited.
It is still the case that the unemployed are less well qualified than the
population as a whole, and unlike the early 1980s more than 50 per cent of
the long-term unemployed are under the age of 35. Skills they acquire could
have a lasting value.
Ms Karen Blackwood, 24, is one who has benefited. She left school in 1984
with 7 CSEs, but was made redundant after working as an audio-typist and
remained unemployed for eight months with employers saying her skills were
out of date.
Eventually she saw an advertisement in a paper for an ET course offering
'upskilling' as the way to get a job. 'I thought, that's what I need, it's
because I haven't got the right skills that I'm having such a hard time',
she said. Soon after that she found a job. Ms Blackwood illustrates the fact
that, while training can be part of the solution, it is no panacea.
