FT  10 JUL 93 / International Company News: Gerstner rules out early
restructuring at IBM
Mr Lou Gerstner, International Business Machines' new chairman and chief
executive, has told senior managers he does not intend to restructure the
company in the near future.
However, his new management approach could raise questions about some
aspects of the reshaping of IBM UK.
As he comes to grips with the problem of reversing IBM's decline, Mr
Gerstner has rejected calls from some IBM managers and many industry
analysts for a radical overhaul of the company's management structure.
'I do not want the company focusing on internal changes in the next 12 to 18
months, but rather on customers, marketplaces and competitors,' Mr Gerstner
said in a memorandum sent to senior managers last week.
'It is not clear to me that there is a demonstrably better alternative (to
the current structure), that eliminates the need for sophisticated
management approaches,' he said.
While continuing with the changes set in motion by Mr John Akers, his
predecessor, to give IBM's product manufacturing and regional sales and
marketing groups greater responsibility for their financial performance, Mr
Gerstner has balked at the idea of cutting ties with central management.
The 'federation of increasingly autonomous business units' envisioned by Mr
Akers is a thing of the past. 'Autonomous is the word that drives me crazy,'
Mr Gerstner has said in management meetings.
Instead, he has set about improving efficiency and responsiveness to
customers within IBM's structure.
Mr Gerstner, in addressing the company's most contentious internal problem,
has called for a clear delineation of responsibilities between the company's
national or regional sales and marketing organisations versus its product
manufacturing groups.
The product groups  - called lines of business in IBM jargon  - are to be
given increased responsibility for sales and marketing.
'Lobs should have dedicated sales resources in each geography,' Mr Gerstner
said. 'The Lob should be heavily involved in determining the size, skill,
training and compensation of these dedicated resources.'
This represents a significant shift of power and responsibilities away from
IBM's country and regional managers. IBM's product groups, most of which
have headquarters in the US, will have increased influence over
international sales and marketing operations.
Mr Gerstner's directive could raise questions about IBM UK's recently
announced plans to divide its operations into 30 separate businesses.
The IBM UK plan now appears to be a regional implementation of Mr Akers'
strategy, rather than a reflection of Mr Gerstner's current thinking.
Indeed, the potential for conflict among IBM UK's newly formed business
units is what Mr Gerstner is attempting to eliminate.
Under the IBM UK reorganisation plan, a mainframe computer sale to a bank
could be made by the banking business sales and marketing unit, or by a
sales team dedicated to the Enterprise Systems (mainframe) product group.
'Duplication and complication should be avoided,' Mr Gerstner said in his
memo to top managers. 'It is my expectation that we will complete all of
this (the company-wide strategy) within the next 90 days.'
