FT  15 JAN 93 / International Company News: Nissan and Mazda in supply deal
NISSAN and Mazda, two of Japan's leading carmakers, have agreed to provide
each other with small vans and light trucks in a significant step towards
the consolidation of the hard-pressed Japanese motor industry.
Under the deal, Nissan is likely to suspend production of some of its light
commercial vehicles and instead sell trucks supplied by Mazda. Mazda will
streamline its range of vans by being supplied by Nissan.
Mr Yoshifumi Tsuji, Nissan president, said the alliance was designed to
improve profitability by reducing development costs.
The partnership is the latest sign of the pressure Japan's vehicle makers
are under to cut costs in response to sharp falls in profits over the past
two years.
It follows a similar deal announced last month between Isuzu and Honda.
Isuzu will supply Honda with its Rodeo recreational vehicle, plugging an
important gap in Honda's product range. Honda will supply Isuzu with small
passenger cars. Isuzu is pulling out of passenger car production.
The pressure for consolidation among the weaker producers in the Japanese
car industry, which is struggling beneath a burden of excess production
capacity, marks a sharp change of fortune.
Until about 18 months ago, the Japanese producers were confidently expanding
across the world and widening their product ranges. In the past year, cuts
in capital investment have become widespread, companies are lengthening the
gap between model changes and pulling in their horns internationally.
Analysts believe the current downturn may usher in an era of slow growth in
car demand which will make it increasingly difficult for Japan to support
nine fiercely competitive car producers.
The Japanese industry is separating into two groups. Companies such as
Toyota, the leading producer, Mitsubishi and Suzuki are weathering the
downturn in relatively sound financial health.
However producers such as Nissan, Mazda and Honda have been badly hit by
declining sales just as they are shouldering the financial burden of heavy
investments they made in the late 1980s.
Mr Koji Endo, analyst at S. G. Warburg securities said: 'No Japanese maker
other than Toyota has the resources to sustain a comprehensive product
range. This deal is the first step towards a wider partnership and other
companies will have to follow, targeting their resources at specific
segments of the market.'
Nissan reported a loss in the six months to the end of last September of
Y14.24bn (Dollars 113m) largely because it has been losing market share in
Japan's declining market. Nissan's sales in Japan last year fell by 20 per
cent to 546,778 units and its market share fell by 1.2 per cent to 22 per
cent.
Mazda reported a 73 per cent fall in pre-tax profits for the first half of
the year to Y3bn.
