FT  17 DEC 93 / Arts: Artists drawn to the club - The continuing popularity
of the London Group
The artists' exhibiting society has been a feature of the British art world
ever since the founding of the Royal Academy. The essential unclubbability
of the artist was always largely a myth - egocentric yes, but not
unclubbable - and how else was he to set his work against that of his peers
and before the public?
The Academy set the pattern and, by its very success, made the proliferation
of junior rivals inevitable. Up they sprang through the 19th century, the
Royal Society of This and the Royal Association of That, all soon to be
reacted against in their turn.
Some groups, especially the more experimental, proved all too disputatious
and ephemeral - Wyndham Lewis's Vorticists before the first world war, for
example, and the Seven &amp; Five Society after. But two have proved as
resilient as any: the New English Art Club, set up by Whistler, Wilson Steer
and their cronies at the turn of the century which openly cocked a snook at
the Academy; and the London Group, born on the break-up of the Camden Town
Group in the autumn of 1913.
Eighty years on, the list of sometime members and exhibitors with the London
Group is almost a roll-call of British modernism, from Sickert, Lewis and
Epstein, through Bomberg and the Nash brothers, Spencer, John, Gertler, Bell
and Fry, to Hepworth, Hitchens, Moore and Piper and so on to Heron, Pasmore,
Auerbach, Rego, Frink, Davie and Bellany in more recent times. Even so, it
is hard to say quite why the Group remains important. It has had its moments
of near-terminal crisis, and long fallow periods, and yet still its
disappearance would be a real loss. Happily, any such outcome now seems
remote.
The London Group is run by artists for their own benefit and interest, quite
independent of the judgment of important dealers and museum curators and
their view of what is saleable and what significant. Conceptual
installations may still command international exhibitions and awards, but
painting, on this evidence, is still a resilient and healthy plant which no
narrow critical correctness will stifle.
Such is the plethora of choice and opportunity facing the young artist these
days, with generous prize exhibitions and an enormously expanded acreage of
gallery wallspace available, that the kind of opportunity the London Group
represents is too easily undervalued and overlooked. Thirty years ago, when
I was a student myself, its annual open-submission exhibitions gave young
artists pretty well the only chance they had of getting work onto a public
wall in the company of their peers. And of them all, it was with the London
Group that we most wished to show because of the distinction of its members,
the rigour of its selection and the knowledge that one's work really was to
be submitted to the judgment of one's peers.
So it still is - and the approbation of one's fellow artists is still the
most gratifying. Lately, after wandering for a while, the London Group seems
to have found a home at the Barbican. The curving Concourse Gallery is not
the easiest of spaces but, used well, it is impressive and this 80th
celebratory show is as well-chosen and hung as any of its recent occupants.
No open show can ever be better than its submission, but the Group evidently
still attracts a strong professional entry. The selection is properly
catholic, setting abstraction against figuration of all kinds, and trusting
the strength and quality of the particular work to hold its own in the
company. It would be invidious to pick out names other than as typical of
the whole, but I do recommend Ray Atkins, Gus Cummings, Adrian Bartlett,
John Copnall, Trica Gillman, Albert Irvin, Anthony Whishaw, Stan Smith and
Ken Oliver among the members and, of the outsiders, Shanti Panchal, Georgina
Hunt, Susan Hawker and Mark Dunford.
Both Graham Sutherland and Edward Burra showed with the London Group in
their time, and it is by a nice coincidence that both are celebrated in
current exhibitions, if only for another week. The Sutherland, at Bernard
Jacobson, is a show of real distinction, a choice group of comparatively
small paintings of landscape and organic forms. They represent the artist on
his surest ground and in his strongest period, most especially the 1940s and
'50s, with a handful of his pre-war prints for good measure. The show has
been extended beyond its advertised run until Christmas Eve.
The Burra show at Lefevre is more of a curiosity but none the less engaging
for that. Given the incidental and picaresque preoccupations of his early
work, in particular the louche bar and cafe life of the Marseilles
waterfront of the early 1930s, it seems no more than obvious that he should
have worked for the theatre. The only surprise, on the strength of these
remarkably lively and witty sets of costume designs for various productions
of the 1930s and '40s, is that he was not working all the time. My own
favourites are the figures for Carmen, at Covent Garden in 1946, but from
Rio Grande of 1931 to Don Quixote of 1949, all have their considerable charm
and quality.
The London Group's 80th Open Exhibition: Concourse Gallery, Barbican Centre,
EC2, until January 7. Graham Sutherland: Bernard Jacobson Gallery, 14a
Clifford Street W1, until December 24. Costume Designs by Edward Burra:
Lefevre Gallery, 30 Bruton Street W1, until December 21.
