FT  06 DEC 93 / The Business Traveller: More first world than wild west -
Philip Gawith guides the first-time visitor around Johannesburg now
sanctions have been lifted
Johannesburg has acquired an unhappy reputation as one of the most violent
cities in the world. Certainly, in some of the neighbouring townships, the
cost of human life sometimes appears alarmingly cheap, but the business
visitor should start out in a more positive frame of mind.
Now that sanctions against South Africa have been lifted, there will be an
increasing number of foreign business travellers arriving in the commercial
capital for the first time. If you are paying your first visit, you are
likely to have several concerns: how safe will you be? Where should you
stay? And what can you do in your free time?
In terms of safety, staying and working in downtown Johannesburg is not
markedly different from visiting other large cities. There are muggings.
Cars are sometimes hijacked. But Johannesburg is not the Wild West outpost
it is often portrayed as.
The normal rules of prudence should ensure the safety of any visitor: take
care about being alone at night, do not wear ostentatious jewellery, and
avoid visiting remote areas.
Nevertheless the city centre's poor image has taken its toll. The Carlton is
the only five-star hotel left in the centre, compared with four a few years
ago.
Most businessmen prefer to stay slightly north of Johannesburg in Sandton,
at the Sandton Sun and Towers, or at the Rosebank hotel, in the city's leafy
northern suburbs. New hotel developments in the northern suburbs are
expected, with Hyatt, the US hotels group, likely to run a hotel there.
If you are visiting government departments in Pretoria, which is 45 minutes'
drive from Johannesburg, or an institution such as the Development Bank at
Midrand, midway between Johannesburg and Pretoria, it makes sense to be in
Sandton. It is also a good place to stay if you are visiting some of the
many companies - particularly consumer groups, advertising agencies and
small financial institutions - that have moved into Sandton and the suburbs
from the city centre.
Be warned, though, you will pay for the privilege - Sandton hotel rates are
now considerably higher than those in the city centre.
For visits to many other institutions, however, the Carlton is more
convenient. The mining houses, financial community and stock exchange are
all still in the city centre. For those concerned about their security, the
hotel offers a minder free of charge, who will accompany guests walking
around town.
For those who choose to defy convention and opt for the city centre, there
are two advantages.
First, most of the city's limited cultural activities are located there. The
Market Theatre complex, in particular, is home to some of the most
interesting theatre and music, especially jazz.
Second, the city centre is predominantly black. Staying there reminds you -
by no means in a threatening way - of what continent you have come to do
business in. The mostly white northern suburbs can easily foster the
illusion that you are in San Francisco or Sydney.
ETIQUETTE
South African business culture is very Anglo Saxon in orientation, but
visitors from continental Europe tend to liken it more to the US than the
UK.
There are no quirky business conventions, but visitors are sometimes struck
by the formality of some of the mining houses and banks. Meetings and
lunches are normally jackets-on affairs, and even fellow directors often
refer to the chairman by his title or surname.
Consumer companies are more relaxed and are also more likely to invite their
visitors for a game of golf. The business community is fairly cordial to
visitors: the chances are that you will be invited out in the evening rather
than left to languish in your hotel.
LEISURE
Johannesburg is not much of a tourist destination - there are very few 'must
see' landmarks. More of these can be found in Pretoria, which boasts the
Union Buildings - the seat of government - and the Voortrekker monument.
Johannesburg does, however, have several well-equipped cinema complexes
screening the latest worldwide releases.
For those who have a spare weekend, South Africa's main tourist destinations
are Cape Town and the Western Cape, the Eastern Transvaal - focus of most
wildlife safaris - and the Drakensberg mountains.
Cape Town is a two-hour flight from Johannesburg. A flight to Skukuza or
Nelspruit in the Eastern Transvaal takes about an hour. The best known
luxury safari lodges - Londolozi, Sabi Sabi and Mala Mala - are five to six
hours' drive from Johannesburg. The main resorts in the Drakensberg are four
to five hours' drive.
The Sun City resort is about 1 1/2 hours' drive away. It has two good golf
courses. And the new Palace Hotel at the Lost City is a splendid, if
slightly over-the-top, luxury offering.
