FT  15 APR 93 / US proposes Dollars 4bn fund for Russian economic reforms
THE US tried to assert its leadership of international efforts to bolster
Russian reforms yesterday in launching a plan for a Dollars 4bn (Pounds
2.6bn) multilateral fund to promote privatisation.
The Clinton administration made the proposal at the opening of a two-day
emergency meeting in Tokyo of the Group of Seven leading industrialised
countries, convened to help strengthen President Boris Yeltsin, the
embattled Russian leader.
Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the Russian foreign minister, who will attend the talks
today, delivered a warning that the world might 'slide back to cold war'
without continued western financial assistance to promote reform.
The US proposal is aimed at easing the privatisation of large state
enterprises, which are the most difficult to privatise.
Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the US Treasury secretary, said the scheme would free
Russia's central bank of some of the burden of converting the huge oil, gas
and other leading industries to private control; save thousands of jobs; and
reduce inflation caused by the bank's issuing of easy credits to state
industries. Mr Bentsen and Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state,
said the US would provide Dollars 500m for the scheme if other G7 countries
provided a total Dollars 1.5bn. The rest would come from international
insititutions such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
However, German officials indicated that further large pledges of money were
unlikely, as it had already contributed huge sums to Russian reform. A
senior Japanese official said: 'We have already made our best efforts and we
do not expect to be asked for further money.'
Mr Norman Lamont, Britain's chancellor of the exchequer, said that although
the UK agreed with the emphasis on privatisation, 'all G7 members would want
to consider further how best to pursue that aim'. Canadian officials said
the proposal would require more study, while the Italians emphasised that
the privatisation plan was still a US idea.
Details of the plan will be developed during this morning's closing session,
which will be attended by the Russian representatives Mr Kozyrev and Mr
Boris Fyodorov, the deputy primeminister. The G7 meeting is expected to
approve aid worth about Dollars 30bn, most of which will be debt relief and
credit extensions from the IMF that have already been agreed.
Several countries announced new country-to-country assistance yesterday.
Japan confirmed that it was offering Dollars 1.8bn in bilateral assistance,
mainly trade credits.
The UK said it would provide an additional Pounds 383m, while the US said
its contribution to the privatisation fund would be drawn from a Dollars
1.8bn package, details of which are due to be announced today.
Germany, France and Canada said they would not add to existing bilateral
aid. Some ministers complained that 'one-upmanship' was encouraging G7
members to announce ever larger offers, of decreasing effectiveness. One
minister said: 'Our emphasis must be on quality, not quantity.'
The foreign and finance ministers agreed that further aid for Russia should
be conditional upon economic, political and foreign policy reform being made
irreversible.
The meeting agreed that aid should be linked to progress in controlling
inflation; establishing greater discipline at the Russian central bank; and
the restructuring of Russian industry, particularly through the development
of small and medium-sized enterprises.
The other main focus for aid was decommissioning Russian nuclear weapons.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the British foreign minister, will today emphasise the
importance of Russia's playing a constructive role in international affairs,
particularly the support for international efforts to end the war in former
Yugoslavia by putting greater pressure on Serbia.
