FT  26 JUL 93 / Biggest VW shareholder backs Lopez
MR Gerhard Schroder, prime minister of the state of Lower Saxony, has
restated his support for Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, Volkswagen's
production director, despite mounting evidence to support industrial spying
allegations against him.
The statement from Mr Schroder, followed a hurriedly called meeting on
Friday with Mr Ferdinand Piech, group chairman.
The state's 20 per cent stake lost an estimated DM300m (Pounds 116m) of its
value last week as legal setbacks lopped 7 per cent off VW shares.
It has since emerged that Mr Lopez, linked last Thursday by state
prosecutors with one batch of confidential documents belonging to General
Motors, his former employer, and found in a Wiesbaden house, had personally
collected some of the others.
In early February, more than a month before he abruptly joined VW, he
visited Adam Opel, GM's German subsidiary, from his Detroit base, to attend
meetings called at his request. On February 3 and 4, during the
presentations, he asked managers from the group's European subsidiaries for
papers on purchasing, cost and new model strategies.
Some of these later turned up in four boxes in the former Wiesbaden home of
two of his Opel colleagues, who followed him to VW.
On the afternoon of February 4, a call was made from his office near
Frankfurt to Wolfsburg, the VW headquarters. Whom he called is not clear,
but according to an extract from his office diary for that day, reproduced
in today's edition of the news magazine Der Spiegel, Mr Lopez had noted:
'14pm Jens Neu'.
The magazine suggested this could have referred to a meeting with Mr Jens
Neumann, the VW director responsible for group strategy.
However, the distances involved suggest a meeting was unlikely. The next
day, when Mr Lopez was to attend talks in Zurich at GM Europe, he cancelled
all appointments and turned up unexpectedly at Eisenach in eastern Germany,
Opel's newest car factory, and asked for documents on the plant's lean
production systems. On February 6, he called Wolfsburg again.
Public prosecutors investigating GM's suspicions of espionage last week
stated that transparencies also found in the boxes, and regarded as
confidential by GM, had also been expressly requested and translated into
German by Mr Lopez.
Der Spiegel, which last week was freed from a reporting gag on the case
imposed through a temporary injunction granted to VW last month, yesterday
quoted a senior VW employee as saying the prosecutors' statement sparked
'blind panic' in Wolfsburg.
It also claimed an eye-witness had seen Mr Lopez's associates, Mr Jorge
Alvarez Aguirre, and Mr Rosario Piazza, using two shredding machines in the
house. Asked what they were doing, Mr Alvarez is said to have replied: 'We
are destroying some General Motors documents.'
The shredding took place after the two had quit Opel.
VW could not be reached for comment yesterday.
