FT  08 MAY 93 / Nuclear scheme that became a 16-year Whitehall nightmare:
The Pounds 2.8bn Thorp reprocessor might yet prove an enormous white
elephant
THE GOVERNMENT is expected to ask the attorney general formally in the next
few days how to avoid a judicial review on its most tortuous environmental
problem: whether to allow Sellafield's Thorp plant for nuclear reprocessing
to go ahead.
British Nuclear Fuels began construction of the Pounds 2.8bn, 500 metre-long
plant after the 1977 Windscale inquiry. All the yellow cranes and steel
walkways are fitted, the gleaming pipes are filled with nitric acid and the
plant could start with the push of a button. BNF, whose long-term future
rests on Thorp, is incredulous that the government can even consider
scrapping it.
But the decision, originally expected by civil servants to be just another
licensing application, has turned into a Whitehall nightmare. One senior
official said it was like 'the worst questions you are ever set (upon)
entering the Civil Service, which you never expect to meet again in your
life'.
If the attorney general decides no further action is needed to ensure the
government is safe from legal action by pressure groups, then Thorp's fate
will be decided in weeks on the basis of the pollution inspectorate's recent
public consultation. The inspectorate is preparing its report for Mr Michael
Howard, the environment secretary, on the 80,000 public responses.
But the attorney general may rule that the government also needs to be seen
to consider the economic and social case for the plant, given that 16 years
have passed since construction was approved. Simply preparing and publishing
the government's view of that case could delay a decision for months. A full
public inquiry could take years.
Although environmentalists believe a referral to the attorney general could
make it more likely that Thorp is cancelled, it is hard to see how any wider
examination would be equipped to come to that conclusion. Simply put, it is
probably now too complicated to scrap Thorp.
The heart of the debate is that the reasons for reprocessing are not as
clear-cut as they seemed 16 years ago. Reprocessing extracts reusable
uranium and plutonium from used or 'spent' nuclear fuel. But uranium is no
longer scarce, and many countries have abandoned development of
'fast-breeder' reactors which use plutonium as fuel. Moreover, worries about
plutonium proliferation have increased.
The UK dares not simply start the plant and wait to see if there is adequate
demand because, as soon as the first load of fuel runs through, the
structure will become radioactive. BNF puts the eventual cost of
decommissioning, including all attached equipment, at about Pounds 1.2bn.
Any government examination would focus on BNF's claim that Thorp would be
profitable just on the basis of contracts already signed for the first 10
years. BNF says that, if Thorp were abandoned, the UK would lose at least
Pounds 900m in cashflow.
There are reasons to doubt foreign customers still want Thorp to go ahead.
In Japan and Germany, which make up half the Pounds 9bn order book for the
first decade, power companies and government officials have said they are
committed to the BNF contracts.
But Germany is investigating storage of nuclear waste as a cheaper option,
while Japan began building its own reprocessing plant last month. Both
countries are also anxious about their contractual obligation to take back
the reprocessed uranium, plutonium and waste produced by Thorp from their
fuel. The German government is wary of its green movement, while the
Japanese government is sensitive to international opposition to plutonium
shipments. These pressures, thought to be the factor most likely to weaken
their commitment, would emerge once Thorp started up.
Given those uncertainties, the economic case for Thorp rests almost entirely
on the strength of the customer contracts - an extremely difficult legal
assessment. BNF says Japan and Germany would be bound by ferocious penalty
clauses obliging them to repay almost all the contracted sum if they pulled
out. That would have to be assessed by any investigation.
The government would also have to judge whether, if it initiated
cancellation of Thorp, it would be obliged to repay foreign customers some
Pounds 1.6bn in advance payments used to pay for the plant's construction.
Then there is the headache of nearly 5,000 tonnes of customers' fuel already
waiting in Sellafield's storage ponds. It is far from clear that customers
would have to take it back.
Fear of incurring penalties would make it hard for the government to raise
the wider question of whether abandoning the plant, and releasing all
parties from the contracts, could be in the mutual interest of the UK and
Thorp's foreign customers. Civil servants say that the parties are trapped
in a nuclear 'prisoners' dilemma', mirroring the famous conundrum of game
theory, where the impossibility of collaboration means that the parties may
reach a mutually undesirable outcome.
Other questions such as converting Sellafield to a permanent store for
international nuclear waste - without activating Thorp - are likely to be
hard to raise.
The International Atomic Energy Authority, the international watchdog, has
urged countries to investigate a politically stable host for such a store.
It might welcome a BNF offer to keep their waste for ever.
Some environmental campaigners say privately that, while they oppose nuclear
power, they might be able to accommodate that solution - their opposition to
reprocessing is driven by worries about plutonium proliferation.
UK officials are pessimistic about the diplomatic possibility of raising
these wider questions. Ministers are conscious of the political
embarrassment cancellation would bring: the loss of at least 1,200 Cumbrian
jobs and the creation of one of Britain's biggest white elephants.
One official said, 'We need to be seen to have jumped through every hoop.'
Only if that took years - because the government launched a full public
inquiry - would Thorp's cancellation seem likely. A very long delay would
erode the profit forecasts and could give customers a legitimate reason to
pull out. But in Whitehall corridors the working assumption is very much
that Thorp will go ahead.
Additional reporting by Quentin Peel and Emiko Terazono.
