FT  05 JUN 93 / Glory days gone for now: Edward Balls says England's
football decline mirrors its economy
Gutted', 'gob-smacked', 'sick as a parrot' - no footballing cliche can
adequately characterise the depth of national despair that engulfed England
after Wednesday's World Cup defeat at the hands of Norway.
England - where the game of football was invented - was beaten 2-0 in Oslo
and probably ejected from the 1994 World Cup final round, to be held in
America next year.
And at the hands of Norway, too. Norway, more famous for its fish than its
football, with a population a 10th that of England's. A country that
worshipped English soccer (as BBC commentator John Motson reminded his
unfortunate audience) had trounced England's national team.
But the defeat has been interpreted as more than just a freak - a single
poor performance by a disorganised team. Instead, it is seen as further
evidence that the decline of English football has become terminal. 'Fatal
flaws of woeful England exposed', thundered The Times; 'Norse manure', The
Sun added.
Yet was anyone really surprised? Britain still has a seat on the UN Security
Council; it has nuclear weapons; it even won the World Cup (at home) in
1966. But surely the decline of English football has gone hand in hand with
England's relative economic decline.
Starting with the 6-3 home defeat at the hands of Hungary in 1953, the
first-ever defeat at Wembley, England's footballing star has been waning,
along with its economic clout. Since 1953 England has slipped from second to
fifth in the world in terms of output; it has fallen considerably further
down the league table of income per head. More populous nations, such as
Brazil and Argentina, have risen to prominence on the world footballing
stage.
The FT's analysis of England's World Cup record since 1953 suggests that the
English soccer team has continued to do better than might be expected from
the country's size and economic power. The analysis awards points for
performance in the final rounds of the World Cup (failure to qualify scores
no points). It divides the 10 World Cup competitions from 1953 into two
groups, the split coming between the 1970 and 1974 contests. The year 1973
was a watershed for England. In addition to the Opec oil shock and the
Barber boom, it saw the English soccer team draw 1-1 with Poland at Wembley
in October. The side was eliminated from the competition during the
qualifying stages (see charts).
From 1954 to 1970, English soccer continued to fare comparatively well,
despite the country being overtaken in economic size by France, Germany and
Japan, and suffering the shock of sterling's 1967 devaluation. The English
team ranked third, well behind Germany and Brazil.
From 1970 on, it was downhill all the way. Inflation soared during the
1970s, labour relations deteriorated, and the England team failed to qualify
for either World Cup tournament. Despite qualifying in 1982, 1986 and 1990,
England has been overtaken in the rankings by Argentina, Italy, Holland and
Poland. Only England's fortuitous 1990 victory over Cameroon prevented the
team from falling behind France and Belgium.
The biggest shifts in relative soccer performance since 1970 have been the
slippage of Brazil and the collapse of the communist teams - only Poland has
bucked the trend, coming from nowhere to sixth place in 1974-90; the rise of
continental European football; and the enormous success of Argentina since
the early 1970s.
The economic background to these changes provides few clues as to England's
relative footballing decline. High and fluctuating inflation since 1973
might have been a clue to the decline of both Brazil and England, though on
different scales, were it not for the rise of Argentina. Nor does the
decline of Soviet-style collectivism help explain why British soccer has
withered alongside British socialism. If anything, the rise of Thatcherite
individualism is a better explanation for England's poor performance at team
games.
Despite the present gloom, it appears that England's declining World Cup
performance has continued to outstrip its economic record. Over the period
1974-90, England ranked seventh in the FT World Cup league table. But among
World Cup qualifying nations, England now has only the 11th-biggest
population and the 14th-highest income per head. Defeat by Norway is not so
surprising. Though smaller, it is now much richer than England - Dollars
6,000 a person a year richer in 1990, according to the World Bank.
So why has England taken the defeat so badly? Part of the explanation is
economic. For a country grappling to get out of recession, and with a prime
minister ill at ease with himself, failure to qualify for the 1994 World Cup
final seems disastrous. The other reason is more simple: England's
performance on Wednesday was terrible. A shocked Mr Graham Taylor, the
England manager, accused his players of giving up. 'It's a performance that
will make people back home very angry,' he said.
But Mr Taylor must take his share of the blame. It was his last-minute
tactical decisions which caused the players to appear like 'headless
chickens' on the pitch. Refusing to select Chris Waddle, and playing Gary
Pallister at left-back, made little sense.
Following Mr John Major's example, he will have to consider a reshuffle. But
it may not be enough to produce a winning team.
