FT  19 AUG 93 / Observer: Developing speculation
Now that the Bank of France governor Jacques de Larosiere has secured the
presidency of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the
rumour-mongers are turning their attention to a much bigger subject - the
presidency of the World Bank, the grandaddy of the development banking
world.
The speculation has been prompted by concern about the health of former J P
Morgan boss Lewis Preston, 67, who moved to the World Bank a couple of years
ago. He is still expected to return after convalescing from coronary bypass
surgery. But this has not stopped much tongue-wagging about who might get
the job if it was up for grabs again.
Though it may seem odd, tradition has it that the job goes to an American.
Preston was appointed by a Republican president, so Clinton would probably
want a Democrat in place.
The favourite on the Washington cocktail party circuit is Paul Volcker, the
former Federal Reserve chairman. He is two years younger than Preston and
was in the running last time. The downside is that he is probably nowhere
near as rich as Preston, so might not be willing to take a pay cut in order
to serve his country yet again.
A couple of other names being bandied around are Lazard Freres' Felix
Rohatyn and Robert Rubin, director of the White House economic council. Both
are old Wall Street hands and know their way around the capital markets, if
not the developing world.
However, ex-President Jimmy Carter's name has also been mentioned. He is a
Democrat and has taken a strong interest in development issues since he left
the White House. But he turns 69 in October. A more enterprising suggestion
is that General Colin Powell, who is about to retire as chairman of the US
Joint Chiefs of Staff, might be the man to attack the World Bank's
management structure. After all, he has already run the Pentagon, possibly
the only organisation with a bureaucracy more Byzantine than the World
Bank's. And thanks to Jacques Attali's brief time at the EBRD, the job is
now much better paid.
