FT  28 OCT 93 / Labour sticks to all-women shortlists
LABOUR'S National Executive Committee has decided to press ahead with
women-only shortlists in some parliamentary constituencies, ignoring claims
that the plan is illegal.
Some Labour MPs have warned that attempts to force constituency parties to
exclude male candidates could provoke a court challenge under the Sex
Discrimination Act.
Mr John Evans, MP for St Helens North and an NEC member, said local parties
might take action 'because people have been nursing those seats for some
time'.
Claims that the plan would breach the act were bolstered this week by Lord
Lester QC, who helped to draft the equal opportunities legislation.
Yet the NEC said yesterday that the party was determined to implement the
policy, which was approved by delegates to the annual conference in Brighton
last month.
A party official said: 'The message the NEC wants to send is that we are
neither unwilling nor unable to implement the policy. Our legal advice is
that there is no impediment.'
The NEC will now instruct Labour's regional parties to draw up lists of
Conservative-held marginal seats, half of which will be instructed to
prepare women-only candidate shortlists. Such shortlists will also be
mandatory in half of the Labour-held seats in each region that will become
vacant at the next general election because of the retirement of the sitting
MP.
Officials calculate that the quota system would increase the number of
female Labour MPs from 37 to between 75 and 80 if Labour won a comfortable
majority at the next general election.
The decision to press ahead with the policy reflects the Labour leadership's
determination to stand by its commitment to positive discrimination, in
spite of recent embarrassments.
Last week's elections to the shadow cabinet were overshadowed by a row over
new rules requiring MPs to cast at least four of their 18 votes for women.
Two high-profile women, Ms Harriet Harman and Mrs Ann Clwyd, lost their
places amid claims that some male MPs had deliberately spread their votes
among female candidates who had no hope of winning a seat.
Mr John Smith, the party leader, signalled his commitment to the quota
system by reappointing Ms Harman to the front bench.
The NEC also decided yesterday to stop the party's commission on electoral
reform from discussing voting systems for local and regional government.
