FT  31 JUL 93 / UK Company News: Europa Minerals in merger talks
EUROPA MINERALS, a small UK mining finance house, is having negotiations
about a three-sided merger with Burmine and Austmin Gold, two Australian
companies with which it is already closely involved.
In addition Mount Edon, another Australian concern, had made an approach
which might lead to an offer.
Europa's two independent directors, Mr Campbell Douglas and Mr Peter
Ronayne, are backing the merger with Burmine and Austmin. An independent
review of asset values is to be made before formal terms are announced, but
they are likely to involve shareholders receiving one Burmine share for
every two Europa.
With Burmine's shares at ADollars 1.90 (85p) each this indicates a value of
about 42p for each Europa ordinary and Pounds 10.3m for the company.
The Europa price slipped 2p to 35p immediately after the news. It has been
as low as 3p in the past year and in June 1992 only 16 per cent of a rights
issue of shares at 5p was taken up.
Trading is expected to begin again today in Australia in both Burmine and
Austmin shares which were suspended after a previous announcement that the
three-way restructuring was a possibility,
Mount Edon, a small Australian mining company backed by Swiss money, said it
had bought another 10 per cent of Europa, taking its interest to 18 per cent
and that it might make a share or cash offer, or a combination of the two,
for the rest.
Mount Edon is understood to have paid a maximum of 33p each and to have
indicated it might bid 34p.
Europa's principal investments are oil and gas royalties and 41.8 per cent
of Burmine, a gold producer in Western Australia.
Austmin, an exploration company, owns 19.8 per cent of Europa. Burmine would
also offer one share for every 11 Austmin, but this would exclude Austmin's
18.1 per cent stake in Consolidated Exploration.
Europa's independent directors argued that the merger would enable the
complex shareholdings to be simplified. They also considered that the
group's combined strength could be more easily recognised by the market and
provide a foundation for future growth.
Under the proposals Europa and Austmin would own 20 per cent and 7 per cent
respectively of Burmine. These cross holdings would be placed to raise
additional cash for the enlarged group which would have a market price of
about ADollars 62m.
