FT  13 FEB 93 / Croat backing on UN force likely
CROATIA is expected to accept a recommendation by Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali,
the United Nations secretary general, to renew the mandate for the
14,000-strong UN Protection Force in Croatia - which expires on February 21
 -for an interim period only, ending on March 31.
In a report to the Security Council, Mr Boutros Ghali said he could not, for
the moment, recommend extending the mandate for a longer period.
This was because of the unstable situation created by the recent Croatian
military offensive in the Krajina region and, more fundamentally, the
failure to implement fully the original peace-keeping plan of January 1992.
The report is due to be discussed by the Council at the end of next week.
The secretary general said he had asked the co-chairmen of the conference on
the former Yugoslavia, Mr Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen, to address these basic
problems urgently so conditions could be established for a 'substantive'
extension of the mandate.
Mr Boutros Ghali's report blames both sides for the renewed fighting in the
region.
'Even if the (Croatian) government had some reason to be impatient with the
local Serb leadership's obstruction of the original peace-keeping plan, its
offensive has had a devastating effect on co-operation between UNPROFOR and
the local Serb authorities at all levels and has put in doubt the
feasibility of a return to the original plan.'
Under the terms of that plan, UN peace-keeping troops were deployed in three
UN protected areas in Croatia, corresponding largely to areas where
intercommunal tensions had led to armed conflict.
Other important provisions were the withdrawal of the federal Yugoslav army
from the whole of Croatia, the demilitarisation of the UN protected areas
and the continued functioning, on an interim basis, of existing local
authorities and police under UN supervision.
The secretary general's report makes clear that, while the withdrawal of the
Yugoslav army had been ensured, the non-co-operation of the local Serb
authorities had prevented the demilitarisation of the protected areas and
the disarming of the Serb territorial defence and irregular forces.
Serb hostility to UNPROFOR, on the other hand, had been inflamed by the
Croatian offensive, since the local Serb leadership felt 'betrayed' by what
it sees as the UN's failure to protect them.
'Neither the Croatian government's position that an overall political
solution already exists, nor the local Serb authorities' demand that they be
recognised as an independent republic provides a solution to the conflict,'
the report states.
'Instead, these positions, if maintained, could lead to large-scale
hostilities.'
Examining the various options for a future extension of the UNPROFOR
mandate, Mr Boutros Ghali underlines the problems of giving the force more
teeth.
The mere adoption of an enforcement resolution by the Security Council
risked threatening the safety and security of UN peace-keeping personnel in
the protected areas.
