FT  04 DEC 93 / Books: Publishers try to win in the Willows - The craze for
the sequel
THE WILLOWS IN WINTER by William Horwood HarperCollins Pounds 12.99, 296
pages
PEMBERLEY by Emma Tennant Hodder &amp; Stoughton Pounds 9.99, 184 pages
Did Elizabeth Bennett and Mr Darcy live happily ever after? Did Toad of Toad
Hall really reform? Of course you want to know. Characters from great and
much loved novels remain so vividly in our imagination that we long for them
to have a future beyond the last page, outside the artistic construct in
which they were created. Hence the craze for the sequel - first Scarlett,
after Gone With The Wind, then Mrs de Winter, after Rebecca, and now
follow-ups to The Wind in the Willows and Pride and Prejudice. To
publishers, it is gold dust - Pemberley, published this month, has already
been reprinted.
The hitch this time is that the better the original book, the less likely it
is that a sequel will convince. Pride and Prejudice and The Wind in the
Willows are harder acts to follow than Rebecca. They do not, as Rebecca
does, leave loose ends and ambiguity as a helpful push for sequel writers.
They have a tight form and an artistic cohesion which is not easily intruded
upon. Their pleasures are rooted in fine and distinctive language, which it
is impossible to imitate. Emma Tennant fails to understand this, and her
pastiche of Jane Austen's style, form and wit in Pemberley is a disaster.
William Horwood does see it, and The Willows in Winter is less ambitious. A
light-hearted updating of Kenneth Grahame's Edwardian classic, it is a
funny, clever book shot through with the delight of recognition.
Horwood's skill is to close the gap between us and Grahame without losing
the playful Arcadian vision which suffuses The Wind in the Willows. He is
slavishly respectful to the river setting and to the animal quartet - loyal
Mole, dreamy Rat, wise Badger, bad Toad - but he invents a run of adventures
more pacy and dangerous than any Grahame would have dreamt up.
Toad graduates from motor cars to aeroplanes, predictably favouring the
crash landing, which is the centrepiece of the book. Rat still dreams of the
wide world beyond, but he does so while slapping about in a parachute. Mole
dives underground, this time through the ice on a bad river outing. Horwood
attributes gravitas and grey whiskers to the animals, and sets them against
a new generation - Mole's Nephew, and the baby otter Portly, now a louche
teenager. But they have become not Edwardian gentlemen but reckless 1990s
adolescents.
Grahame's 1908 novel is a mix of slapdash grotesque, in Toad's story, and
spiritual longings - the ache for childhood and home; nostalgia for the
changing countryside. The idea of home survives here, in the plot of animals
lost and found; otherwise Horwood concentrates on comedy. He neatly reverses
some famous images - Toad is disguised as a chimney sweep instead of a
washerwoman - and introduces a bold colloquial idiom ('Toad's probably
gassing away', 'Rat had put two and two together').
Never for a moment does this book resemble Grahame's masterpiece, the
pastoral dream, the sense of hope and loss, the emblematic characters. 'The
child who has once met Mr Badger has got ever afterwards, in its bones, a
knowledge of humanity and English history,' wrote CS Lewis. Horwood does not
try to equal this; he merely capitalises on it. Self-publicity seems to
drive him - a final page invites inquiries about him to 'Department
Willows', c/o his publishers - but his book is affable and entertaining.
Pemberley on the other hand is an attempt at copycat creativity: Ms Tennant
writes her own novel using Austen's characters. The Darcys and the Bennetts,
now intermarried, gather for a first Christmas at Pemberley, and fall out
spectacularly. Jane Bingley goes into premature labour, her sister Elizabeth
cannot conceive. An illegitimate child in the village may be Darcy's, but he
is too proud and Elizabeth's too prejudiced to discuss it. Jane nearly dies,
Lizzy runs away and decides to become a governess. Janeite serenity is
restored, several banquets and many stilted 18th-century conversations
later: 'Do we go into your bedchamber, or do we go to separate quarters? The
decision is yours, my dear Elizabeth' . . .
This is Elizabeth Bennett and Mr Darcy transported to Georgette Heyer-style
historical romance. It is thin, shallow, lifeless. Austen's sparky Elizabeth
withers into a disappointed Georgian wife. Darcy is stiff, icy and
preposterous as a snowman.
The wintry setting and Christmas ambience suggests that Pemberley, like The
Willows in Winter, was published with an eye to the festive market. There is
an excellent tradition of one writer transforming elements of another's work
into something new and exciting - as in Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are
Dead, Lady Macbeth of Mtensk, Jean Rhys's Wide Sargasso Sea, which tells the
story of Jane Eyre from the mad wife angle. It does not include rewriting
the classic as seasonal slush.
