FT  09 SEP 93 / Clarke snubs spending-cut calls
MR Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, yesterday moved to stamp his authority on
the Budget-making process, which has been under pressure during the summer
from the cabinet's rightwing minority.
Interviewed in The Daily Telegraph - his first interview since returning
from holiday - Mr Clarke disdainfully brushes off rightwing calls for
spending cuts rather than tax increases in the November Budget.
In a passage which will enrage the right, he flatly rejects the possibility
of reopening next year's agreed public spending total of Pounds 254bn.
The chancellor's constant refrain is that he remains committed to low direct
taxation, but that all revenue-raising options remain open.
'You cannot have simplistic self-denying ordinances that at no stage do you
ever put taxation up,' he says.
'But the thing about being a Conservative chancellor is that, on the whole,
you very strongly do not wish to do so.'
Mr Clarke says that 'one of the big political victories' won by the
Conservatives in the 1980s was the reduction in the rate of direct taxation.
'I find it hilarious to hear John Smith (the Labour leader) and the shadow
chancellor (Mr Gordon Brown) saying how strongly they feel that we should
not overtax the wage earner. We have got them standing on their heads by
having won a key economic argument, which I don't wish to go back on.'
However, the chancellor offers a clear hint that he favours higher indirect
taxes if increases are necessary.
Outlining the need for a 'broad' tax base, he describes VAT on heating fuel
as 'perfectly fair,' and says it was 'extraordinary' that the fuel was
exempted until Mr Norman Lamont, the former chancellor, imposed a two-stage
extension in the last Budget.
Mr Clarke also speaks of 'the joys of VAT,' which he describes as
'reasonably straighforward'.
He says there is no truth in speculation that the Pounds 50bn borrowing
forecast for next year has been revised downwards.
An 'as yet unknown proportion' of the deficit will be eliminated by faster
growth, but it is 'sensible for me to be prudent', he says. 'If I take a too
Micawberish view - sitting around waiting for something to turn up - and it
goes badly wrong, then I'm in real difficulties.'
Mr Clarke also rules out an early cut in interest rates and says he is not
convinced by the arguments put by some commentators for an independent Bank
of England.
