FT  06 NOV 93 / Foreigners drawn into Algerian conflict: The increasing
violence of Moslem militants
THE French and Algerian governments were mightily relieved this week when
three French consular officials were freed after a seven-day kidnapping by
suspected Moslem militants.
But the hostages' ordeal - following the murder last month of seven foreign
nationals by radical Islamic militants - has dramatically brought home to
all foreign residents the fact that they are inexorably being drawn in to
the conflict which is tearing Algerian society apart: that between those who
wish to install an Islamic republic and those who want to pursue reforms
aimed at liberalising the country's economy and society.
The safe release of the three French officials - the result of a massive
joint police and army operation in Algiers - does at least suggest that the
Algerian security apparatus is more efficient than many observers might have
believed.
Whether the fear that is gripping the foreign community turns into panic
hangs on what happens in the next few weeks. The sheer size of the country,
the number of foreign residents (over 100,000, of whom 76,000 are French,
half the latter number spouses of Algerian citizens), and the diversity of
their occupation and place of residence make it very difficult to ensure
their safety.
No leading foreign company, including those operating in the oil and gas
sector, has so far left Algeria despite the wild rumours sweeping the
capital. But some are cutting back their operations. Some families have been
evacuated; children who had gone to Europe for half-term school holidays are
not returning for the time being. Many foreigners have been regrouped by
their respective companies and embassies, notably those living in more
isolated areas and away from big cities. Many companies have asked for a
permanent military presence on their building sites, a request which
increasingly is being granted.
Some diplomats complain the Algerian authorities have been very slow to
react and increase their safety. Others point out that it is not easy for
the police to switch from the hands-off attitude the government insisted it
adopt after the riots of October 1988 and during the three years of
free-for-all demonstrations by the now-banned Islamic Salvation Front.
The violence is escalating, with at least 700 reported dead this year. Until
last winter members of the security forces were the main targets of radical
Islamic groups. The most dangerous of these groups is the Islamic Armed
Movement, whose members received a thorough training in the camps of
Peshawar in Pakistan before going to fight the Russians in Afghanistan.
Violence has increasingly taken the form of economic sabotage - anything
from setting forests on fire to burning municipal rubbish trucks and on
occasion factories.
Leading Algerian intellectuals and writers, few of whom favour an Islamic
republic but many of whom have long been critical of the manner in which
their country was governed after independence, have been slain: people such
as the academic Professor Mohammed Boukhobza, knifed to death last June in
front of his teenage daughter, and the writer Tahar Djaout, murdered last
May. In the eyes of many radical Islamic activists, they are worthy of the
same fate the Iranian leaders wish on Salman Rushdie.
Algerian intellectuals are not alone in arguing that murder is 'not', as one
of them put it, 'an acceptable form of literary criticism'. Many ordinary
Algerians are deeply sickened by the growing violence on all sides, though
among the crowd of younger unemployed many appear to look on the whole
situation as a kind of wild thriller in which they tot up the points.
Journalists have figured prominently as targets. Omar Belhoucet, the editor
of the daily El Watan who has just been in New York to receive a press
freedom award, narrowly escaped murder last May. He also had a difficult
time with the former government of Mr Abdessalan Belaid, which imprisoned
him for a few days earlier this year for articles allegedly endangering the
'security of the state'.
Not that the press has been beaten into submission. El Watan, La Nation and
the satirical El Manchar are as lively, and critical of the government, as
ever. Indeed, press freedom in Algeria today remains, in the view of one
senior diplomat with wide experience of the Arab world, greater than in any
other member of the Arab League.
But this does not reflect a broader easing of the political climate. The
High State Council (HCE), the five-man presidency which has de facto ruled
Algeria since President Chadli Bendjedid was forced to resign in January
1992, has sought for about a year to institute what it calls a 'national
dialogue' among trade unions, employers, professional organisations and the
legal political parties - which do not include the Islamic Salvation Front.
But this has yielded no results, and has utterly failed to dissipate the
prevailing atmosphere of political mistrust. Members of the 'dialogue' are
deeply divided on whether to talk to the fundamentalists, and have not even
been able to agree on an agenda. The recent advent as prime minister of Mr
Redha Malek has so far made little difference.
In view of this political vacuum, all the parties to the talks turn to the
military as the sole bulwark against a total collapse. Its senior officers
might well be able to live with a more strictly improved code of Moslem
social rules but they would baulk at the idea of a 'government of god', as
one of them put it.
Such people acknowledge they are engaged in a tough fight. But they argue
that western powers should understand the advent of an Islamic republic in
Algeria is not in their best interest. Such a development would not simply
destabilise the whole southern and eastern flank of Europe, they say: it
would also cause considerable tension among the millions of Moslems living
in the European Community.
