FT  27 APR 93 / Technology: Concorde's heavy use of protocol - Technically
Speaking
OVER the last few years, HIV-infected patients have faced a bewildering
barrage of press opinion about the efficacy of Wellcome's drug Retrovir.
The latest episode occurred earlier this month when a press conference from
an Anglo-French trial called Concorde revealed preliminary data that
suggested there was no benefit among people in the early stages of
HIV-infection after three years of treatment.
This conclusion contrasted with other Retrovir trials, such as the one-year
study published in August 1989 which was acclaimed as providing some hope in
deferring the disease.
To those present at the US Food and Drug Administration meeting in January
1990, it will come as little surprise that the benefits of Retrovir could
decline over time. Nevertheless, the preliminary conclusions of the Concorde
trial seem discouraging.
A recent article in the British Medical Journal supports Wellcome's view
that changes in protocol make any meaningful analysis difficult. The main
problem is that about 40 per cent of people who initially received a placebo
changed early to Retrovir for compassionate reasons.
The article also quotes Ian Weller, a principal investigator in the trial.
He says the only way to analyse the data was on a so-called
'intention-to-treat' basis. This means that patients who start in a control
group remain there for statistical purposes regardless of whether they
continue taking the placebo.
'Any statistician will tell you that unless you do this, you destroy the
randomisation of the study. You can't just forget people who stopped or
started taking the capsules or it introduces bias,' claims Weller.
Intention to treat analysis is discussed in a number of recent articles. A
standard discussion is included in the 1990 book 'Statistical issues in Drug
R&amp;D'.
This article supports the general principle of intention to treat analysis.
But it does raise a number of practical questions about its limitations,
pointing out that one crucial problem in clinical trials is that they
rarely, if ever, can be performed without flaw. There is, for example, a
danger that patients may not comply perfectly with the assigned therapy or
they may deviate under medical advice.
Problems of this nature are of particular concern in a long-term clinical
trial with large numbers of people involved, especially in Aids therapy
where popular advice tends to influence the patients involved in the trial.
Similar concerns are raised in a second article, 'The application of the
principle of intention to treat to the analysis of clinical trials' (Gilling
and Koch, in Drug Information Journal P41 1, 1991). Though this article
emphasises the need to follow intention to treat analysis, it recognises the
problems of meaningful analysis when the original trial protocol is breached
to a significant extent.
Weller, therefore, appears to be sticking rigidly to the principle of
intention to treat. Given the number of changes from protocol in this trial,
one must query the strength of Weller's conclusion.
Results of another Retrovir trial in early-stage patients are to be reported
shortly and doubtless will lead to a similar worldwide debate on the merits
of this therapy.
A recent article in Nature, demonstrating how HIV infects large numbers of
cells in the lymph glands during the early phase of the infection, has
received comparatively little publicity outside the medical press.
This explains how the disease was progressing during the latent phase even
when difficult or impossible to detect in the bloodstream. It indicates the
importance of starting drug therapy at the earliest stages of infection.
The Concorde study's preliminary findings indicated that Retrovir was
well-tolerated. It must be hoped that combination therapy, using Retrovir,
will provide a greater level of success in deferring the onset of the
disease.
The author is pharmaceuticals analyst at Panmure Gordon.
