FT  29 MAY 93 / Arts: Faith and guilt - Radio
THE WORLD of Faith was Radio 2's theme of the week, with a peak on
Wednesday, the Archbishop of Canterbury discussing the Church of England
with Jimmy Young. Radio 4, by contrast, featured Reasonable Doubt in this
week's 'You and Yours' slot. Radio 2 was more widely spread, for it covered
all kinds of religious singing, from Anglican hymns to music from Buddhist,
Hindu, Moslem and Sikh observances, with popular items like folk, pop and
congregational 'West Gallery' song. The Jamesons discussed women's
ordination - with a woman ordinand, of course.
Reasonable Doubt covered the actual commission of sin, or 'offences', as we
say now. We all worry about the number of cases in which guilty verdicts
have been overturned by matters like alleged police error; and presenter
Tasneed Siddiqi discussed such cases with witnesses, lawyers and police.
Each day last week, two cases were brought up where convicted prisoners
still insisted on their innocence. Michael Mansfield, QC, defender of the
Birmingham Six, said on Monday that there might be many dubious cases; but
on Thursday, Barbara Mills, Director of Public Prosecutions, spoke out for
the Crown Prosecution Service.
Next week Radio 3 will begin all Marlowe's plays, but the World Service beat
them to it this week with its own Doctor Faustus on Sunday. It was a very
short version, not even the 1604 edition; but that magical first act, the
spellbinding tragedy of the last, are among the most beautiful moments in
all English drama. We skipped the low comedy, though we attended an unruly
supper with the Pope. Donald Sumpter was a good Faustus, though a bit cool
in 'Was this the face that launched a thousand ships'; Carl Johnson was an
ironical Mephistopheles, properly pathetic in his regret at what he had
missed by following Lucifer; Norman Rodway had the great lines of the
Chorus. Hilary Norrish directed.
Radio 4's Kershaw in Cuba, on the last two Tuesdays, was not like Pilkington
in Kighizstan or Wilco in Spain; it gave the feeling that its original
target had been replaced by another, a better one as it happened, and I hope
Noah Richler, who produced, will not be cross with me for saying so. Andy
Kershaw is not the man you would naturally send for a political view of
today's Cuba, more for a social view, accent on music. Yet the programmes
dealt rather casually with music - there was an interesting talk with a
Finnish player in a Cuban group, and much Cuban-style music both in the
background and, less often, the foreground. What we had in fact was the
street-politics of Cubans under double restriction - the American embargo
and no more help from Russia.
It began in Miami, where Cuban exiles go. There were the successful, adapted
to American comforts; more interestingly, the committed, devoted to
rehearsing a counter-revolution. In Cuba, itself, we went first to Santiago,
where the state record company produces vinyl discs at about Pounds 1 a time
but you queue 20 minutes for a coffee. Then to Havana, whose Cubans seemed
to be good-tempered despite severe food-shortage - four eggs a week, but
endless coffee, and lobsters for the fishermen. All were insistent on being
Cuban, 'culturally, ethnically, politically'. Fidel Castro claimed that the
elections on February 25 proved that 98 per cent of the electorate supported
the socialist system, though as no other party stood there was little
argument. He thought he might step down from presidency within five years.
