FT  01 FEB 93 / The importance of being Hillary: America
They might have been more honest. For most of the campaign Mrs Hillary
Clinton went into 'cookie-baking' mode, gazing adoringly at her husband and
promising to be a traditional first lady. But within hours of the
inauguration, the old assertive Hillary had reappeared, complete with maiden
name and headband. Husband Bill announced that she was taking charge of a
presidential taskforce on health-care reform and she promptly set up shop in
the west wing of the White House - the domain reserved for senior (and
usually male) policy advisers.
This is not an honorific title. Health-care reform is the nation's most
pressing domestic challenge. Mrs Clinton will lead a group that includes the
most powerful cabinet officials, such Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the Treasury
secretary, and Mr Leon Panetta, the budget director. After the announcement,
Mrs Clinton hit the White House phones and spent six hours introducing
herself to congressional leaders. Mr Dan Rostenkowski, the wily chairman of
the powerful House Ways and Means Committee, said she appeared to have 'both
hands on the throttle'.
Mrs Clinton will be easily the most powerful first lady in history (with the
possible exception of Mrs Woodrow Wilson, who gained great influence
following her husband's stroke). Indeed, her remit seems likely to extend to
most aspects of domestic policy. Eyebrows were raised when Mr Clinton chose
Ms Carol Rasko, an aide from Arkansas, as his domestic policy adviser. She
lacked the stature of Mr Robert Rubin and Mr Anthony Lake, her counterparts
in economic and foreign affairs. But then stature was not important - Ms
Rasco and other domestic policy aides will in effect defer to Mrs Clinton,
who is emerging as the chief domestic strategist. Some are already referring
to her as a 'domestic prime minister.'
Mrs Clinton's executive role reflects the political coming of age of women.
She arrives in a Washington where her contemporaries occupy previously
unimaginable positions. Women now fill both Senate seats from California,
the most populous state. The president has a female chief economist and
wanted (and may still get) a female attorney general.
Hillary is as well-qualified academically as Bill (both are graduates of the
Yale Law School) and, as a top Arkansas lawyer, earned five or six times
Bill's meagre salary as governor. She advised him throughout his career, to
the point of chairing the committee that devised the educational reforms now
regarded as his main achievement in Arkansas. As an equal partner for so
many years, her desire for hands-on responsibility is understandable.
Even so, her new position raises questions. After John F Kennedy made his
brother Robert attorney general, anti-nepotism laws were passed to prevent
the appointment of close relatives to powerful positions. By not paying his
wife, Mr Clinton has dodged these constraints. Yet people seem oddly
reluctant to criticise Hillary's role, perhaps because greater
responsibility for women is seen as so obviously a good thing. Yet if Mr
Clinton had put a brother or favourite uncle in charge of health-care
reform, all hell would have broken loose.
Health-care reform is a make or break issue for Mr Clinton. If he cannot
control the dizzying escalation of costs, he has no hope of cutting the
structural budget deficit; and if he cannot extend coverage to the 35m
Americans without insurance, his standing as a domestic reformer will be
nil. So it made sense to turn to somebody he trusted - and somebody who
could wield near presidential authority as a deal-maker. But why not turn to
Mr Al Gore, the official vice-president? He is as capable as Mrs Clinton and
better connected in Washington.
Mrs Clinton's appointment also sends unfortunate signals about the direction
of domestic policy. Perhaps unfairly, she is seen as more of an
'unreconstructed' liberal (left-leaning) Democrat than her husband. This
partly reflects her links with groups such as Ms Marian Wright Edelman's
Children's Defence Fund, a powerful Washington lobby that opposes the tough
restrictions on welfare payments publicly advocated by Mr Clinton. Mrs
Clinton chaired the CDF for years and insisted that her successor - Ms Donna
Shalala - be made health secretary. Mrs Clinton is also thought to have
vetoed the appointment of conservative Democrats to important domestic
policy positions.
The fear is that a 'Marian-Hillary-Donna' axis will insist on the effective
socialisation of American health care, with universal insurance cover backed
up with strict controls on the price and volume of medical services. Mr
Clinton, it is felt, would have more willing to experiment with
'market-based' reforms that offer a more limited role for public
bureaucracies. But it is possible, of course, that Bill and Hillary (Billary
as some call them) have always agreed on policy; Bill just had to be more
careful about what he said.
The US has had almost as many different types of presidencies as there have
been presidents. In an age when power is increasingly distributed equally
between the sexes, a husband and wife working in harness can arguably lead
the country more effectively than either spouse alone. The pity is that the
electorate was not asked more explicitly to support such an intriguing
innovation.
