FT  22 OCT 93 / Two arrested as construction scandal widens
JAPAN'S construction industry scandal widened yesterday when prosecutors
arrested two branch executives of Kajima, one of the country's top
contractors, on suspicions of bribery.
This means prosecutors have arrested executives from all of Japan's top six
contractors, suspected of paying bribes to get local government building
contracts. Kajima is Japan's second largest construction group in sales, but
is the most politically influential, thanks to the many former government
officials it employs.
Mr Akira Miyazaki, Kajima's president, yesterday said he believed the pair
had made illegal political donations, but head office was not involved.
Prosecutors also raided the home of a Kajima vice-president to gather
evidence.
The latest arrests add fresh weight to US allegations that the Japanese
construction market is rigged against foreign competition. They come in the
final weeks before the US-imposed November 1 deadline after which Washington
has threatened to apply trade sanctions against Japan unless the
construction market is made more open.
Washington's main complaint is against the designated bidding system,
whereby a local government chooses companies suitable to tender for a
contract. Companies not designated have no right to bid.
This is blamed as a factor in the kind of corruption of which Kajima is
suspected. Legal and illicit construction industry donations are a
traditionally large source of political campaign funds.
The two Kajima branch managers arrested, Kazumi Suzuki and Ichiro Takagi,
are suspected of handing Y10m to the former mayor of the northern town of
Sendai, Mr Toru Ishii, last year. Mr Ishii has already been charged with
receiving bribes from four other contractors, Shimizu, the industry leader,
Hazama, Nishimatsu Construction and Mitsui Construction. A senior executive
of Taisei, another construction group, has also been held.
'This just shows how endemic the construction industry problem has become,'
said Mr Graeme McDonald, analyst at James Capel Pacific.
As in previous arrests, the Kajima inquiry is based on evidence gathered
from the papers of Mr Shin Kanemaru, former political godfather of the
Liberal Democratic Party.
His arrest in March on charges of tax evasion on donations from the
construction industry contributed to the LDP's election defeat after 38
years in power.
Japan construction talks, Page 6
