FT  02 JUL 93 / Russia's reforms fail to tackle industrial decline
RUSSIA will continue to suffer from high inflation and economic decline
because its divided leadership is pursuing only partial economic reforms,
according to the head of the government's own forecasting centre.
Mr Yakov Urinson said that despite the efforts of Mr Boris Fyodorov, the
finance minister, to pursue financial stabilisation and encourage economic
restructuring, the latter had been frozen by money being poured into
inefficient enterprises.
Mr Urinson poured cold water on claims by some government ministers that
industrial production had finally stabilised.
He pointed to the fact that not one enterprise had gone bankrupt.
'It will be hard on both the country and the government as long as the
latter contains people with diametrically opposed views on reforms,' he
said, also blaming 'braking' action by the conservative-dominated
parliament.
But, if under the best circumstances the government maintains moderately
restrictive credit policies, begins to focus social welfare payments and
launches an industrial policy, the centre forecasts that annual inflation
will fall to 950-1,150 per cent this year, down from 2,500 per cent in 1992.
Only if those conditions are met will the government be able to achieve 5-7
per cent monthly inflation by the end of the year.
The centre's experts forecast that significant progress will be made in
eliminating price distortions in the economy if liberalising of energy
prices is completed by the end of this year.
The centre's forecasts suggest that industrial production will fall by 13-15
per cent this year compared with a 19 per cent drop last year.
In 1994, gross domestic product might decline by 3-7 per cent. Economic
growth could resume in 1995.
Exports are expected to shrink by just 5 per cent to Dollars 38bn (Pounds
25.3bn), if Russia can maintain oil exports at last year's level.
The latter's volume increased by 20.6 per cent in the first quarter of this
year.
Imports will fall sharply to 66 per cent of last year's level, partly
because of a shortage of government funds to subsidise imports.
