FT  15 FEB 93 / US Money and Credit: Poised for the President's long-awaited
package
AFTER many months of election campaign promises and nearly four weeks in
office, President Bill Clinton is poised to unveil his long-awaited economic
package. It will be detailed on Wednesday evening in Mr Clinton's first
State of the Union message.
The information contained in Mr Clinton's speech is likely to influence the
parameters of Treasury bond trading activity for several months to come. On
Thursday morning the market will have still more information when it digests
the contents of Senate testimony by Mr Alan Greenspan, chairman of the
Federal Reserve.
Investors in the Treasury bond market have speculated, discounted and
satisfied themselves that Mr Clinton's hands are sufficiently tied by the
size of the US budget deficit that he is unlikely to push through a large
fiscal stimulus programme. Indeed, Mr Clinton's comments during a televised
meeting last week included a call for sacrifice on the part of taxpayers,
another indication that the fiscal stimulus package could be more modest
than was promised during the campaign.
Among the possible features of the economic package that should please the
bond market are tax increases for corporate America and for high-earning
individuals, as well as increased taxes on social security benefits for
wealthy Americans. The higher taxes are likely to be accompanied by cuts in
government spending levels.
Further signs of a deficit-battling approach that should please the bond
market include the fact that some of the latest macroeconomic indicators
show the US recovery picking up its pace. In addition, Clinton
administration officials have been stressing in recent days the degree to
which the Bush administration understated the size of the prospective budget
deficit -  by about Dollars 50bn.
The market's assumption is that since the deficit is bigger than had been
thought before, there could be less room for manoeuvre on the stimulus
front.
Mr Clinton's comments last week did help the Treasury bond market to stage
something of a late rally, with the yield on the benchmark 30-year paper
declining to 7.12 per cent on Friday, from 7.15 per cent a week before.
Analysts at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, the New York securities firm, are
thinking in terms of a short-term fiscal stimulus package totalling Dollars
31bn, and a long-run deficit reduction proposal of about Dollars 145bn. DLJ
noted that the deficit reduction plan could be met by scepticism in the
market. The view of SG Warburg analysts on Friday was more bullish.
While noting that the market is wary of pricing too much good news from the
President on deficit reduction, Warburg said 'we have a strong hunch that
Clinton will look and sound impressive' in his address on Wednesday. If that
occurs the trend towards a 7 per cent yield at the long end of the Treasury
market should remain intact, according to Warburg.
Not everyone operating in the highly speculative mood ahead of Mr Clinton's
address is so confident.
Mr Philip Braverman, chief economist at DKB Securities, agreed that Treasury
yields should continue to drop, even below the 7 per cent level. But Mr
Braverman pointed out that the strength of the US recovery should not be
overstated. He predicted last week that a more likely scenario will be
on-again, off-again recovery, citing as his main reason the fact that many
of the root causes of the recent recession have not been corrected.
Excessive debt burdens, the credit crunch, the overhang of commercial
property loans at banks and cuts in defence spending could still prove a
burden during 1993. Mr Clinton's speech will be significant and
market-moving, but it is unlikely to be a panacea.
