FT  29 MAY 93 / Seriously Rich: Distressed governesses - Jane Eyre was the
exception not the rule, says Anthony Curtis / Books
THE VICTORIAN GOVERNESS by Kathryn Hughes The Hambledon Press Pounds 25, 256
pages
'READER, I married him'. According to The Victorian Governess - an
informative account of this much exploited member of the domestic workforce
 -frequently she did not succeed in marrying anyone. Jane Eyre was the
fictional exception, not the rule in real life.
At around the age of 40 - the normal cut-off point for enforced retirement,
but it could easily come when a governess was still in her early thirties -
she became an isolated old maid, worn out by her exacting years ministering
to the spoiled brats of the aristocracy or of the newly rich merchant class.
She would be put to grass with nothing to live off except her meagre
savings, the financial support of her own family and such handouts as her
former employers might send her from time to time. Her likely fate was a
home for distressed gentlewomen or the dreaded alternative of the workhouse.
Much more typical of the conditions and expectations of the average
Victorian governess were those endured by sweet-tempered, God-fearing Agnes
Grey in the novel of that name by Charlotte's least famous literary sister.
We observe Agnes in two equally awful posts before she finally escapes into
a happy marriage with the curate (the optimum end to the governess story).
It is from Anne Bronte that we receive a full picture of the daily round of
humiliation experienced by someone who by birth and up-bringing was a lady
but who could never rely on being treated like one. Agnes became a governess
at 18 and was, like her creator, a clergyman's daughter, motivated by the
spirit of adventure but also by economic necessity. In that respect she was
very typical
Kathryn Hughes documents the 'plight' of the governess with a great deal of
material drawn from contemporary social history, fictional portraits,
memoirs of former governesses and advice books for aspiring governesses that
abounded throughout the Victorian era. As well as the three Rs the governess
was expected to provide her pupils with a rudimentary understanding of
French and German, and also tuition in music. To be expert in the latter
accomplishments increased her marketability and could help her to command
Pounds 15 to Pounds 20 a year for the novice to an exceptional Pounds 80 to
Pounds 100 at the linguistic and musical top of the scale.
Though she played a key part in a prosperous entrepreneurial society,
freeing its adult members from day-to-day parental responsibilities, the
governess totally lacked any economic or social clout. However great the
demand for governesses might become, it was always grossly exceeded by the
supply of new ones coming onto the market. The new governess soon discovered
that her status was painfully ambiguous - a gentlewoman, a
mother-substitute, employed on account of her refinement and breeding, but
just as much at the mercy of the whims of all the family as were the
servants below stairs.
The most famous governess of the later period - the narrator of The Turn of
the Screw - was quite exceptional in that she was given sole responsibility
for her charges in a household where her employer was completely absent and
where she was able to form an alliance with the housekeeper.
The relationship between her predecessor Miss Jessel and the upper servant
Peter Quint would have been a most unlikely occurrence. The governess as a
force exerting any moral pressure for good or ill within such a household
seems to have been more a creation of novelists and playwrights than a
reality.
