FT  09 AUG 93 / Employers face extra maternity costs of Pounds 60m a year
BRITISH EMPLOYERS are facing extra costs of up to Pounds 60m a year as a
result of a government decision not to foot the bill for bringing UK
maternity benefits into line with EC requirements.
Under proposals to be unveiled this week, UK employers are to be asked to
pay the difference between the cost of existing maternity benefit
arrangements and the new system which must be in place by October 1994.
The decision reflects the government's determination to clamp down on its
Pounds 80bn a year social security budget as part of its onslaught on public
spending.
This was underlined yesterday when Mr John Major, the prime minister, used a
rare appearance as a newspaper columnist, in the News of the World, to
emphasise that social security spending was rising too fast and needed to be
better targeted.
A consultation document to be published this week by the Department of
Social Security is expected to set out two options for implementing the EC
proposals which are enshrined in a maternity directive agreed last year.
Both options are thought to incorporate a Pounds 4.55 increase to Pounds
52.50 a week in maternity benefit and to increase the number of women
eligible to receive an initial six weeks' maternity leave on 90 per cent of
full pay.
Currently, women in the UK are entitled to this six-week period on close to
full pay after two years' continuous employment. The proposals are expected
to cut this qualification period to either six or nine months.
The decision to load the additional cost on to employers may prove
embarrassing to the government, which has consistently argued that such
impositions should be kept to a minimum so as not to impair competitiveness.
But some left-leaning ministers will be secretly delighted that higher
payments for working mothers have been sanctioned. They see more generous
maternity and childcare entitlements as a potential Conservative vote-winner
capable of yielding substantial ballot-box dividends at a relatively low
cost.
In his News of the World column, Mr Major said the government had to ensure
both that the 'really needy' got all the help they deserved and that
taxpayers' money was not being given to 'people who don't need it.'
Mr Donald Dewar, shadow social security secretary, said Mr Major's talk of
'cuts and means testing' would frighten people coping with disability,
ill-health and unemployment.
