FT  27 APR 93 / Oxfam wants urgent Marshall Plan for Africa: West attacked
for lacking political will while IMF/World Bank policies 'hurt but do not
work'
OXFAM yesterday called on the west to back a Marshall Plan for sub-Saharan
Africa, warning that without greater assistance the region's economic crisis
is set to deepen.
'Africa is on a knife edge,' Mr David Bryer, director of the Oxford-based
charity, told the London launch of its Africa recovery programme.
The end of the Cold War, 'fragile' peace in Ethiopia, Eritrea and
Mozambique, and the emergence of more representative governments in Africa
provided the opening for a western initiative, said Mr Bryer, adding:
'Northern nations have the power to tip the balance: to support the current
opportunities for recovery or to sentence the region to a spiralling and
agonising decline.'
But unless the opportunity were seized, prospects were bleak, Mr Bryer
warned. In the words of the charity's 40-page analysis* of the crisis:
'Economic stagnation, social breakdown, decaying infrastructures, crippling
debt burdens, ruinous prices for commodity exports, and environmental
degradation threaten to retard Africa's development prospects into the next
century, with frightening consequences for human welfare.'
'Without recovery, more than 300m people - half the region's population -
will be living in poverty by the end of the decade.'
The report accuses the west of lacking the political will, contrasting the
response to problems of eastern Europe and Russia with 'their neglect for
over a decade of Africa's far deeper problems'.
Some of Oxfam's sharpest criticism is directed at the International Monetary
Fund and World Bank, arguing that their policies are 'hurting but not
working'.
The Fund's 'increasingly damaging role' stems from policy mistakes in the
early 1980s, says the report: 'The Fund treated what was a problem of
insolvency as one of short-term liquidity, extending short-term loans at
high interest rates to cover structural and trade deficits.'
The Fund embarked on financing 'what was bound to be a slow process of
adjustment and recovery with the wrong resources and the wrong approach . .
.'.
'Africa has been paying the price ever since.' It is time for northern
governments 'to face up to the fact that the IMF has failed Africa . . .'.
'The time has come either fundamentally to reform the IMF or extricate it
from Africa.'
The report calls for a write-off or concessional rescheduling of much of the
region's external debt.
The debt crisis is deepening, says Oxfam. Total external debt in 1992 was
Dollars 183bn (Pounds 116bn), including IMF and World Bank debt - Dollars
30bn higher than in 1989 when large scale cancellations began.
Multilateral agencies, mainly the World Bank and IMF, accounted for 36 per
cent of debt servicing payments in 1991. Neither agency, under existing
rules, is permitted to reschedule or write off debt.
Tackling the debt burden would be central to Oxfam's five-point recovery
programme, which urges western governments to treat Africa with the same
sense of urgency and concern that prompted the Marshall Plan.
Under the plan, launched at the end of the second world war, the US
transferred some 2 per cent of its gross national product to support the
rebuilding of post-war Europe.
Oxfam will put its debt proposals to the G7 summit in Tokyo in July.
Oxfam's recovery programme also calls for:
Increased aid flows, moving towards the UN target of 0.7 per cent of GDP for
aid budgets. Oxfam urges Britain to take a lead by agreeing an extra Pounds
100m in support of Africa's recovery.
A fund to help Africa process its commodity exports; the ending of
subsidised disposal of agricultural surpluses; reduction of protectionist
barriers against Africa's exports.
Reform of structural adjustment programmes, including protection for African
industries and greater investment in health and education.
Strengthening the UN role in aid and peacekeeping; the appointment of one
special representative responsible for co-ordinating UN operations.
The report says that while the 1980s were grim, 'things are getting steadily
worse'. Gains in health and education are being eroded, and as a result
'Africa is being disempowered as the educational gap between itself and
other parts of the world widens'.
Oxfam's analysis is at odds with the World Bank's appraisal, published last
February.* * 'Sub-Saharan countries have achieved significant progress in
the last few years. Growth has resumed,' said the Bank.
Though it acknowledges the 1990s will be a critical decade, the Bank
maintains that there has been general agreement on the merits of its
reforms, arguing that 'adjustment has improved the lives of the vast
majority of Africa's poor'.
* Africa, make or break: Action for recovery, Oxfam, 274 Banbury Road,
Oxford OX2 7DZ; tel (0865) 312498/311311 fax 312580
Africa.
* * From stagnation to recovery, World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington DC
20433; tel (202) 4771234 fax 4776391
*****
Our current trends, Africans living in poverty will increase from 218m to
300m - half the poulation - by 2000
The region has 32 of the world's poorest 47 nations
It has 10 per cent of the developing world's population but receives over 30
per cent of official aid
It relies on aid for 80 per cent of its financial resource flows - 11 per
cent of GDP (Asia 1 per cent)
Its share of world trade has fallen from 3 per cent in 1970 to just over 1
per cent
It receives less than 1 per cent of worldwide foreign investment
The slide of commodity prices between 1986 and 1990 cost Africa Dollars 50bn
in lost earnings - more than twice the amount received in aid
IMF Economic Outlook, Page 6
