FT  06 NOV 93 / Heavy falls hit stock markets: FT-SE 100 drops 63.4 points
but Wall Street recovers at close
SHARP declines in US and European bond and stock markets this week have
prompted fears that the strong performance of both this year could be
reversed.
US Treasury bond prices fell for the sixth consecutive day yesterday,
dragging European bonds down with them, while most of the world's leading
stock markets also fell heavily.
In London yesterday, the FT-SE 100 index dropped 63.4 points to close at
3,085.6, the biggest single day's fall since a 103-point slide on October 5
last year. Share prices in Paris, Frankfurt and other continental European
markets also suffered large declines.
'We are at a crossroads for all the markets, but I'm not sure we can say we
are into a bear market,' said Mr Kirit Shah, a market strategist in London
with First Chicago.
The immediate weakness was triggered by a sell-off in the US Treasury bond
market, where strong economic data have fuelled expectations that short-term
interest rates may start to rise again next year.
This persuaded traders and investors to take some of the profits they have
accumulated in this year's rally by selling some of their US bond holdings.
Profit-taking in the US bond market was quickly imitated in Europe, even
though most European economies show little sign of economic recovery, and
are expected to benefit from further short-term interest rate cuts in the
coming months. 'We are approaching the end of a year which has truly been
the year of the bond,' said Ms Marie Owens Thomsen, international strategist
at Midland Global Markets. 'People have made spectacular profits from this
year's bull market and they want to lock them in.'
US bond prices fell sharply yesterday after a stronger-than-expected October
employment report. In late New York trading, the benchmark 30-year bond
yield had reached 6.21 per cent, the highest since mid-August. In two weeks,
the 30-year yield has now risen by nearly half a percentage point. Price
falls in European bond markets yesterday ranged from a slight drop in
Germany to more than a point in UK gilts. Prices in France, Italy and Spain
lost several points during the week.
'The US market is a nasty magnet for Europe, but it's the first real
correction for European bonds in six months,' said Mr Gordon Ross, director
of invest ments at Lombard Odier Invest ment Mangement, the Swiss bank's
London-based fund management arm.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average, which fell by 36.89 to 3,624.98 on
Thursday, was undermined yesterday by further weakness in the US bond market
in early trading. Bargain buying, however, and a renewed focus by investors
on the good economic news, helped the Dow rebound from its early 25-point
loss to end the day up 18.45 at 3,643.43, but still well below its record
high of 3,697.64 on Tuesday. Profit-taking has spread to stock markets
because of fears that dividend yields will appear unattractively low if bond
yields rise too far.
France's CAC-40 index lost 2.6 per cent yesterday and nearly 5 per cent over
the week. Germany's Dax index, which celebrated its high for the year as
recently as Tuesday, lost 2.4 per cent yesterday.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225-share index fell 1.9 per cent to 18,590.46, a drop
of 5.6 per cent on the week and more than 12 per cent since its September
high.
Tokyo shrugs off fall, Page 3;
US jobs market improves, Page 4;
Editorial Comment, Page 8;
London stocks, Page 15;
World stocks, Page 21;
Lex, Page 24;
Markets, Weekend Page II
