FT  22 OCT 93 / Tempers frayed as Irish show disappointment
THE ROW between the Irish government and Mr Jaques Delors, the European
Commission president, over Ireland's allocation of EC structural aid for
1994-99, intensified yesterday.
Claims and counterclaims have flown between Mr Delors and Dublin over
whether or not the Commission promised to allocate to Dublin more EC money
than it was able to give.
The Commission yesterday approved an allocation of IPounds 7.2bn, IPounds
640m less than the Irish government claims it had been assured by Mr Delors
in a meeting last July.
Last night in an interview with Irish radio and TV, Mr Delors said that Mr
Bertie Ahern, the Irish finance minister, had asked the Commission to delay
the funding announcement to Ireland until after the Irish Government had set
out its IPounds 20bn national development plan  - in effect to avoid adverse
publicity at the plan's launch. 'I followed his advice and postponed the
meeting,' Mr Delors said.
Mr Delors had already said, earlier this week, it was 'a lie' that he had
broken a promise to Irish ministers.
The EC funds are the linchpin to Ireland's national development plan, which
aims to create 200,000 jobs up to the end of the decade.
Mr Ahern said: 'I have some control, but unfortunately my power does not
extend to deferring Commission meetings in Brussels or changing items of the
agenda. . . What upset me, and it's not easy to upset me, is the idea all of
a sudden I have the power to change Commission meetings, to change the
agenda, because that is something that just did not happen. . . The only
thing I asked him was that we expected that the agreement of July 20, as we
understood it, would be honoured.'
The row spilled over into the Irish parliament, where angry exchanges
between government and opposition led to temporary suspension of debate and
expulsion from the House of Mr Prionsias de Rossa, the leader of the
opposition Democratic Left party. Mr De Rossa had accused the government of
'fraud and deception' over the EC structural aid figures.
Mr Albert Reynolds, Irish prime minister, shouted: 'I will not accept that.
I misled nobody.'
After returning from the EC Edinburgh summit last December, when agreement
was reached on expanding the structural fund and creating a new cohesion
fund, Mr Reynolds told parliament: 'The agreement now reached ensures, and I
say this with complete confidence, that Ireland will obtain in excess of
IPounds 8bn over seven years. This will comprise up to IPounds 1bn from the
new Cohesion fund and more than IPounds 7bn from the structural funds.'
Nonetheless, Mr Ahern acknowledged yesterday that Mr Delors' goal on
structural fund shareout was opposed by Mr Bruce Millan, commissioner
responsible for regional policy. 'I knew all year he had problems (with the
figure). . . what Bruce Millan was saying for many months is what has
happened in effect,' he said.
