FT  11 DEC 93 / Russians urged to reject neo-fascists: Elections in Russia
Russia's Choice, the radical pro-government reform bloc, yesterday urged
rival democratic parties to help it fend off the danger posed by the
neo-fascist leader, Mr Vladimir Zhirinovsky, while the government attempted
to woo the electorate with last-minute tax breaks.
After polls showed his neo-fascist Liberal Democratic party might become the
second largest party in the new parliament to be elected on Sunday, Russia's
Choice issued a statement saying 'if it has all been a joke to you so far,
then now it really is frightening'.
Mr Mikhail Poltoranin, a key figure in Russia's Choice, which started off
the campaign by refusing to take Mr Zhirinovsky seriously, even went as far
as saying Mr Zhirinovsky could become president by next autumn.
But Mr Poltoranin, who is particularly given to hyperbole, did not give
details of how this scenario might come about, using it rather as a rallying
call to urge leaders of other democratic parties to persuade their
supporters to back Russia's Choice.
Meanwhile, the government, many of whose members are leading candidates for
Russia's Choice, approved a law on personal income tax, designed to attract
additional votes. It raised the threshold of tax-deductible income for each
member of a household to a minimum wage level of Rbs14,000 a month. In a
decision of interest to foreign companies and Russia's rich alike, it
confirmed that top bracket tax-payers, which include most western
expatriates, would not see their tax rate increased to 40 per cent next
year, as originally sought by the Finance Ministry, but would continue to be
charged 30 per cent.
A decree doubling pensions for 90 per cent of pensioners is also expected to
be signed by President Boris Yeltsin before the elections. Mr Sergei
Alexashenko, deputy finance minister, said it would cost the government
Rbs765bn a month - a very large amount given that the budget deficit for the
fourth quarter of this year alone is projected at Rbs5,500bn. In another
boost for the government, miners in the arctic region of Vorkuta yesterday
called off a strike begun on Monday, presumably after concessions from the
government in a pay dispute.
Meanwhile, Mr Boris Fyodorov, continuing to express confidence that Russia's
Choice would do well on Sunday, yesterday threatened to resign unless
President Yeltsin sacked Mr Victor Geraschenko as central bank chairman
after the elections. 'Either I am right or Victor Vladimirovich
(Gerashchenko) is right,' he said, referring to their conflict over whether
Mr Fyodorov's financial austerity measures are what Russia needs.
