FT  12 FEB 93 / World Stock Market: Strong January on Santiago market reform
 -Leslie Crawford details reaction to the widening of institutional
investment options
Santiago's stock exchange soared in January, on the wings of proposed
capital market reforms which promise to broaden the investment options of
Chile's private pension funds and insurance companies.
These institutions are the biggest participants in the market. The IPSA
index of the 40 most traded shares rose by 11.7 per cent, in one month
almost doubling the modest price gains registered in the whole of 1992.
Trading was also unusually heavy in second-tier stocks, as retail investors
reacted to the news that pension funds would soon be authorised to invest in
more than 100 new companies. At present, the equity portfolios of pension
funds are restricted to 40 blue chips.
As speculators snapped up shares in these little-traded companies, the
general share price index, or IGPA, rose by 16.6 per cent. In the last week
of January, average daily market turnover more than doubled to Dollars
28.2m. On one day, turnover on the stock exchange floor and the electronic
bourse notched up a record Dollars 45.5m.
In spite of some profit-taking at the end of January, most analysts expected
the stock exchange, or Bolsa, to remain steady during February. Earlier this
week the IPSA, returned to 100 each December 31, had eased to 111.06, from
111.7 on January 29.
The proposed capital markets reforms were leaked throughout the month,
before being unveiled finally by Mr Alejandro Foxley, the finance minister,
on January 23.
The reforms will allow private pension funds (AFPs) and insurance companies,
which manage Dollars 15bn worth of funds, to broaden and diversify their
equity portfolios. They will also be allowed to invest in new financial
instruments such as convertible bonds, revenue bonds, foreign exchange,
interest rate and equity index futures. AFPs will be free to acquire shares
and corporate bonds abroad. At present, their foreign investment is
restricted to AAA-rated bank debt and gilt-edged securities.
AFPs welcomed the proposed reforms as an opportunity to diversify their
portfolios and reduce risk. Their equity investments are currently heavily
concentrated in the privatised electricity and telecommunications sectors.
This over-exposure was making both the authorities and pension fund managers
feel uncomfortable.
Although the new law is not expected to enter the statute books until June,
Mr Mario Lobo, an investment banker with Celfin Consultants, says the
announcement was 'the psychological boost the market needed to consolidate
other good news'. This includes some excellent corporate results following a
year in which the Chilean economy grew by 9.7 per cent - one of its best
ever performances.
Endesa SA, the privatised utility, said 1992 had been the best year in its
history, with profits up 30 per cent to Dollars 260m. Endesa is now planning
to raise in excess of Dollars 50m on the international bond markets to
finance acquisitions in Argentina and Peru, and to build a Dollars 450m
hydro-electric dam in southern Chile.
Vineyard stocks are also bubbly after wine and champagne exporters increased
their foreign shipments by 41.7 per cent last year to Dollars 119.2m. The
winemakers Santa Carolina, Santa Rita and San Pedro have all outperformed
the share price index.
New stock market favourites are emerging as investors realign their
portfolios in anticipation of the capital market reforms. The top performers
in January were the metals refinery Elecmetal and the bottling plant
Cristales, both up by around 62 per cent.
Mr Antonio Cruz, manager of the two Midland Bank foreign investment funds in
Chile, sees the greatest growth potential occurring in medium-sized
industrial and consumer product companies. 'These companies are making large
investments to meet growing demand,' he says. Cement plants, for example,
are working at full capacity due to the construction boom in Santiago.
