FT  09 FEB 93 / VW to cut 36,000 jobs worldwide in five-year programme
VOLKSWAGEN, Europe's leading carmaker, said yesterday that it plans to cut
its worldwide workforce by 36,000 by the end of 1997, reducing the current
figure of 276,000 by 13 per cent.
The cuts are a response to sharply deteriorating markets in Germany and
Europe as a whole. In broad terms, the cuts had been expected for some time,
although their scale is larger than expected. Previous estimates centred on
a loss of 30,000 jobs.
VW is believed to have been planning the cuts since the beginning of the
year when Mr Ferdinand Piech, previously head of its Audi luxury cars
division, took over as the group's chief executive.
It is thought the group has made an operating loss of DM1bn (Pounds 420m) in
its core VW division last year and its efficiency, measured in terms of
sales per employee, is poor compared with other carmakers.
The plan is believed to have been drawn up as part of a five-year strategy
agreed by the group's supervisory board early last month, but details have
never formally been released.
VW hopes to achieve the cuts without compulsory redundancies by means of
early retirement schemes and natural wastage.
The company insisted yesterday that the figure represented only a
'guideline, not a target', drawn up on the assumption that the German car
market would shrink by 20 per cent during the current year and the European
market by 10 per cent.
If conditions turned out better than expected, the figure would be revised,
VW said. It did not indicate how much money the group planned to save.
Of the total, 21,000 jobs will be shed in Germany and 15,000 elsewhere.
Around 5,000 will go at Seat, the group's Spanish subsidiary. Its Audi and
Skoda divisions will lose 8,000 jobs between them, although the majority
will fall at Audi rather than at Skoda, the group's Czech subsidiary.
The overseas division includes operations in the US, Mexico, Canada, South
Africa and Japan. It is also responsible for VW's 51 per cent stake in
Autolatina, the Argentine and Brazilian operations.
The German motor industry faces major restructuring; Mr Louis R. Hughes, a
former head of Opel, the General Motors subsidiary, has recently predicted
the industry workforce would be cut by half in the next few years.
The car industry has been one of the hardest hit of all sectors of the
German economy during the current downturn.
Companies are suffering a sharp fall in sales after two record years
following German reunification, their problems exacerbated by the
appreciation of the D-Mark in recent months. There is also increased
competition from Japanese carmakers within Europe.
With the exception of VW, almost all manufacturers announced their first job
cuts a year ago.
European stocks, Page 33
