FT  24 FEB 93 / Japan Responds to Downturn: Japan holds its breath as the
economy sinks
JAPAN IS facing one of the most comprehensive, complex and severe economic
crises since the end of the second world war.
The sharp fall in land, property and share prices from the heyday of the
speculative bubble economy between 1987 and 1989, has led to a steep fall in
private demand.
Manufacturers overinvested and overproduced in the late 1980s. In cars and
electronics especially, they have been carrying huge stocks of idle machines
and unsold products. Consumer demand for them appears to be saturated.
The population's propensity to consume is falling as people's anxiety about
the outlook leads them to build up precautionary savings.
The financial sector is hobbled by mounting bad debts at the banks, a
prolonged slump in share prices and very low trading volumes on the stock
market, which is punishing the profits of securities houses.
Without a healthy financial sector, the economy will find it difficult to
generate the credit needed to finance recovery.
Japan's much vaunted industrial companies let their personnel and investment
costs grow rapidly in the 1980s, an increase disguised at the time by the
very low cost of raising capital.
As Mr Yasushi Mieno, the governor of the Bank of Japan, put it yesterday,
the rapid economic expansion at the end of the decade merely delayed the
need for Japanese companies to cut costs in line with slower growth.
This combination of pressures has left the economy in a vulnerable and
volatile state. The stock market is drifting listlessly around the 16,800
level, open to a further sharp fall as companies revise profits down before
the end of the financial year at the end of next month.
The sudden appreciation of the yen against the dollar in the past two weeks
has hit exporters. The growth in the trade surplus fuels worries about a
resurgence of trade friction with the US.
Many companies are waiting to see whether the economy can recover. They are
holding fire on plans to cut their payrolls and restructure some of the
international operations they acquired at great cost in the 1980s. The
electronics company JVC signalled at the weekend what might be in store by
announcing plans to close subsidiaries in the Netherlands and Germany.
Companies may not have to wait for long. The forces behind the downturn will
come to a head in the next few months. Things may well get worse before they
get better.
The response of Japan's politicians, bureaucrats and executives will
determine whether the economy slumps into a prolonged period of very slow
growth or whether it can stage a modest recovery from the end of the year.
They will have to confront some of the most powerful taboos of Japanese
economic and corporate life to rescue the economy.
Fiscal policy - public spending and tax cuts - will be vital to compensate
for the fall in consumer spending. But income tax cuts will require higher
government borrowing, turning back the hard won consolidation of public
finances during the 1980s. The Liberal Democratic party will have to assert
itself over the Finance Ministry which rules budgetary policy. The party's
leaders will have to face up to their seniors, still influential older
leaders such as former prime ministers Nakasone and Fukuda who oppose higher
borrowing.
The hard-pressed banks will come under increasing pressure from the Bank of
Japan to deal with their bad debts. Many would make sharply lower profits if
they had to write off non-performing assets. Some would be forced into
losses. No Japanese bank has made a loss since the end of the last war.
Industrial companies are just embarking on a long retrenchment, which will
force them to amend some of their traditional values and practices.
At companies such as Matsushita in electronics and Bridgestone, the tyre
maker, this has already involved dramatic changes in senior management. More
companies in cars, steel and electronics are likely to follow Nissan's plan
to reduce its workforce by almost 10 per cent in the next few years. Sanyo,
the electronics group, is not alone in decentralising to give its divisions
more autonomy.
Everywhere, Japanese companies say that after three years of declining
profits, the imperative is to improve profitability rather than the
traditional goal of expanding market share.
Japanese policymakers and companies are well known for their long-termism,
their strategic approach to investment and their patience over earning
returns upon it.
The reality is that the creativity of the Japanese economy has been largely
the product of crisis - from the occupation after the second world war to
the oil shocks of the 1970s and the high yen recession of the mid-1980s.
With the economy close to the core of another such crisis, everything will
turn on whether the response is another bout of feverish creativity or a
lapse into complacency.
