FT  13 JAN 93 / Arts: Germany on the couch - Television
Generalising about nations and races is a tricky and not entirely
respectable business, even though whole careers are built on it. The
superior view is that using national stereotypes is vulgar and mentally
lazy. Yet much depends on how sophisticated the generalisation is or, at the
very least, on how it is phrased. 'What one should remember about the French
is . . .'; 'The key to the Finnish character is . . .'; those are the
conversational markers which initially suggest the wisdom of the well-read,
well-travelled observer, rather than - although it may indeed be the case -
the bar-room bigot.
The Essential History of Europe: Germany (BBC 2 on Thursdays) was an
extraordinarily interesting programme which brandished the sophisticate's
version of the national stereotype. We were presented with a classic
definition of the German as someone obsessed by the 'vices' of obedience,
discipline, order, and gripped by an exaggerated sense of dedication and
perfection. Germans fear the outsider. Germans are always looking over their
shoulder at the past.
Just the stuff, one might think, to fuel the prejudices of bar-room bigots
everywhere. However, observations which would have sounded highly dubious
from the mouth of a non-German sounded respectable when spoken as
pessimistic home-truths. The cleverness of this film was to put Germany on
the couch and, apart from an English narrator (perhaps a mistake), to make
German speakers and the German language itself stand as witnesses to the
troubled state of the German soul.
Most prominent among the speakers was a psychotherapist from Halle in former
East Germany called Hans Joachim Maaz. Author of a recent book about the
psychological trauma of reunification for East Germans, Maaz proposes an
ominous view of the national psyche which few foreigners would feel
comfortable about expressing at a German dinner table.
According to Maaz, the German suffers from the lack of a clear point of
view, the consequence of being the obedient child produced by an
authoritarian state. Democracy has been no more than imposed like a mask, a
mantle, on a people whose history has created deep within them an 'inner
fascism'. Setting fire to the homes of Auslander is an all-too typical
manifestation of 'the hidden destructive forces which can emerge any
moment'.
The film was intelligently structured around conceptual signposts;
Zerissenheit, meaning 'a condition of inner strife'; Vergangenheit
Bewaltigungs or 'overcoming the past', Heimat, 'homeland', and so on. We
heard the terms spoken and, in a hopeful attempt to make them stick, were
shown them written. That kind of didacticism would probably have made your
average bar-room bigot switch off long before the grim forebodings of the
programme's conclusion, about Seelischer Emfremdung and what will happen
should western capitalism ultimately fail to deliver the material goodies
which currently compensate for the Germans' spiritual bankruptcy.
But does this kind of analysis, which to many a British person would seem
merely pretentious, actually take us near what real, live Germans worry
about? I suspect that it may do, to judge from the experience of learning
German at London's Goethe Institut. Even though we are mere babes attempting
to get our feeble intelligences around the subjunctive tense, Teacher has
already introduced the resonant concept of Vergangenheits Bewaltigung. Only
this week she was exhorting us to attend a public seminar on VB, to be
addressed by a minor government minister. Which suggests to me that
Essential History did get it right, and that the Germans really do revel in
discussing their collective psyche in public.
Now Americans, I fondly believe, possess an innate conviction that the world
can always be shaped to accommodate their wishes. So it was gratifying on
Horizon's Cheating Time (BBC 2, Monday) to hear a 53 year-old singer called
Jonie Mosby Mitchell state, 'We don't have to accept the menopause any
longer. You can do anything you want'. And so Jonie ignored the ineluctable
onset of ageing, the age-freckles on her hands and crowsfeet, and the
withering of her womb four years previously with the menopause. She went
right ahead and had herself a nice little baby boy which she loves very
much.
However, to be accurate, it is only 50 per cent her baby, and genetically
not hers at all - and if you are watching Channel 4's absorbing series on
sociobiology, The Sexual Imperative on Thursdays at 9.00, you will
appreciate what an unnatural thing that is. New techniques being practised
in the US implant the eggs of donor mothers, fertilised by a woman's
partner, into the womb of post-menopausal women which have been rejuvenated
with hormones. It costs around Dollars 11,000.
Well, frankly, I do not hold with it. However, implantation looks a rather
different matter when you see a young woman in her twenties who has already
experienced the menopause. Should she just bow to fate? But there again, why
should any of us women accept the menopause which one doctor described as
'one of nature's design faults.'
We are the only animal to have this particular design fault, and to lead
such long lives after we become reproductively useless. Already the
technology exists to freeze the eggs of fruitflies and return them to their
aged mums which then buzz about like youngsters and live many days longer
than they should. So it stands to reason, does it not, that some women are
going to want to have babies in order to live into their hundreds? Is that
kind of selfishness really possible? I would say yes. After all, Jonie
Mitchell admitted she had never asked herself what it would be like for the
child of her autumnal years to have such an antique mum. But that is not
really part of the picture, is it, if your creed is, 'You can do anything
you want?'
