FT  22 APR 93 / Republicans block US stimulus bill
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton faced an important legislative reversal yesterday
after Senate Democrats again failed to overcome Republican resistance to his
economic stimulus package, in spite of his agreement to reduce it by Dollars
4bn to Dollars 12bn (Pounds 7.9bn).
The White House refused to admit defeat yesterday morning, but Democratic
senators acknowledged that they could see no way of breaking Republican
opposition.
A vote on the bill yesterday produced no defections among Republicans, who
have maintained their filibuster since before the Easter recess. As long as
they remain united, they can deny the Democrats the three-fifths majority
needed to force an end to debate and bring the measure to a vote. One
Democrat, Senator Richard Shelby of Alabama, continued to vote against his
party, leaving the vote at 56-43, four votes short of the 60 Mr Clinton
needed.
Mr Clinton may now be forced to fall back on a much-reduced version offered
by Senator Mark Hatfield, a moderate Republican. That proposal would salvage
only Dollars 6bn of the Dollars 16bn the administration originally proposed.
However, some members of Congress argued that it would be best for the
president to cut his losses before the perception spreads that he is
powerless to break Washington gridlock.
'You move on to other things. I don't think it serves the president to
belabour this further,' said Senator Dale Bumpers of Arkansas, one of Mr
Clinton's Democratic allies.
Most economists argue that the stimulus bill, which the administration
claimed would, in its original form, have created 500,000 jobs, is far too
small a cash injection to have any appreciable effect on the huge US
economy, and is in any case no longer needed, since the economy is now on
its way to recovery.
Some recent weak economic statistics have given the administration
ammunition for arguing the stimulus is still needed to 'goose' the recovery.
But a popular, if cynical, interpretation of Mr Clinton's insistence on the
need for the bill is that he wants to claim the recovery as his own, rather
than something well under way before he took office.
Political analysts remain divided over the Republicans' prospects of
repeating their show of strength on future legislation. Party line votes are
rare in Congress, especially in the Senate, and most believe that defeat on
the stimulus bill does not portend a string of failures on Mr Clinton's
other legislative proposals.
