FT  29 NOV 93 / Survey of Software at Work - Winter 1993 (25): It's all
change at the ministry - Maiden project at the Ministry of Agriculture /
'Change management' is the key to success for an office automation project
involving 3,000 staff
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is equipping 3,000 staff
with office automation over the next three years, reports John Kavnagah.
The Maiden project (Ministry of Agriculture Integrated Desktop Environment
for the Nineties) is a big challenge for the computing department, which is
running the project with support from Siemens Nixdorf Information Systems.
The end-users are divided into more than 20 work groups in half a dozen
towns and cities; some are split between sites. The work groups are largely
autonomous and to an extent control their own computing. Most of these
staff, who have not used personal computers (PCs) in their work before, are
now being given the most powerful standard office PCs available, based on
Intel's 486 processors. They are also getting Microsoft Windows software as
needed: Word for word processing; the Excel spreadsheet package; Powerpoint
for graphics and MS Project for project management. Siemens Nixdorf is
supplying all the equipment and software, including the company's own most
powerful office computers as local processors.
The whole lot is being tied together in an electronic mail and data network,
providing text communication and access to mainframe computer systems for
those who use them.
'We've introduced a management of change process,' says Mr John Kennedy, one
of the project's managers. 'We start talking to a work group six to nine
months before installation. We have to anyway, because we need to know the
numbers of staff and so on. But this is an opportunity for us to start the
group thinking about change management, what needs to be done and the
benefits.
'One of our main tasks is to help them in this management of change. We meet
them at least every two weeks in the run-up, but it's their project. Work
groups typically hold awareness sessions, run newsletters for staff, work on
operational procedures and look at the ergonomics aspects and plan new
furniture.'
The ministry has analysed the skills of individual users and Siemens Nixdorf
has developed training at different levels. PC appreciation courses are
available for people new to computers. There are basic courses on the word
processing and spreadsheet packages and intermediate courses for already
experienced users. Advanced courses on the applications, local networking
and system administration are provided to local systems administrators.
The most detailed training is on word processing - 'the spreadsheet package
is available to everyone but initially we just make people aware of the
potential rather than give detailed instruction,' Mr Kennedy says.
Everyone gets half a day on electronic mail. Mr Kennedy says all the work
groups see big benefits in this facility, especially those split across
sites.
Standard templates have been set up for documents of different types, with
specific typefaces and character sizes. As Mr Kennedy says: 'A package such
as Word offers a large number of fonts and if you give people free rein you
risk getting some horrendous looking documents.' (That is also a reason why
the trainers do not over-emphasise the availability of the graphics
package.)
User preference was a key factor in the ministry's selection of the
Microsoft products. Many who already used PCs had the Microsoft Windows
system, which uses a mouse pointer and little colour pictures of functions,
rather than keyboard instructions, and therefore more acceptable to users.
'We looked at the Lotus products but Microsoft's packages were already
available under Windows and the company was starting to take over the world
at the time,' John Kennedy says.
'Many work groups have their own budgets and users can choose what they want
but we won't support them. Non-standard products can be a problem if you
want to send a document by electronic mail, but it's not insurmountable.'
Work group autonomy means the computing department does not control the use
of the systems. The ministry is very serious about illegal software copying
(it has recently joined the Federation Against Software Theft) and about
viruses - programs which can destroy files.
'We provide any number of sheep-dip PCs loaded with virus checkers,' John
Kennedy says. 'Every PC has a big sticker saying it should only be used for
the purposes for which it is intended. We have two virus experts in our
department. We have not had any viruses in the first four months.
'We constantly hammer home the point about viruses in particular, but it's
up to the local managers to set up policies and 'police' their systems. Most
of them are concerned anyway. One work group even puts a physical lock on
each floppy disc drive, so no outside discs can be loaded.'
Every work group has at least a system administrator and, in many cases, one
or more computing specialists to look after the office network and act as
the first line of support. They liaise with a central computing department
help-desk in Guildford, Surrey.
'We don't have central control,' John Kennedy says. 'This is in line with
the way the ministry is decentralising budgets and computing. We keep
telling the users that it's their system and it's up to them how they use
it. We're user-driven and I'm perfectly happy for users to run their own
systems.'
He adds, 'When we started it was seen as a computing department project. Now
the users are clamouring for it.'
