FT  02 DEC 93 / UK Company News: Pearson acquires Extel Financial for Pounds
73.5m
Pearson, the publishing and media group, yesterday agreed to buy Extel
Financial, the financial information group, from United Newspapers for
Pounds 73.5m.
There was considerable interest in Extel, which pushed the purchase price
beyond the expected Pounds 50m-Pounds 60m, but it is believed that Pearson,
owner of the Financial Times, was the only bidder willing to buy all five
divisions of Extel Financial, including the lossmaking Financial Systems
side.
The purchase price, which has delighted United, includes repayment of an
Pounds 11.8m inter-company loan.
Pearson, which announced in July it intended to concentrate on its media
interests, said the buy would accelerate its expansion 'into electronically
delivered information markets not only in Europe but also in the US and
Asia.'
Extel Financial's businesses range from financial and corporate information
on securities to financial news and services for investment admin-istration
and analysis.
According to Pearson, Extel's 1992 sales were Pounds 34.5m and pre-tax
profits, excluding pension credit, Pounds 5.6m before losses of Pounds 2.8m
in Financial Systems, a division providing investment accountancy systems
and services. Pearson believes the losses can be cut sharply next year.
Mr Derek Terrington, media analyst at Kleinwort Benson, said the deal was
'good news for United and a considerable challenge for Pearson.'
Mr Graham Wilson, managing director of United, said that after provision for
goodwill the sale would realise a net gain of more than Pounds 25m.
Extel, whose managing director is Mr Martin Brooks, a former Financial Times
executive, will continue as a separate operating subsidiary with the
Financial Times Group.
Mr Fred Perkins, managing director of Financial Times Information Services,
said Extel was in almost every area complementary to FTIS services such as
the Profile data base.
As part of the deal Pearson also gets a 50 per cent share of a joint venture
with Agence France Press which operates the AFX electronic financial news
service.
