FT  09 JUN 93 / Bonn pressed over race attacks: Emergency debate called as
'copycat' violence grows
AT LEAST four more arson attacks on foreign homes and businesses were
reported in Germany yesterday, as politicians and community leaders called
for firm action to combat racism.
Fourteen people, including six children, were taken to hospital suffering
from inhaling smoke, after a fire in a house near Dusseldorf occupied by
several Turkish families.
In a separate incident, a Turkish restaurant owner and his family just
managed to escape a blaze started with four incendiary devices in their home
near Karlsruhe.
The security services fear that racist gangs have embarked on a series of
'copy-cat' attacks, following the deaths of two Turkish women and three
girls in Solingen 10 days ago. Turkish community leaders believe they may be
co-ordinated by extreme right-wing groups.
The government agreed yesterday to hold an emergency debate in parliament
next week on the violence and ways of combatting racism. Chancellor Helmut
Kohl, criticised for not reacting more forcefully to the attacks, will speak
for the ruling coalition.
Changes in the German nationality laws now appear inevitable, with growing
cross-party support for relaxation of restrictive rules that link
naturalisation to German ancestry. But there is strong resistance in Mr
Kohl's Christian Democratic Union and its sister party, the conservative
Bavarian-based Christian Social Union, to calls for dual nationality.
The clampdown on illegal foreign immigration from eastern Europe continued
yesterday with the proposed introduction of new labour rules for east
Europeans employed in the country.
Government officials, under pressure from IG Bau, the construction trade
union, have thrashed out rules to restrict the ability of east European
sub-contractors on German construction projects to pay their employees
directly.
The new regulations, expected to come into effect later this year, will
force German companies to directly employ east European nationals and pay
for their social insurance. The eastern European sub-contractors, who
provide workers for a third of the cost of German employees, are accused of
undermining Germany's highly regulated wage system. Some sub-contractors are
regularly approached by German companies seeking illegal workers.
While quotas signed between Germany and eastern European countries,
including Russia, allow for 97,000 workers a year to work on short-term
contracts, up to 400,000 are believed working illegally in the country, over
two thirds of them on construction sites.
But the new regulations are likely to have little effect on the illegal job
seekers pouring through the country's eastern borders.
The number of illegal immigrants caught at the Polish and Czech borders
increased by 233 per cent to 29,200 in the first five months of the year, Mr
Rudolf Seiters, the federal interior minister, said yesterday.
While the interior ministry has tightened security at the borders, the
number of illegal immigrants has increased ahead of the curbs on Germany's
liberal asylum law recently passed in parliament.
