FT  24 MAR 93 / Mitterrand feels pressure of victors
FRENCH President Francois Mitterrand yesterday came under pressure from both
sides of politics to resign, in the wake of the Socialists' defeat by the
right in the first round of the general election, but officials said he
would stay.
Mr Jacques Chirac, head of the Gaullist RPR, which polled the most votes
last Sunday, said: 'It would be in Mr Mitterrand's own interest to resign.
Otherwise he must not hinder the next government.'
Among the Socialists, the former prime minister, Mr Michel Rocard, regretted
the 'over-elitist and imperial character' of political leaders on both
sides. He said the campaign had already begun for the presidential election,
not officially due until March 1995. Mr Rocard confirmed that he would be a
Socialist candidate for the presidency, because that was the most obvious
solution.
Officials at the Elysee palace said Mr Mitterrand had a right and duty to
serve out his full seven-year term, as guarantor of the smooth running of
the constitution. He was certainly not thinking of resigning and saw
co-existence with the conservative alliance of RPR and UDF as no different
from the last period of cohabitation with them in 1986-1988.
The RPR and UDF yesterday patched up what had threatened to blow up into a
row over the share-out of seats in next Sunday's final round of voting. They
agreed to field joint candidates in all but four constituencies, where
voters will choose between runners from both conservative parties.
The deal isolates Mr Valery Giscard d'Estaing, leader of the UDF. He wanted
the two parties to fight it out next weekend in all constituencies where a
Socialist had no chance of being elected to the national assembly, in the
hope that the UDF would catch up on the RPR, the bigger coalition partner.
Earlier, Mr Edouard Balladur, the RPR's front-runner for prime minister,
said the new government must be as 'open, as tolerant and as respectful of
others as possible'. His appeal for consensus reflects the sheer size of
popular rejection of the three mainstream parties.
The combined score of the Socialists, RPR and UDF has fallen from 72 per
cent in the first round of the last general election in 1988 to 57 per cent
last Sunday. Within this, the conservative allies have barely maintained
their share of the vote, enough to give them a huge majority a parliamentary
seats. Unstable or extreme minority parties, like the ecologists and
National Front, have won more votes, but few seats.
Ecologists' fortunes took a fresh dive yesterday when Mr Antoine Waechter,
head of the Greens, the older of the two ecology parties, ended his group's
electoral pact with Generation Ecologie. He called for the two parties to
field separate candidates in the 1995 French presidential elections and next
year's vote for the European Parliament. Mr Waechter said the pair's
unexpectedly poor score on Sunday showed the pact 'had not worked' and that
they had 'different sensibilities'.
