FT  05 AUG 93 / Government signals support for N-fuel reprocessing plant
THE GOVERNMENT said yesterday it was 'minded' to give the go-ahead to the
Pounds 2.8bn Thorp nuclear reprocessing plant as it launched a further round
of consultation into the controversial project.
British Nuclear Fuels, owner of the Cumbrian plant, said in one of the
consultation documents published yesterday that Thorp would earn some Pounds
950m for the UK and about Pounds 1.8bn for BNF in the first 10 years of its
life.
Ministers are calling for comments on the economic case for the plant and on
the dangers of nuclear weapons proliferation before deciding whether to
award a licence to start operation.
But they drew sharp criticism from opposition MPs and environmentalists with
the statement that these wider economic and diplomatic questions were
legally 'not relevant' to the government's eventual decision. It was up to
BNF to assess the commercial benefits of Thorp, they said.
Mr John Guinness, BNF's chairman, welcomed the government's support and
hoped Thorp would be given the go-ahead without further delays. The
consultation is due to end on October 4 and the government could make a
final decision by the end of the year.
The plant, which has taken nearly 10 years to build, is designed to extract
reusable uranium and plutonium from used nuclear fuel. Environmentalists say
the attractions of reprocessing have diminished since a 1977 inquiry gave
the go-ahead for Thorp's construction.
Greenpeace, the pressure group, said it was 'considering what legal steps it
will be necessary to take in order to ensure that this consultation is more
than just a sham'. It has threatened to mount a legal challenge if the
government does not adequately consider the economic and diplomatic issues.
The first public consultation addressed only environmental and health
issues. The pollution inspectorate said yesterday it had received 80,000
responses but had found 'no points of substance' to cause it to reconsider
the terms of the draft licence. Its 200-page report, published yesterday,
said the proposed licence would 'effectively protect human health, the food
chain and the environment generally'.
Mr Chris Smith, shadow environment secretary, said the government should
carry out a full independent study of the economic case for the plant.
Details, Page 7
Editorial Comment, Page 15
