FT  29 APR 93 / Survey of Business Schools (4): Quality matches the quantity
 -Warwick University's business school has the largest faculty in the UK
WITH 130 full-time academic staff, Warwick University's Business School
(WBS) has the largest faculty of any university business/management
department in UK higher education.
It has quality to match the quantity. The Universities Funding Council's
recent assessment of university research output gave Warwick a '5' rating.
It was one of only seven institutions judged to be publishing work of
international excellence.
Few quibble with the UFC's judgment. But Warwick's reputation is of recent
growth. While the university's industrial relations research unit has a
reputation going back 30 years, its business school rose to prominence only
in the late 1980s.
The transformation was the result of smart footwork, and strong leadership,
by George Bain, now principal of London Business School.
Bain not only masterminded the change: he personifies it. Arriving at
Warwick in 1979 as professor of industrial relations, he became chairman of
the School of Industrial and Business Studies four years later. By the time
he left for London in 1989, it had become Warwick Business School.
'Industrial relations' - words redolent of the corporatist, union-dominated
1960s - were banished from the title and incorporated as just one pillar in
a reconstructed edifice. Symbolically, his successor, Robin Wensley, is a
marketing specialist, who spent much of the 1980s researching 'market share
effect' - the relationship between finance, accounting, and marketing in
investment decisions and strategic planning. And Wensley came from LBS.
Insiders talk of a 'palace revolution' under Bain. Whatever the history, the
legacy is a department combining a formidable research record with a large
undergraduate intake and a highly-rated MBA programme.
More important, for grant purposes, WBS is quick to react to changes in the
academic-political climate for business studies. The Economic and Social
Research Council (ESRC) provides the bulk of WBS's Pounds 3m grant and
contract income, and for the medium term, its council funding is assured.
Though all its faculty are expected to publish regularly, WBS has four
centres dedicated to research in particular sectors:
The Centre for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises (SMEs), which includes a
small business research programme led by David Storey. Among its larger
contracts, National Westminster Bank is paying Pounds 129,000 for a start-up
business survey, and the European Commission is paying Pounds 130,000 for a
study of the international role of SMEs in regional development.
The Centre for Corporate Strategy and Change, directed by Andrew Pettigrew,
author of a celebrated study of ICI (as was), and more recently of Managing
Change for Competitive Success (with Richard Whipp), a leading account of
how Britain's boardrooms have come to grips with external pressures.
The well-honed Warwick instinct at work, Pettigrew moved away from ICI a
decade ago and is now preoccupied with the public sector. His research group
is currently studying management styles and systems in the new-style
National Health Service, courtesy of a Pounds 330,000 grant from Department
of Health.
The Industrial Relations Research Unit. Surprise surprise, the unit is
moving into European employment trends and the employment effects of
compulsory competitive tendering in local government.
The WBS Research Bureau, under Paul Stoneman, an umbrella group embracing
everything from a centre for the study of new technology, to centres for
local government, financial options and performance measurement.
Stoneman sees research as WBS's main raison d'etre ('I don't have anything
to do with teaching'). A priority is to improve conditions for the 40-odd
full-time researchers on short-term contracts. 'Over the past 15 years
research has become a career for the first time; for researchers to have to
live in a hand-to-mouth manner on two-year contracts is neither feasible nor
desirable,' he says.
Accordingly WBS has started to offer rolling contracts to its best research
staff, and will foot the bill itself if necessary.
Another priority is to make the School more international. Almost its entire
faculty is British; most of its work is UK-focused; and a gripe - one of the
few - of the MBA students is the Anglo-US-centric nature of their case
studies. The creation of a chair in international business was intended to
help remedy the weakness; it has been filled by a professor from Glasgow.
Robin Wensley insists that research and teaching go hand in hand. None of
the sneers about 'finishing-school undergraduate courses' are to be heard at
Warwick. WBS has 110 undergraduate places a year: for this September's entry
it had 1,600 qualified applicants, with A-level conditional offers in the
Oxbridge region of ABB.
Mr Wensley says: 'Undergraduates are vital to us; not least because they
unite us strongly with the rest of the university. MBA-only schools can too
easily become worlds apart.'
WBS has the now-typical array of MBAs, including one of Britain's first
modular courses, launched last month. Its full-time course, 123-strong this
year, lasts one year, a strong selling point if this year's intake is any
guide. It is not hard to see why: the students estimates that, all told, the
year will cost them about Pounds 25,000 - 'and that's just about all the
human capital investment I can put up with,' quips one.
The fastest growing MBA is the distance learning course. 'The market took
off in a way no-one expected,' says Suzanne Alexander, the course
co-ordinator.
It can be completed in three years, but most students take between 3.5 and
four. Students must spend at least eight days at classes at Warwick during
the year, and can attend for up to another seven days. The intake is mostly
private sector, leavened by a few NHS employees.
'Integration is the key,' says Robin Wensley. 'We have lots of different
course and research 'limbs', but they are all part of the same basic body.
We haven't gone heavily into the short-course and other markets just to pump
the cash flow.' Thanks to the ESRC, Warwick can afford to be so high-minded.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
PROFILES OF CURRENT FULL-TIME MBA CLASS, WARWICK
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Class size                           135 students
Applications                         Over 1,000 per annum
Average age on entry                 28
Educational attainment               80% hold 1st or 2.i honours degrees
First degree background              46% Science/engineering
                                     38% Economics/social studies
                                     16% Arts
Country background                   67% UK
                                     33% Overseas
Sources of finance                    5% Scolarships
                                     10% Sponsored
                                     85% Self-financed
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Warwick University
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
