FT  25 SEP 93 / Survey of Residential Property (6): Smoother moves abroad -
International
HOW DOES one cope with moving abroad? Currently, some 421,000 Britons live
in other EC countries. While there is a network of relocation agents to
guide and help other nationals moving into Britain - as in the US - the
number of companies offering to assist the British into Europe seems
surprisingly few.
The directory of the Edinburgh-based Association of Relocation Agents (ARA)
lists 116 members and Associates ready to help people find homes in parts of
Britain. But only six will handle moves into Europe.
ARA was founded in 1986 and its chairman, Tad Zurlinden - he is of Swiss
extraction - admits that the number of members in the international section
is sparse. In a growing market it seems odd to find so few companies
operating.
Taking the Benelux countries as an example, the latest figures (which are
for 1991) show that Belgium had 23,300 resident Britons - the number of
Britons moving into Belgium has nearly quadrupled since 1985 - the
Netherlands 39,000, Luxembourg, 3,200.
'The Americans have had relocation in all its different guises for 25 to 30
years. In Britain there were a few companies in the 1970s but the service
has only built up in the last ten years,' says Zurlinden.
However, although there are relatively few relocation companies, between
them they provide a wide range of services. Not only will they find property
and furnishing services, they will make sure that gas, electricity and so on
are connected for new occupants. They may also arrange the letting and
management of the home you have left behind.
People &amp; Property says it gives a personal service to corporate and private
clients. This includes area orientation, homefinding (to buy or rent),
educational counselling, furniture removals and introductions to decorators.
At EuroHome Corporate Services, based in Amsterdam, Avrom Goldberg, managing
director, provides destination homefinding, international homesale and spans
37 countries on four continents. Goldberg says of Belgium: 'It is pretty
much a buyers' market. You will get detached houses and far more space
there.' Rents in Brussels had peaked and were coming down, he says, while in
Amsterdam they were rising.
Association of Relocation Agents, tel: 031-558-3060; People &amp; Property,
071-225-1313; EuroHome Corporate Services, Amsterdam 611 69 36.
