FT  07 APR 93 / A setback, but the search goes on: Disappointments over AZT
are unlikely to slow research into Aids treatments
The virus that causes Aids, HIV, is the most intensively studied microbe in
history. Worldwide spending of about Dollars 2bn a year on Aids research has
produced extraordinary knowledge of HIV but no effective treatment for the
infection, as the disappointing outcome of an international trial of the
leading Aids drug AZT showed last week.
However, with 12m people worldwide estimated to be HIV-positive and the
total direct and indirect costs of the disease running at Dollars 90bn a
year, government health agencies and the pharmaceutical industry say there
will be no let-up in their research effort.
The virus is deceptively simple; it has a genetic blueprint of just nine
genes (compared with 100,000 in man) producing 15 proteins. Scientists now
know the precise chemical sequence of all the genes and proteins, yet they
cannot develop a selective drug to jam the vital processes of HIV without
devastating the cells it infects.
Aids researchers face two fundamental problems. First, HIV mutates more
quickly than any other microbe known; there are countless different strains,
and within each patient the virus changes character as the disease
progresses. Therefore drug-resistant forms can evolve very fast.
The second problem is that, although the chemistry of the virus itself is
simple and well understood, scientists are still baffled by the extremely
complex process through which HIV infects human cells and then, several
years later, destroys the immune system.
One particularly puzzling feature of Aids is that patients have very low
levels of the virus in comparison to other infectious diseases. Indeed HIV
may not actually 'infect' most of the cells it kills; it may somehow set off
a cascade of 'cell suicide' similar to an accelerated ageing process.
AZT was rushed through the approvals process and on to the market in 2 1/2
years - a record for any drug - after Wellcome researchers discovered its
activity against the newly discovered HIV in 1984. It can prolong the lives
of patients with full-scale Aids by several months, but clinical trials show
that the benefits wear off with time. As the Anglo-French Concorde study
concluded last week, after three years, people with HIV taking AZT had just
as many Aids symptoms as those on an inactive placebo.
Although AZT is still the mainstream Aids therapy, regulatory authorities
approved two new drugs last year: DDI from Bristol-Myers Squibb of the US
and DDC from Roche of Switzerland. All three belong to a group of synthetic
chemicals called nucleoside analogues which work by mimicking natural
building blocks of genetic material. When HIV takes up a drug molecule, it
stops replicating.
The theory behind nucleoside analogues may sound convincing but in practice
they are 'relatively ineffective drugs', says Dr Joep Lange, head of
clinical research for the World Health Organisation's global Aids programme.
They produce only a 10-fold suppression of viral activity, whereas an
antibiotic will suppress bacteria by a factor of many million.
'On a scientific level, I think AZT and all the simple nucleoside analogues
have been massively oversold,' says Dr Alan Kingsman of Oxford University.
He points out that a modest suppression of HIV might have no clinical
benefit if the virus is not killing cells directly but triggering a process
of cell suicide.
Over the past year, Aids specialists have come to agree that no nucleoside
analogue on its own will treat HIV effectively in the long term.
'Combination therapies are likely to become the mainstay,' says Dr Trevor
Jones, research director of Wellcome. AZT is likely to be part of most
'cocktails' developed in the near future.
Clinical tests have already demonstrated two advantages of pharmaceutical
combinations: first, the ingredients may have a synergistic effect on each
other; and second, it is far more difficult for HIV to mutate in a way that
develops resistance to several drugs at once. Their disadvantage will be
financial. A course of AZT at the minimum recommended dose already costs
Pounds 1,900 a year and the price of a combination with other patented drugs
may be prohibitive.
Although nucleoside analogues are in the forefront of HIV drug development -
and two more, Glaxo's 3TC and Bristol-Myers Squibb's D4T, are beginning
large-scale clinical trials - different approaches may be more promising in
the long run.
Therapeutic vaccines are an example. They are designed not to prevent
infection like a conventional vaccine but to boost the immune defences of
people who are already HIV-positive. British Biotechnology recently started
clinical trials of one such product called p24-VLP; this includes multiple
copies of an HIV core protein, packaged in a virus-like particle made by
genetically engineered yeast cells.
Genetic attacks on HIV are a somewhat more distant prospect. But some US
biotechnology companies are planning to put anti-viral genes into the blood
cells of Aids patients, and others want to use so-called anti-sense
technology to de-activate the virus by blocking its genes.
Doctors such as Professor Anthony Pinching of St Bartholomew's Hospital,
London, say they are impressed by the way the pharmaceutical industry
continues to pour several hundred million dollars a year into Aids research
and development, even though patient activists have directed a long campaign
against Wellcome, the only manufacturer to have made money out of an
anti-HIV drug, for allegedly profiteering at their expense.
Indeed Dr Richard Sykes, chief executive of Glaxo, says his company is
devoting more resources to Aids R&amp;D than the likely return from successful
products would justify according to normal commercial criteria. 'I don't see
any cut-throat competition in drug development in the Aids area,' he says.
'No one is going to make much money from this but we need to show that the
pharmaceutical industry can produce the goods when it needs to.'
The scientific credibility of any large drug company would be at stake if it
pulled out of such an important field. The argument that Aids is a special
case may not appeal to someone dying of another incurable illness, but it
may be reasonable to devote a disproportionate share of pharmaceutical R&amp;D
funds to Aids because it poses an incalculable threat for the future which
makes it genuinely different from the established killer diseases.
'The virus is relatively innocuous at the moment because it does not
transmit very easily,' Dr Kingsman says. 'But what if it became more robust
and was transmitted like 'flu?' The risk of that nightmare scenario coming
true may be remote but with such a fast-mutating organism as HIV it cannot
be dismissed entirely.
Assuming that HIV does not change significantly in the near future - and is
spread only by sexual contact, blood or maternal transmission - forecasts of
the number of people infected in the year 2000 vary from the World Health
Organisation's conservative 30m-40m up to 120m.
The latest WHO estimates of the number of new infections each year (see
chart) show peaks in the mid-1980s in Europe and North America and in the
early 1990s in Africa and Latin America - though the long delay between
infection and disease means that actual Aids cases will continue rising in
these regions into the next century. The most frightening picture is for
Asia, where the the number of new HIV-positives is expected to go on
increasing until about 2010.
The total worldwide cost of Aids is probably running at about Dollars 10bn a
year for direct treatment, prevention and research and Dollars 80bn
indirectly from loss of earnings.
Figures such as those are helping to persuade governments to increase
spending on Aids research - and to ignore the small group insisting that the
threat from the disease has been grossly exaggerated by a medical
establishment eager to nurture a worldwide 'Aids industry'. The Clinton
administration is leading the way with plans to set up a strengthened Office
of Aids Research with a Dollars 1bn annual budget.
If that level of commitment is maintained, researchers should eventually
translate the scientific understanding of HIV into treatments that work far
better than AZT.
