FT  08 JUL 93 / Fear and loathing in Vegas and Jersey: The threat of
competition to US's traditional gambling centres
NO sooner had the Mississippi burst its banks this week, than there was a
spate of announcements: riverboat gaming would not be interrupted.
Little, it seems, will stop the explosive growth of the US gambling
industry. And that means problems for the nation's two traditional gaming
strongholds, glitzy Las Vegas in Nevada and New Jersey's more down market
Atlantic City.
For years, these were the only centres for legalised casino gaming in the
US. Now competitors across the nation are threatening to woo their punters
away.
Atlantic City, a depressed town which lacks essential infrastructure, is the
more severely affected. This is particularly bad news for Mr Donald Trump,
whose three casinos make him the biggest operator in town. The New
York-based property and gaming mogul has even filed a legal action against
the US federal government seeking to block the growth of casinos on Indian
land.
Mr Trump's complaint stems from a 1988 federal law which permitted Indian
tribes to engage in any form of gambling which was already legal in a
particular state. In itself, this did not look hugely permissive. However,
many states which outlawed traditional gambling did permit charitable 'Las
Vegas nights' with 'casino-style' gaming. Using this loophole, tribes
successfully established their right to run casinos.
Today, legal gaming operations, from bingo to blackjack, are reckoned to
exist on more than half the nation's Indian reservations. In the case of
more serious 'class three' gaming operations - casino games, slot machines,
Jai Alai and horse and dog-racing - 78 agreements have been struck between
tribes and officials in 18 states. Gaming on Indian land is now a Dollars
6bn-a-year business, according to the National Indian Gaming Association.
Meanwhile 'riverboat' gambling has started to flourish on the Mississippi.
The movement began in Iowa, largely in response to local economic
difficulties. The state approved riverboat gaming in 1989 after four years
of lobbying.
Illinois, Missouri, Mississippi and Louisiana quickly followed. Now Texas is
considering legislation which could bring riverboat gaming to seven
locations on the state's Gulf Coast.
Given these two catalysts, the spread of legalised, onshore gaming to
centres other than Vegas or Atlantic City has become almost inevitable. Most
states could use the additional tax dollars and the jobs.
The expansion remains controversial: opponents cite social problems and
Indians themselves have been divided. Worries of mob influence in the newer
gaming centres also continue to surface - an issue mentioned in the Trump
suit.
His legal action, however, centres on the issue of state powers versus
federal ones, and mirrors rearguard actions being mounted by 'anti-gaming'
lobbies in states such as Florida and Alabama. It argues that the federal
Indian Gaming Regulatory Act is unconstitutional under the 10th Amendment,
which reserves for states all the rights which have not been expressly given
to the federal government.
Legal arguments notwithstanding, much of the industry's expansion may now be
irreversible. Big gaming companies - such as Hilton Hotels, Promus and Steve
Wynn's Mirage Resorts - have seized the new opportunities, striking deals
with tribes and competing to run both new land-based casinos and riverboats.
For Atlantic City, where the seafront casinos lead on to blocks of run-down
houses and dilapidated streets, this is bad news.
To boost business, New Jersey decided to allow 24-hour gaming, lifting
revenues to Dollars 3.2bn last year. But infrastructure investments - such
as a modern airport and a new convention centre - are only belatedly getting
under way, presenting an opening for eager competitors.
Nevada has been in the gaming business since 1931, compared with only the
mid-1970s for Atlantic City, and the transport and convention facilities are
better. About 40 per cent of visitors fly into Vegas, giving the city more
chance of competing for punters on a national scale.
Even so, Vegas has not been immune to the west coast recession and
competitive pressures. Although California has declined in importance as a
source for visitors, the state still accounts for about one-third of Las
Vegas's customers. A surge in alternative gaming options there could present
the Vegas impresarios with even tougher business odds.
