FT  02 DEC 93 / FT Traveller, Zurich (12): A chance to eat, drink and be
merry - Alan Bridgman samples two top Italian restaurants
Il Giglio is a fairly recent arrival on the Zurich scene and is managed by a
young team. Casa Ferlin, on the other hand, which dates back to 1907, is
still owned and operated by the Ferlin family and their long-serving staff.
Il Giglio is a little off the beaten track in a less attractive part of
Zurich, near Stauffacher. The dining room does not have a specially warm
atmosphere, but is very reminiscent of many restaurants in Italy in its
austerity.
First courses include antipasto, a plate of undistinguished cold vegetables,
some fried in oil. But the prawns in batter (gamberetti) (SFr14) on a green
salad were delicious.
For those who like their pasta with a 'bite', the linguine mare (SFr16) were
acceptable, if rather chewy. The plate-sized pasta triangle filled with
ricotta and basil, however, was perfect (SFr12).
The beef tournedos with aceto balsamico (SFr36), a speciality, was
beautifully tender, but the scaloppine al limone (SFr27) was too drenched in
lemon juice to have its own flavour.
Full marks to the waitress who immediately offered and quickly brought a
plain grilled veal dish in replacement.
The choice of desserts was not enormous, but strictly Italian. Panna cotta
was excellent, and there were various fruit-flavoured sorbets. The
restaurant also offers a choice of dessert wines by the glass.
The wines available were from all over Italy at prices from SFr34 to SFr130
a bottle. The Vino Nobile di Montepulciano (SFr42) was agreeable, although
the year we asked for was not available despite being on the list.
On arriving at Casa Ferlin, which is a short walk from the main station and
the Bahnhofstrasse, one cannot but be impressed by the warm and welcoming
atmosphere exuded by the dark red walls, and the oil lamps alight on every
table.
The service is friendly and personal, in a relaxed way that the young and
less experienced staff of Il Giglio will no doubt learn with time.
The menu here is more international, although the specialities of the house
are typical Italian dishes. Unfortunately, the main specialities of the
house (including filetto di vitello al limone) are available only for a
minimum of two persons.
We started with a half portion of the locally famous home-made meat-filled
ravioli (SFr17), and a half-portion of fettucine alla panna (SFr14), and
were not disappointed. For our main course we chose the piccata alla marsala
(SFr36), which was pleasant if not memorable, and an excellent veal
medaillon at SFr45, with mushrooms (funghi porcini), spinach and saffran
risotto.
These dishes were accompanied by a good if overpriced 1981 Chianti (SFr58).
The restaurant's other name happens to be Chiantiquelle, or source of
Chianti, and the wine list mentions a number of vintages, mostly from the
same grower. There is also a reasonable selection of other wines from Italy
and elsewhere.
Our dessert was a zabaglione of outstanding quality (SFr11), accompanied by
a Vinsanto dessert wine (Antinori).
Both these restaurants were full when we visited, but we had to book a day
in advance for Casa Ferlin, which suggests that many people appreciate its
qualities.
Casa Ferlin, Stampfenbachstrasse 38, tel 362-3509.
Il Giglio, Weberstrtasse 14, tel 242-8597.
