FT  25 JAN 93 / Economics Notebook: A single bullet can't kill Brazil's
inflationary tiger
IN the war against inflation in Brazil, a minor battle was won last week.
Agreement by a special session of Congress over a new tax on financial
transactions is forecast to raise Dollars 7.2bn (Pounds 4.7bn) to help plug
the government's budget deficit.
Yet, although helpful, the move will do little to address Brazil's long-term
inflation problem. That will require a shake-up of the government. That only
appears possible when the 1988 constitution comes up for review by Congress
next September.
Inflation in Brazil has been above 20 per cent for 14 months now. The
country has suffered triple-digit annual inflation for 10 years; last year
it stood at 1,149 per cent.
Brazil's inflation contrasts with the rest of Latin America. In the region
as a whole excluding Brazil, average inflation was 21 per cent last year
against 1,203 per cent in 1989.
Insights about why inflation in Brazil is so tenacious are contained in a
working paper from the World Bank's policy research department* which covers
recent hyperinflation in Argentina, Peru and Brazil.
It cites evidence that high inflation degenerated into hyperinflation in
these three countries in the late 1980s not because their chronic budget
deficits somehow got sharply worse. Neither did hyperinflation - at least in
Argentina and Brazil - take off without any prior surge in money supply as
one would expect from examining the 'classic' hyperinflations of Poland,
Austria and Germany in the 1920s and of Bolivia in the early 1980s.
Instead, hyperinflation was the culmination of a variety of factors:
worsening fiscal accounts, a growing tendency to accept high inflation, and
increased financial fragility. This was complicated by limited access to
external finance because of the debt crisis, weak monetary and fiscal
control and the limited availability of non-inflationary domestic financing
to the government.
Financial fragility stemmed from the impact over time of high inflation on
the willingness to hold money. In Brazil, M1 dropped from 14 per cent of
gross domestic product in 1970 to just 3 per cent in the late 1980s. That
meant, for example, that if the central bank had printed money to offset a
shortfall of taxes of 3 per cent of GDP in the late 1980s, it would have
doubled money supply. The authors conclude hyperinflation came about because
of recurrent failed stabilisation attempts which created instability in the
rate of change of inflation.
Furthermore, after the 'new' hyperinflations, 'restoring price stability has
been longer and more costly than in the classical cases'. This was because
it was not clear in the public mind where inflation would settle once
hyperinflation had stopped, experience showing that it fell back to the high
levels prevailing before hyperinflation. The battle to beat inflation thus
had to continue for longer.
Hyperinflations themselves must come to an end because they are
unsustainable. Government revenues collapse, production and most commerce
stop. They can usually be brought down through an orthodox economic
programme which indicates a 'change of regime' - a strong indication to the
public that the factors creating hyperinflation had ceased to exist.
However, in high inflation economies it was much more difficult to
demonstrate that a change of regime had taken place sufficient to bring
price stability.
In Argentina, two stabilisation programmes - the Austral plan in 1985 and
the Primavera plan in 1988 - had initial success in bringing down inflation.
But by mid-1989, inflation was approaching 200 per cent a month. The
so-called Bunge &amp; Born plan ended it, but inflation persisted at about 5 per
cent monthly. A new price explosion in December 1989 prompted the Bonex
plan, aimed at reducing the government's domestic debt.
A further plan was required in April 1991, which along with subsequent
supportive measures has succeeded in pushing price increases down much
closer to international levels.
The plan, named after the economy minister Domingo Cavallo, fixed by law the
exchange rate to the dollar and instituted a fiscal reform that went further
than anything previously announced. The central bank was forbidden by law to
print money, except when backed by hard currency reserves,
The fiscal adjustment was reinforced over time with privatisations,
rationalisation of public spending and better enforcement of tax collection.
The lesson here, say the authors, is that stabilisation efforts -
macroeconomic reforms to bring the budget into line - and structural reforms
 -aimed at improving the allocation of resources within the economy -
strongly complement one another. Together, they send 'a stronger signal
regarding the direction in which the economy is moving,' say the authors.
There are useful lessons in this for Peru and Brazil, the authors say. In
Brazil, they argue that the second inflationary shock plan in January 1991
of the government of President Fernando Collor - who promised to slay the
inflationary tiger with a single bullet - sent just the kind of mixed
signals that Argentina has managed to avoid.
The orthodox message of deepening the fiscal adjustment by dealing with the
finances and debt overhang of the state and local governments was
compromised by accompanying wage and price controls (which had failed in the
past) and by moves to regulate financial markets.
The authors have not had time to address the new policies of President
Itamar Franco who took over the presidency from the deposed Mr Collor last
month. Yet already conflicting signals are being sent. True Mr Franco has
his tax changes, which may help him in his talks over the next few months
with the International Monetary Fund, but he is also talking about expanding
spending in other areas. The message being sent so far is equivocal to say
the least. Expectations that inflation will drop rapidly therefore seem set
to be disappointed.
*Stopping Three Big Inflations (Argentina, Brazil, and Peru) by Miguel
Kiguel and Nissan Liviatan. Working paper. World Bank 1818 H Street NW,
Washington DC 20433. 52pp Free.
