FT  08 JUN 93 / Kohl defends absence from funeral of Turks
MR Helmut Kohl, the German chancellor, yesterday defended his decision not
to attend the funeral last week of five Turkish victims of an arson attack,
saying his presence would simply have provoked the crowd.
In the face of widespread criticism for his decision to stay away - when
federal President Richard von Weizsacker and Mr Klaus Kinkel, foreign
minister, both attended - the chancellor insisted: 'I know how to behave.'
He told a television interviewer that his presence would have attracted boos
and whistles from the crowds attending the funeral in Cologne of the two
Turkish women and three girls who died. 'That would have been taken as proof
that I was provoking a Turkish or a German reaction,' he said. 'I know what
(television) pictures get sent round the world. So that is why I know how to
behave.'
He blamed the latest upsurge in racist attacks not on the existence of a
large Turkish migrant worker population, but on the failure to tackle the
problem of 'economic asylum seekers' flooding into the country. Turks and
Germans had lived together for years with scarcely any racial problems.
His interview was broadcast after the federal prosecutor's office had
confirmed that one of the four men charged with the latest murders was the
member of an extreme right-wing political party.
The man, named only as 23-year-old Markus G, had a membership card for the
nationalist German People's Union (DVU), a legal political group which has
won seats in local elections in north Germany. In spite of the discovery,
the prosecutor still believes there was no formal right-wing conspiracy
behind the arson attack in the town of Solingen, north-east of Cologne.
The deaths have sparked a new wave of national protests at the failure of
the authorities to curb extreme right-wing groups, and demands for the
introduction of more liberal nationality laws for Turkish and other
long-term residents. The liberal Free Democrats, junior partners in Mr
Kohl's ruling coalition, yesterday called for dual nationality to be granted
to such applicants.
