FT  18 FEB 93 / International Company News: Audi presses ahead with new
models
AUDI, the luxury car division of Volkswagen, is pressing ahead with its
ambitious development plans in spite a sharp reversal of fortunes this year.
According to Mr Franz-Josef Kortum, 42, the company's new chairman,
production will fall in 1993 by between 10 and 15 per cent because of
falling domestic demand and the effects of the rise of the D-Mark on sales
in important export markets such as Italy.
The slump follows the sudden end of the boom last year, when Audi made
492,000 cars - 9.3 per cent more than in 1991 - and 'a good, positive
operating profit,' Mr Kortum said yesterday. Full details would be announced
in April, he added, although he admitted profits-to-sales ratios had
suffered.
Even so, projects for new models to extend the brand's appeal at both the
top and lower ends of the market remain on schedule. A flagship V8-powered
car with aluminium bodywork will be launched next spring, to be followed
later in the decade by a new version of the old Audi 50 at the bottom of the
range.
The next key decision, which will be made this year, is whether to start
manufacturing in the US. Possible sites are believed to have been narrowed
down to two in Indiana and Kentucky. However, it is still possible that the
hard-pressed parent company may choose the cheaper alternative of extending
its existing VW works in Mexico.
Mr Kortum - the successor to Mr Ferdinand Piech, who last month took charge
at the parent group - is keen to rebuild Audi's reputation and position in
the US market after years of decline. He can probably count on support from
Mr Piech, who has publicly acknowledged that the dangers of failure in the
US market include loss of ground elsewhere.
In Mr Kortum's view, a north American plant is important to guarantee a
place in the North American Free Trade Area (Nafta) and to ensure
competitiveness with other Nafta-based manufacturers, be they Japanese or
US-owned.
Audi sales in the US have started to recover after falling from 75,000 in
1985 to around 12,000 in 1991. Following last year's increase to 14,800, the
more recent past had seen a renewed 'decisive upwards trend' of 30 per cent
monthly growth, Mr Kortum said.
Sales promotions, including discounts and special service deals have also
helped, but Audi models have been made more expensive by the recent
depreciation of the dollar against the D-Mark.
