FT  07 DEC 93 / VW believes itself cleared: Criminal probe seen as private
affair
After 10 weeks' rooting about in the databases and filing cabinets of
Volkswagen's Wolfsburg headquarters, auditors KPMG Deutsche Treuhand
recently published selected highlights of a report. In the words of the man
who ordered the investigation, it concluded: 'There are no clues that
industrial espionage took place to the benefit of Volkswagen.'
Mr Klaus Liesen, chairman of the VW supervisory board and overseer of the
group's corporate conduct, repeated it at dictation pace to ensure the
assembled journalists got it right.
The investigation, and a criminal inquiry that is still going on, began
after General Motors in the US alleged that former GM employees who defected
to VW in March took with them huge quantities of confidential and
market-sensitive company documents.
Mr Liesen, chairman of the Ruhrgas energy group, chose his words carefully
at the recent press conference. He generated two clear impressions. The
first was that he believed Volkswagen - the company as a legal entity - did
not possess and had not made illegal use of any competitors' secrets. Mr
Liesen seemed satisfied by the auditors' claims that material found at
Wolfsburg which did not originate from VW's own sources was not
confidential.
The second - more puzzling - was that the continuing criminal investigation
of four senior VW employees for suspected theft of masses of confidential
data from their former employer, General Motors, was neither his nor VW's
concern. In other words, that the actions of Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de
Arriortua, VW group production director, and close associates Mr Jorge
Manuel Gutierrez, Mr Jorge Alvarez Aguirre and Mr Rosario Piazza, were
strictly their own affair.
The four men arrived in Wolfsburg virtually simultaneously last March,
followed by clouds of suspicion generated by alleged information-gathering
activities in the latter part of their service at GM and its German
subsidiary Adam Opel.
As the KPMG report confirmed, within days of their arrival, two of them were
busy in VW's Rotehof guesthouse unpacking, sorting, and destroying 'in
part', the contents of 20 cartons delivered to Mr Lopez. It also emerged
that they found time to make several thousand photocopies while feeding the
shredder.
The box contents, according to Mr Lopez and his colleagues comprised books,
magazines, seminar material, hand-written notes, brochures and
correspondence with GM component suppliers.
However, the KPMG investigators, who claim elsewhere to have employed the
most sophisticated techniques to try to detect the presence of GM group
secrets (how they managed this without cross-checking VW's database with
those of GM/Opel is unclear) admitted they were unable 'fully to establish'
the whereabouts of material left unshredded. They merely reported that Mr
Lopez's lawyer told them the remaining 'books and magazines' had been sent
to his office and his home.
Nor were the KPMG sleuths, who were given a free rein to dig and question
within VW, able to discover what was photocopied in the Rotehof, even though
they know the copies did not go into the shredder. Claims from Mr Lopez's
colleagues that it was 'VW information material' for the Spaniard's team
remained unsubstantiated, and KPMG had to be satisfied with their
protestations that they 'could not remember' what they had done with the
copies.
The auditors also failed to pursue the paper chase beyond Wolfsburg. They
did not, for example, investigate subsequent key events, known to VW
management, including a visit to VW's Kassel works in Germany by Mr Lopez's
subordinates, who collected a shredder and 'disappeared' for several days.
Kassel, some 150km south of Wolfsburg, is midway between the VW headquarters
and the former home of Mr Piazza and Mr Alvarez in Wiesbaden where,
witnesses allege, the duo filled a van 'metres high' with sacks of shredded
paper in mid-April.
A good two months later police recovered from the Wiesbaden house four boxes
containing secret Opel price and model data. This find, in the words of the
prosecutor's office, took the investigation 'a decisive step forward'.
According to KPMG, three of the cartons originated in VW's Rotehof
guesthouse. According to Mr Lopez's colleagues, lamely reported by the
auditors, they took empty boxes from Wolfsburg to Wiesbaden. The origin of
the contents found in the cartons later was not explained by KPMG.
And that, in Mr Liesen's view, is the end of the story.
Meanwhile, Ms Dorothea Holland, the state prosecutor leading the German
criminal investigation against Mr Lopez and his men, continues her
meticulous probings.
At hand is material equivalent to a tiny fraction of that apparently combed
and declared non-confidential by KPMG.
It comprises computer data, seized in a raid on VW in August, and known to
contain material copied from GM and Opel documents.
According to Ms Holland's office, this little file alone would generate 2.5m
pieces of paper if printed out.
