FT  29 JUN 93 / South Africa and EC begin reconciliation: The shaping of
post-sanctions relations
AS South Africa moves into the post-sanctions era, aid, trade and political
relations are being shaped with a crucial partner - the European Community.
At a conference under way in Brussels both the European Commission and the
South African government are laying out their stalls.
Notwithstanding the tortuous progress of constitutional negotiations,
Community officials accept that a new South Africa is emerging, and they are
determined to be an important player in the post-apartheid process.
There is already a substantial base of trade and investment relations to
build on. Figures from the department of customs and excise show that in
1992 38.5 per cent, R46bn (Pounds 9.5bn) of a total R119.4bn visible trade,
was with Europe. This compares with 34 per cent in 1985, before sanctions
were implemented in earnest.
European countries also account for most of the foreign investment in South
Africa. The most recent available figures from the Reserve Bank (end 1988)
show that of the cumulative R70bn foreign investment in the country by
individuals and corporations, about 50 per cent came from Europe.
The EC is also a significant donor to South Africa. The 1993 EC aid budget
to South Africa is Ecu90m (Pounds 70.7m), its largest budget in Africa.
Diplomatic links between South Africa and the EC are less developed. There
is no formal diplomatic treaty and the EC is not formally present in
Pretoria other than to administer its aid programme. Upgrading these links
is important to South Africa, however, as the imprimatur of full diplomatic
relations will improve the climate for trade and investment.
Recent years have seen increasing efforts at diversification, mostly
eastwards, of South Africa's trading links. Thus 20 per cent of South
Africa's total trade in 1992 was with Asia, compared with 14.7 per cent in
1985. Taiwan has risen from nowhere to be one of South Africa's top 10
trading partners.
Among South Africa's priorities in talks with Brussels will be what sort of
trade preferences it should seek from the EC, which could affect 20 per cent
of exports, most notably those from labour-intensive agriculture.
The extent of preferences will depend on what sort of trading status South
Africa is granted. Although a per capita annual income of about Dollars
2,300 ranks it as an upper middle-income developing country, other
indicators - such as infant mortality, literacy, and reliance on a few
commodity exports - are associated more with developing countries.
At the conference yesterday Mr Chris Stals, governor of the South African
Reserve (central) Bank, said South Africa should consider seeking developing
country status. 'I do not think that will decrease our credibility, but it
will help us to develop the country much faster,' he said.
His remarks, which were made in a personal capacity, echo the view on this
issue held among others by Mr Nelson Mandela, African National Congress
president.
At recent Gatt discussions in Geneva, however, Japan and the US gave notice
that they would not support South Africa being given developing country
status. It was advised to seek 'economy in transition' status, such as has
been given to various east European countries, which affords similar
benefits granted to developing countries, but on a less permanent basis.
Given this background, South Africa will probably try to negotiate some
specially tailored package of preferences with the EC rather than try to
join the Lome Convention, a trade concession deal between a grouping of
developing countries and industrialised countries.
The latter route would cause all sorts of complications, as Lome's existing
80 members, all of whom are smaller and less developed than South Africa,
would understandably oppose granting benefits to South Africa which, to some
extent, would come at their expense. Included in this group are all of South
Africa's neighbours.
The EC has already made clear that its policy towards South Africa will be
premised on viewing South Africa as part of the southern Africa region.
Although there are growing ties between South Africa and its neighbours, the
issue of how to integrate it into regional structures, such as the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) and the Preferential Trade Area (PTA)
is fraught with excessive expectations of what South Africa can do for the
rest of the region and fears that it will dominate the others. South Africa
accounts for about 75 per cent of regional gross domestic product.
Although the shape of future South Africa/EC relations lies mostly in the
hands of Brussels - where the extent of any concessions will be decided -
their success will be determined in Pretoria. For South Africa's future will
ultimately turn on whether its politicians can create a favourable climate
for investment. If they fail in that, the rest will count for little.
