FT  23 MAR 93 / London Stock Exchange: UK equities upset by Russian fears
LONDON suffered in the general setback in European stock markets prompted
yesterday by the darkening political scene in Russia. Although sterling,
benefiting from weakness in the German mark, held steady, share prices fell
heavily across the range of a stock market still taking a generally negative
view of last week's UK Budget. However, selling by the big institutions was
not heavy, as was borne out by the day's Seaq volume figure of 529.1m
shares, down by about 36 per cent on Friday's total. Sentiment was further
bruised by poor UK non EC trade figures.
A poor start by the June futures contract on the FT-SE Index, which took
over leadership of the derivatives sector yesterday, sparked off the slide
in equities. The Footsie Index itself quickly abandoned the 2,900 mark and
fell 41 points to 2,858.7 at the day's low point. A modest rally took the
FT-SE to a closing level of 2,863.9, a net loss of 36.2 on the day.
Yesterday's loss of 1.2 per cent on the Footsie Index was close to the
average loss in European markets, with Germany providing the strongest
exception with a loss of just over 2 per cent. The FT-SE Mid 250 Index
recorded only a minor fall, closing 10.7 off, or 0.3 per cent, at 3,144.
Non-Footsie business made up around 62 per cent of total Seaq business
yesterday. Retail, or customer, business in equities has remained high,
recording value of Pounds 1.54bn on Friday.
Steadiness in sterling, benefiting from weakness in the German currency, was
largely ignored in London where hopes for a further cut in base rates have
now been put aside for the present. Investors in the UK stock market now
appear to be pinning their faith in prospects for long-awaited recovery in
the domestic economy, rather than in prospects of a further cut in domestic
base rates.
However, the suddenness of the fall in UK equities alerted fears that the
market could be vulnerable down to FT-SE 2,800 in the wake of a UK Budget
now seen as threatening further fiscal tightening in the future as well as
concerns over dividend yields in the near term. However, some analysts
believe that the Budget measures on dividends on overseas earnings may not
unduly upset a stock market more likely to focus on prospects for strong
corporate earnings.
Underlying confidence was implied by the late rally in UK stocks which
contrasted with a fall of 16.75 on the Dow in early dealings on Wall Street.
Many sectors of the market gave back some of their recent gains. Food
retailers, hotels and selected engineering shares fell foul of
profit-takers. But merchant banks continued to respond favourably to
excellent company results from the big names of the sector.
Among the industrial blue chips, pharmaceutical stocks continued to suffer
from the nervousness prompted by both the new political regime in the US and
by market re-ratings of what had been one of its most-favoured sectors.
But losses in the blue chip issues were emphasised by general uncertainty
regarding the latest developments in Russsia as well as across other areas
of eastern Europe. The London market was following other Continental centres
in foreseeing pressures on Wall Street as global investors await the outcome
of the renewed struggle for power in the former Soviet Union.
