FT  22 APR 93 / Survey of Egypt (13): Fewer children mean a better life - A
look at the progress of the government's family planning programme
In a large, shabby room in old Cairo's Zeinhom district, a small gathering
of headscarfed women is waiting to see Dr Mawaheb El-Mouelhy.
'There is no excuse for not using birth control in Egypt,' says Dr
El-Mouelhy, who has been running the family planning clinic since 1986.
'Anyone who wants it, can get it.'
Certainly the Egyptian government has been very active in promoting family
planning since 1985 when the National Population Council was established.
A blunt television campaign tells women that fewer children will mean a
better life. On street corners, billboards urge parents to content
themselves with two babies. There has been assistance too, from the Grand
Mufti, Egypt's highest authority on Islamic jurisprudence. In a pamphlet
entitled 'Birth Planning and the Religious Point of View,' he declared that
family planning did not contradict the teachings of Allah.
The NPC has an office in every region of the country. Under a programme
sponsored by the United States Agency for International Development, Egypt
has been flooded with highly subsidised intra-uterine devices (IUDs).
The official figures are impressive. Total births per year have dropped from
1.92m in 1988 to 1.65m last year. The birth rate has fallen from 39.8 per
1,000 in 1985 to 29.9 per 1000. The contraceptive prevalence rate - women of
child-bearing age using contraception - has risen from 24.2 per cent at the
beginning of the 1980s to 47.6 per cent at the beginning of this decade.
Unfortunately these figures cannot mask the fact that the total population
is increasing by over 1m a year, and that at current rates it will take only
30 years for it to double to 114m.
The Egyptian Gazette, an English language daily, poured scorn on the
official population statistics earlier this month. It quoted from a report
which put the total population about 2m higher than the official count of
56.434m. In spite of efforts by the government and aid agencies, Egypt's
heavily burdened resources are coming under too much pressure - 98 per cent
of the population live on 4 per cent of the land. A short drive out of Cairo
along the Nile is enough to see how crowded the thin strips of green either
side of the river have become.
Dr Sobhi Abdel-Hakim, professor of population studies at Cairo University,
says that the government's target is to reach a total fertility rate of 2
per cent, at which point the population would be replacing itself. He
believes this can be achieved by the year 2025, but the areas outside Cairo
and Alexandria continue to present an enormous challenge.
Statistics culled from the rural communities of upper Egypt are
significantly less impressive than those from the big cities - tradition and
lack of resources combine to hinder the progress of the campaign. One aid
official pointed out that the proportion of women of childbearing age using
contraception - to over 40 per cent since methods of birth control became
easily accessible - reflects a demand that was already there.
'These are the women who wanted to use contraception but never had access,'
he says. 'It is going to take a much greater effort, and much more
investment in information campaigns, to persuade those who are reluctant.'
Although the NPC is represented in every governorate of Egypt, Dr Maher
Mahran, chairman of the NPC, says that doctors - female doctors in
particular - are reluctant to work outside the big towns. The government is
trying to reach rural communities with mobile units, but low resources mean
that the effort is very stretched.
The biggest block to progress in rural areas remains poverty. Dr Mouelhy
tells the story of Zeinab, in her late thirties, pregnant for the tenth
time. Zeinab and her husband, a farmer, were proud of it; they told Dr El
Mouelhy that one more child meant two more helping hands.
Poor education - especially education of women - and the tradition of
marrying young is also widespread. Dr Mouelhy, who sees up to 40 women a day
at the Cairo clinic, says it is unusual to meet a woman of 20, particularly
in rural areas, who has not already had a child.
Girls usually leave school at 11 and are often married by 14, although the
legal minimum age for marriage is 16. Moreover, parents tend to keep
reproducing until a son has been born.
There are also fears that the rise of Islamic fundamentalism will work
against government and aid agency efforts to bring down the birth rate.
Although the Grand Mufti has spoken in favour of family planning, some imams
have been preaching against it in local mosques.
'The feminist movement is going downhill here,' says Dr Mouelhy. 'We were
the pioneers of the movement in the Middle East, but now it is going
backwards.'
While the government is committed to the work of the NPC - scarcely a speech
passes President Hosni Mubarak's lips without some reference to the problem
of population growth - those in the field feel the government should do more
to promote the cause. About a quarter of the funds spent on family planning
in Egypt comes from the government, but about 25 per cent of it is in kind,
through air time on television and radio.
'Mubarak doesn't put his money where his mouth is,' says one aid official.
'The government doesn't provide enough of a budget to the population council
so it can't be as effective as it should be.'
He worries that the increase in the contraception prevalence rate is
artificial, and that the moment USAID stops providing IUDs, it will drop
back.
Although Dr Mahran is pleased with the progress of the NPC's work, he
remains outspoken about the lack of funds. 'The most serious issue is time,'
he says. 'The clock is ticking in Egypt and each time you postpone a project
by just six months, you lose a lot. We have reached a critical stage.'
Back at the Zeinhom clinic, Dr Mouelhy reflects that when she started work
there in 1986, she rarely saw a woman seeking contraception after just one
child.
'The traditional belief that a woman's only job is to produce children is
still strong here,' she says. 'But we now see women who want to spread out
their families, or take a break from pregnancy, and it gives me such a
thrill to see women and children in good health.'
