FT  07 JAN 93 / Peruvian economy minister sacked
THE SURPRISE removal this week of Mr Carlos Bolona as Peruvian economy
minister suggests significant changes in the austere economic stabilisation
programme he has masterminded for almost two years.
President Alberto Fujimori chose to remove Mr Bolona from his post when the
entire current cabinet, as is traditional at year's end, placed their jobs
at his disposition.
Differences had been growing between Mr Fujimori and Mr Bolona over the
economic programme. Mr Fujimori personally intervened in mid-December with
Mr Michel Camdessus, managing director of the IMF, pleading for greater
flexibility and understanding of Peru's economic plight. He has also delayed
signing an IMF loan agreement Mr Bolona spent two months negotiating.
Mr Fujimori is thought to be seeking to cut 1993 external debt payments in
order to raise domestic spending to curb poverty while increasing public
investment and job creation.
In his resignation letter, however, Mr Bolona makes clear his opposition to
what he calls 'government with an eye on opinion polls and short-term
popularity.' He said he had come under repeated pressure to print money, to
concede subsidies and privileges to economic interest groups and to use
Peru's international reserves to finance private and public-sector credit.
Mr Bolona's economic fundamentalism has made him enemies - not least in the
military, an important influence on Mr Fujimori. Businessmen, wanting a more
growth-oriented policy, also joined the ranks of his opponents.
The minister was known to have been unhappy with Mr Fujimori's April 5
institutional coup, when Congress was dissolved and the constitution
suspended. But he decided to stay on 'to maintain the viability of the
economic programme and contribute to a return to democratic
institutionality'. Now the latter objective has been achieved - through
congressional elections in November - his fear, he says, is that the former
may 'remain half way down the road'.
Oxford-educated Mr Bolona was responsible for a frontal attack on the
hyperinflation inherited from the spendthrift Alan Garca regime. Last year's
57 per cent rise in consumer prices compared with 7,650 per cent two years
earlier. The cost last year was negative growth of 3 per cent.
Under Mr Bolona, Peru experienced a remarkable transition from statism to a
free market economy. He also orchestrated Peru's new relationship with the
international financial community. Quarterly financial targets agreed with
the IMF have largely been met - in some cases exceeded - and the government
kept its promises on reduced debt payments to foreign creditors.
However, plans to pay off arrears with international financial institutions
next month and to negotiate debt reschedulings with bank and government
creditors - temporarily derailed by the April coup - will be called into
question by Mr Bolona's departure.
In the next three months Peru faces important negotiations with the Paris
Club over relief of a total debt of Dollars 7bn. A new 'support group' of
friendly countries must be formed to help cover a projected Dollars 1bn
balance of payments deficit this year, and talks are also due with
commercial banks in New York.
But pleasing the multilateral organisations dented Mr Bolona's - and hence
Mr Fujimori's - popularity at home. Accusations of a lack of 'social
sensitivity' have surrounded monthly payments of about Dollars 60m to
creditors while less than that was spent in a year on alleviating poverty.
