FT  21 AUG 93 / Bugs that come to plague us: The renewed war against disease
A virulent new strain of cholera emerges from India. Diphtheria strikes at
the heart of European Russia. Hantavirus starts killing Navajo Indians in
the south-western US. Drug resistance fuels a resurgence of the world's two
biggest killers, tuberculosis and malaria. And the global Aids epidemic
sweeps on.
The current spate of stories about plague and pestilence may hasten the end
of what the US Institute of Medicine calls an 'era of complacency' - a
period of about 30 years, during which the medical profession and general
public assumed that they had won the war on acute infections and focused
instead on chronic degenerative disorders such as cancer, heart disease and
mental illness.
'We claimed victory too soon,' said Dr Robert Shope, professor of
epidemiology at Yale University and co-chairman of the institute's committee
on emerging infections. 'The danger posed by infectious diseases has not
gone away. It's worsening.'
Changes in the environment, in human behaviour and in the microbes
themselves are interacting in a complex way to set the stage for new
diseases to emerge and old ones to reappear. The main factors include:
Poverty and population growth. Diseases thrive in overcrowded third world
cities with inadequate sanitation and unclear water. An alarming example is
a new strain of cholera now spreading fast through the Indian sub-continent;
meanwhile the previous cholera epidemic, which originated in Indonesia in
1961 and reached South America in 1991, is still killing thousands of people
a year.
Development of forests. The rapid human intrusion into tropical forests is
exposing people to new reservoirs of infection in animals and insects.
Several 'new' diseases are probably caused by old monkey viruses, including
Aids, Ebola and Marburg fever. In the eastern US, the rapid increase in Lyme
disease is due mainly to housing development close to wooded areas; the
bacteria responsible are carried by ticks from woodland mice and deer -
their normal hosts - to people living nearby.
International travel and commerce. Increased mobility can spread a new
disease rapidly around the globe wherever it arises. Aids, for example,
probably took hold first in tropical Africa, travelled along the
Mombasa-Kinshasa highway with truck drivers, soldiers and prostitutes - and
reached the western hemisphere by air.
Farming and food processing. Intensive animal rearing can transfer germs
from animals to humans. Microbiologists believe that the most dangerous
strains of influenza arise in south China where integrated pig-duck farming
is practiced; the animals act as genetic 'mixing vessels' in which genes
from different flu viruses are recombined. Today's record levels of
salmonella food poisoning in Europe and north America are linked to
large-scale poultry production.
Civil unrest and political instability. Pestilence has been linked with
warfare throughout history; a current example is the epidemic of Kala-Azar,
a virulent form of leishmaniasis, a disease spread by sandflies which has
killed an estimated 50,000 people as a result of the prolonged civil war in
southern Sudan. Political disruption can also lead to disease, as the
current outbreak of diphtheria in Russia shows; its principal cause seems to
be a breakdown of the immunisation system in the former Soviet Union.
Drug resistance. Misuse of antibiotics has produced drug-resistant strains
of many bacteria. In western industrialised countries, thousands of people
die every year from antibiotic-resistant infections which they pick up while
in hospital for other reasons. Tuberculosis, which kills 3m people a year
worldwide, is beginning to acquire antibiotic resistance. And the fight
against malaria, now responsible for 2m deaths a year, is hampered both by
drug-resistance in the microscopic parasite that causes the disease and by
pesticide-resistance in the mosquitoes that carry it.
Many microbes can undergo genetic changes at frightening speed - either
random mutations or responses to environmental forces. As Mr Robert Walgate
of the World Health Organisation's tropical diseases research unit put it,
'one can see the 20th century, subjecting micro-organisms to so many
pressures, as the most ambitious short-term experiment in evolution in the
history of the world'.
Under those circumstances, it is not surprising that some unpleasant new
forms of viruses and bacteria arise. For example the latest cholera strain,
known officially as 0139 Bengal, causes similar symptoms to its predecessor
 -diarrhoea, vomiting and severe dehydration - but appears to last longer in
the environment and may be more difficult to eradicate from water supplies.
Microbiologists advocate a four-pronged strategy to contain the threat of
infectious diseases.
Surveillance. 'Global infectious disease surveillance is the most urgently
needed first step to protect ourselves,' said Dr Stephen Morse, a virology
professor at New York's Rockefeller University. WHO and the Federation of
American Scientists are sponsoring a conference next month in Geneva, to lay
the foundations of an international network of monitoring centres, located
mainly in the tropics.
The global network would use the latest genetic and computer technology to
spot emerging diseases, rather as the Centres for Disease Control does in
the US. CDC was quick to identify the cause of a mysterious fever that has
killed at least 20 people in the south-western states this year; the fever
was a new Hantavirus spread by mice.
Vaccines. One disease has already been eradicated by mass vaccination:
smallpox in the 1970s. Several others that exist only in humans, with no
animal reservoirs, could be wiped out in the same way and WHO says its
campaign to eradicate polio by 2000 is on target. But prevention of many
other diseases, including malaria and Aids, will require new vaccine
technology.
Drugs. Doctors must learn to be more sparing in their use of antibiotics,
prescribing them only for known bacterial infections; doctors must also stop
contributing to drug resistance by giving broad-spectrum antibiotics to
patients with ill-defined symptoms who are unlikely to benefit. At the same
time, pharmaceutical researchers need to develop not only new classes of
antibiotic but also drugs against viruses and parasitic diseases such as
malaria.
Sanitation and hygiene. As Dr Hiroshi Nakajima, WHO director-general, put
it, 'cholera is the litmus-test of a country's socio-economic well-being.
For as long as there is lack of proper sanitation facilities and safe
drinking water, epidemics of cholera are bound to return, time and again'.
In our present dirty world, with its inadequate drugs, vaccines and
surveillance, is there a threat of more serious epidemics than those raging
today?
The apocalyptic nightmare would be a new microbe combining extreme virulence
 -quickly killing a high proportion of those infected - with high
transmissibility, passing easily from person to person through normal social
contact in an otherwise healthy population.
Fortunately the human virus that came closest to that combination of
virulence and transmissibility is the one already eradicated, smallpox. Some
microbiologists say there are theoretical reasons for believing that the
chances of anything similar arising again are extremely low. Viruses
introduced from animals may cause lethal fevers but they do not pass easily
between humans.
But Dr Shope warns against complacency. 'The most disastrous emerging event
might be another pandemic of influenza, like the 1918-19 pandemic that
killed 20m people worldwide,' he says. 'But we don't know what the next
event is likely to be and we must prepare to be surprised.'
