FT  28 MAY 93 / UK Company News: HK Telecom 13% ahead aided by larger user
base
HONGKONG TELECOM, Hong Kong's telecommunications monopoly which is 58.5 per
cent owned by Cable and Wireless of the UK, yesterday announced a 13 per
cent rise in net profits to HKDollars 6.4bn (Pounds 457m) for the year to
March 31.
The outcome was struck on an 18 per cent rise in turnover to HKDollars
21.6bn from HKDollars 18.3bn - which included a 23 per cent gain in revenues
from international telephone traffic to HKDollars 13.6bn.
The final dividend of 23.1 cents raises the total for the year 14 per cent
to 43.4 cents.
Analysts said that the growth in profits and revenues indicated that the
underlying trends in the company's main businesses remained extremely
favourable.
It was the growth in Hongkong Telecom's business user base and the volume of
telephony that caught the eye of analysts. Overall growth in installed
services to businesses rose by about 13 per cent compared with the previous
year.
Growth in international telephony was also very strong. Overall it rose by
26.5 per cent, of which services to China grew by 30 per cent. The
significance to Hongkong Telecom of China was underlined by the volume - 44
per cent - of the company's international traffic being calls either to or
from the mainland.
Mr Mike Gale, the company's chief executive, said that he thought Hongkong
Telecom was well placed to participate in telecommunications on the mainland
when the Chinese government decided the time was right to admit foreign
participation.
To date, the Chinese government has said it would not permit foreign
involvement in the ownership, management or operation of telecommunications
services on the mainland.
The company announced a number of changes to accounting practices which had
the effect of reducing the 1993 profit figure. A decision was taken to
accelerate the depreciation of submarine cable technology, which resulted in
an extra charge to the profit and loss account of HKDollars 105m.
In addition, Hongkong Telecom increased its contribution to its staff
pension scheme by a one-off injection of HKDollars 225m and an ongoing
commitment to raise its contribution by an extra HKDollars 127m a year.
The company said its pension fund was underfunded, and that returns earned
by its fund managers had failed to keep pace with the high rate of salary
inflation in Hongkong.
