FT  18 MAY 93 / US court delays Barclays tax ruling: Justice Department
asked for opinion on bank's challenge to Californian unitary tax system
THE US Supreme Court has asked the Justice Department for its opinion on
Barclays Bank's suit against California's worldwide unitary tax system,
forcing the Clinton administration to take sides on the issue. However, the
court's decision also delays indefinitely any final decision on the 10-year
legal wrangle.
Barclays has asked the Supreme Court to outlaw the unitary tax system, under
which companies may be taxed not just on the profits they make in California
but on a proportion of their worldwide profits calculated in line with the
size of their payroll, property and sales in the state.
Previous US administrations have sided with Barclays in the case, arguing
that the unitary tax method could unravel the system of bilateral treaties
under which international taxation is regulated.
But President Bill Clinton promised influential California backers last June
that 'a Clinton administration will be pro-California in this matter'.
Although his administration has not gone so far as to file a brief with the
Supreme Court on California's behalf, it reversed previous administration
policy by not filing for Barclays. While the Justice Department could file a
neutral brief, the Supreme Court's request for an opinion will make it more
difficult for the administration to sit on the fence between its California
supporters, who have been at pains to remind the president of his pledge,
and angry foreign governments, who have been vociferous on Barclays' behalf.
Mr Jerome Libin, of the Washington tax law firm of Sutherland, Asbill &amp;
Brennan, said that if the Solicitor General filed his views over the summer
the court should announce whether it would hear the Barclays case on the
first Monday in October.
However, there is no time limit on the Solicitor General, and Mr Drew Days,
Mr Clinton's nominee for the office, has not yet been confirmed by the
Senate.
'As a practical matter, and assuming that the Supreme Court were to agree to
hear the case, a decision would be close to a year away,' said Mr Jim
O'Hara, worldwide head of tax with the Cleveland-based law firm of Jones Day
Reavis &amp; Pogue.
The UK government, however, has threatened retaliation that could cost
California-based companies with British subsidiaries an estimated Dollars
50m (Pounds 32.4m) a year if the matter is not resolved by the end of
December. Inland Revenue officials are travelling to Washington this week
for talks with the US Treasury.
