FT  13 FEB 93 / Major's 'classless' honours plan upsets forces chiefs
LOLLIPOP LADIES, postmen and shop-floor workers are to be accorded the same
status as bank managers, headteachers and office managers under Mr John
Major's plans to revamp the honours system.
But generals, admirals and air marshals have voiced indignant opposition to
the prime minister's attempt to inject his vision of a classless society
into the twice-yearly distribution of royal awards.
The British Empire Medal (BEM), the traditional royal recognition of active
citizenship by members of the working class, will be abolished later this
year
Instead the nation's humbler citizens will be eligible for the MBE (Member
of the British Empire), hitherto reserved for the genteel inhabitants of
middle-class suburbia.
The class-conscious armed forces chiefs have lined up in Whitehall
negotiations against Downing Street's plan to deprive the top brass in the
officers' mess of the automatic right to a knighthood.
At the heart of Mr Major's recommendations to the Queen on reform of the
honours system is a plan to apply a little more equality when rewarding
service to the community by the great, the good and the plain humble.
Under the present arrangements, a baker judged to be a worthy pillar of the
local community might aspire to a BEM. But the doctor next door, deemed to
have delivered similar charitable or voluntary service, would expect an MBE.
Mr Major has also made headway in his attempts to balance merit with rank in
awards for civil servants.
Politicians will still be eligible for retirement in the House of Lords. But
Whitehall's mandarins are resigned to the fact that a trip to Buckingham
Palace to pick up a Companion of the Bath or a Knights Batchelor (the basic
knighthood) will no longer be automatic for deputy and permanent
secretaries.
Nor will diplomats necessarily be offered compensation for a posting to
nowhere by being appointed a Companion of St Michael &amp; St George.
The prime minister will not get his way without a fight with the armed
forces chiefs. They are arguing that classlessness may be all very well in
civilian life but the rigid observance of social status is a vital component
of a well-oiled military machine.
Services opponents of the plan to abolish the BEM say the criteria for
awards are different. Officers are rewarded with an MBE for specific
achievements rather than the 'meritorious service' which qualifies, say, a
long-serving army cook, for the BEM.
But Whitehall insiders say the military's main concern is Mr Major's
decision to reform the award of knighthoods to the 50 or so senior officers
on the active list.
Knighthood does not come before the rank of lieutenant-general, vice-admiral
or air marshal (in US terms, three-star appointments), but then it is
automatic.
The wrangling is delaying a Downing Street announcement of the reforms, but
Mr Major is determined to have his way. The officials charged with preparing
recommendations for the Queen's birthday honours in June have been told to
draw up as usual a list of nominations for the BEM - but on the basis that
the recipients will then be 'bumped up' to MBE.
