FT  13 OCT 93 / London Stock Exchange: Footsie Index drifts below 3,100
level
A FAVOURABLE legal ruling in Germany on the Maastricht Treaty, together with
renewed hints of a base cut in the UK, proved unable to stir much interest
in the London stock market yesterday. Investors, already unsettled by the
widening in the UK trade gap, backed away ahead of the UK Retail price index
(RPI) for September, due this morning.
Belief that constitutional approval for Maastricht from the German High
Court would hearten European bourses helped the FT-SE Index to 3,115.2 early
in the session. But when the legal ruling came, London, together with the
German stock, lost impetus and the Footsie 3,100 mark was lost in sluggish
trading, for a day's low point of 3,093.
Trading volume in the blue chips picked up towards the close to show a final
Seaq total of 536.8m shares. On Monday, when business was reduced by holiday
closures in Tokyo and the US, Seaq volume of only 444.4m shares was worth a
mere Pounds 936.1m at retail level, the first daily figure below Pounds 1bn
for many months.
The final reading put the FT-SE Index at 3,094.7, down 7.5 on the day.
Second line issues played little part in the initial rally in the market and
closed without recovery. The FT-SE Mid 250 Index shed 7.3 to 3,474.9.
The stock market's nervousness reflected caution ahead of this week's heavy
list of economic data. Much of the session passed without significant trends
developing, as it became clear that the big institutions were keeping out of
the way.
Activity in the short sterling contract lay behind the stock market's hopes
for an early base rates cut. But equity strategists brushed such hopes aside
for the time being, and focused on the prospects for today's inflation
statistics.
The market's median forecast is for an annualised RPI number unchanged at
1.7 per cent in September. However, some market firms predict a higher
figure and warn of the danger that inflationary pressure could be returning
sooner than expected.
With Wall Street making a slow return to full trading power after the
Columbus Day break, the Dow Industrial Average gave little lead, showing a
minor gain as London closed for the day. Leading oil shares edged higher
behind crude oil prices but the pharmaceuticals lacked direction.
The base rate hints were not strong enough to impress share prices in
sectors likely to be affected by such a move. Bank stocks, which have this
week been responsive to interest rate optimism, made little change, while in
the store sector, shares were mostly easier in thin trade.
The most active features were among the hotel and brewing sectors, but
investors were merely responding to the events of the day rather than
initiating any fresh strategies. The leisure sector remained a prey to the
rumours of adverse corporate developments which have been circulating over
the past fortnight.
The big investment funds showed signs of having returned to a defensive
posture until the November Budget is safely out of the way. Mr Craig Knox at
Lazard Investors warns that 'the good news' - base rate cuts, small tax
rises - may already be in the market, while 'potential bad news' - lower
relief on Advance Corporation Tax or higher rates of corporation tax - is
far from the market's current thoughts.
