FT  01 SEP 93 / Economy may be Tokyo power-broker
JUST as Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, the Japanese prime minister, is being urged by
the more senior of his coalition partners to concentrate on political
reform, the economy is threatening to shorten his government's life by
failing to recover.
Technically, Japan has not yet hit a recession, in that it has not seen two
consecutive quarters of decline in gross national product. The latest gloomy
indicators released yesterday, as ministers responsible for the economy met
in emergency session, were no surprise, but they do add weight to the theory
that the economy might fall into recession before recovering at the end of
this year or early next.
They included a 0.3 per cent decline in seasonally adjusted industrial
production from June to July, or 4.5 per cent down on the year. In
unadjusted terms, industrial output has fallen for a record 22 straight
months and the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Miti) forecasts
that it will be stagnant for the next few months.
Car and construction industry figures are even worse. A 33.6 per cent
year-on-year decline in construction industry orders in July was far worse
than expected.
Meanwhile, car exports plunged by 13.9 per cent last month, as against July
last year, the fourth monthly decline, according to Nikkei, the economic
newspaper. The outlook for a recovery is poor, as European Community
negotiators meet trade officials tomorrow and Friday to seek, and probably
get, further cuts in car exports to the EC.
There was one small cause for cheer in yesterday's figures, a better than
expected 4.6 per cent year-on-year rise in housing starts last month, the
14th consecutive monthly rise. Yet the overall picture confirms that the
signs of recovery seen early this year have vanished, stifled by the impact
of the yen's sharp rise on export earnings and by the continuing caution of
consumers.
Economic analysts have slashed their forecasts for GNP growth this year from
between 1.5 per cent and 3.2 per cent, to between 0.3 per cent and 1.5 per
cent. There is one exception; the government's Economic Planning Agency is
staunchly sticking to its target of 3.3 per cent growth.
So what are the government's options?
Mr Hosokawa's coalition partners are applying pressure for a drop in income
taxes, favoured by Mr Ichiro Ozawa, the real power behind the Japan Renewal
party, one of the main coalition members.
However, the powerful Finance Ministry, which is against cutting income tax,
appears to be gaining the upper hand, helped by the fact that one of its own
former bureaucrats, Mr Hirohisa Fujii, happens to be its minister. It argues
that in the short term a shortfall in tax income will hamper the
government's freedom to dole out any further spending packages and that in
the longer term Japan's ageing population will eat into the current budget
surplus.
Equally, the latest evidence of the failure of the expected recovery has
piled fresh pressure on the Bank of Japan, technically independent, to lower
interest rates. Its official discount rate has been at a post-war low of 2.5
per cent since early this year and it is desperately keen to avoid a repeat
of the liquidity-fed rise in asset prices that preceded this downturn.
However, some analysts believe the central bank might see fit to drop rates
if its next quarterly survey of business confidence, due on September 10,
shows a decline.
Mr Hosokawa knows that failure to take some kind of action against the
downturn could land him with two headaches. The first will be when he meets
Mr Bill Clinton, at the end of September, when the US president is expected
to require evidence that the Japanese government has made progress in
stimulating domestic demand and encouraging imports to make an impact on the
trade surplus.
The second will be at the next general election, where several observers
believe a real recession could well help the Liberal Democratic party to
make a surprise comeback.
