FT  14 JUL 93 / Sabotage of relief effort may force UN pullout from Bosnia,
warns Stoltenberg
MR Thorvald Stoltenberg, the international peace mediator for the former
Yugoslavia, warned yesterday that the United Nations might be forced to pull
out of Bosnia if the warring sides continued to sabotage the relief effort.
His warning came as an escalation in the fighting threatened to block
humanitarian relief from reaching besieged communities throughout Bosnia.
Mrs Sadako Ogata, the UN's High Commissioner for Refugees, is due to visit
Sarajevo today as Serb forces close in on the Bosnian capital.
While Bosnian Serbs tightened their grip on Sarajevo, Croats clashed with
Moslems near Mostar, south-west of the capital. 'It's an all-out Moslem
offensive on our positions,' said Mr Veso Vegar, spokesman for the Croatian
Defence Council (HVO). Bosnian radio said HVO units used small aircraft to
bombard the Moslems, stranded on the left bank of the River Neretva which
runs through Mostar.
Serb forces pressed forward, seizing three more villages after recapturing
Trnovo on Monday, reported Tanjug, the Serbian news agency. The military
campaign seemed of great importance because it was directed by Bosnian Serb
commander General Ratko Mladic.
The loss of Trnovo severed any link between Sarajevo and Gorazde, two Moslem
enclaves ostensibly under UN protection.
'The doors of Sarajevo are now open to the Serbs,' warned the 'war
president' of Trnovo in an interview broadcast on Bosnian radio.
Mrs Ogata's visit will coincide with a meeting of Bosnia's collective
presidency about peace proposals for the Geneva talks. The mainly Moslem
leadership has rejected Serbo-Croat plans for the republic's ethnic
partition.
Just 18 miles to the south, Sarajevo remains without electricity and water,
raising fears of epidemics.
While attacking UN 'safe areas', Bosnian Serb officials and their
counterparts in Serbia were stopping the relief operation by demanding
visas.
Ms Lyndall Sachs of the Belgrade UNHCR, office said: 'The visas are
completely outrageous. It will severely hamper operations, not only to the
Moslems, but to the Serbs as well.'
Seven Islamic countries yesterday committed themselvesto provide up to
18,000 troops for the United Nations protection force in Bosnia, Farhan
Bokhari reports from Islamabad.
Iran offered up to 10,000 troops, Pakistan 3,000, Bangladesh 1,220, Malaysia
1,500, Tunisia 1,000, the Palestinian delegation 1,000 and Turkey offered up
to a brigade in response to a request by Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN
secretary general, for more troops to protect safe zones.
Foreign ministers at the Organisation of Islamic Conference meeting also
agreed a 20-point action plan and called for measures to ensure prompt
delivery of humanitarian relief supplies, even if that required the use of
force.
'The OIC countries emphasised that their forces will be assigned for this
humanitarian mission to protect the people in Bosnia-Hercegovina,' the plan
said. 'They will in no condition be a party to any plan to partition the
country or to create refugee ghettos in Bosnia-Hercegovina.'
Diplomats said more commitments were expected within the next fortnight. The
meeting also called for an immediate lifting of the arms embargo.
The Islamic foreign ministers urged that the London conference on the former
Yugoslavia be reconvened to consider proposals submitted by the Bosnian
government for a political solution.
