FT  01 MAY 93 / How To Spend It: The designer office in your living room -
Santa Raymond visits four professionals who have created a happier home by
making themselves a modern workspace in it
TRADITIONALLY, working at home has been the preserve of writers and mothers
and small independent operators. This has changed. Today even executives
such as Richard Branson work in their living rooms and Steven Jobs invented
the Apple computer in a garage.
John Worthington, a founder of DEGW, an office design group, believes women
working at home have got it right. 'They have set up a model which will be
followed by many in the future.' The model may provide an environment which
lacks intellectual stimulus and social interaction but it often includes an
attractive environment.
Working from home can offer pleasant views and peaceful surroundings,
natural light and ventilation. It can save time and money and reduce
pollution caused by commuting. It can offer low overheads and tax
advantages. Home workers can spend time with their families when their
families want to spend time with them. They can work as many hours as they
like without being cut off from home life.
Not everyone can work from home - half the working population do jobs which
require their physical presence in a particular place, and for them the
traditional pattern of commuting to work will remain largely unchanged. But
the other half - some 11m people in Britain - could probably work as well,
or better, in their homes.
Pauline Hodson, a psychotherapist, consults in a converted garage at the
bottom of her garden in Headington, Oxford. It must be one of the nicest
offices around. It is clad in timber inside and out, furnished with antiques
and a great colourful rug is simply flung over the sofa. The view through
the full height window to the stream beneath is breathtaking - a good place
to work and to be.
Pauline's consulting room has its own separate entrance, just like the
office of her husband Noel. He works on the far side of the house in an
extension squeezed along the boundary wall. His view is also magical. A
great cherry tree screens the glass roof from the sun. Trees and plants
enclose the garden facade: one might be on the edge of a forest glade.
Noel Hodson is a prophet of home working. He chose it in order to spend time
with his young daughters. Fifteen years on he is a leading teleworking
consultant with an impressive client list, mainly built up during the past
three years. It contains nearly 100 large organisations, including BT, of
course, IBM, Marks &amp; Spencer, banks, building societies, insurance brokers
and local authorities.
Noel is writing a book on teleworking, networking with 16 co-authors all
over the UK and one in the US. He has an all singing and dancing computer
hired from BT and connected to an Integrated Services Digital Network line
for maximum clarity.
His office is a most civilised place. It is heated by a cast iron
wood-burning stove containing a flickering gas fire. This keeps house and
office heating separate, and can be left on at night at a low temperature to
stop the photocopier paper succumbing to the damp. The natural timber
windows, beams, columns, and furniture, the green carpeted floor, the
pictures hanging on soft white walls, all add up to an inviting environment.
There is enough room for a meeting of 10 people, or for Noel to have a good
stretch. The furniture is basic: work tops are supported by filing cabinets
and there is not even a special desk chair. Noel says he can work a 15-hour
day at the computer without suffering neck or back ache, but his eyesight is
deteriorating. The office took eight weeks to build and cost Pounds 30,000
(paid for by a business loan). Pauline's garage conversion cost just Pounds
12,000, but it lacks a lavatory.
As with many home offices the weakest design element is the lighting: too
much in the wrong place. Noel himself is not happy with it. The 19
spotlights ranging on tracks along the beams provide illumination that is
attractive, but insufficient at his main workstation. It uses a lot of
energy, generates a lot of heat and clashes with the elegance and precision
of the rest of the place.
The office also suffers from that perennial complaint - insufficient filing
space. As Noel says, with faxes and photocopiers we generate more paper now
not less. Even with six filing cabinets, a stationery cupboard and a lot of
shelving, he still does not have enough storage space.
In working at home, Alan Tye, a Royal Designer for Industry probably best
known for his Modric range of ironmongery for Allgood, is following the
atelier tradition of his Swedish wife, Anita. He considers himself a special
adviser rather like a QC. As a product designer with all the resources of
his manufacturing clients, he can operate large scale jobs with a small team
in a way which, he says, would not be possible for straight architectural
practices.
He created ample storage space by using Remploy's mobile Lundia system to
fill two whole bays in his office with four double-sided shelf units which
can be rolled across the floor on tracks like in a library. His office was
conceived as a model of what the modern workspace should be. It nestles in a
garden with tall trees and a raked gravel driveway. It appears to grow from
the contours of the 1970s house. The white walls spring from the modernist
movement but are totally sympathetic to the site on the edge of a small
Hertfordshire town.
The office is a light, bright space, with a translucent ceiling and large
windows looking on to courtyards furnished with alpine plants and a little
waterfall. The dark stained telegraph poles, (the cheapest and most
effective of beams) on their almost invisible polished concrete columns,
form a strong horizontal plane.
The building was designed from the inside out, with the spacing of the
telegraph poles springing from the modular desk system, Herman Miller's
Ethospace. It is not cheap, but it is one of the few which has adjustable
worktop heights, essential he says in any healthy office. The supporting
panels and cupboard fronts, covered in blue-grey flannel, provide
sound-absorbent surfaces.
The five work stations (three with VDUs), each with pale timber work tops,
include one for a secretary complete with a rusty steel reception shelf.
This material is used in various places including radiator fronts, and for
three curved steps leading up to a practice room, which doubles for Tai Chi,
the mainspring of Alan's work and beliefs.
Lighting is provided by low voltage spots and high frequency fluorescent
lamps fitted under high-level cupboards.
Flyproof mesh covered openings provided the ventilation and there are
extractor fans for the summer. Underfloor heating provides ideal
temperatures throughout the space. At a cost of Pounds 100,000, the 100
square metre single storey building is good value for money, though it did
take a long time to build.
Marina Haidopoulou Adams, a landscape architect, carries out large
international projects from her Kensington studio. She works with up to four
assistants on hospitals or schools in her native Greece, private gardens in
France and Germany, or conservation schemes in the UK. She has a word
processor but does not use computer-aided design.
Marina's is a great place to work and live and sleep. There are flowering
plants at the door, quince blossom inside the studio, great north-facing
lights looking up into the sky, edged by fine Victorian brickwork
Her bed in the gallery looks down on to the sitting area lying between the
workspace and the eating and cooking areas under the gallery. Grey sofas
focus on a stripped steel fire surround (containing an operational grate).
An antique dining table, laid with fine cutlery, glass, china and linen,
antique chairs, and wicker fronted kitchen cabinets, provide a very
different aesthetic to that of the office just across the room, even with
the warm, 19th century floorboards flowing right through.
For Marina, there is no physical divide between working and living. She
works when there is work to be done, which may be all day non-stop, evenings
and weekends; but she has no guilt about not working when there is no need.
She takes things as they come and slots the plumber's visit into her general
routine. She chose this very close mix between professional and private life
when newly divorced and needing to house herself and her teenage children.
Santa Raymond is an architect who specialises in the design of office
interiors.
