FT  08 NOV 93 / Still waiting at the bus stop: The delay to London bus
deregulation
Like the traveller hanging on for the bus that never comes, Clive Hodson,
managing director of London Buses, has been waiting for the government to
give the go-ahead for deregulation of the capital's bus routes.
News that the UK cabinet is expected to drop bus deregulation from its
legislative programme not only prolongs the uncertainty. It will also delay
plans to privatise the 10 bus companies owned by London Buses, and pose
difficulties for the management teams and private companies expected to bid
for bus companies.
The reason for the delay is the controversy surrounding bus deregulation. It
has achieved only partial success in the regions. In many cities competing
companies have swamped busy routes with fleets of buses, while ignoring less
popular destinations. The government is keen to avoid further upsets in the
wake of the difficulties it has faced in getting its rail privatisation bill
through parliament and ahead of local elections in May.
The difference between deregulation and privatisation might not be
immediately apparent to the man on the Clapham omnibus, but two separate
processes are involved. Deregulation would open up routes to competition
from any operator willing to provide a service. Privatisation, on the other
hand, involves the sale of the 10 subsidiaries of London Buses.
In preparation for both developments, London Buses began putting routes out
to tender in 1985. Half have been contracted out, with 20 per cent going to
private operators such as Kentish Bus, Grey Green and Metrobus and 30 per
cent kept by subsidiaries of London Buses. Companies belonging to London
Buses still run 4,000 of the 5,000 buses in the capital.
Mr Hodson had hoped to send out details of London Buses' subsidiary
companies to prospective purchasers in December, and to complete the
disposals by September 1994. Deregulation was to have taken effect the
following August. 'We were all psyched up to deliver in December, but if
deregulation is postponed or delayed I can't issue the sales prospectus,'
said Mr Hodson.
The private companies that may bid for the London Buses subsidiaries will
also need to rethink their positions. 'The potential for buses in a
deregulated environment would be very different from that in a regulated
one,' commented Mr Brian Hirst, general manager of Kentish Bus. At present
operators must obtain approval to run buses on a particular route, but this
would not be necessary after deregulation. 'There would be routes the
private bus companies would want to look at again. We do need to know
whether this is a delay or a U-turn.'
If deregulation went ahead, the companies running London's buses would be
'mature organisations, not cowboys', said Mr Hodson. But he is aware of the
danger of outsiders attempting to muscle in on popular routes, as has
happened in other cities: 'We might still need some regulation of, for
example, road space and the use of bus stations.'
In a study earlier this year, London First, a private-sector organisation
set up to promote the capital, called for safeguards to avoid a
free-for-all. It demanded, for example, more bus lanes, better passenger
information and limits to the number of operators on routes.
If deregulation suffers considerable delay, Mr Hodson believes he would be
asked to complete the contracting out of the remainder of London's bus
routes. In addition, to improve value for money, any new contracts, he
thinks, would impose tougher conditions on the operators and require them to
take greater responsibility for achieving revenue targets.
Tendering has proved its worth, reducing operating costs by 40 per cent over
eight years. Privatising the bus companies might achieve further
improvements but, for many of those involved, full-scale deregulation
represents a stage too far. The latest delay appears to confirm that the
government realises this too.
