FT  28 SEP 93 / Commodities and Agriculture (Farmer's Viewpoint): Hard
labour after the harvest - Late crops can make sowing for the next season a
race against time
IT IS popularly believed that the period of hardest labour and greatest
stress on a UK arable farm is the grain harvest. Well yes, it is demanding
and often continues for 15 or more hours a day for several weeks. But if I
am honest, modern machinery and bulk handling of grain has taken much of the
sweat out of the job. And at least there is only one priority during harvest
 -to bring in the crop.
The fact is that the autumn season that follows the harvest is more frenetic
and much more diverse in the demands it makes on management and farm staff.
And if, as in some places in the north of England and in Scotland this
autumn, harvesting remains to be completed, the pressures are really severe.
For it is a matter or urgency that the seed for next autumn's crops of wheat
and barley be sown. Delay shortens the growing season from the optimum 11
months and can seriously reduce potential yield next August. Such is the
timescale to which we crop farmers have to work, and if we get it wrong we
have until next harvest to reflect on what the mistakes may have cost us.
On some of those northern farms, moreover, workers are attempting to plant
seeds for next year in the mornings and, if the weather is dry enough, to
harvest what remains of this harvest in the afternoons.
Further south the grain harvest is finished but crops such as potatoes and
sugar beet are being harvested concurrently with the autumn ploughing and
planting. It all adds up to a sustained period of intense activity and long
hours for today's tiny farm labour force and, partly because there are so
few people to do the work, the traditional gap between the grain harvest and
the autumn rush seems to become shorter every year.
But at least the summer rains have ensured that this year's root crops are
potentially profitable. Potatoes, which we do not grow on our farm, are, I
am told, yielding well, if a little below last year. Growers will not be
unhappy with that because short supplies raise prices and last season's
enormous crops pushed some ex-farm returns down to loss-making levels of
only Pounds 30 a tonne. As a result of that fewer potatoes were planted last
spring and that too is helping to keep this year's prices at more acceptable
and profitable levels.
This year's sugar beet harvest is also looking promising. Some of the
processing factories owned by British Sugar, which is the monopoly buyer of
all sugar beet grown in Great Britain, opened as early as mid-September this
year. This was 10 to 14 days before the usual date in anticipation of a big
crop and to try to avoid too much late processing through to February of
next year.
Growers hate such an extended campaign. It means that they have to store
roots on the farm from late November or early December by when it is
recommended they be lifted until their nearest factory is able to accept
them. Meanwhile the clamps must be covered and protected from winter frost.
For if roots become frozen and then rot they are unsuitable for processing
and are rejected.
But that is some months ahead. For the present I am pleased to report that
the sugar content of the first few lorry-loads of roots sent for processing
from our farm have been above 18 per cent. That is higher than average and
since growers are paid according to sugar content it means the price we
receive per tonne of beets will be better than we budgetted for.
British Sugar reports, in fact, that quality across its southern growing
area (which includes Norfolk, where I farm) is good, while further north, in
Yorkshire, sugar levels are down around 16.5 per cent. Much depends on the
amount of recent rain and the subsequent root growth. Once present, sugar
does not disappear, but if a root grows in volume the sugar concentration in
the juice declines.
Even so British Sugar predicts that the 1993 crop is on course to produce at
least 1.3m tonnes of sugar; less than last year's record of 1.46m tonnes but
still nicely above Britain's inadequate 1.14m-tonne European Community
quota.
Why inadequate? Because Britain consumes some 2.3m tonnes of sugar a year
and both farmers and British Sugar would dearly love to be allowed to come
closer to national self-sufficiency. But that's another - EC - story.
In the meantime the cat and mouse game of marketing recently harvested grain
proceeds - or, if some merchants are to be believed - does not. For cereal
growers are being accused of holding on to grain while the trade warns that
if they do not shift it now other EC supplies will replace it on the market,
UK demand will drop and prices will fall.
I am bound to concede that there is more than a grain of truth in the
merchants' tale and on our farm, at least, we plead not guilty, having sold
a fair proportion of our crop either spot or forward.
But it is fascinating to see the participants in the game issuing estimates
of the harvest that a cynic might think smacked of talking their own books.
For instance, Allied Grain and Dalgety, two of the biggest grain merchants,
have come out with estimates for the total UK harvest of almost 21m tonnes.
If they were proved accurate there could be an implied surplus over UK
requirements of some 4.5m tonnes and consequent downward pressure on prices.
United Grain Producers, a farmer-owned co-operative, puts the harvest at
20.25m tonnes, while the National Farmers' Union plumps for 19.5m tonnes.
Should that NFU figure be correct the surplus would be one third less than
that predicted by the merchants at a tonnage that could probably be exported
without too much difficulty.
As regular readers of this column will realise, I never talk my own book] I
would, however, point out that with the harvest still unfinished in the
north it may be a little premature to quote absolutes. I would further draw
attention to the fact that the recently published Ministry of Agriculture
crop census indicated that plantings for harvesting this year were down 14.8
per cent for wheat and 10.3 per cent for barley.
Both of those figures were greater, I suspect, than those used by any of the
forecasters quoted, who probably relied on a previous estimate of 9.3 per
cent as the reduction in UK cereal cropping because of set-aside.
We will not know the truth of all this until all the grain has moved off
farms before next harvest. Meanwhile, as one commentator recently put it,
the game of spoof goes on.
