FT  09 JUN 93 / Islamic militants bomb bus in Egypt
ISLAMIC extremists killed one man and injured 14 others in a bomb attack on
a tourist bus in Cairo yesterday as part of a continuing campaign to cripple
the tourist industry, Egypt's biggest source of foreign revenue.
The terrorists dropped the bomb from a bridge as the bus travelled through
an underpass towards the pyramids at Giza. It exploded on a car, badly
damaging the vehicle and the tourist bus which was following.
One Egyptian died and 14 other people were injured, including five Britons
who were among a party of 39 on a one-day visit to Cairo.
The attack was the latest in a year-long campaign waged by extremists
primarily against the tourist industry, but which has also targeted
government ministers, senior security officials and members of Egypt's
Coptic minority.
The economy has already felt the impact with some forecasts suggesting a
halving of tourism revenues this year. Over 3m tourists visited Egypt last
year with earnings estimated at Dollars 3.2bn (Pounds 2.1bn). Some officials
had forecast an increase to more than Dollars 4bn during the current year.
President Hosni Mubarak has blamed Iran for being behind the violence, which
he claims is aimed at destabilising his regime. However, there is also
evidence that widespread poverty, particularly in the south and in inner
city areas, is proving fertile recruiting ground for groups pledged to the
introduction of full Islamic government.
The authorities have responded to the attacks by declaring all-out war on
the extremists and have used thousands of police and para-military units in
assaults on suspected terrorist hideouts. Military courts have sentenced 21
extremists to death in recent months.
Religious broadcasting on the state-run media has also been sharply
increased in an effort to demonstrate that the regime is more devout than
its radical opponents.
This has caused growing alarm among more liberal, secular groups in Cairo
who say that the government is polarising society and denying greater
democratisation which, they argue, is the only effective way of defeating
the Islamic extremists.
The British Foreign Office is waiting before deciding whether to advise
Britons not to visit Egypt in the wake of today's terrorist attack.
'Our consul and vice-consul are visiting the scene of the incident and will
be reporting back,' the Foreign Office said. Advice to visitors to Egypt,
issued in March this year, was that they should be vigilant at all times,
avoid Dairut and Assiut districts unless carrying out essential business,
and dress and behave discreetly.
While the highest priority was given to protecting visitors, people's safety
could not be guaranteed and further incidents in Cairo and elsewhere 'must
be expected'.
The Association of British Travel Agents said it would continue to tell
tourists of the dangers and urge them to be careful.
More than 80,000 Britons visit Egypt each year.
