FT  10 APR 93 / Leading Article: Homes versus enterprise
IS THE British personal sector about to change the habits of a lifetime in
the way that it saves and invests?
For the best part of half a century, privately owned housing and collective
forms of investment such as occupational pensions have claimed a
disproportionate share of the asset side of the household balance sheet. Yet
suddenly there are signs of a change. Last year, as house prices continued
to fall in nominal terms, private individuals ceased to be net sellers of
company securities and emerged as buyers of Pounds 4.7bn-worth of shares. If
the trend were sustained, it would amount to nothing less than a financial
revolution.
At first sight, it may seem perverse to raise the possibility of a shift in
deeply entrenched behaviour just when demoralised home owners are seeing the
first tentative evidence that the housing market is beginning to stir. But
one month's figures from the building societies, which is all the evidence
amounts to, hardly count for much.
While the ratio of house prices to earnings is below its average level of
the past 25 years, it is still well above the level in earlier troughs in
1970, 1977 and 1982. After the biggest of all the post-war housing booms and
busts, it would be surprising if the trough turned out to be shallower than
in earlier downturns, especially when the fall in nominal prices has been so
severe that the speculative investment premium in house prices may well be
disappearing.
New incentives
Moreover, the pattern of previous troughs has been for the price-earnings
ratio to remain broadly stable for two or three years once the bottom of the
cycle has been reached, as a backlog of transactions works its way through
the market. House prices could thus bump their way along the bottom for two
or three years, once again, before turning up. And by the second half of the
1990s, demographic factors will probably militate against a big upturn.
The more substantial arguments for believing that the rules of the game have
changed rest on a new and different pattern of incentives. The tax system
has long favoured investment in collective savings vehicles and in home
ownership. But the fiscal carrots are getting leaner by the year.
On the investment side of the equation, life assurance premium relief is
long gone. Since Mr Lamont's latest Budget, the fiscal reliefs for pension
fund investment are under attack, on an arbitrary basis that leaves pension
funds vulnerable to further imposts in future. Yet private investors now
have a powerful incentive to invest in the stock market directly via
personal equity plans.
Mortgage relief
In housing, the exemption from capital gains tax remains an important fiscal
privilege. Yet the value of mortgage tax relief has been reduced in
successive budgets and further eroded by inflation. The shrinkage in the
private rented sector over a period of several decades means that the
alternatives to home ownership remain inadequate. But this is a nettle which
the government will one day have to grasp.
It is, however, too soon to declare that the 1990s will be the decade of the
private equity investor, not least because of the costly impact of the
Budget's Advance Corporation Tax measures on higher rate tax payers.
But the market is undeniably becoming less institutional, with pension fund
cash flow falling from Pounds 16bn in 1990 to a mere Pounds 4.4bn last year,
reflecting a combination of contribution holidays and the increasing volume
of pensions in payment. As in the US over the past two years, private
investors may also be tempted to continue investing in expensive-looking
equities because they incur an income penalty by putting money into building
society deposits, rather than equities or gilts.
Thus far, it looks less like a revolution than a slightly haphazard set of
steps in broadly the right direction. The definitive verdict on whether
enterprise is to enjoy larger rewards than home ownership in Britain will
hinge above all on the course of monetary policy between now and the next
general election.
