FT  06 FEB 93 / Markets: Giving a pep to savers' incomes - Serious Money
ANNUAL income twenty pounds, annual expenditure nineteen nineteen six,
result happiness.  Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure twenty
pounds ought and six, result misery.
MR MICAWBER'S words in David Copperfield ring specially true for savers at
the moment, with returns falling and spending still rising. How do they get
a decent income now base rates have dropped to 6 per cent?
We devote two pages to the issue this week (see opposite); meanwhile, three
well-known financial companies have launched similar products which attempt
to meet this income need. All combine shares and bonds within a personal
equity plan to offer a decent, tax-free income.
The Cazenove Bond &amp; Utility fund yields 7 per cent by investing in utility
companies such as water, electricity and gas, and in bonds. That yield
allows for the annual charge (a very reasonable 0.5 per cent).
The initial charge of 0.2 per cent is extremely low by industry standards
and means the bid-offer spread on the trust will be around 2 per cent. But
those who want to hold the fund in Pep form must pay a further initial
charge of Pounds 35.
What does this mean in real money? On an investment of Pounds 6,000, the
annual tax-free income will be Pounds 420. The tax saving for a basic-rate
payer will be Pounds 105, and Pounds 168 for the top-rate payer. So, the tax
benefit will outweigh the initial charge in the first year and, for top-rate
payers, the bid-offer spread as well.
The Cazenove fund pays dividends twice a year. The two other new products,
although higher-charging, offer a monthly income facility. This will
undoubtedly increase their appeal to investors although the amount paid each
month will be small in early years.
Fidelity's tax-free income plan is based on a new unit trust called the High
Income fund. This will invest in high-yielding equities and fixed-interest
stocks and will have a yield of 6 per cent. Again, this yield allows for the
effect of the annual management charge (a rather more hefty 1.25 per cent).
The initial charge on the Pep is 2 per cent (4 per cent for those who invest
in the unit trust alone). This should mean the bid-offer spread for Pep
investors is around 3 per cent. As with its other Peps, Fidelity is making
withdrawal charges which fall from 3 per cent in year one to 1 per cent in
year three and zero thereafter.
To turn this into pounds and pence, an investment of Pounds 6,000 would get
an income of Pounds 360, or Pounds 30 a month. The tax saving for a
basic-rate payer would be Pounds 90, and Pounds 144 for the top-rate payer.
The initial charge of Pounds 120 would, thus, be reclaimed by the top-rate
payer in the first year (although not if he withdrew his funds); it would
take part of another year to reclaim the spread as well.
The minimum lump sum investment into the Fidelity fund is Pounds 1,000, or
Pounds 50 for monthly savings.
The M &amp; G Managed Income fund offers, at around 5 per cent, the lowest yield
of the three. It will invest in a variety of M &amp; G's trusts, with up to 40
per cent in the group's Treasury bill fund and in its Gilt &amp; Fixed Interest
fund.
The initial and annual charges of 4.5 and 1.5 per cent respectively are
higher than those made by Fidelity (although M &amp; G imposes no withdrawal
charges). There will be no 'double charging' - that is, investors do not
have to pay the fees of the underlying trusts as well. The minimum
investment will be Pounds 1,000.
On a Pounds 6,000 M&amp;G Pep investment, the annual income would be Pounds 300.
The tax saving for a basic-rate payer would be Pounds 75, and Pounds 120 for
a top-rate payer. Thus, it would take around four years for a basic-rate
payer to earn back the initial charge of Pounds 270, and longer if one
accounts for the 6 per cent bid-offer spread.
Why do the Fidelity and M &amp; G plans have higher charges than the Cazenove
fund? The simple answer is that they are paying commission to intermediaries
to sell the fund and have to reclaim the cost from the investor.
Herein lies the paradox. Advisers and intermediaries are supposed to offer
'best advice.' The Cazenove fund has the highest yield and the lowest
charges and is offered by a blue-chip name; it might seem an obvious piece
of 'best advice' to recommend it for those who need income. But it will
probably raise less money than either of the other two.
Could there be a good reason for recommending any of the M &amp; G and Fidelity
funds ahead of Cazenove? One could argue that the lower the yield, the
greater the potential for capital growth. But only up to a point. If two
portfolios own exactly the same stocks, the one with the lowest charges will
have the highest yield. Then there is the monthly income facility. But would
you rather have Pounds 25 a month from M &amp; G or Pounds 210 every half-year
from Cazenove?
It would be wrong to suggest that all advisers are commission-hungry; many
work very hard to do their best for their clients. But these three funds
will provide a good test case to see if the words 'best advice' mean
anything at all.
