FT  07 JUL 93 / International Company News: Time out for Benetton game plan
 -The sports side may not be ready for investors
ITALY'S Benetton family may be having second thoughts about pressing ahead
with the planned flotation of its growing sports activities on the New York
Stock Exchange, in spite of the successful example set by the Fila sports
group in May.
Fila, best-known in Italy for its up-market sports clothing and, in the US,
for its footwear, listed 30 per cent of its ordinary shares on the Big Board
in a deal which raised about Dollars 135m for Gemina, the Fiat-controlled
investment group which owns it.
Some bankers believed Benetton Sportsystem, the holding company established
this year for the family's bulging sports portfolio, might have followed the
lead and been floated before Christmas.
However, signs now are that the Benettons, who over the past three years
have quietly acquired 10 leading sports equipment companies through their
Edizione Holding master company, may have pushed back their ambitions.
The group, which includes familiar brands such as Prince tennis racquets and
Nordica ski boots, 'still needs to be simplified', says one banker familiar
with the company. 'They need to talk to US investors, and there are still
tax implications to be worked out.'
However, the Benettons have started to spread the word. At a penthouse
showroom in New York's Fifth Avenue earlier this year, they displayed
together for the first time their full range of brands.
The target is to make Benetton Sportsystem one of the world's top five
sports groups by 1995. By then, sales should exceed Dollars 1bn, putting it
just behind Nike, Reebok, Adidas and Mizuno of Japan.
Benetton's strategy began in the late 1980s, when the fragmented sports
equipment industry was identified as offering potential for growth through
consolidation. The sector fitted in with the Benettons' experience in
manufacturing and retailing and coincided with the family's relaxed, unfussy
and vaguely 'green' business image.
The takeovers started with Italy's Nordica in May 1989. This year, the group
reached its first goal of assembling an adequate portfolio of sports brands.
'We have products for sports from January 1 to December 31, meaning we are
no longer dependent on one season,' says Mr Silvano Storer, joint managing
director of Benetton Sportsystem.
Other criteria - buying brands which were internationally known and among
the leaders in their sectors, and in sports showing rising demand  - have
also been met, he says.
With the acquisition phase complete, attention has shifted to rationalising
manufacturing and distribution to save money in production, marketing and
distribution.
Rollerblade's in-line roller skates show different parts of the group
working together to improve quality and lower costs. Buyers remark that the
boot section of the skates look increasingly like sophisticated ski boots.
The change reflects Nordica's influence. About 30 per cent of Rollerblade's
boots are now made at Nordica's plant in north-eastern Italy, and the
proportion is expected to reach 70 per cent eventually. 'The two products
meet broadly similar physical requirements. Nordica's experience in the ski
boot market gave it an edge in designing and choosing materials for in-line
roller skates, especially for comfort and strength,' says Mr Storer.
The link has helped Rollerblade, which virtually invented in-line roller
skates, to survive the 'boom-and-bust' cycle facing many innovative
companies which surge on new products but then decline as competition
sharpens.
But it is sports footwear and clothing which will need the greatest
attention if Benetton Sportsystem is to realise its growth ambitions. 'There
are a limited number of consumers for each of our sports, but many more for
related clothing,' says Mr Storer. 'To have annual sales of over Dollars
1bn, shoes and clothing would probably have to account for at least half.'
To get there, Sportsystem will have to combine skills and resources in its
component companies in much the same way as is already happening with
Nordica and Rollerblade.
The Benettons have created a new subsidiary, N &amp; Co, to co-ordinate clothes
manufacturing. Tennis fans will still have Prince apparel to match their
racquets, but production will be co-ordinated by N &amp; Co. Costs will be cut
by farming out manufacturing to eastern Asia.
A similar strategy is planned for footwear. The aim is to rationalise
individual ranges, while preserving brand identities, to create a shoe
selection spanning products for tennis and jogging to those used for hiking
and mountaineering.
The group also sees scope for improving marketing and distribution by
combining sales forces. At present, each brand has its own sales and
distribution. The aim is to reduce that to just one network for all the
brands.
Rationalisation is already under way. Nordica has signed an agreement to
distribute Rollerblade products in Europe and Japan, the areas where its
sales force is strongest.
