FT  07 MAY 93 / Arts: Old Masters in Oxford - Patricia Morison visits Christ
Church picture gallery
In 1765, General John Guise, redoubtable soldier and lover of art, gave his
extremely fine collection of Italian paintings and drawings to his old
college, Christ Church. Never had, nor has, an Oxford college received such
a bequest. It includes a wonderful 'Virgin and Child with Three Angels' by
an artist very close to Piero della Francesca; Hugo Van der Goes's
'Lamentation', which is all the more moving for being but a fragment;
Annibale Carracci's 'Butcher Shop'; Tintoretto's 'Martyrdom of St Lawrence';
and Van Dyck's powerfully arresting oil sketch, the 'Soldier on Horseback'.
The list of Old Master paintings could be far longer. And then there is the
world-famous Christ Church collection of drawings, selections from which are
displayed throughout the year.
In the early summer, two modest exhibitions examine certain puzzles arising
from General Guise's benefaction. Carlo Ridolfi, Collector and Art Historian
(until July 6) is a footnote show about a figure much honoured among
students of the Italian Renaissance. A professional painter and scholar,
Ridolfi (1594-1658) stands to Venetian historiography as Vasari does to
Florence. Like Vasari, he was not much of a painter - or so it is said.
(When next in Venice, I mean to track down what is supposedly his best work
in San Giovanni Elemosinario.) As for seeing how he measured up to Vasari as
a historian, the problem is that there is no modern edition, let alone
translation, of Ridolfi. And yet, his Life of Tintoretto and Le Meraviglie
dell'arte are key works, written out of patriotic indignation that Vasari
had been so pro-Florentine and showed so little appreciation of the
'marvels' achieved by Venetian artists.
One of General Guise's coups was to buy Ridolfi's collection of drawings, or
at least a sizeable chunk of it. Scholars are now satisfied that the general
really did secure this collection and was not, as had been suggested,
tricked by an elaborate forger. The cloud of doubt arises from the fact that
the bound volumes which Ridolfi made were dismembered by some dim college
Librarian in the last century.
That said, with some exceptions the drawings we see in the exhibition are
not particularly remarkable. The reason for showing them is that they are
marked 'R' in Ridolfi's hand, or with a different 'R' added in the 18th
century. Many great drawings in the collection may actually have been
Ridolfi's but are unmarked. However, 'The Archer' is both a fascinating and
exceedingly rare work. It was made with the point of a brush by a late
14th-century artist now identified as French, the Master of the Parement of
Narbonne. There is also a small Leonardo study of a sleeve bound with
fluttering ribbon, and a tiny sketch of figures for the background in
Carpaccio's St Ursula cycle.
The second Christ Church show (until June 15) focuses on a Titian which is
not normally on view, 'The Adoration of the Shepherds'. Dark and damaged
though the picture is, it repays a long look. Titian's composition conveys
the quality of worshipful repose normal in a Nativity, and yet he also
included the energetic figure of a shepherd tugging at his donkey. Another
shepherd doffs his hat as he kneels, and two boys hang over the back wall of
the stable, peering by the light of their candle at the holy infant.
Again, General Guise had invested in a good provenance. The picture had been
in Charles I's celebrated collection, he having bought it from the duke of
Mantua. The Oxford painting has hitherto been described as a version of the
'Adoration' which was commissioned from Titian by the Duke of Urbino,
brother-in-law to the Duke of Mantua. This picture, now in the Pitti Palace,
is a wreck. However, the exhibition makes the suggestion that the Christ
Church picture is the original and that the Pitti Palace is the later one.
Recent X-ray examination of the Oxford picture has revealed paint applied
with a Titianesque bravura which could make the picture 'of great interest'
if it were cleaned.
And there the matter is likely to rest. These are lean times for Oxford
colleges. Christ Church already faces a pressing question over the
deteriorating condition of its superb Van Dyck, 'The Continence of Scipio':
the bill for conservation is estimated at around Pounds 20,000. These are
considerations to be borne in mind, while the public still continues to
enjoy access to this remarkable private collection.
Christ Church Picture Gallery is open Monday-Saturday 10.30-1.00 and
2.00-5.30; closed Sunday morning. Guided tours, Thursday at 2.15
