FT  29 SEP 93 / World Trade News: Pharmaceuticals groups warned on R&amp;D
spending
THE world's pharmaceuticals industry will be unable to sustain its high
levels of spending on research and development. Recent government measures
to restrain healthcare spending mean the drugs market will grow
insufficiently quickly to provide a reasonable return on the Dollars 30bn
(Pounds 19.8bn) a year presently being spent on pharmaceuticals R&amp;D,
according to Prof Jurgen Drews, president of international R&amp;D at Roche, the
Swiss healthcare group.
Professor Drews said global prescription sales would need to reach about
Dollars 280bn a year within 10 years to justify present R&amp;D spending.
'Given growing containment on healthcare budgets around the globe, the
chances of reaching the Dollars 280bn figure are more than low - they are
non-existent. The industry has clearly been overspending,' warned Prof
Drews.
The sector faced a period of consolidation and contraction. R&amp;D spending
would have to contract as well, he added. Dr Armin Kessler, chief operating
officer, said he expected further mergers to occur over the coming years as
drugs groups struggled to cope with the new environment.
The warning came as Roche, which spends SFr1.5bn (Pounds 697m) a year on
pharmaceuticals R&amp;D and is one of the world's largest R&amp;D investors, said it
would slow its spending in the area. Roche's pharmaceuticals operations,
which include a 60 per cent stake in the US biotechnology group Genentech,
spends about 24 per cent of turnover on R&amp;D.
Prof Drews said a level of 17 per cent to 18 per cent would be preferable.
Genentech's R&amp;D investment would fall from about 50 per cent of sales to 24
per cent within five years, he added.
Roche would achieve its target not by cutting R&amp;D spending, but by ensuring
sales increased faster than expenditure, stressed Prof Drews.
'Those companies that are innovative will survive,' he said. 'We will manage
our projects vigorously and become more efficient. We will also set up
strategic networks between academic organisations, biotechnology groups and
ourselves to ensure access to the rapid scientific advances that will offer
us novel, worthwhile treatment.'
