FT  18 JAN 93 / With cries of 'Down, Bush', Baghdad calls a celebration
WITH drums beating, torches burning and chants of 'Down, Bush' and 'Long
Live Saddam', thousands of Iraqis took to the streets of Baghdad yesterday
in well-orchestrated demonstrations to mark the second anniversary of the
start of the Gulf War.
One of those on the march to the United Nations Development Programme
building, Mr Starred Husseini, 30, who said he had fought in the war,
insisted the anniversary was a cause for celebration in view of the
impressive reconstruction programme carried out by Iraq.
'The people are happy. They are proud they have been successful in
rebuilding Iraq. We have survived everything thrown at us,' he said.
At 8am, all traffic in Baghdad came to a standstill for five minutes in
memory of the war dead, and schools and universities received lectures on
the US-led military 'aggression' against Iraq.
Iraqi newspapers appeared with special celebratory issues. Carrying large
pictures of their leader and defiant headlines such as 'All allegiance to
Saddam Hussein, Hero of the Mother of All Battles' and 'The aggressors have
been defeated'.
They all ran President Saddam's speech to the nation on the first day of the
war, along with pictures and articles on the reconstruction. The newspaper
Al Thawra said in its editorial that 'Iraqis are launching their
counter-attack with a massive drive to reconstruct, in record time, all
things damaged by the aggressors.'
The reconstruction theme was also played up by government ministries, which
announced the opening of new industrial and public service projects. A
fertiliser plant, new electricity generators and super-grid stations, a
government foodstuffs sales department, an ammonia plant and an air
conditioner factory were all inaugurated by various officials yesterday.
Mr Asama Abdul Razaq al Hitti, oil minister, announced oil production would
reach 3m barrels a day by the end of this year due to the finding of new
reserves and plans to drill 5,000-10,000 new oil wells. In 1989, output was
2.79m b/d. Iraq was ready to begin exporting oil with renewed vigour as soon
as the embargo was lifted, the minister added.
With only a few days left of Mr George Bush's presidency and President
Saddam firmly in power, the atmosphere was one of victory for the Iraqi
leader. Many Iraqis see the current crisis between the western allies and
Iraq as a last-ditch attempt by Mr Bush to finish work left unfinished
during the Gulf War, and the celebrations are likely to last until Mr Bill
Clinton's inauguration on Wednesday.
Mr Tariq Aziz, deputy prime minister, said Iraq 'would like to see the
personal vendetta policy come to an end. That will be enough to create an
objective for a special atmosphere to discuss all the questions between the
two sides.' He called on the incoming US administration to 'review Iraq's
situation in a non-personal manner.'
