FT  03 APR 93 / Books: Serious money in the family
THE ASTORS, 1763-1992: LANDSCAPE INTO MILLIONAIRES by Derek Wilson
Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson Pounds 20, 439 pages
JOHN JACOB ASTOR, the butcher's son from Walldorf near Heidelberg, was the
first seriously rich American; in some ways, too, the first glaring
embodiment of the American dream of rags to riches in a generation. Yet his
public image was not good to Americans of his day; the press, especially,
did not like him, and even Derek Wilson highlights his weaknesses as a
landlord and as the hard man first of the fur trade and then of the Pacific
China trade. Of course, Wilson also describes how he endowed and enriched
one of the top three public libraries in the world, the New York Public
Library. To-day it is still the Astors, through Mrs. Vincent Astor, who help
fund its alarming budget.
In the next few generations after John Jacob I, the Astors were joined by Du
Ponts, Vanderbilts, Carnegies, Delanos and Rockfellers, etc. The seriously
rich became large in number and created their own culture. However, the
Astors, after 200 years, are still a name to conjure with even in New York.
Their name still dominates New York society. Mrs. Vincent Astor at 91 is the
acknowledged queen of New York, an active patron and tireless supporter of
charities. Unfortunately Wilson only spares a sentence or two for Brooke
Astor, who is one of the most remarkable women New York has ever known.
Maybe she will be the last vivid blaze of the Manhattan Astors for, always a
restless lot, the bulk of the family are now in Britain.
It all began with flutes. London was the greatest market in the world from
1750-1830 for musical instruments. John Jacob's brother, George, started up
in London with flutes: a good craftsman and a good business man, he
flourished. His brother joined him, but not for long. He bundled together as
many flutes as he could get away with as personal luggage, bought the
cheapest ticket he could find and made for New York and set up in trade like
his brother. He was soon back to get more stock.
What a world it was in the last decades of the 18th century - opportunities
abounded, imaginative entrepreneurs plunged, swam or drowned by the
hundreds, and the world's commerce expanded at a rate mankind had never
before witnessed. Probably John Jacob by 1820 was one of the richest men in
the world, and in spite of the alarming children - one mad, one hysterical,
most extravagant - the family's wealth held up. His son, William Backhouse,
consolidated and enlarged their huge Manhattan real estate, and his sons and
grandsons did likewise (they were the first into great luxury hotels, the
Waldorf-Astoria, the St Regis, etc). Manhattan was the goose that never
failed to lay eggs for the Astors.
Yet they were restless people. John Jacob himself left his wife in Manhattan
for two years at a time to visit Europe with a daughter or so. On his last
return he became so hysterical that he tried to bribe the captain to change
course and drop him in Cork.
This stroke of hysteria and the need for instant decision seems to thread
the Astor story, and so is uneasiness - the fear that all daughters are
likely to be the victims of ne'er-do-wells and all sons wanton, dissolute
and interested in spending but not making money.
The Astors had such children in plenty in every generation but they, like
the Rothschilds about whom Derek Wilson has written so well in his last
book, threw up many men and women of great ability and distinction. That is
even more true of the British Astors than the American, although Vincent
Astor - a complex man - was outstanding too.
With the British Astors, Wilson has to deal with two issues: the pro-German
Cliveden set of the 1930s, and the Stephen Ward-Profumo affair. He does so
with excellent judgment, although perhaps he could have stressed more
strongly how the Astors never forgot their German ancestry nor severed their
links with Walldorf. On the Profumo affair he is quite excellent, showing
what has become the poison in English tabloid journalism, that it prefers
sensationalism to truth.
The book teams with good things: Wilson writes plainly but well; he is
sensitive to human beings in all of their complexity; and he understands, as
he showed in the Rothschild book, the extraordinary effects of extraordinary
riches. Now he has taken on the Guinnesses - another fruitful field. After
that, perhaps he will break off and write a philosophically inclined
assessment of the effects of extravagant wealth on human nature. Quite a
task.
