FT  20 AUG 93 / Rexrodt seeks road to peace for car makers
MR Gunter Rexrodt, the German economics minister, has had almost three weeks
in which to reconsider his impulsive hint that he might be prepared to act
as middleman in the industrial espionage row between Volkswagen and Adam
Opel, the German subsidiary of General Motors.
On Tuesday night he was given food for thought in an hour-long meeting with
Mr David Herman, the beguilingly mild Opel chairman. They had a 'good talk'
on matters of a 'non-communicable nature', according to official statements.
The minister will hear from VW's Mr Ferdinand Piech at a similar private
session today.
Signs of potential misunderstandings were already apparent as this week's
meetings were announced. Mr Rexrodt's office was careful to stress that the
minister's aim was to gather information, while VW tried to suggest the
talks were in some way a continuation of Mr Piech's own peace-making
initiatives.
These started with an abortive attempt to heal the breach with Mr Jack
Smith, GM president, after a nasty exchange at the end of last month.
The VW chairman's suggestions at a press conference, laced with war-like,
xenophobic overtones, that Opel secrets had been 'planted' on his new
employees and in VW computers, had earned him the riposte from GM that his
ideas were grotesque and that his grasp on reason might be less than secure.
A telephone call to Mr Smith was rewarded with the cold shoulder.
Mr Piech might communicate in writing with Mr Herman, but he had to retract
his charges first, he was told. A telephone call from Mr Piech to Mr
Rexrodt, who had appealed for more moderate language and warned against
damaging Germany's international image, was the cue for this week's
interviews.
Both sides, the government, and other German motor makers have reason to be
worried. Although it is understood Washington does not see any immediate
danger to inter-governmental relations, the fact that the US Justice
Department has begun an investigation into the case is reason enough for
concern.
Future US sales prospects for German car makers, not least VW itself, may
also be at stake. BMW and Mercedes-Benz are at or beyond the point of no
return on their first-ever investments in US car plants. Mr Rexrodt is also
confronted by a mood approaching panic in some sectors of the domestic
vehicle components industry, caused partly by VW's draconian price-cutting
demands.
However much the minister may wish for calm, his half-hearted mediation
offer came too late. Mr Rexrodt appears to believe that it is best if both
sides agree to keep quiet and let the criminal investigations proceed.
Volkswagen pre-empted his wishes last weekend when it said it was
withdrawing from the war of words.
