FT  10 JUN 93 / US sees bigger role at UN for Tokyo, Bonn
THE US has reiterated its commitment to Japan and Germany becoming permanent
members of the UN Security Council.
In the clearest statement so far of the Clinton administration's position,
Mrs Madeleine Albright, the US delegate to the UN, said the council must
'adjust to new realities and new responsibilities.'
In the early days of the Clinton administration, Mr Warren Christopher,
secretary of state, also spoke in general terms of the desirability of
reforming the Security Council. This prompted a sharp rebuttal from Mr
Douglas Hurd, UK foreign secretary, who had been asked if Britain was
prepared to lose its permanent seat.
On this occasion, however, senior British diplomats in Washington said that
Mrs Albright's remarks merely reaffirmed existing US policy, which does not
seek to displace any present members nor, as she put it, 'to sacrifice the
council's new-found effectivness on the altar of reform.'
They pointed out that Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN secretary general,
had been inviting suggestions for reform. Various discussions with the
administration had not resulted in even the hint of a disagreement between
the US and the UK, they said, noting with satisfaction that the US was
understood to have no interest in the suggestion that the EC be given a
seat.
In her address to the Foreign Policy Association in New York on Tuesday, Mrs
Albright did not mention the earlier British objections to changes in
council membership.
The collapse of communism has revived the council as a political force after
decades when it was hamstrung by vetoes. These were cast mostly by the
former Soviet Union but also by the other permanent members - the US,
Britain, France and China. The new spirit of co-operation was evident
particularly during the Gulf conflict.
Japan, currently an elected member, wants a permanent seat by 1995, the UN's
50th anniversary. Although less strident in its claim, Germany is believed
seeking permanent membership at the same time.
Britain argues that economic clout should not be the criterion, and it has
yet to be determined whether new permanent members would have the power of
veto. Several third world nations also want seats alongside Japan and
Germany. These include India, Indonesia, Nigeria and Brazil.
A big change in council composition would require amendment of the UN
charter.
