FT  26 MAR 93 / The Coal White Paper: Market to determine pits' future - The
government's blueprint to tackle projected energy demands
THE GOVERNMENT has signalled a much bigger role for market forces in the
coal industry with its commitment to move towards privatising British Coal
as quickly as possible and to sell off pits the corporation wants to close.
The government's white paper stressed the limited options available for
extending the market for coal. There is little market for coal outside
electricity generation, and the 'demand for coal in this market is set to
decline significantly from current levels. There is no likelihood of
significant growth in demand in other markets and a substantial risk of
further decline.'
The government wants to leave decisions about energy use to the free market,
but it is setting up a panel to advise it on developments. This is what the
white paper had to say about the main sectors:
Coal
The government confirms that British Coal's decision to close 31 pits 'was
soundly based in the market conditions'.
But it concluded that there is a case for enabling British Coal to phase the
inevitable closures needed and also offer the coal industry a viable future
in the private sector.
In order to do this, the government is providing a subsidy for additional
tonnages of coal the corporation can sell to the generators.
This will be on top of contracts already signed to supply 160m tonnes over
five years - 40m tonnes in 1993 to 1994 and 30m tonnes in each of the
following four years. Negotiations about any additional tonnages are still
under way.
The subsidy will enable British Coal to compete with imported coal and other
black fuels such as orimulsion. It will encourage the generators to
substitute coal from the UK for coal from overseas.
This will give British Coal time to implement the productivity and cost
improvements in order to make coal competitive with world prices within five
years.
The level of subsidy is for negotiation, but the white paper embraces
figures put forward by the select committee. These state that subsidies
should provide the difference between the cost of additional British coal
and imported coal. The subsidy will stop when the industry is privatised.
It does not give any indication of what additional tonnages the corporation
can expect to sell as a result of the subsidy.
The government intends to speed up the privatisation process and the white
paper says privatisation will be achieved at the earliest practical
opportunity.
The government stresses that it cannot legally force the generators to carry
higher stocks of coal as a way of increasing the market, but that it would
continue to consult with them over stock levels as a matter of urgency.
Opencast mining production is expected to fall even further than British
Coal's forecasts because of government efforts to subsidise deep-mined coal.
British Coal had forecast that opencast mining would fall from 16m tonnes to
12m tonnes by 1997 to 1998. Mr Michael Howard, the environment secretary, is
reviewing planning guidance on opencast coal.
British Coal has agreed that, in the approach to privatisation, it will
offer to sell or licence any pit it plans to close.
A new Coal Authority with responsibility for licensing pits and maintaining
records of mining activity will be set up in Nottinghamshire.
The government also plans to remove limits placed on underground working
hours in an effort to help British Coal improve efficiency.
The government intends to pass legislation that will remove restrictions
under which British Coal is unable to license mines at which more than 150
workers are employed.
Nuclear
The government sees no justification for forcing Nuclear Electric to close
any of its Magnox stations before the end of their planned lifetimes.
The review of future prospects for the nuclear industry will be completed
earlier than planned and the government will make an announcement later this
year. The nuclear review was planned for next year.
Mining communities
The white paper increased the amount of cash available for helping areas
affected by the pit closures to Pounds 200m.
Environment
The government expects the amount of coal burnt at power stations to fall in
the longer term because of environmental pressures. But it has made an
additional Pounds 12m available over the next three years to support
research into clean coal technology at British Coal's Coal Research
Establishment.
Gas
No measures to restrict gas-fired power generation.
Orimulsion
Orimulsion exports from Venezuela to the UK will stay at minimum contracted
levels for the foreseeable future.
This should see a reduction in consumption of at least 500,000 tonnes
equivalent of coal a year from the current level.
Electricity
The government reaffirmed its commitment to an open electricity market with
more competition to be introduced in 1994 as planned.
Consumers should pay lower electricity bills because the generators will be
buying subsidised coal and could then pass these savings on.
The government is considering whether to allow large electricity users to
bypass the pool - or the wholesale market.
The electricity pool authorities are looking at introducing demand-side
bidding into the electricity pool which means that large users could be
given incentives to shift their electricity demands to periods of low usage.
There would be no restriction on imports of French electricity.
Energy Commission
The government plans to set up an energy advisory panel of independent
experts, which will offer advice on the development of energy markets.
