FT  12 MAR 93 / Choice for Escobar is surrender or die
AS THE police hunt for Pablo Escobar intensifies and more of his associates
are killed, captured or give themselves up, the chief of the Medelln drug
cartel seems to have little chance of staying alive unless he surrenders
once again to the Colombian authorities.
In his latest move, he has requested protection for his family and the
mediation of the Catholic Church, recalling the pattern that led up to his
first surrender in 1991.
Escobar has never been under such pressure: since his escape from jail last
July, a special search force has carried out thousands of operations in and
around Medelln - dawn patrols, helicopter sweeps, road-blocks and,
increasingly, raids mounted as a result of tip-offs.
His safe territory is dwindling as even Medelln residents turn against his
random terror tactics. And the revenge of a band known as the Pepes  -
people persecuted by Pablo Escobar - has left a trail of more than 40 dead
employees, collaborators and gunmen and several burnt-out family properties.
Last month, Escobar's family tried to flee to the US, but Colombian
immigration officials stopped them because papers permitting his children to
travel did not carry Escobar's signature. The US embassy in Bogota then
revoked their visas. Now the only surrender condition publicised by Escobar
is protection for his family; but a warrant is out for the 17-year-old son
who has been linked to the murder of a police captain.
The government has firmly rejected any negotiations for re-surrender. The
shaming memories of Escobar's luxurious prison life and the way he imposed
his own requirements on the authorities in 1991 make any under-the-counter
deal impossible.
With over a dozen cases of murder, terrorism and trafficking to face,
Escobar can now expect a much longer and less comfortable prison sentence
than when he first surrendered. But the circle is tightening and the Medelln
cartel has lost key military and financial personnel.
Already, Medelln has lost much of the drug trade to the Cali organisation.
By forgoing violence against the public and using more subtle tactics, such
as the infiltration of local business and political institutions, the Cali
groups have kept out of the limelight and built up their trafficking
networks in Europe and North America, as well as neighbouring South American
countries and new Far Eastern markets.
Apart from some international operations against money-laundering, the
authorities have made few moves against the Cali drug lords and some experts
believe it may be too late.
