FT  04 FEB 93 / The DAF Crisis: Battle-weary Heseltine rolls with the
punches
IT TOOK Mr Michael Heseltine's predecessor at the department of trade and
industry a matter of weeks to learn the perils of the job.
After a number of near-misses Mr Peter Lilley instructed his private office
to create a file marked simply 'Impending Disasters'. He hoped it would
provide early-warning of the next, inevitable, catastrophe to hit one of the
most accident-prone departments in Whitehall.
Mr Michael Heseltine has not told us whether he kept the file open when he
moved across to the DTI last year.
But either way it would not have saved him from the political fall-out from
the threatened collapse of Leyland-Daf. In the political parlence of
Westminster, the fiasco over the government's coal closure programme was a
blunder, the financial problems of the truck maker an accident.
The difference has done little to soften the damaging impact on Mr Michael
Heseltine's reputation. Six months ago he was one of the strongest figures
in Mr Major's cabinet, a member of the inner circle trusted to pull the
hottest coals from the political fire.
It is not only the Labour party that has been reminding Mr Heseltine of his
promise at last October's party conference to intervene 'before breakfast,
lunch and dinner' to support British industry. Right-wing Tories who bear a
grudge over his destruction of Mrs Margaret Thatcher's premiership are
gleeful about his inability to match the words with deeds. Mr Heseltine's
brand of industrial interventionism was never directed at bailing out
companies such as Leyland-Daf. But his enemies are happy to blur the
distinction between policy designed to promote industrial innovations and
one directed at propping up lame-ducks.
For his part the trade and industry secretary has begun to look
battle-weary, leaving his colleagues wondering whether he is any longer
interested in the day-to-day grind of politics.
It is much too early though to write off a man who has proved one of the
most resilient politicians of his generation. Leyland-Daf has delivered
another blow. But Mr Heseltine learnt long ago to roll with the punches of
politics.
