FT  16 APR 93 / Post Office sell-off postponed until 1994 at earliest
CABINET MINISTERS have agreed to delay privatising the Post Office because
of pressure on the government's legislative programme and a dispute over the
best form for the sell-off.
The cabinet is expected to agree next Thursday on an outline programme for
legislation in the parliamentary session starting in the autumn that
includes the privatisation of British Coal but not the Post Office.
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, has still to decide
whether to sell the Post Office as one unit or break it into three - the
Royal Mail, Post Office Counters and Parcelforce.
The sale is sensitive among Conservative MPs because of worries about the
impact on the postal service in Tory-held rural constituencies.
No clear option has emerged that will break the Royal Mail's monopoly,
increase competition and keep the government's commitment to a nationwide
delivery service with uniform prices. The Treasury also wants to ensure
maximum revenue from the sale, which could still take place before the next
general election.
Mr Edward Leigh, the trade and industry minister with direct responsibility
for the Post Office, is a strong supporter of privatisation. But he is
understood to agree with the FLG (future legislation) cabinet committee,
chaired by Mr Tony Newton, leader of the house, that the measure should be
delayed until at least next year.
Within Whitehall, there is no expectation that the full cabinet will
overturn that decision.
The sale of Parcelforce could still proceed without legislation. Under the
British Telecommunications Act 1981, Mr Heseltine has the power to sell Post
Office subsidiaries. But he is unlikely to take a decision on this part of
the privatisation until he has decided on the overall form of the sale.
Mr John Major, prime minister, wants to draw up a distinctive legislative
programme that will rally the Conservative party after a bruising
parliamentary year dominated by the Maastricht bill. The next session is
expected to include a substantial criminal justice bill and the
restructuring of the police force.
The Department of Education wants to end the obligation of students to join
the National Union of Students and reform the training of teachers. The
Department of Trade and Industry plans a deregulation bill and the
environment department a 'green' bill, setting up an environmental
protection agency. Legislation is also expected from the social security
department on reforming - and cutting the cost of - invalidity benefit.
However, it remains unclear whether two politically sensitive bills will be
included: on equalising the male and female state retirement ages and on
Sunday trading. The cabinet may not make a final decision of these for some
time.
The Home Office hopes to publish a draft bill on Sunday trading before MPs
begin their summer recess, probably in late July. That will set out three
options for MPs and ministers hope the bill will proceed in the next
session.
Pensions equalisation is a weaker contender because Mr Peter Lilley, social
security secretary, has still to decide formally on whether to raise the
retirement age for women from 60 to 65 - the same as men.
With the decision to make women work longer likely to be politically
unpopular, some ministers see a strong argument for waiting another year.
