FT  29 MAR 93 / Monday Interview: First in the fight for fairness - Herman
Ouseley, new chairman of the Commission for Racial Equality, talks to Alan
Pike
The Commission for Racial Equality will next week gain its first black
chairman and, as a direct consequence, its first chairman to have suffered
insults, harassment and violence because of the colour of his skin.
Herman Ouseley goes to the commission from the equally demanding job of
chief executive of the London borough of Lambeth where, when appointed in
1988, he set another record as Britain's first black local authority chief
executive.
Reaching the top of powerful organisations, public or private, is still
relatively rare for members of Britain's ethnic minority communities. As
someone who was born in Guyana, came to Britain as a child in 1957 and grew
up as part of an immigrant family in south London, he shares a personal
history with many of Britain's black people.
'My experiences are ones that are mirrored by many black people living in
the inner cities, although I have been luckier than most in being able to
side-step the difficulties that a lot of people have not been able to escape
from,' he says.
'I have suffered having bricks and bottles thrown through our window and
other forms of racial harassment. I have been beaten up on my way home from
school by groups of white youths and called a black bastard. Things have
happened for no reason other than what I look like.
'I have failed interviews when I felt I should have been successful, but how
could I prove it was discrimination? The majority of people who are
discriminated against cannot prove it. I have been picked up by the police
for no reason. I have sued the police for wrongful imprisonment and won.'
Ouseley's origins give him an appreciation of the lives of ordinary black
people in Britain that none of his predecessors in the CRE chairman's office
 -however committed to its goals of eliminating racial discrimination and
promoting equality of opportunity - could totally share. This does not mean
that the new chairman will arrive determined simply to be a strident,
one-dimensional advocate of black rights. Ouseley has a strong sense of
balance, and it shows as he continues to review the influences that will
help determine his style in the post.
'At the other end of the spectrum, I have had the experience of being a
black person in a powerful position. Other black people have expected me to
be able to do things for them, while white people have thought I might
possibly discriminate against them or overlook them. I have had to be seen
to be fairer than fair to white people, while bending over backwards to help
black people and avoid being accused of having sold out.'
He takes over the commission at a difficult time. Unemployment, even when
the economy is flourishing, is disproportionately high among Britain's
ethnic minority communities; the recession is aggravating the problem and
worsening other social tensions. Ouseley's annual budget at the commission
will be limited to a modest Pounds 15m and the government plans no growth in
real terms at least up to 1995-96. With only about 200 staff and limited
funds, it must be selective in its activities, which include giving advice,
legal assistance and mounting investigations into allegations of racial
discrimination.
Under Sir Michael Day, its outgoing chairman, the CRE has demanded stronger
race relations legislation but ministers have not rushed to oblige. Ouseley
recognises the commission's limitations. 'It is a creature of statute and
the government controls its finances. People who think the CRE should be
challenging every institutional practice in the world should realise it is
impossible. But the commission none the less has a very important job to do
in helping to promote a society based on respect, fairness, tolerance and
justice.'
He supports the commission's call for stronger race relations laws, saying
that, while the present act had proved a powerful weapon, weaknesses have
been exposed. In some respects, says Ouseley, the legal position on race
relations was weakened during the 1980s by other legislation. He cites the
1988 Local Government Act, which he says gives local authorities
insufficient power to ensure that contractors pursue adequate equal
opportunities employment policies. The value of positive action programmes
in overcoming discrimination in employment has, he says, been proved in the
US. And he says black people find it 'painful' that the powers of the
Northern Ireland Fair Employment Commission to challenge discrimination on
religious grounds in the province are tougher that those available on the
mainland to attack racial discrimination.
A conversation about race relations with someone whose experience is in the
inner cities inevitably touches the fragile, fraught question of
relationships between the black community and the police. Mr Paul Condon,
the new Metropolitan Police commissioner, made racism the subject of his
first public speech, voicing determination to outlaw it in both the
community and the force. Ouseley, welcoming strides he believes the police
service has made in recognising that it has problems in its relationships
with black communities, again takes care to inject balance. 'Equally, the
minority communities have problems with regard to crime and attitudes. They
have to face up to these. The law has to be upheld fairly, and people have
got to recognise that if they are stepping outside it, they are likely to
fall foul of the police.'
How does the CRE's new chairman, a role model of black achievement, view the
status of ethnic minority communities in Britain today? In the 36 years
since Herman Ouseley and his family came to London alongside many other
Commonwealth citizens, predictions about how the arrivals would influence
their new society have varied widely. Prophets of doom foretold streets
alive with serious and repeated race riots; some optimists assumed that
there would be an almost magical and effortless assimilation leading to
equality of opportunity. Neither has happened. Ouseley compares individual
examples of success with the scale of the problem still to be addressed.
'You see many Asian names on lists of very wealthy people in Britain. There
are half a dozen black members of parliament compared with none five years
ago. There are now about five black local authority chief executives, while
I was the only one in 1988. But there are more racial attacks and there is
more racial violence. There is a high proportion of black people on the
unemployment register, in penal institutions and among the homeless. The
real problem in race relations is that the worst afflictions affect the
black community to a disproportionate level. Black people bear a greater
share of the misery and poverty in our society.'
These are big issues, but Ouseley believes they can be tackled through
specific, targeted action. He has a reputation as a strong and brave manager
 -his parting gift to Lambeth was a highly publicised report alleging fraud
and corruption in the council, now being studied by the government - and he
emphasises the scope for clearly thought-out management action as a tool for
improving race relations. In 1979, 6 per cent of Lambeth council's employees
were from ethnic minorities. Now the figure is 48 per cent, reflecting the
ethnic composition of the borough. He would like to see more employers in
both the public and private sectors following the example.
'This would not have happened unless people in the organisation had been
persuaded that it needed to happen. It required managerial will and
political will.
'Many examples of success by members of Britain's ethnic minority
communities - whether we regard them as token or significant - are as a
result of institutions saying: 'We cannot go on like this. We must make a
positive effort.' There must be more positive efforts to create a structure
where people who are being denied opportunities can play their full part in
society, unconstrained by race.'
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
PERSONAL FILE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1946 Born in Guyana.
1957 Family emigrated to Britain.
1963 Began work in local government town planning administration.
1981 Principal race relations adviser, Greater London Council.
1984 Assistant chief executive, London borough of Lambeth.
1986 Director of education and later chief executive, Inner London
     Education Authority.
1988 Chief executive, Lambeth.
1993 Chairman, Commission for Racial Equality.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
