FT  15 SEP 93 / Business and the Environment: Answers in the wind - A look
at a new World Energy Council report on renewable energy
What will happen when the world's oil and gas supplies run out? The need to
find answers to this question has been frequently postponed in recent
decades as further resources of oil and gas have been discovered.
But reserves will finally start to run dry by the middle of the next
century, according to the World Energy Council, a non-governmental
organisation representing more than 100 countries. Coal and nuclear power
are the most 'readily available' alternatives, it concludes in its latest
worldwide projections*, published this month.
That answer will leave many dissatisfied. Coal is a prime source of carbon
dioxide, implicated in the threat of global warming, environmentalists and
governments agreed at last year's Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. There is
also mistrust of nuclear power among many people in industrialised
countries, while governments are increasingly wary of the expense of
building and then scrapping nuclear plants.
To solve the conundrum, parts of the 'green' movement have rested hope on
the potential of 'renewable energy' - wind, solar, wave power and the like.
But the issue has divided environmentalists - many object to the appearance
of these new energy forms and their impact on wildlife.
How seriously should the potential of 'renewables' be taken?
A new 320-page report by the World Energy Council sets out to answer that
question. It marks the council's first systematic attempt to bring
renewables into its models, and is the result of four years' work by a
specially formed committee.
Although the report's conclusions are incorporated into the council's
worldwide projections, the committee makes clear that its views do not
always coincide with the council's. The committee chides the WEC for having
given renewables 'secondary status as minor contributors to the overall
energy picture', and it adopts throughout a campaigning tone which will be
unfamiliar to regular WEC readers.
The committee's main conclusion is that the proportion of world energy
consumption supplied by renewables, currently 2 per cent, could double to 4
per cent by 2020. That would represent a trebling of the amount of energy
currently supplied by renewables.
It says this projection is based on 'current policies', but that it has
assumed that fossil fuels will become more expensive, while the prices of
renewables will fall. However, these assumptions are not spelled out.
The central claim of the report is that with special aid from governments
and international initiatives, the proportion of energy use contributed by
renewables could grow to 12 per cent. It calls this the 'ecologically driven
case'.
These projections include six types of energy: wind, solar, geothermal
(making use of the earth's underground heat), oceans, small-scale water
power and biomass - organic-based fuels made from sugar or waste.
However, one of the report's oddities is that it does not look at large
hydro-electric projects, one of the most well-established forms of renewable
energy, on the grounds that enough research is already available. Nor does
it consider in detail the role of what it calls 'traditional biomass' - wood
burning - by far the greatest source of energy in many developing countries.
By concentrating only on the newer forms, it understates the role that
renewable energy already has. The report does acknowledge that if
hydro-electric power and biomass are taken into account, total renewable
resources contribute about 18 per cent of world energy use today, or about
1,559m tonnes of oil-equivalent.
Even within its limited terms of reference, however, its projections contain
surprises.
It estimates that some three-quarters of energy from 'new renewables' comes
from 'modern biomass' - the burning of waste and sewage, and fuels made from
sugar and other organic matter. The popularity of 'modern biomass' in North
and Latin America means that it will still contribute nearly half of the
total in 2020, the report argues.
It clearly recognises that one of the biggest obstacles to renewables is
their expense. The report estimates that its 'ecologically driven'
projections would need cumulative investment of Dollars 2,400bn (Pounds
1,600bn) in renewables between now and 2020. That compares with some Dollars
930bn capital investment in fossil-based systems to produce the same amount
of energy. However, the report is correct that this handicap may diminish.
It is also right to warn of the danger of subsidising renewable energy:
'Experience has shown that too rapid a growth, through massive tax and other
incentives, encourages marginal companies and technologies into the market,'
which then fail to survive.
In many cases, it points out, the natural limitations of renewables limit
their spread. For example, many areas which are suitable for wave power have
other cheap energy - Australia has coal, New Zealand has hydro and
geothermal potential and Britain has coal and nuclear energy.
It will also find increasing support within governments of industrialised
countries for its view that the environmental costs of fossil fuels -
principally their atmospheric emissions - should be reflected in energy
policy. But the report leaves this question open - along with many others.
It expects solar and wind power to make considerable inroads after 2010, but
does not spell out the technological improvements and falls in price that
will bring that about. It includes few comparisons with the cost of nuclear
power, one of renewables' chief rivals for government subsidies.
Nor does it offer much comment on how to treat the initial high-capital
investment which renewables require when comparing them with fossil fuels,
where initial investment is low, but continuing costs are high.
This report provides too little analysis of the future costs of renewables
to show how those choices will be made.
*Renewable Energy Resources: Opportunities and Constraints 1990-2020; Energy
for Tomorrow's World. World Energy Council, 34 St James's Street, London
SW1A 1HD. Pounds 25 plus postage.
