FT  21 JAN 93 / Technology: Patent troubles create trauma and cost
A brown six-inch-thick box landed on the desk of Clive Shipley, joint
managing director of Bath Scientific, a small west country electronics
group, last September. It was to transform what was expected to be a record
year for the small UK company into a four-month trauma that has not yet
ended.
The box, from the International Trade Commission in the US, detailed
allegations by a US competitor, Integri-Test, that it was trading unfairly
in selling its equipment to the US, infringing three patents held by the
competitor which apply to moving probe systems measuring capacitance and
resistance. It called for a temporary exclusion order against Bath
Scientific's products - mainly moving probe systems to test computer circuit
boards.
For Bath Scientific such an exclusion order would spell disaster: 'This
could put us out of business,' Shipley said. While the company, with just 25
staff, claims to be a world leader in a small and highly specialised market
in which it may take up to two years to make each probe, it sold just 20
units last year. Earnings totalled Pounds 1.4m, with half of sales in 1992
made in the US.
The unpleasant twist was that the cost of contesting the case in US courts
might put Bath Scientific out of business just as easily as the loss of the
US market. A one-week hearing by the ITC in Washington last month has cost
the better part of Dollars 250,000 (Pounds 164,000), wiping out all of
expected 1992 profits.
The cruel - and perhaps not accidental - irony is that the action comes at
exactly the point where Bath Scientific's business appears poised for
dramatic growth. The accelerating trend towards miniaturisation in the
electronics industry means manual testing of components is less practicable.
The company saw 40 per cent growth in sales between 1991 and 1992, and
projects annual growth of 50-100 per cent in the three years ahead.
Mercifully for Bath Scientific, the ITC court has ruled initially in its
favour. It found that there were other technologies similar to, and
predating, Integri-Test's patents, and that Bath Scientific was not using
the same technology anyway. Shipley went further last week, dismissing the
patent claims as ludicrous: 'Putting patents on measurement of capacitance
and resistance is like trying to patent gravity, or air.'
But the case is not yet won. Just two days ago Integri-Test called on the
ITC to review and reverse its decision, promising new evidence before the
October deadline for a permanent ruling. It still insists its patents 'are
valid and enforceable'.
The problem facing Bath Scientific is not uncommon for exporters to the US,
and illustrates international concern that US laws intended to protect small
domestic companies against unfair foreign competition by larger foreign
companies are being abused for wider protectionist reasons.
Many US companies have found that the mere act of bringing a case can scare
foreign competitors from the market. Investigations are launched before
careful evaluation of the evidence provided by the US company. Once a case
is launched, legal costs are unavoidable. Faced with the prospect of
expensive legal action, exporters often decide the sensible course is to
lick wounds and withdraw from the market - particularly small companies.
'A normal patent action would take up to six years,' Shipley said. 'We are
confident that we could prove we are right. The problem with this action is
that the US government provides local companies with a powerful lever just
by having the procedure in place.' It is possible that Integri-Test hoped
for exactly this result after arguments for the past six years with Bath
Scientific over patents. The UK company says Integri-Test refused a
'cross-licencing' arrangement, suggesting a main aim was to exclude Bath
Scientific from the US market. Integri-Test counters that Bath Scientific
refused its own proposal for a licencing fee to use the patents.
Integri-Test possibly misjudged how the critical importance of the US to
Bath Scientific gave it no option but to defend the action. Unless the ITC
reverses its December decision, Integri-Test will no longer be able to seek
protection behind patent claims, instead being forced to vie on
technological merit with its UK competitor. But Bath Scientific may have to
wait until October for the threat to be lifted. Meanwhile, legal fees mount.
