FT  09 SEP 93 / Embattled VW chairman warns of 'enemies within'
MR FERDINAND PIECH, Volkswagen's embattled chairman, who is fighting charges
that his company stole secrets from its rival, General Motors, sees enemies
all around. There are even some working against him inside his own senior
management, he says.
They are fighting a losing battle. What he views as the attempts by his
opponents at Adam Opel, the German subsidiary of General Motors, to
discredit his controversial production director, Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de
Arriortua, worry him least of all.
In a frank and wide-ranging interview with the Financial Times, Mr Piech
offered few counters and no concessions to his antagonists. Instead, he made
plain that he sees everything that is going on - both beyond the factory
gates and behind his back.
He presented the face of a man at home with and master of the most
extraordinary imbroglio in Germany's recent business history. It is, after
all, his own creation.
'My creativity costs money and someone has to stop me,' he says. The person
in this instance is Mr Lopez, under investigation for theft and industrial
espionage against Opel, his former employer, and Mr Piech's 'soulmate'. Mr
Lopez is the man for whom, he says repeatedly, 'I would put my hand in the
fire'. He was hired to rationalise VW production and squeeze ballooning
costs. Mr Piech makes no exceptions for himself.
Like Mr Piech, he is a skilled cost-cutter, a zealot, and a rare friend and
ally against the VW chief's private demons: corporate bureaucracy and
traditional German manufacturing practice.
Before Mr Piech took charge last January, he was advised to clear out all
the old management. 'But I didn't do so . . . and as a result there are
still too many dead bodies in the cellar.'
The resistance to him is still there, even though Mr Piech has made
wholesale changes to the executive board and purged six of VW's former nine
management layers. There are those who work against him, leaking and
gossiping, forgetting that he has mastered other personal crises before and
learnt from the experience.
He relates with some feeling his struggle in the late 1980s to take the
wheel at Audi, VW's quality-car division. But Mr Piech's already developed
cost-cutting zeal worked against him among labour representatives on the
company's supervisory board. Mr Wolfgang Habbel, then chairman and due to
retire, was given a new two-year contract.
'The same day, two members of my immediate staff tried to get a job with
him, although they had worked for me for many, many years,' Mr Piech says.
'And if your nearest environment turns against you, you really don't feel
very good'.
Mr Habbel had been re-elected at the insistence of the workers'
representatives on the Audi supervisory board, despite a deepening crisis in
the company. 'I had been running the company for many years . . . I did his
job,' Mr Piech recalls, with no apparent sense of paradox.
'I said I would stay one more year . . . But for the next six months I did
only my job in research and development, and left everything else to him.'
The crisis deepened. Workers' officials overcame their fear of his rigorous
style and fears that he would shift production abroad. 'They came to me and
said they had made a mistake and that they would correct it.' At the end of
his ultimatum year, Mr Piech got the job. 'It was at that time that I learnt
I needed allies.
'In those days, when my wife went shopping nobody wanted to know her. Now
when she goes out in the village where we live, surrounded by many
Volkswagen people, they come to her and say, 'Stay, fight, you will win, we
need you'.'
'It's a new experience for me, but we have a very strong relationship now
between labour and management,' he says. He sees his allies in the group's
115,000-strong workforce.
A curious picture emerges of a D-Mark-billionaire Austrian, content at last
in an isolated patch of Lower Saxony, in alliance with with hard-headed
trade unionists in a grassroots Social Democrat stronghold. From there, he
thumbs his nose at conventional German business wisdom while his motor
industry associates look on with mounting alarm as he goes his own radical
way.
'There are some who believe that the worst thing of all would be if he were
to succeed,' says a company insider. These, the theory goes, include
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democrat party and its sister grouping
Christian Social Union, supported by mainstream business, playing a double
game.
That is an alliance which would like to be rid of Mr Piech and Mr Lopez. On
the one side the aim is to discredit the Lower Saxony government and the
labour-dominated VW supervisory board. One result, it is imagined within VW,
would be to improve the conservatives' chances of winning next year's
federal and regional elections.
The Bonn government lost its say in VW affairs when it sold its last holding
and withdrew its two representatives from the supervisory board. Another
result would be to demonstrate that Germany's traditional 'softly, softly'
approach to reform is, after all, best.
Whether Mr Piech can believe in such a convoluted conspiracy theory or not,
he has repeatedly emphasised that there is no going back to the company's
old ways.
As Mr Piech's confident proclamations of a group turnround this year fade
into muttered assurances of a profit from his power base at the German
parent, it becomes almost daily more apparent that a key short-term aim is
to keep the faith with his key shareholders and his suffering workforce.
If that means sacrifices elsewhere, then Mr Piech is not afraid to make
them: ruthlessly if need be.
There have already been signs enough of wavering on the supervisory board,
prompted from without as well as within. Mr Piech has a saying, which he has
refined since his Audi days, and which has been heard in Wolfsburg recently:
'Either I do it my way, or I go.'
The chances appear to be increasing that if he were to use it now in
earnest, he might have to accept defeat, and leave Volkswagen to the
still-lively corpses in the cellar.
