FT  28 APR 93 / UK Company News: McKechnie to expand via Pounds 47m bid for
Savage - Offer accompanies static interim profits
MCKECHNIE, the inter-national plastics and metals components group, is
seeking to expand its consumer products business by acquiring Savage, the St
Albans-based home improvement accessories company, in a deal worth Pounds
47.2m.
Savage is recommending acceptance of the 4-for-21 share-exchange offer or a
cash alternative of 73.33p per share. McKechnie is also offering 100p for
every Savage preference share.
The offer came as McKechnie announced that although first half pre-tax
profits for the six months to January 31 were fractionally higher at Pounds
10.8m, compared with Pounds 10.6m last time, there was an underlying
improvement in profits before interest of 7 per cent.
The bid was foreshadowed on April 22, when Savage announced it was in
discussions. Since then its share price has risen from 48p to 71p. The
McKechnie share offer, however, values each Savage share at 80p, or 67 per
cent more than its price before the bid talks announcement.
To meet demand for the cash alternative, Baring Brothers is underwriting the
issue of 8m new McKechnie shares at 385p.
McKechnie is paying Pounds 15.1m cash for the preference shares, a move
which is likely to lift gearing to about 20 per cent by the year-end from
10.4 per cent at the end of January.
Both groups stressed the neat fit of their respective businesses. The
acquisition will more than double the turnover of McKechnie's consumer
products division. Savage, whose core business is shelving and storage
systems, has been recovering from the damaging effects of continental
European acquisitions in the late 1980s. It made pre-tax profits of Pounds
1m on turnover of Pounds 32.3m in the six months to last December.
For McKechnie, the takeover of Savage represents the resumption of expansion
after concentration on reduction of its cost base and the maximisation of
cashflow.
In the latest half turnover was barely changed at Pounds 140.8m (Pounds
139.9m). Earnings per share rose from 9p to 9.5p, while the interim dividend
is maintained at 5p.
COMMENT
The full price McKechnie is paying for Savage suggests confidence on three
levels: recovery on the UK housing market, Savage's ability to generate
European sales in devalued pounds and its own ability to trim Savage's
costs. It will make little difference this financial year but could add over
Pounds 3m to McKechnie's bottom line in 1993-94 when the group should in any
case be recovering on the back of UK and US economic recovery. For the
immediate future, seasonal shifts in McKechnie's earnings mean that the
second half will be better than the first. That makes brokers' estimates of
1992-93 pre-tax profits over Pounds 26m look realistic. On earnings
approaching 20p, this puts the shares at yesterday's price of 423p on a
prospective multiple of over 21, recovery having been anticipated already.
