FT  15 MAY 93 / Good times predicted if Danes vote for EC treaty: Danish
referendum
DENMARK'S business leaders, anxious to avoid a second rejection of the
European Community's Maastricht treaty, said yesterday interest rates would
be likely to fall significantly and investment would increase if the country
votes Yes in next Tuesday's referendum.
A Gallup poll published yesterday showed the Yes camp growing slightly to 50
per cent, against 32 per cent for the Noes, with 13 per cent undecided and 5
per cent set to abstain.
But a poll in the business newspaper Boersen showed the Noes narrowing the
gap significantly. It gave the Yes vote 50 per cent, No 39 per cent, and 11
per cent undecided.
The same poll a week ago showed 53 per cent for Yes and 34 per cent for No,
with 13 per cent undecided.
At a joint press conference, leaders of the Federation of Danish Industries,
representing manufacturers, the Employers' Association and the Bankers'
Association, emphasised a central message of the Yes campaign that a second
rejection would have strongly negative economic consequences.
Mr Klaus Willerslev-Olsen, deputy head of the Bankers' Association, said
there had been a premium on Danish interest rates since the first referendum
last June. He predicted a fall of 1.5 to 2 points in interest rates if there
is a Yes this time.
The current key central bank money market interest rate is 9.75 per cent and
the official discount rate is 9.25 per cent, about two points ahead of
short-term rates in neighbouring Germany.
The Danish krona has been under sporadic pressure during the referendum
campaign amid speculation that a No vote would force Denmark to seek an
exchange rate adjustment within the framework of the ERM, or even to float
the krona.
Mr Poul Erik Pedersen, head of the Employers' Association, said many
companies had put investment plans on hold after last June's No.
Lego, the Danish toymaker, suspended a DKr300m (Pounds 31.5m) expansion
programme and has said the project will only go ahead if there is a Yes vote
next week.
Mr Pedersen said a No vote would also have an adverse effect on foreign
investment in Denmark. He said a report by the Keidanren, Japan's industrial
federation, which for the first time commended Denmark as a potential target
for Japanese investment had been withdrawn after last June's vote.
