FT  06 MAY 93 / Watchdog queries power prices
PROFESSOR Stephen Littlechild, the electricity industry regulator, yesterday
told generators to account for significant rises in power prices since April
following complaints from intensive energy users.
He also asked the National Grid, which runs the electricity distribution
system in England and Wales, to explain price 'spikes' - sharp rises over
short periods of time - and an increase in the 'uplift' charges levied to
cover administrative costs of running the wholesale electricity market.
The regulator's intervention comes as the market, known as the pool, moves
into the final stage of a review of its operations. This was prompted by
concern about the complexities of its operations but has been given added
impetus by the price rises.
In April the average pool purchase price was about 10 per cent higher than
in March and 20 per cent higher than during April the previous year.
Volatility has also increased. PowerGen, the smaller of the two main
generators, said the prices that it bids into the pool reflected the cost of
production.
It pointed out that Prof Littlechild had recently concluded that pool prices
were artificially low in the first two years of its operation following
privatisation.
Mr Ed Wallis, PowerGen chief executive, said price spikes may have occurred
in part because of inadequacies in pool software.
National Power, the other main generator, said that even at the higher pool
prices 38 per cent of plant was not recovering its cash costs.
Pool prices were also below those agreed with regional companies in recent
contracts for coal-fired electricity, it said.
The pool price rises will have only a marginal effect on domestic and
smaller commercial customers. They buy electricity directly from their
regional electricity company at price levels outside the pool.
Larger companies that pay pool prices are suffering. For some of them price
increases since privatisation have been sharp.
April's price rises followed the end of contracts concluded at electricity
privatisation between the two main generators and regional power companies.
Far fewer of the new contracts are covered by hedging agreements, and the
generators say this means they are bidding in nearer to the true costs of
generation.
Prof Littlechild, speaking at a conference on the reform of the pool,
indicated support for the idea of demand-side bidding under which large
users could be paid for shedding load.
