FT  23 SEP 93 / People: SERC chief to head Glaxo's research
Glaxo, the world's biggest spender of pharmaceuticals research and
development, is reorganising its R&amp;D.
The company, which spent Pounds 739 on R&amp;D last financial year and intends
to spend Pounds 850m this year, has split the position of R&amp;D director.
Sir Mark Richmond, 62, chairman of the UK's Science and Engineering Research
Council, is to become director of the research division for a period of two
years. The SERC is the largest of Britain's government-funded research
councils; it distributes more than Pounds 500m a year in grants to
university scientists and engineers.
Goran Ando, currently research and development director, becomes director of
group development and product strategy. Both Ando and Sir Mark will report
to Richard Sykes, chief executive, and board director responsible for R&amp;D.
Sykes says the rapidly expanding knowledge base, especially in the
understanding of the genetic basis of disease and the microbiology of cells,
means that pharmaceutical companies would increasingly have to have access
to information from both universities and biotechnology groups.
'To be successful you have to harness these new technologies. Having access
research is really critical to the future of the company and you need very
good people to do it.
'Sir Mark has exceptional scientific skills from his experience of molecular
genetics at Edinburgh University and microbial biology at Bristol
University. He also has organisational skills from running the SERC and
being vice-chancellor of Manchester University, the largest outside London.'
Sir Mark will be responsible for research as Glaxo's research organisation
moves into its new headquarters in Stevenage.
Sykes says Ando's position was also highly critical. He would be responsible
for developing safe, effective medicines that represented significant
advances in therapy. For products to be successful, they had to offer value.
As head of product strategy, he would ensure that the important links
between product development and marketing were tightened.
