FT  19 AUG 93 / Letters to the Editor: Monetary union possible now
Maastricht is dead
Sir, The ratification by the UK of the Maastricht treaty is a prime example
of political necrophilia. In substance, the treaty is dead.
The world has been reminded forcefully of the incompatibility of (quasi-)
fixed exchange rates, independent national monetary policies and
unrestricted international mobility of financial capital. However, the
current alternative of a (quasi-) free float, independent national monetary
policies and unrestricted capital mobility, while feasible, is bound to lead
to unattractive behaviour of exchange rates and interest rates.
We should expect to see, once again, exchange rate overshooting, excess
volatility and persistent misalignment. Foreign exchange markets are
inhabited by nervous, myopic, private-sector herd animals, economically
illiterate politicians and wide-eyed innocents masquerading as central
bankers and monetary technocrats. How these players are driven matters
little if no two experts agree on what the fundamentals are or how they
affect exchange rates.
Regardless of the exchange rate regime, the basic incompatibility and
tension is between multiple currencies and independent national monetary
policies on the one hand, and unrestricted capital mobility on the other. If
we are to have unrestricted capital mobility, we need a single monetary
authority and preferably a single currency. If national currencies and
independent national monetary policies are retained, restrictions on
international capital movements are essential.
Since effective capital controls are hard to administer - and are
inconsistent with single market legislation - we are likely to see a
continuing exchange rate mess until a common European currency finally is
established.
The mechanics of monetary union are actually very simple; the principal
point is that it should come like a thief in the night. We will wake up and
discover that independent central banks have been abolished (after fixing
exchange rates for ever) and that currency control has been transferred to
the European central bank. This could happen as early as the second half of
the next decade.
It is fortunate that the process of European integration is strong enough to
survive one bad treaty.
Willem H Buiter,
Yale University,
Department of Economics,
PO Box 1972,
Yale Station,
New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-1972,
US
