FT  20 MAY 93 / UK Company News: Focus on the luxury look - Time Products'
US expansion
A US manufacturer of luxury handbags might seem an unlikely diversification
for a UK watch and jewellery distribution group, but Time Products is
convinced that the recent acquisition offers immense opportunities.
The UK company paid Dollars 17m (Pounds 11m) in March for the business of
Judith Leiber, an American who designs handbags which can sell for several
thousand dollars each.
Mr Marcus Margulies, chairman of Time Products, said of the acquired
company: 'Its products have not been actively marketed outside North America
and I am confident that there is a substantial potential for developing the
brand on a worldwide basis.
Mr Margulies is excited about the opportunities for the group - particularly
in North America, where leading department stores are keen to stock Judith
Leiber's handbags. 'The day just hasn't got enough hours in it at the
moment.'
Time Products owns Sekonda watches, one of the UK's biggest mass-market
brands, but it is increasingly focusing on luxury goods.
Mr Margulies said that three years ago the balance of the group would have
been 80 per cent mass-market and 20 per cent luxury products, and by next
year the proportion would be reversed.
In March the company paid Pounds 2m for 5 per cent of Audemars Piguet, the
Swiss watchmaker which specialises in technical and luxurious pieces.
These most recent investments came together when Time Products was awarded
the North American agency for Audemars - having distributed its watches in
the UK for a number of years. A showroom for the luxury watches is now being
developed at Judith Leiber's New York premises.
Time Products also claims to be the UK's leading distributor of branded
simulated pearls following the bolt-on acquisition of Rosita and Samuel
Jones. In spite of recent heavy spending on acquisitions, the group has
about Pounds 10m of net cash.
Time Products reported a 22 per cent increase in pre-tax profits to Pounds
9.3m for the year to January 31, on overall sales down from Pounds 51.1m to
Pounds 49.6m.
The group's shares have risen from 101p at the end of 1990 to their present
level of 208p, giving it a market value of Pounds 110m.
Mr Margulies gives much of the credit for Time Product's new strategic
stance to Mr Richard Langdon, the City company doctor who took over from him
as chairman from 1984, after difficulties in Hong Kong had pushed the group
into the red.
Although Time Products makes watchstraps and now handbags, manufacturing
will never again play a big role in group thinking.
Mr Langdon, who retires from the board soon, handed the chairmanship back
last year to Mr Margulies, whose family controls 20 per cent of the company.
Mr Margulies said: 'Richard forced us to put blinkers on - we now know we
have to concentrate on brands and marketing.'
