FT  10 DEC 93 / Chancellor attacks Delors plans to create jobs
The UK government yesterday attacked plans by Mr Jacques Delors, European
Commission president, to create jobs by borrowing money to pay for
environmental and transport projects such as the Channel tunnel rail link.
On the eve of the European summit in Brussels, Mr Kenneth Clarke,
chancellor, said there was no evidence of the need for borrowing for
infrastructure improvements across Europe.
'Here are the Commission for the first time saying they are going to borrow
billions of Ecu as a Commission and dish it out to as yet unspecified
projects across Europe,' he said on BBC Radio. This would push up the
average rates of interest, he said. All European Union governments were
trying to reduce borrowing to create the right conditions for growth.
Mr Clarke added: 'It really is rather perverse for the European Commission
to say: 'Oh, but we are going to have a public sector borrowing requirement
of our own now and we are going to start borrowing billions of pounds' which
might start driving things in the wrong direction.'
Asked if money from Brussels would be helpful to finish the Channel tunnel
rail link, Mr Clarke said: 'There's no shortage of money for these projects.
Private sector finance will go into well-judged projects.'
He said: 'We don't want these white papers produced on a Monday, trundled
through a heads of government conference at the weekend, accompanied by a
press release indicating that something like Pounds 100bn worth of borrowing
can speed up the construction of the networks across Europe.'
The government's reaction to the Commission's proposals was criticised by Mr
Gordon Brown, Labour's shadow chancellor.
'Many of the proposals the government now rejects out of hand are modelled
on the December summit agreement in Edinburgh in 1992 for which the prime
minister once claimed credit,' he said.
Mr Brown added: 'It is clear that the negative, destructive, anti-European
attitudes now being expressed even by declared pro-Europeans like the
chancellor are designed to hold the Conservative party together.'
He asked: 'Why does the government refuse to back action that would clearly
be of benefit to the Channel tunnel rail link and prevent the national
humiliation until 2002 of trains travelling at 185mph from a link already
opened from Paris to Calais but at only 47mph from Dover to London?'
Summit faces discord, Page 2
