FT  06 AUG 93 / UK Company News: Buyer of Starmin assets faces charges on
unrelated issue
ONE OF the men at the centre of deals connected with Starmin Group's
disclosure that reported full year losses had been understated, was last
year charged with offences under the Theft Act in an unrelated matter.
Mr Brian Masterson, director of the privately-held Jeniva Landfill and its
subsidiary Chepstow Environmental Services, faced the charges at Bow St
Magistrates Court, London last August.
Starmin, a quarry products company, is chaired by Lord Parkinson, the former
cabinet minister, and was, until July, controlled by the Abdullah brothers,
who earlier had built up the Evered aggregates company.
In July Starmin announced a review of its 1992 accounts. On Tuesday the
company said that a change in accounting policies meant that instead of
pre-tax losses of Pounds 8.06m for 1992, losses totalled Pounds 11.9m. The
proposed final dividend of 0.2p will not now be paid.
The charges against Mr Masterson arise from his position on the board of the
Caird Group waste management company in the late 1980s. The case was
remanded to Southwark Crown Court and a trial is set for January next year.
Starmin's advisers said that the company regarded Mr Masterson as 'one of
the top men in the quarry business'. Starmin had felt he could enhance the
value of some of its sites.
The understatement of Starmin's losses hinges on profits having been booked
on disposals which have now been reversed.
The company had recorded a Pounds 1.4m profit on the sale of some assets and
landfill facilities to Chepstow in December 1991. However, that deal had
fallen through by April 1993.
In May 1992 a company controlled by Mr Masterson, Environmental Protection
and Disposal, bought Chepstow for Pounds 1.89m, mainly in loan notes, and
sold it to Jeniva in December that year for Pounds 1.85m in shares and an
undetermined deferred consideration.
Jeniva took on Chepstow's original purchase of assets from Starmin plus an
additional quarry with a Pounds 100,000 net book value, and a Pounds 160,000
cash injection from Starmin. It paid for them with its own shares,
representing 35.5 per cent of its total equity. Starmin booked an extra
profit of Pounds 250,000 on the sale of the additional quarry.
Starmin said a balance of Pounds 1.26m which had been recorded as 'owing'
from Chepstow was now being written off, while the Pounds 750,000 investment
in Jeniva had been written down to its cost of Pounds 438,000.
The balance of the increased losses stemmed from other transactions and a
provision of Pounds 1.03m related to non-core activities.
Accounts filed in January for Jeniva and EPD showed that both were qualified
by their auditors who prepared them on a going concern basis.
