FT  18 NOV 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Norske Shell says leaking tank
shut down platform
NORSKE SHELL, the Norwegian subsidiary of the Royal/Dutch Shell group,
disclosed yesterday that two small holes in one of seven storage tanks of
the NKr2bn (Pounds 180m) Draugen concrete oil platform had caused an
estimated 1m tonnes of crude oil to leak into the Norwegian Sea.
The leak was discovered late on Sunday and production of 20,000 barrels a
day was shut down for a period of 36-hours. Shell said that it had deployed
the Seaway Condor diving vessel, which is equipped with a remotely-operated
underwater robotic vehicle, to make video recordings of the leaking areas of
the storage tank.
The holes in the tank had not affected the structural integrity of the oil
platform, Shell said, adding that safety of the platform was not endangered.
The company said that there had still been a small stream of crude oil
leaking from the tank yesterday.
The concrete, single tower platform was constructed by Norwegian Contractors
 -a subsidiary of Norway's Aker group - which has contributed to the
membership of a four-man team established by the two companies to determine
a course of action to repair the tank.
NC has built 15 concrete platforms over the past 20 years - including the
Sleipner A platform, which sank in the west Norwegian Gands fjord in August
1991.
Aker's shares were little affected yesterday on the Oslo bourse by the
disclosure. A-shares closed down NKr0.50 to NKr85 and B-shares lost NKr1.50
to NKr92.
The Norwegian Petroleum Directorate, the country's oil industry watchdog,
yesterday received a preliminary report on the incident from Shell, but a
final report will not be available until the underwater vehicle's
inspections are completed.
Bad weather and water depth of 280m had made the inspections of the storage
tank difficult, but not impossible, Shell said.
The leaking tank has been drained of oil and re-filled with water.
Draugen's seven seabed tanks have the capacity to store 1.4m barrels of oil,
or about 11 days' production.
The platform came on stream on October 19 and is expected to achieve a
plateau production rate of 90,000-95,000 barrels a day by the middle of next
year.
