FT  27 MAR 93 / When terror takes a toll: How international tourist
destinations are affected by political violence
A year ago, the Cairo Sheraton hotel was 75 per cent full. This month, 41
per cent of its rooms are occupied. Some Cairo hotels are just over a third
full. One five-star hotel is charging only Dollars 28 a room.
The Gama'a al-Islamiyya, the Islamic militant group which is seeking to
destabilise the Egyptian government, has deliberately targeted the country's
tourist industry. Late last year, gunmen shot at tour buses in Upper Egypt,
killing one British visitor. Earlier this year, two visitors were killed
when a bomb exploded in a cafe in Cairo's Tahrir Square.
Mr Fouad Sultan, the tourism minister, says earnings are down by a fifth on
last year. Many in the industry consider that an underestimate. The tourist
ministry has hired Burson-Marsteller, the world's biggest public relations
company, and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi to help improve the country's image.
While terrorism and the murder of foreign visitors can substantially damage
a nation's tourism, the effect differs widely from country to country. As
Egypt agonises over how to salvage its fastest growing industry and biggest
foreign currency earner, the tourist businesses of other countries have been
largely unaffected by terrorist and criminal violence.
Third world destinations appear to suffer more than developed countries from
attacks on tourists. Kenyan tourism was badly hit last year as a result of
publicity surrounding the trial of two game rangers accused of the murder of
British tourist Julie Ward in 1988, and by reports of other attacks on
tourists.
By contrast, the murder of a British visitor in Florida last year had little
effect on the state's tourism. Thomson, the UK's biggest travel group, said
that while the depreciation of the pound against the dollar had deterred
some British travellers, reports of violence had little effect.
Similarly, Egyptian tourism has been much more severely affected by
terrorist incidents than the industries in the UK or the US. Despite years
of widely-reported deaths and injuries from IRA bombs, the British tourist
industry has suffered little long-term damage. Mr Alan Jefferson, the
British Tourist Authority's international marketing director, says his
offices abroad usually receive no more than a handful of calls after IRA
attacks. One New York travel agent said that, while some US tourists about
to leave for the UK had asked about recent IRA bombs, they had decided to go
ahead with their trips.
The UK tourist industry has been more severely affected by events elsewhere.
The US bombing of Libya in 1986 contributed to a 4 per cent fall in visitors
to 13.9m, as Americans, fearing terrorist reprisals, stayed at home. The
Gulf War resulted in tourists to the UK falling to 16.7m in 1991, from 18m
the year before.
In the US, the bombing of New York's World Trade Centre last month produced
'no significant cancellations', according to the city's Convention and
Visitors Bureau. Airlines servicing the New York area also say that there
has been very little impact on passenger traffic.
The National Parks Service reports that the number of visitors to New York
attractions such as the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island ran at about
3,500-4,000 daily during February, a typical number for the month.
While tourist destinations such as Egypt and Kenya might feel they are the
victims of double standards, travel industry executives say they suffer from
a perception that they are societies under siege. The futures of the US and
British governments are not perceived as being threatened by violent crime
or terrorism.
Although the IRA has bombed areas frequented by tourists, foreign visitors
to the UK have not been specific targets as they have in Egypt. Mr Peter
Kerkar, chief executive of Cox &amp; Kings Travel, a London-based company,
argues that American visitors to the UK are behaving quite logically in
ignoring IRA attacks but staying at home during the Gulf War and in the wake
of the bombing of Libya. 'The IRA is not singling out Americans. If they're
involved in an IRA incident, it's because of bad luck. In the case of Libya,
Americans were a target.'
One British travel industry manager points out that Florida, while plagued
by violent crime, offers tourists a sense of safety, however illusory, that
countries such as Kenya and Egypt do not. 'America is familiar territory,
where everyone speaks the same language and where half the TV programmes are
the ones you see at home.'
Mr Martin Brackenbury, president of the International Federation of Tour
Operators, says there are a few general principles which countries can apply
when attempting to limit the damage caused to tourism by violence. 'The
first is: never attempt to cover up. Clearly admit a problem if there is
one. The second is to put in place measures which can clearly be seen to be
effective,' he says.
He says Kenya has responded constructively to Ifto recommendations. The
Kenyan government has begun aerial surveillance of game parks and has issued
advice about which areas of Nairobi are considered dangerous.
Mr Martin Thompson, managing director of the London-based tour operator
Abercrombie &amp; Kent, says his business to Kenya fell to 30,000 travellers
last year from 34,000 in 1991 as a result of press coverage of violence in
the country. However, he expects business to return to 1991 levels this
year.
The Egyptian authorities, after initially criticising the western media for
what it described as a biased, exaggerated campaign, is now taking active
steps to restore the country's image. It has supplied more tourist police,
troops and helicopters to protect visitors at sites in Upper Egypt.
Both the government and the country's tourism industry are now hoping that
this iron-fisted policy will stem the terrorist attacks. Mr Taher el-Sharif,
chairman of the Egyptian Businessman's Association says: 'The problem is we
just don't know when this will stop - unlike the Gulf War, when we knew
there would eventually be an end.'
Mr Brackenbury says that once a destination is perceived as being safer,
recovery for the tourist industry can be swift. 'People's memories are
short,' he says.
Reporting by Michael Skapinker, Nikki Tait and Mark Nicholson
