FT  27 JAN 93 / Technology: Emission-free car shows its mettle
With the big three US car makers, General Motors, Ford and Chrysler, ready
to co-operate more closely on the development of an electric car, metal
producers are watching developments with great interest, as electric
vehicles promise big new markets for both lead and nickel.
Inco, the Canadian group, reckons that by 2000 there will be 200,000 to
500,000 electric vehicles produced each year to meet legal requirements.
Given the short time-scale of the tough emission laws in California, and
with other states considering whether to follow, car makers see electric
vehicles as the only available technology to give immediate pollution-free
driving.
To meet the challenge, the Advanced Lead-Acid Battery Consortium (Alabac)
was formed in the US. Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry
also has an electric vehicle battery programme.
With tentative plans to keep conventional cars out of the polluted centres
of European cities, Fiat of Italy and Peugeot of France estimate that by
2000 there will be a European market for 250,000 electric vehicles a year.
For nickel producers, this means the search is being speeded up for better
rechargeable batteries - to take vehicles further and faster, charge more
quickly and need charging less frequently.
Five different types (nickel-cadmium, nickel-iron, nickel-zinc,
nickel-hydride and nickel-sulphur) are under study. Competition is mainly
from standard lead-acid and more advanced batteries under development, such
as sodium sulphur or lithium systems.
Inco believes a new nickel market of 25m lbs to 60m lbs a year would be
created; present nickel consumption in batteries is probably less than 22m
lbs. Altogether, countries outside the former eastern bloc will consume
about 1.5bn lbs of the metal this year.
Lead-acid battery producers are also enthusiastic about electric vehicles.
At the Alabac headquarters in Durham, North Carolina, experts reckon this
type of battery offers the only affordable alternative to the internal
combustion engine in vehicles.
'If society is to make a big impact on pollution from cars, a large number
of people have to switch to electric or hybrid cars. And only electric cars
with lead-acid batteries can be priced within reach of large numbers of the
population,' says John Sharpe, an Alabac official.
Alabac makes no estimates about future demand, but the potential for lead
producers can be judged from the fact that today's conventional battery in a
US car weighs between 60 and 70 lbs.
Lead-acid battery packs in an electric vehicle would weigh between 600 and
800 lbs, while there would be about 400 lbs of batteries in a hybrid
vehicle. Most of the weight is accounted for by the lead content.
Today, about 5.5bn lbs of lead, or 60 per cent of that consumed, is used in
batteries, of which about 1.1bn lbs is used in the production of new cars.
