FT  26 JUL 93 / Brussels to discuss Pounds 4bn waste over milk subsidies
THE European Community has wasted an estimated Ecu5.38bn (Pounds 4.1bn) in
unnecessary subsidies because Italy, Greece and Spain have systematically
failed to enforce milk production quotas, according to internal estimates by
the European Commission.
The Commission is expected to discuss on Wednesday how much money to recover
from the three member states, all of which have pledged to respect new rules
to curb over-production.
Several Commissioners are said to be reluctant to provoke a fresh
confrontation with the Italian government. Relations are already strained
because Brussels is sticking to a hard line on state aid to Efim, the state
industrial holding company, and Ilva, the state steel producer.
The UK and Germany, however, are pressing the Commission to claw back a
substantial portion of the excess subsidies, partly to relieve pressure in
next year's budget and partly to deter future fraud.
The funds at issue cover 1989-93, but the problem goes back to 1984, when
the EC introduced a milk quota system. If production quotas were breached,
farmers were supposed to pay a heavy penalty known as the additional levy.
As late as 1991, neither Italy, Spain nor Greece had a system in place to
supervise milk production or to collect the levy, according to a report by
the EC's Court of Auditors. The Commission continued to pay full subsidies
even though failure to collect the additional levy should have disqualified
the three countries from obtaining matching levels of spending.
Internal estimates suggest that Italy owes Ecus 2.76bn for the period
between 1989-93, followed by Spain (Ecus 2bn) and Greece (Ecus 620,000).
The Commission meeting on Wednesday is scheduled to 'clear the accounts' for
1989 alone. That means only a proportion of the gross sum of Ecus 5.38bn is
under discussion, but the outcome will influence repayment for the next four
years.
In practice, the recovery of excess spending is likely to be reduced even
further because Italy has argued successfully that its original 1984
national quota was based on statistical errors.
Last spring, EC farm ministers accepted this point implicitly when they
agreed to a provisional, one-year increase in the Italian milk quota of
900,000 tonnes. Coincidentally, Spain won an increase of 500,000 tonnes, and
Greece secured an extra 100,000 tonnes.
EC officials said last week the milk revenue matter was proving so divisive
that Commissioners might not reach a decision on Wednesday, the last meeting
before the summer recess.
