FT  30 OCT 93 / Japanese steel group to shed 7,000 jobs
NIPPON Steel, the world's largest steelmaker, is to shed 7,000 jobs, a fresh
blow to Japan's employment market, which hit its weakest level for six years
last month.
The job cuts, spread over the next three years, are the heaviest so far
among Japan's top industrial companies, as they seek to cut costs amid the
worst recession for 20 years.
Nippon Steel said yesterday it aims to cut white-collar staff by 4,000 on
top of the already planned loss of 3,000 workers' jobs, totalling 19 per
cent of parent group employees.
Numbers will be cut through reduced hiring, non-replacement and job
transfers to affiliates. There will be no redundancies. Annual production
costs will be cut by Y300bn (Pounds 1.88bn) during the three years, the
group said. Nippon is expecting to lose at least Y15bn before tax this year.
Nippon Steel blamed the rising yen and a permanent reduction in domestic
demand for steel caused by a shift of production overseas by its car and
consumer electronics industry customers.
Similar factors were behind recent job cuts announced by two other Japanese
steelmakers, NKK, which is to reduce its workforce by 3,200, and Sumitomo
Metal Industries, which is to shed 3,000 jobs.
A fall in new employment in manufacturing industry was a big factor in the
reduction in the number of job offers in September, which fell from 70 per
100 job seekers in August to 69, the lowest since 1987, according to the
management and co-ordination agency.
This pushed the unemployment rate up to 2.6 per cent, 0.1 of a percentage
point more than in August. Although low by European standards, the number
out of work is climbing fast, by 17 per cent from September 1992 to last
month, to reach a total of 1.72m.
This is grim news for the Japanese government, which yesterday set up an
emergency team, under the most senior civil servant in the labour ministry,
to come up with plans by mid-November to support employment.
The worsening jobs market, in a country long accustomed to almost full
employment, provides an unwelcome distraction at a time when the seven-party
coalition is struggling to pass laws to reform Japan's corruption-prone
political system by the end of the year.
Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, the prime minister, has implied he will resign if he
misses the deadline.
