FT  07 DEC 93 / Kohl's party third in state poll
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democrats last night fell behind the
former communists, into third place, in Brandenburg's local government
elections.
The final result of the elections, the first council polls in any east
German state since unification, are considered a barometer for the marathon
round of local and state elections that will culminate in the federal
elections next October.
The party that gained the most from a 59 per cent turnout - which clearly
reflected disillusionment with the established political parties and
particularly with Mr Kohl's gov erning coalition, led by the CDU - was the
Party of Democratic Socialism.
The PDS, successor to east Germany's former communist party, gained 21.23
per cent of the votes, 10 percentage points more than in the December 1990
federal elections in Brandenburg. The SDP which governs Brandenburg
increased its share by 2 points to 34 per cent, and the CDU saw its share of
the vote fall nearly 14 points to 20.4 per cent. The Free Democrats, junior
partner in Mr Kohl's coalition, ended with 7.1 per cent, two points below
the federal election but better than expected.
The PDS is even in a strong enough position to clinch Potsdam, the state
capital, in the run-off. Mr Rolf Kutznutz, a one-time self-declared informer
for the Stasi, or former east German secret police, obtained 43.5 per cent,
leading Mr Horst Gramlich, the SPD incumbent, with 30 per cent.
Also curious is that the greatest support - so far - has been for an
independent candidate. Mr Wolfgang Pohl was elected mayor on first count for
Frankfurt/Oder, one of the four most important cities in Brandenburg, after
receiving 61 per cent of the counted votes.
Dozens of towns and villages in Brandenburg will vote in a second round of
local government elections on December 19, after many candidates failed to
secure a majority, or because of irregularities. However, officials from the
SDP and the CDU yesterday said that would not significantly affect the
outcome of yesterday's final count.
Wobble atop the pillars of state, see Leader Page 17
