FT  06 FEB 93 / How To Spend It: The tastebud test is best
TECHNICALLY safe our tap water may be; a joy to drink it is not. So welcome
to Kenwood's Ultrascreen water filter which I have been testing for the last
few months.
Slightly more complicated (and expensive) than simple counter top jugs, much
less complicated (and expensive) than full-blown plumbed-in systems, I have
the impression it makes a real difference.
Laboratory testing is not one of my strong points. I have no impressive
scientific data to offer, all I can say is that going by the simple tastebud
test I like water better when it has been through the Kenwood system than
straight from the tap. Our kettle, too, seems to like it better and needs
only the occasional minor defurring compared with the heavy decrusting that
it seemed to need before.
Kenwood, as is only right and proper, has all sorts of stalwart scientific
data to offer those of a more rigorously technical turn of mind, but to put
it at its simplest, the system is based on a filter cartridge that contains
a patented selection of ion exchange resins which Kenwood claims 'reduces a
comprehensive range of impurities such as aluminium, chlorine, copper, iron,
lead, mercury, nitrates and zinc.'
It is the only portable table-top electronic system. It remineralises the
water once it has been filtered (if you take everything out of water it
tastes rather dead, remineralisation returns trace elements). In addition
the pump system disperses water more evenly over the filter, resulting in
more efficient filtration than gravity-fed activated carbon filters.
There are a few other points prospective buyers might like to bear in mind.
Firstly, Ultrascreen, as you can see from the accompanying photograph, is
larger and more cumbersome than smaller counter-top jugs  - I still prefer
it but others who are short of space would have to take this into
consideration.
Secondly, the cost, at Pounds 59.99, is about four times that of the
simplest systems and more importantly perhaps the cost of the filters is
Pounds 6.99 a time. In our (mainly) two-person London household a filter
seems to last about two months, which works out at under a pound a week - a
price I am very happy to pay and a lot cheaper than drinking bottled water
but again it should be borne in mind.
One big advantage is that the machine delivers the filtered water faster
than most table top models. Ultrascreen is the only machine which alerts
users to when it is time to change the filter. The built-in memory points
out when the cartridges's effective life is ending.
It can be found in most good kitchen and department stores. Double packs of
replacement filters can be bought for Pounds 14.99 by mail order from OAS
Ltd., Bletchington, Oxford OX5 3AX. (Tel: 0869-50949).
