FT  11 MAR 93 / Leading Article: A strike too far for Germany
THE SAGA of eastern Germany's forced integration into a market economy
during the last 2 1/2 years has not been a happy one. If IG Metall, the
metal-workers' union, goes ahead with strikes to pursue a 26 per cent wage
rise in the east German engineering industry, the story could become a
tragedy.
West Germany's consensus-based industrial system has in the past succeeded
in sharing out equitably the rewards accruing to a society registering
steady economic growth. Confronted with the necessity of several years of
belt-tightening in the west, and a still longer period of restructuring in
the east, the system now looks much less able to cope.
The 26 per cent wage rise was agreed in March 1991. This was part of an
overall policy, promoted by the Bonn government, for realtively fast
alignment of east and west German living standards. There is now a clear
case for lengthening the timetable for eastern wage increases. During the
last two years, over-rapid wage rises, by depressing competitiveness in a
region of chronically low productivity, have accelerated east Germany's
industrial destruction.
Yet the two sides remain far apart. Mr Franz Steinkuhler, the IG Metall
leader, believes protecting the wage contract has repercussions for western
wage negotiations. The union also argues that east German labour costs are
lower than employers claim, taking into account longer working hours and
lower fringe benefits. Employers, by contrast, say a 26 per cent pay rise
would damage already fragile eastern manufacturing.
A rise going much beyond the 9 per cent so far offered would increase east
Germany's 15 per cent unemployment rate, itself an under-estimate of true
unemployment. East German hopes that Bonn will bail out hard-hit eastern
industrial groups, irrespective of the cost, are quite unrealistic.
Furthermore, far from safeguarding Germany's collective bargaining system,
IG Metall's campaign could undermine it. Many east German employers are
already opting out of the tariff system by undercutting centrally-set wage
levels. An unrealistic pay increase would strengthen this tendency.
Mr Steinkuhler may be overplaying his hand. But responsibility for the
impasse is evenly divided. West German unions played little part in agreeing
the east German wage timetable. This was largely the work of an ill-assorted
alliance of directors of east Germany's state-owned Kombinate, officials in
the Treuhand privatisation agency, and west German 'advisers' - many of whom
had a direct interest in putting east German competitors out of business.
Whatever the result, strike action would lead to unproductive bitterness.
This would depress prospects for a self-fuelling upturn east of the Elbe,
and deepen the psychological gulf dividing east from west. The Bonn
government must make every effort to bring about a compromise, before the
dispute ends up in a strike no-one can win.
