FT  30 JUL 93 / Leading Article: A right to privacy
THERE ARE fundamental difficulties in defining a right to privacy in English
law, as successive inquiries, reports and private members' bills on the
subject have discovered. A government considering legislation on privacy
should proceed warily and consult on the widest possible basis. Yesterday's
green paper on privacy should therefore be welcomed for its comprehensive
and scholarly examination of this thorny issue.
Less welcome, however, is its recommendation of a civil remedy in law for
people whose privacy is infringed. It is true, as the green paper argues,
that 'a society which permits individuals to choose how they are to lead
their lives is one which will recognise the choice of privacy'. But privacy
is a complex subject: people need - or want - different amounts of privacy.
And the right to privacy cannot be unconditional: people in public life must
accept some loss of privacy in return for high office and popular esteem.
For these reasons, the green paper sensibly rejects an absolute right to
privacy. But its proposed remedy against conduct which would infringe a
person's privacy is scarcely better. Such a remedy must be open to a public
interest defence, especially in a country where the media enjoy no
constitutional right of free expression. The green paper suggests that
matters falling into the public interest category would include 'seriously
anti-social conduct' and 'the discharge of a public function'. Would the
recent behaviour of some politicians or members of the royal family fit into
these definitions?
And since there would be no access to legal aid in enforcing the proposed
tort of privacy, only the rich would be able to use it. Mr Robert Maxwell
and Mr Asil Nadir would undoubtedly have had the resources to use such
provisions, unlike the widow of an IRA victim hounded by the press.
Public concern over infringements of privacy has abated recently, partly
because of increasing suspicion that politicians would like greater
protection from public scrutiny. Some of the more notorious allegations
about the great and the good have been subsequently justified by events. In
any case, the level of complaints to the Press Complaints Commission
suggests that intrusion is less common than many suppose: just 109
admissible complaints on privacy were received in the 18-month period to
July 1992.
That there have been quite unjustifiable and egregious infringements of the
privacy of individuals is undeniable. But many of these might be better
dealt with by tightening up on the laws of trespass and telephone tapping.
Until those avenues have been fully explored, the case for legislation on
privacy has yet to be made.
