FT  21 AUG 93 / Markets: New York discovers the rest of the world - Wall
Street
IN NORMAL times, the global perspective of US investors is pretty narrow.
Events overseas rarely have much of an impact on the financial markets at
home, which traditionally keep their focus on domestic economic news,
internal money-flows, and the economic and monetary policies of the
country's politicians and central bankers.
These are not normal times, however, and this week shock waves from a
ministerial meeting in Tokyo, a sharp widening in the US trade deficit, a
dramatic drop in the value of the dollar against the Japanese yen followed
by an equally dramatic recovery, and record-breaking rises in European
equity markets, buffeted US financial markets.
On Wednesday, big gains in European equity markets provided the fuel for a
sharp rally in US stocks. This sent the Dow Jones Industrial Average above
3,600 for the first time in its history. This was unusual, because US
equities do not normally follow the European markets. Typically, it is the
other way around.
Yet this week, US investors took their cue from their European counterparts,
primarily because they shared the same hope - that falling interest rates in
Europe will boost flagging economies. In the case of US investors, the
flagging economy which they hope will benefit from lower interest rates in
Germany, France, Spain and elsewhere is the US economy. Their thinking goes
that an improved business climate on the other side of the Atlantic will
revive demand for US goods and services.
(This symbiotic relationship between US and European markets worked
especially well this week. Not only did buoyant UK, German and Spanish
equities lift US shares at the New York opening, but early strength in US
markets provided UK, German and Spanish stocks with a lift late in the
European day.)
If equity investors' newly-found international sophistication was on display
on Wednesday, it was bond investors' turn to adopt the global perspective on
Thursday.
It all started in Tokyo, where Morihiro Hosokawa, Japan's new prime
minister, held the first meeting of a special ministerial council on the
economy. At the meeting, the council agreed to draw up an emergency
programme aimed at deregulating the Japanese economy and shifting the
balance of power in the country from producer to consumer.
After the meeting, Hosokawa spoke on the telephone to President Bill
Clinton. Economists in New York and Tokyo suspect that the two leaders
struck a secret agreement during their talk - a deal that Japan will take
action to spur domestic economic growth and open up the Japanese market more
to US goods, and in return the US will take action to halt the dollar's
slide against the yen, and perhaps expend less energy talking the US
currency down.
The conversation between Hosokawa and Clinton took on so much significance
(and set the rumour mills grinding) because of what happened later that
Thursday morning. First, the June US merchandise trade deficit was released,
showing an unexpected and dramatic 44 per cent rise in the deficit to
Dollars 12.06bn, the largest for almost six years.
Then, also out of the blue, the New York Federal Reserve began intervening
in the foreign exchange markets to protect the dollar, which was taking a
pounding from currency dealers who had begun selling dollars and buying yen
as soon as the awful trade numbers were announced.
In a remarkably effective piece of central bank intervention, the Fed's
intercession halted the dollar's slide towards Y100, and dragged it back
above Y105.
Bond investors, meanwhile, watched all of this with undisguised glee. They
liked the trade figures, which indicated that the US economy has been
growing at an even slower rate than everyone thought. Indeed, many analysts
said the sharp drop in June exports would almost certainly force the
government to revise its original estimate of second-quarter gross domestic
product growth. Initially put at 1.6 per cent - a modest expansion in the
first place - analysts now think the GDP growth rate will be brought down to
around 0.5 per cent.
Treasury investors also welcomed the Fed's attempts to halt the dollar's
decline. This is because if overseas investors believe the US currency is
about to turn, then they will begin investing more of their money in
Treasury bonds in the expectation of benefiting from the appreciating
relative value of US assets.
All of this sounds complicated, which it is. Yet, this week ended with US
stock markets at or near record highs, the biggest European stock markets at
or near record highs, and US bond yields at record lows. Somebody,
somewhere, seems to like what's going on.
 --------------------------
Monday      3579.15   +9.50
Tuesday     3586.98   +7.83
Wednesday   3604.86  +17.88
Thursday    3612.13   +7.27
Friday      3615.48   +3.35
 --------------------------
