FT  17 JUN 93 / Economic Viewpoint: The true case for an independent Bank
The case for an independent but accountable Bank of England is mainly that
it could make it easier to lock in a low rate of inflation. This is more
than it seems because the pain of recent recessions has been aggravated by
the need to reduce inflation after it has already taken off. But even the
retiring UK governor, Robin Leigh-Pemberton, oversold the case when he
attributed the upward drift of unemployment over three business cycles -
which has been a common European phenomenon - to the failure to contain
inflation. This is a structural problem which will be no more cured by an
independent Bank than will cancer or the common cold.
The distinguishing feature of monetary policy is that its short-term effects
are often the opposite of its long-term ones. The UK government has
committed itself to keeping inflation within a range of 1 to 4 per cent. But
sticking to this target may be what some economists call 'time
inconsistent'. In other words, it may not always pay the government to
observe its own guidelines.
Stimulating the economy with low interest rates in the period before an
election may bring a temporary increase in jobs and output. An increase in
government spending, not offset by taxes or tighter monetary policies, will
benefit specific groups, while the inflationary costs can sometimes be
deferred. Thus it may pay a government, which is sincerely intent on keeping
inflation low, to tie its own hands or 'pre-commit' itself, just as it may
pay someone trying to wean himself off smoking to clear all cigarette
packets out of the house.
WHY DO EX-CHANCELLORS TEND TO PUT FORWARD THE IDEA AND PRIME MINISTERS TO
REJECT IT?
There is no 'ex' about it. Both Nigel Lawson and Norman Lamont put forward
plans when they were chancellor. The unfortunate holders of that office know
that they get the blame when inflation gets out of hand, but they also see
how intrinsically political monetary policy decisions are, and how
short-term tactical motives will interfere with decisions.
Prime ministers, on the other hand, have itchy fingers and feel that they
cannot enjoy the full dignity of their office unless they can interfere in
every area of policy implementation.
Independent national central banks are required under the Maastricht treaty
for countries which want to go to a full monetary union, as a preliminary to
establishing an independent European Central Bank. Therefore the idea has
suffered guilt by association. But the UK can also have an independent
central bank of its own quite apart from Emu.
Many people confuse democracy with the unfettered rule of the government of
the day. A central bank is more accountable if it has to report directly or
via parliament than under the present system under which all
advice is secret and policies are supposed to emerge fully fledged from the
head of the chancellor, like Athene from the head of Zeus.
The US Federal Reserve is free of presidential control and reports to
Congress. One specific UK plan, dating right back to 1988, long before
others climbed on to this bandwagon, is described in an appendix in Nigel
Lawson's The View from Number 11. Under the Lawson plan, the Bank of England
'would have the statutory duty to preserve the value of the currency'. The
idea was to 'lock in an anti-inflationary force into the system as a
counterweight to the strong inflationary pressures which are always
lurking.' The governor and members of the Court would be appointed by the
government - the Court for a long period. The Bank would be answerable to
parliament in the sense that the governor would appear regularly before a
select committee.
IS THERE NOT A DANGER THAT AN INDEPENDENT CENTRAL BANK WILL CONCENTRATE ON
INFLATION? HOW ABOUT OUTPUT AND EMPLOYMENT?
The crucial insight is that there is no long-term choice between reasonable
price stability and growth. So you might as well have price stability, which
has advantages of its own and may provide a helpful background to policies
to stimulate growth.
Of course, policies to squeeze out high inflation often involve a painful
transitional recession. But if anything the pain is likely to be worse when
policy lacks credibility. Pay and prices will rise for longer; and the main
effects of a credit squeeze will for some time be on output and employment.
The speed of disinflation can be decided by democratic process. Under the
New Zealand Reserve Bank Act, passed with cross-party support by the former
Labour government in 1990, the Bank has total independence in the operation
of monetary and exchange rate policy. But the act leaves the definition of
price stability to the government, which sets a target range for inflation
in the form of a personal contract with the governor, normally for a fixed
five-year term. Contrary to hearsay, the Reserve Bank governor's salary is
not tied to inflation, although his job is on the line in the event of
failure. The government can amend the contract, but any change must be made
publicly, ensuring that monetary policy is always transparent.
The Reserve Bank governor, Don Brash, describes the contract as 'a useful
bulwark against any government which might wish to return to the bad old
days of saying one thing to the public about the need to control inflation
and at the same time trying to get mortgage rates down before an election.
That is the sort of thing which used to happen in New Zealand, and cannot
happen now.'
Don Brash was appointed by a Labour government, but has been reappointed by
the outspoken National party finance minister, Ruth Richardson, for a
further five years from this September. His new contract, like his old one,
will require inflation to be maintained within a range of 0-2 per cent. The
contract specifies the temporary adjustments that can be made for one-off
price rises and for distortions such as the effects of mortgage rates.
The act marked a watershed for New Zealand, which had suffered double-digit
inflation for most of the 20 years since 1970. The policy has become more
popular since recession has given way to what appears to be a sustainable
economic recovery. Growth in GDP reached 3 per cent in the 12 months to
December, and is widely expected to stay near this rate.
According to Brash, the New Zealand Reserve Bank's most significant
achievement has been a change in inflationary expectations. 'Regardless of
whether they agree with the policy, people know that the miserable bloke in
the Reserve Bank is going to keep pursuing it.'
IS NOT INFLATION YESTERDAY'S PROBLEM? SHOULD WE NOT WORRY MORE ABOUT
DEPRESSION AND UNEMPLOYMENT?
No one knows. But it is all too easy to have high inflation combined with
high unemployment, as has frequently happened in Latin America. Although
preventing inflation is usually the main task of central banks, occasionally
there is another supremely important task: that is to prevent a cumulative
contraction of spending, such as that which occurred in the 1930s when the
national income of countries like the US and Germany fell by a half in money
terms.
Although we have never had it since the second world war, I would give
central banks responsibility for avoiding deflation as well as inflation. As
Lord Lawson argues in his concluding chapter, a deflation in today's
circumstances would almost certainly be associated with cumulative failures
of financial institutions across national frontiers which could best be
fought by independent central banks co-operating together.
Alas, I do not think they would do it well, but they could act more quickly
and more informally than prime ministers and finance ministers. The Latin
American debt crisis of the early 1980s was an example.
WHICH ARGUMENT AGAINST AN INDEPENDENT CENTRAL BANK DO YOU FIND MOST
DIFFICULT TO ANSWER?
The knowledge that the central bank had the task of fighting inflation might
make for bigger structural budget deficits. I am not sure how important this
is in practice. The main examples of supposedly conservative governments
running high budget deficits have been the US in the 1980s and Germany in
the 1990s. The Reagan administration persuaded itself that tax cuts would
pay for themselves through so-called supply-side effects. Germany would have
had a high post-unification deficit anyway. But it is difficult to see how a
pliant central bank would have helped in either country.
According to Don Brash, there are four key elements in central bank
accountability: the objective of price stability; a clear policy targets
agreement; the personal responsibility of the governor; and the publication
of a regular monetary policy statement. New Zealand has all four; Britain
has at most the first, and that not very clearly.
