FT  01 OCT 93 / Arts: A little light train music - The Lille Festival
While the government blusters and British Rail agonises over the UK link to
the Eurotunnel, the French are celebrating the arrival of the TGV, the
superfast express, to their northern shores. On Sunday the first train
reached Lille from Paris in an hour and former French prime minister Pierre
Mauroy joined Jacques Delors and any number of dignitaries at the grand
concert for the premier of a commissioned paean to the achievement, 'MGV,
Musique Grande Vitesse'.
But if the British are pathetic at rail investment, they still lead in the
arts and the gala was dominated by British creativity. MGV was composed by
Michael Nyman and the entire evening was given over to his music. The new
work shows his strengths as a writer of the classical pastiche. It should
feature regularly on Friday Night is Music Night and be none the worse for
that. A child could follow, through the music, the journey of the TGV as it
quickly moved into a regular chug. It proceeded with few stops, overcame a
nasty incline near the end, and suddenly hit the buffers at the finale.
Last week Harrison Birtwistle called for more light music, and it is an area
where Nyman, with many film scores behind him, excels. He is fond of
hammering a note, and a phrase, to minimalist depth, and this works well for
the monotony of a train journey. MGV could easily become the Eurotunnel
anthem, offending, exciting few, a reassuringly safe evocation of
bi-national co-operation
Earlier Kathryn Stott played The Piano Concerto, Nyman's music for the film
Piano Lesson. By its nature this is background music, brooding, descriptive,
but inevitably transitory in its grip. Stott stuck to it, but was given few
opportunities to sparkle.
Nyman had been commissioned by the Lille Festival, which over 20 years ago
was the first arts festival to rebel against the centralising grip of Paris.
It is now showing some muscle under director Brigitte Delannoy. Every year
there is an international scene. For 1993 it is the Orient Express (The TGV
by itself was considered too limiting). In contrast the Orient Express
traversed the continent, so the festival, which concentrates on music and
film, calls on musicians and styles from Vienna, Budapest and all the Balkan
stopping points east.
It also called on the Siobhan Davies Dance Company to perform Different
Trains, the work Davies choreographed to the music of Steve Reich. It was
re-staged for Lille, Davies having the confidence to add to the
characterisation of the dancers. It is a powerful piece with Reich's driving
minimalist score played by the Smith Quartet against the tape of a recorded
quartet and fragmentary and distorted words. The energy of the music, in
which Reich remembers trans-American train journeys of his youth and the
cattle trucks that took his relatives to Nazi concentration camps, is
matched by the rapid, agile, gestures of the dancers as they run from their
fate.
Sometimes their movements reflect the petty preoccupations of peacetime; but
the darker depths of entrapment give the work its dynamic strength. A giant
cog turns as the backdrop, reflecting the wheels of the train and the
remorseless fate. Davies' journey is a much more significant and affecting
experience than that of Nyman.
Also performed was her latest work, Wanting to Tell Stories, an elusive,
less concentrated work, but fine at relating bodies and poses and then
separating them through the screens of wire netting designed by David
Buckland. If you feel slightly cheated by the abstraction you can enjoy the
maturity of the dancers, rolling with the rhythms and still finding their
moments of ambiguous stillness.
Next year the Lille Festival takes as its theme The Promised Land, the hope
coming from the Israeli Palestine talks, although Delannoy chose the subject
before the recent breakthrough. This festival will grow in size and
influence. The local authorities are supportive with cash; a 6,000 seat
arena and a 1,000 seat music theatre are rising near the new station. The
Lille Festival grew up to entertain and stimulate the locals but, by next
September, Lille will be an hour from Paris, less than 30 minutes from
Brussels - and just two hours from London. Lille is going European and
wisely using the arts to anchor itself at the epicentre of the new market
place.
