FT  29 APR 93 / US red tape ties up food for Russia
THE Dollars 900m (Pounds 584.4m) food aid package promised by President Bill
Clinton to his Russian counterpart, Mr Boris Yeltsin, at the Vancouver
summit earlier this month has stalled in Washington. Some grain interests
are now saying that bureaucratic difficulties may prevent the aid ever
reaching Russia.
The package, which did not require special funding, was designed to ship
food quickly, in time to support Mr Yeltsin's wavering power base. Russia
has been shut out of the US commercial grain trade since late November, when
it stopped paying interest on billions of dollars in US-guaranteed loans.
However, the US Agriculture Department, which oversees the aid programme, is
embroiled in a controversy over how it will pay to ship the food. Russia has
also balked at accepting the Dollars 700m in concessionary loans that
comprise the bulk of the package because it is being required to pay above
world market rates for both the grain and the freight.
To date, neither the loans nor about Dollars 444m in US food donations
promised to Russia since October have left the US. 'Clinton does not appear
to have been aware of US farm laws' when he made the promises to Mr Yeltsin,
said Mr Steve McCoy, president of the Washington-based North American Grain
Export Association.
A Russian delegation is visiting Washington today and tomorrow to discuss
the problems. The delegation includes executives from Russia's domestic and
export grain-buying agencies, as well as Mr Alexander Shokhin, deputy
premier for foreign economic affairs.
Agriculture Department officials, fearing the aid programme will fail, seem
prepared to announce a solution to the freight problem during the Russian
visit.
'The money for the freight will be found one way or the other,' said one.
The agency is expected to shift funds - as much as Dollars 319m, according
to one congressional report - from other programmes to pay the bill.
Smoothing out Russian objections to the concessionary loans will be more
difficult. Mr McCoy believed Russia might prefer to side-step the Dollars
700m offer and wait for more palatable guaranteed commercial loans to become
available.
The food give-away portion of the programme stalled when freight speculators
drove up already expensive rates for US flagged vessels. Cargo preference
laws require US ships to deliver 75 per cent of the food aid. Money shifted
from the Defence Department budget was to be used to pay for this, but now
rates have moved beyond that budget.
Faced with abandoning the donations or asking Congress to provide taxpayers'
money to pay the freight, the Department is re-tendering for the ships,
hoping for more reasonable prices.
