FT  18 FEB 93 / Clinton sets out Dollars 500bn package to cut deficit: State
of Union address outlines tax rises and spending curbs to save Dollars 140bn
by 1997
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton last night launched a four-year Dollars 500bn package
of tax increases and spending cuts designed to cut the annual US budget
deficit by Dollars 140bn to Dollars 206.5bn in 1997.
The programme combines long-term tax increases and spending cuts with a
short-term boost to the economy, involving expanded infrastructure spending
and a short-term investment tax credit.
'Unless we have the courage to start building our future and stop borrowing
from it, we are condemning ourselves to years of stagnation, interrupted
only by recession,' President Clinton said in his State of the Union address
to Congress in which he outlined his programme.
But Mr Robert Michel, the Republican leader in the House of Representatives,
immediately attacked the Clinton plan.
'When you hear a Democrat call for taxes, do not ask for whom the tax rises
 -it will rise for you,' Mr Michel said, adding that the 500,000 jobs Mr
Clinton says his plan will create this year would cost the taxpayer Dollars
55,000 apiece.
Before Mr Clinton's speech administration officials mounted a spirited
defence of the programme after Tuesday's sharp fall on Wall Street. Mr Roger
Altman, deputy treasury secretary, described as 'exaggerated' reports that
middle-class Americans were going to pay a lot more.
Mr Lloyd Bentsen, treasury secretary, Mr Robert Reich, labour secretary, and
Mr Leon Panetta, director of the Office of Management and Budget, also made
efforts to soothe market fears.
Before the speech, stock markets remained relatively calm, with the Dow
Jones Industrial Average closing 2.7 higher at 3,312.19.
Bond prices rose sharply on hopes that the measures would have a realistic
chance of passing through Congress. The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond
climbed  1/2 point to 100 5/16 , pushing the yield down to 7.095 per cent,
its lowest level for more than six years.
In Tokyo, shortly before the address, the dollar opened steady against the
yen and a fraction firmer against the D-Mark. There was heavy buying of US
government bonds, with prices rising steadily.
The tax package includes:
A new top-income tax rate of 36 per cent for couples earning more than
Dollars 140,000 in taxable income.
A 10 per cent surtax on taxpayers earning more than Dollars 250,000.
A rise in the corporate tax rate from 34 per cent to 36 per cent.
A new energy tax levied on the thermal content of fuels.
An expanded earned income tax credit for low-income taxpayers.
Income tax levied on 85 per cent of social security retirement payments,
instead of 50 per cent.
At the same time, Mr Clinton plans a short-term Dollars 30bn stimulus
package to create the 500,000 jobs by 1994 through a temporary investment
tax credit and an accelerated programme of public spending on
infrastructure, housing, education and the environment.
Over the long term, Mr Clinton wants to reduce government spending on
wasteful programmes and excessive administration, cutting the number of
federal jobs by 100,000, or almost 5 per cent, by 1995.
He also wants to cut more than Dollars 125bn from the five-year defence
budget outlined by the former president, Mr George Bush, and save Dollars
60bn over the same period by controlling health costs.
The impact of the new taxes will only be felt in later years: this year, new
revenues of Dollars 2.9bn will be more than offset by a temporary
incremental tax credit for large businesses and a permanent investment tax
credit for smaller businesses. The energy tax, which will be phased in in
three stages starting in July 1994, will be levied at a rate of 25.7 cents
per million British thermal units on coal, gas and nuclear energy, but at a
higher rate of 59.9 cents on oil. The tax is eventually expected to cost the
average family with an income of Dollars 40,000 a year an extra Dollars 118,
and will bring more than Dollars 22bn a year into the Treasury.
One important potential source of new revenue included in Mr Clinton's
campaign documents has been greatly scaled back: the administration now
expects to raise an additional Dollars 3.8bn over a six-year period from new
rules governing transfer pricing by foreign and US multinationals, not the
Dollars 45bn in four years Mr Clinton estimated during the campaign.
However, Treasury officials said they planned to spend Dollars 38m on hiring
more tax inspectors and doubling the rate of audits on foreign-owned
subsidiaries, in the hope that this would yield significant extra revenues.
Mr Clinton, who promised voters last year to lower taxes for the middle
class, is taking a calculated risk by presenting an economic package that
requires immediate pain in the interests of a long-term improvement in the
health of the US economy.
While components of the programme are expected to arouse fierce opposition
from affected interest groups, many members of Congress believe that their
voters want them to give the new president a chance.
The House of Representatives, where the Democrats have an 80 seat majority,
may swallow the Clinton plan as a package. In the Senate, where party
discipline is often weaker, some Democrats believe the president's best
chance of success will come if he can enlist the support of Senator Bob
Dole, the Republican leader.
Americans to pay more for energy, Page 6
Worst of friends, Page 20
Editorial Comment, Page 21
Bonds, Page 29
Currencies, Page 35
US stocks, Page 41
