FT  11 AUG 93 / Branson truce in battle of Paris
Correction (published 14th August 1993) appended to this article.
VIRGIN, the UK leisure group, has agreed to close its Paris megastore on
Sundays for the rest of the summer.
Mr Richard Branson, Virgin's founder, said yesterday that the store on the
Champs-Elysees had decided to suspend Sunday opening because it was clear
that no decision on the issue would be taken during the summer when
ministers were on holiday.
Mr Branson said: 'With every day that's gone by we've been hoping for a
response from the government. But the government are on holiday and they're
not responding. August is not a good time in France to be campaigning for
anything.'
Mr Branson said the FFr1m (Pounds 110,000) fine imposed on the group by a
French court last week for each Sunday the store was open would make trading
difficult. The fine represented nearly a third of takings last Sunday when
about 75,000 people visited the store, he said. The fine was reduced from an
original penalty of FFr4m.
Mr Branson repeated his threat to cancel expansion plans in France unless
the store was allowed to open on Sunday. The group plans to open a further
25 outlets in France.
Mr Patrick Zelnick, chairman of Virgin in France, said the decision to
suspend Sunday opening should be seen as a 'peace gesture' to the
authorities.
'We've decided to stop opening on Sundays to take the drama out of the
situation,' said Mr Zelnick, who has for the past two years orchestrated
Virgin's battle against France's ban on Sunday trading which dates back to
1906.
Virgin's decision follows an announcement by Mr Michel Giraud, employment
minister, to initiate a parliamentary debate in October on Sunday trading
which could lead to Virgin and other stores being exempted from the general
ban.
Virgin has adopted a high profile in France in the four years since opening
the successful Champs-Elysees store. The Sunday trading campaign has turned
out to be one of Mr Zelnick's most successful promotional ploys, both in
terms of generating free publicity for the company and in enhancing Virgin's
image as a younger, more fashionable version of Fnac, the vast chain of
music and book shops that has for decades been the dominant force in French
leisure retailing.
Mr Branson said yesterday that Virgin had been given permission by the
authorities in Barcelona to open its megastore in the city on Sundays.
