FT  15 MAY 93 / Norway to defy ban on whaling: Decision by Oslo may
complicate attempts to join Community
NORWAY said yesterday it would resume commercial whaling within the next few
weeks in defiance of a decision by the International Whaling Commission to
maintain the ban.
The UK and other nations opposed to commercial whaling had claimed victory
yesterday at the IWC's annual meeting in Kyoto, Japan. But both Japan and
Norway claim that scientific evidence supports resumed whaling.
Last night the European Community criticised Norway for its plan to resume
whaling. 'We have international laws and regulations and . . . these should
be observed by everybody concerned,' said EC environment commissioner Yannis
Paleokrassas. He also repeated the Commission's view that whaling would
complicate Norway's bid to join the EC.
Mrs Gro Harlem Brundtland, Norway's prime minister, said yesterday whaling
would resume by the end of this month or in June. She criticised the IWC,
established five decades ago to maintain a balance between harvesting and
protection of whales, but said Norway would not leave the organisation. It
said quotas for traditional coastal whaling would be set next week.
She said that the IWC's decision not to support Norway's intention to resume
whaling further undermined its credibility as an international organisation
for natural resource management: 'The meeting in the IWC has confirmed there
exists a scientific basis to harvest the north-east Atlantic minke whale at
a sustainable level.'
Mr Jan Henry T Olsen, the fisheries minister, said that unless the growth of
minke whale stocks was controlled, they would consume the fish on which
endangered species depended.
Nations in favour of the ban argue that a relaxation could set in motion a
pattern of commercial catches that would seriously threaten the whale
population, which has been severely depleted by large-scale harvesting since
the IWC was formed in 1946.
Japan also complained that the IWC had become 'a body to protect the rights
of whales' and ignored a scientific report that cited no reason to ban
limited quotas.
Mr Kazuo Shima, head of Japan's delegation, said the outcome of the Kyoto
meeting was 'deplorable' as 'the efforts of the scientists were wasted'.
Both Japan and Norway hinted they might pull out in the next year unless
whaling was allowed.
Countries in favour of maintaining the commercial ban, introduced in 1982
and effective from 1987, were pleased that little progress was made on a
management plan which would pave the way for small commercial quotas of
minke whales in the north Atlantic and in the waters around Antarctica.
Culture clash, Page 9
