FT  05 JUN 93 / International Company News: CMB sells packaging division
SCHMALBACH-Lubeca, the German packaging and paper group, has acquired
Impetus, one of Europe's largest manufacturers of PET packaging, from the
CarnaudMetalbox packaging company for an undisclosed sum in a cash
transaction.
Impetus, which has annual sales of FFr780m (Dollars 144.4m) through its
operations in the UK, France and Spain, was until earlier this year run as a
joint venture between CMB and the Lawson Mardon group.
However, the capital requirements of the PET sector are very high and
neither CMB nor Lawson Mardon was prepared to make the necessary financial
commitment to modernise Impetus's production plants and develop the
business.
Moreover, CMB, which has an annual turnover of FFr25bn and employs 30,000,
is pursuing a policy of concentrating resources on three important areas of
activity - steel-based packaging products, packaging for the health and
beauty business and expansion in the Asia-Pacific region.
Mr Jurgen Hintz, CMB chief executive, described Impetus as 'a good business,
but not strategic for us'.
He said the disposal would enable CMB 'to focus our efforts even more on our
core strategic businesses'.
CMB will retain its other PET interests, which are directly related to the
health and beauty sector.
The Impetus deal follows the sale of a 25.3 per cent stake in CMB previously
held by MB-Caradon, the UK building products group, to a consortium of
investors led by CGIP, the French holding company which was already a
minority shareholder.
Schmalbach, a leading European packaging manufacturer, has been keen to
expand its interests in the PET sector. A subsidiary of the Viag industrial
group with more than 12,500 employees, Schmalbach made pre-tax profits of
DM91m (Dollars 56.9m) last year on sales of DM3.46bn.
The Impetus deal is the latest in a series of international acquisitions by
Schmalbach.
Last year it bought Italian White Cap, a metal vacuum lid manufacturer,
following the previous year's purchase of Continental White Cap in the US
for DM500m and Continental Can Europe for DM1bn.
