FT  12 JUN 93 / Finance and the Family: Women still suffering pension
discrimination - How part-timers and the low-paid are penalised
INDIRECT discrimination by company pension schemes against women employees
continues unabated in the UK, in spite of the general drive towards equal
pensions for all. One particular practice, known as 'integration,'
effectively bars many thousands of women from access to occupational scheme
benefits.
Integration, in this context, involves an occupational pension scheme which
only makes payments after allowing for a notional level of state benefit.
Those women who suffer from the practice tend to be low earners who are not
entitled to a full state pension.
In 1986, the European Court of Justice ruled on a case where a German
company excluded part-timers from its scheme. Since most of them were
female, the court stated that the company had discriminated indirectly
against women.
About half the final salary schemes in the UK are integrated. Final salary
schemes calculate the individual's pension as a proportion of salary at
retirement. Typically, where a scheme is integrated, the value of the state
pension or the lower earnings limit for national insurance - both worth
about Pounds 3,000 - is deducted from the employee's final salary before the
occupational pension is calculated.
In effect, this means where a single integration factor is used, employees
would not receive any occupational pension for the first Pounds 3,000 of
their final salary.
According to the National Association of Pension Funds (NAPF), about
one-fifth of schemes apply a high integration factor where one and half
times - or even twice - the value of the state pension is deducted before
the company pension is calculated. In the latter situation, an employee
would receive no company pension for the first Pounds 6,000 of his or her
final salary.
Tina Norris, manager of pensions research at actuary and consultant Noble
Lowndes, says: 'This obviously works against low earners and the problem
particularly affects women, especially part-timers. In this respect,
integration could be regarded as a form of indirect discrimination.'
Trade unions have been active in trying to abolish integration. Paul
Moloney, pensions officer at the General, Municipal and Boilermakers Union
explains: 'We feel integration is indirectly discriminatory, particularly
where it is not applied on a pro rata basis. Where a high integration factor
is used, this means that although, in theory, part-time employees are
allowed to join the scheme, in practice there is no point.'
Employers who use integration argue that their aim is to provide an overall
level of retirement income, and that it makes sense to take into account
what the state pays already. They also argue that it can be possible to
'over-provide' where integration is not used. This means that the low-paid
scheme member ends up with a combined state and occupational pension higher
than his or her final salary.
But Paul Greenwood, head of actuarial research at employee benefits
consultant William M. Mercer, says cases of over-provision have become
increasingly rare since the reduction in the real value of state pensions
since 1979 when the government linked annual increases to prices rather than
wages inflation.
Moreover, where employees' earnings fall below the lower earnings limit for
National Insurance contributions, they will not build up a right to a state
pension because, due to family commitments, they have long periods out of
employment.
Around 500,000 women continue to pay the reduced rate of National Insurance
contribution - known as the married woman's stamp - which does not build up
a right to the state pension.
Where a woman is not entitled to a state pension in her own name, she can
claim a smaller pension based on her husband's entitlement, although even
this is vulnerable if she changes her marital status.
In spite of the German case, UK law on indirect discrimination is unclear.
All forms would have been outlawed under a provision of the Social Security
Act 1989 which was due to come into effect in January this year. However
this was dropped by the department of social security, which preferred to
wait for an equal pensions case involving the Coloroll company to go to the
European Court.
The court gave an 'opinion' on this at the end of April, with the final
judgment expected later this year. While the opinion cleared up confusion
about the date from which equal occupational pensions for men and women must
be implemented, it did not refer specifically to the issue of indirect
discrimination.
But Mark Grant, a solicitor with McKenna &amp; Co. which is acting for the
company, says: 'The guiding principle behind Coloroll is that all elements
of sex discrimination are outlawed. The problem is that the law on sex
discrimination in occupational pensions schemes in the UK has developed
piecemeal. What we need now is a Coloroll Act or Pensions Act that will
clarify the position on all aspects of direct and indirect discrimination.'
Meanwhile, employees should check with the pension scheme manager or
trustees to see if their scheme is integrated. Fortunately, employee
contributions are based only on pensionable pay - that is, the portion of
salary above the integration level. Bear in mind that integration relates
only to the basic state pension and has nothing to do with the State
earnings-related pension scheme (Serps).
When you come to assess the impact of integration on your pension, pensions
consultant Alan Pickering stresses: 'It is vital to see the problem in
context.'
Pickering, of employee benefits consultant R Watson &amp; Sons, adds: 'Different
pension schemes build up at different rates and it may be that, if your
scheme has a high accrual rate, this will compensate - at least in part -
for the integration factor.'
The recession has accelerated the impact of integration. Pickering says:
'The problem is particularly acute for the growing number of employees who
are forced to retire early as part of a redundancy programme. These people
face a double blow.
'First, even if their occupational pension is not 'actuarially reduced'
because of early-leaver provisions, it is based on a much shorter employment
period and, therefore, will be considerably less than the pension available
at the normal retirement date.
'But, in addition, where integration applies, the reduction to take account
of the state pension kicks in immediately, even though it may be some years
before the individual actually starts to draw the pension at age-60 for
women and age-65 for men.'
If, due to integration, you expect to get very little from your company
pension, it could be worth considering a personal pension. Due, however, to
the high level of charges on most life office plans, these arrangements tend
to represent poor value to low earners making small contributions, so it is
important to seek expert advice.
