FT  21 JUN 93 / Arts: William Golding - Lord of the sea / Obituary
I happened to be there when Sir William Golding, who died on Friday aged 81,
met Auden for the first time. After saying how much he had enjoyed Lord of
the Flies - the first novel with which Golding leapt to fame in 1954 - Auden
added that he thought the older boys on the desert island would have been
more protective towards the younger ones. He felt that the appalling
cruelties perpetrated as the boys fight for survival would not have happened
in the way Golding described.
Golding's reply came without any hesitation: 'Oh, they might have been
protective for a while. But not in the end. It's a question of time.
Seemingly endless time. That was what would have defeated their
benevolence.'
If one had to try to formulate a single theme underlying Golding's entire
work as a writer of fiction, it would be this: survival in an extreme
situation where time seems endless and there is no reprieve. It would apply
as much to the early books as to his last great work, the sea-faring trilogy
To the Ends of the Earth (Rites of Passage, Close Quarters and Fire Down
Below) revealing how the passengers and crew in one of the old 18th century
square-riggers try to survive amidst the hazards of a voyage to New Zealand.
This work was an achievement of remarkable vigour and imaginative complexity
for a writer in his seventies. A similar celebration of heroic endurance
underlies such earlier triumphs as The Spire, Free Fall, Pincher Martin,
Darkness Visible, all of them works of great originality.
Golding served in the navy during the war and never lost his love of the
sea. When he left the service he tried to become an actor (see The Pyramid).
Then he became a classics teacher before the success of his first book
enabled him to retire from that profession. He lived for many years at Broad
Chalke near Salisbury and then in Cornwall where sailing was one of his
chief recreations. Another was the game of chess which he played with a
cheerful aggression.
I had many enjoyable games with him in recent years - not over the board but
by correspondence. In one of them in 1983 he was in a winning position when
the award of the Nobel Prize for Literature intervened and amidst all the
excitement he failed to see that he had left either a rook or a bishop
exposed to capture by my knight. 'Oh fork it]' he wrote back in a note
announcing his resignation, and requesting a new game.
Golding's occasional visits to London were much treasured by his many
friends in the literary world. Many of those attended a luncheon to
celebrate his 80th birthday given by his publishers, Faber. The guest-list
spanned several generations of literary life from the poet Stephen Spender
to the novelist Ishiguro as well as a strong group up from Cornwall. It was
some indication of the respect with which Golding was regarded by his peers.
If personal memories of him will fade with time, his work seems certain to
endure.
