FT  23 JUN 93 / Healthcare spending curbs are 'likely to fail'
UK HEALTH spending will rise from 6.1 per cent of gross domestic product in
1988 to more than 6.6 per cent by 1998, says a survey of 425 leading
professionals in the healthcare sector.
The increase - generated by more expensive procedures, an ageing population,
harder-to-treat illnesses such as Aids and cancer, and higher expectations
of care among patients - is forecast in spite of government initiatives to
control spending.
The growing demand will lead to yet further changes in healthcare provision,
according to the survey, part of a pan-European study commissioned by
Andersen Consulting and consultants Burson-Marsteller.
The report says a tiered system of care on two or more levels is likely to
emerge. More than 75 per cent of those polled expect that there will be a
specified minimum level of care by 1998. Rationing of services is also
expected - more than half of those surveyed expect certain expensive
treatments to be excluded from some of the population.
Some patients are also likely to be excluded from less expensive services
for reasons such as age - the report gives the example of dialysis for
elderly patients.
Attempts by hospitals to control costs will lead to 22.5 per cent fewer
acute beds by 1998 than there were in 1990 as more patients are treated on a
daycare or out-patient basis, rather than being admitted overnight.
Hospitals will compete increasingly with general practitioners, who will be
looking to expand the scope of their practices to include minor surgery and
other non-specialist procedures.
The survey predicts that competition between hospitals for business will
alter the way hospitals are managed. More than half of those polled expect
information technology to lead to a significant improvement in the quality
of patient care.
The use of non-patented generic drugs will be encouraged, according to 97
per cent of those polled. More than 93 per cent expect NHS doctors to be
limited in the range of drugs they can prescribe, 38 per cent expect
controls on drug company profits and 57 per cent expect the introduction of
price controls on medicines.
Patients will pay a greater share of the cost of their medicines, the survey
says. More than 80 per cent of healthcare professionals expect patients to
pay more for their prescriptions and 75 per cent expect an increase in the
use of over-the-counter, non-prescription drugs which are paid for by the
patient, not the government.
The Future of European Healthcare. Andersen Consulting and
Burson-Marsteller, 24-28 Bloomsbury Way, London WC1A 2PX. UK section: Pounds
25; complete set: Pounds 50.
