FT  29 JUL 93 / Piech hurls some of his own mud: Christopher Parkes goes to
Wolfsburg to hear VW chief answer GM and prosecutors
MR FERDINAND Piech, Volkswagen chairman, yesterday established that he is
quite adept himself with the weapon he accuses General Motors of using
against him - mud.
Having summoned reporters to 'Alaska', (his pet name for VW's northern home
town, Wolfsburg, in the days when he was head of Audi in Bavaria), he was in
a mood to practise his marksmanship.
There was one in the eye for the press and a couple for the public
prosecutors investigating suspected industrial espionage by four of his new
employees, most notably production director, Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de
Arriortua. A special bombardment was reserved for 'our opponents'.
Displaying a mild tan and no signs of resentment at having been dragged back
early from his holidays, he proposed that GM and Adam Opel, its German
subsidiary, call off their 'shady manoeuvrings' and their 'attempts to abuse
the public prosecutor's office, the media and public opinion'.
His first press conference on the issue has followed a bad spell for the VW
side in which the company failed to secure a gag on the news magazine Der
Spiegel, which had aired suspicions and allegations that Mr Lopez and
members of his team systematically plundered GM's confidential data banks
and files before joining VW. This attempt at gagging was the result of bad
advice, Mr Piech said yesterday.
Then state prosecutors investigating GM's suspicions of industrial espionage
decided to widen their probe from Mr Lopez and his first lieutenant Mr
Manuel Gutierrez, to include two more GM defectors after establishing
possible links between Mr Lopez and documents found in their former home.
While pondering aloud if foreign reporters were aware of the law in Germany
 -that a person is innocent until proven guilty - he appeared well briefed
when confronted with detailed questions on his allegations. His normal
stop-go style of delivery was more than usually punctuated by pauses.
He reminded his audience of his interview with the weekly magazine Stern, to
be published today, that VW had been subjected to mud-slinging - although he
did not repeat what he told the magazine, that it would defend itself
accordingly.
His suspicions were based on facts, he claimed. Facts such as the 'unknown
ways' in which four boxes of papers and slides, including details of a
secret Opel mini-car project, reached investigating prosecutors from their
place under the stairs in the former home of the defectors, Mr Jorge Alvarez
Aguirre and Mr Rosario Piazza.
In the time between their departure from Opel - and from their Wiesbaden
house - for Volkswagen and Wolfsburg, 'other hands' had been involved, he
said. Meanwhile, two audits of VW computers had not turned up anything
untoward.
But Mr Piech seemed happier on the firmer ground of 'facts' than in the
mud-patch. His demeanour brightened visibly when he turned to his constant
companion - a shiny alloy briefcase - to rummage for market data.
He had focused his presentation on an extract from a New York Times
interview with Mr Daniel Jones, professor of motor industry management at
University of Cardiff in Wales. 'This is corporate war. GM wants Volkswagen
to stay a big, uncompetitive and bureaucratic company. This is a campaign by
GM to do exactly that. . . They are going after Lopez until they get him,'
according to Mr Jones.
Mr Piech had found in Mr Jones a valuable and authoritative ally to support
his contention that GM's assault is a commercially motivated war designed to
damage VW at a time when it is fighting not only for its own survival but
that of the whole European motor industry.
GM, VW claims, wants to deprive its Wolfsburg competitor, regardless of the
means used, of its prize catch, Mr Lopez, and disrupt the restructuring.
From his briefcase he fished detailed data on recent increases in incoming
orders, to supplement figures in his opening statement showing that VW's
top-selling Golf was widening its market share advantage over Opel's Astra
rival.
VW's second-quarter loss would be considerably less than the DM1.25bn
(Pounds 480m) deficit in the first three months of this year, and the group
would return to profit in the third quarter. It was implicit that GM had
reason to be worried about the rapid revival of its wounded but agile
European competitor.
News agency portable telephones clicked, and in faraway Frankfurt the market
gave Mr Piech an implied round of applause - a rise of almost DM12 in the VW
share price.
