FT  02 APR 93 / London Stock Exchange: Early gains lost in cautious trading
THE SECOND quarter of 1993 made an unpromising start on the UK stock market
yesterday, with some fund managers still unhappy with current valuations of
an equity sector which has made little progress over the opening three
months of the year. Early gains in share prices faded away in the second
half of the session when dollar weakness took the heart out of the blue
chips.
Interest rate hopes, already challenged by the UK chancellor of the
exchequer and by the governor of the Bank of England, receded when the
Bundesbank left rates unchanged, although the outcome of the German bank's
policy meeting had been largely discounted in London. However, the strength
of sterling later in the session brought suggestions from some analysts that
a cut in UK base rates might not be out of the question.
Share prices opened lower as the pharmaceutical leaders turned down,
following Wall Street's setback overnight. But the initial dip in market
indices was recovered when stock index futures opened and the June contract
on the FT-SE 100 Index at first extended its move above 2,900.
By midsession the market was more than 9 points ahead on the Footsie scale,
although trading was uneventful. The hotel and leisure sector remained very
nervous as it awaited further news from Queens Moat Houses, sus-pended in
the previous session and due to report profits next week.
The day's list of company news brought mixed fortunes for the shares
concerned and left unanswered the market's doubts over the progress of
economic recovery in the US. Weakness in the drug stocks, joined by falls in
other dollar-related issues, steadily eroded the market's gain and by the
close many share prices were little changed on the day.
The FT-SE 100 Index finished at 2,878.4, leaving a net loss of just 0.3. In
the first quarter of the year, which closed on Wednesday night, the index
shows a gain of barely 1 per cent after giving back nearly 80 points since
the UK Budget of March 16.
Retail, or customer, business in equities, which has remained high since the
middle of September last year, when sterling departed from the ERM network,
totalled Pounds 1.54bn on Wednesday. Yesterday's Seaq volume dipped to
676.7m shares from the previous day's 821.8m, with non-Footsie business
falling away from recent daily averages to make up only about 51 per cent of
yesterday's total.
Sector performances indicated that investors were continuing to rotate
portfolios, rather than put new money in or take cash out of equities. The
FT-SE Mid 250 Index, which takes in a range of second line stocks, shed just
0.6 to 3,107.2.
The overall picture was somewhat irregular. In addition to the
pharmaceuticals and hotel sectors, merchant banking and building material
stocks gave ground. But stores and construction issues, both linked closely
to interest rate views, attracted buyers. In many cases, investors were
merely moving back into sectors which are perceived as having suffered
unduly in the past fortnight.
Traders commented that the big institutions have not yet opened their equity
campaigns for the second quarter of the year.
