FT  27 NOV 93 / Finance and the Family: GA reforms endowments
The life insurance industry is starting to respond to criticism of the poor
value received by customers who surrender their endowment policies in the
early years. General Accident Life is introducing a new endowment policy
which guarantees that the surrender value in the early years will be equal
to all the premiums paid. There are some conditions, however.
The guaranteed payout applies only in cases of financial hardship - for
example, if the borrower defaults because of redundancy, marital breakdown
or sickness. And the company will pay only the surrender value to the
mortgage lender. But at least borrowers will owe less than they might
otherwise have done.
While this change is undoubtedly an improvement, it deals with only part of
the problem of the inflexibility of endowments. Many people who are not in
financial hardship may want to surrender their policies because of a change
in their circumstances.
The good news is that the GA policy will also offer enhanced values to those
who surrender for any reason in the first few years. It estimates, for
example, that payouts for those who surrender after year three will improve
by 60 per cent.
GA Life will achieve this change by spreading the costs of setting up the
policy over five years instead of the first two, as was the case previously.
As a result, intermediaries who recommend the product will be paid on a
'level commission' basis through the life of the policy, rather than
receiving most of it upfront as is usually the case.
This obviously creates a cash-flow problem for financial advisers. Some
believe that when, under proposed new disclosure rules, they have to reveal
the amount of commission they receive, consumer pressure will force the
industry to move to a level commission basis.
GA Life will continue to offer its old-style endowment policy, which pays
commission upfront, alongside the new version. In its press release, the
company says it 'anticipates that IFAs (independent financial advisers) will
make the decision based on the right product for the individual
circumstances of the client.'
The whole issue brings us back, however, to one of the basic problems of the
commission system. The new policy will result in the same terminal payout as
the old; indeed, the only difference for the policyholder will be the
enhanced value in the early years.
Thus, it is hard to imagine any circumstances when it would be in the best
interest of the client to have the old policy; the best interests of the
adviser are another matter.
If all products were sold on a level commission basis, these conflicts of
interest would not occur. But while the systems run in tandem, there are
likely to be problems.
Nevertheless, any attempts by the life industry to reform itself must be
welcomed. Present regulatory plans, which will involve customers being given
full details of surrender values as well as commission payments, ought to
mean that those consumers who do want endowment policies will be buying with
their eyes open.
