FT  30 SEP 93 / Survey of India (4): Challenge from homespun right - Shiraz
Sidhva assesses the power of the BJP opposition party
EARLIER this month a group of eminent jurists, doctors and politicians clad
in homespun khadi cloth, congregated at a seminar in New Delhi to warn
against the dangers of what one of them termed 'the Coca-Cola culture'. The
backdrop of the podium showed Mother India astride a lion and the speakers
represented the Swadeshi Jagaran Manch, an organisation promoting the use of
swadeshi, or Indian-made, goods.
Forty years ago, Mahatma Gandhi cleverly linked the concept of swadeshi with
freedom from British rule. Today, the Rashtriya Swayam Sevak Sangh (RSS),
the parent organisation of the Bharatiya Janata Party, is launching a
movement against the 'indiscriminate' entry of multinationals into the
Indian market it fears will accompany the ruling Congress (I) party's
economic liberalisation programme.
India's liberalisation programme is unlikely to grind to a halt if there is
a change in government and the BJP comes to power. But any shift in emphasis
could hurt foreign companies. 'We are all for reform,' says Lal Krishna
Advani, the party's president. 'We support liberalisation, but believe that
internal liberalisation must precede globalisation and must be introduced in
phases.'
The ambiguity of Mr Advani's comment reflects the diversity of opinion among
the party's support groups, ranging from the near-autarchic RSS to free
marketeers. Herein lies the threat to foreign companies. A BJP government
would not reverse reform. But it might be more willing than Congress (I) to
pick fights with multinationals to satisfy some of its more nationalistic
affiliates such as the RSS.
In the most detailed statement of the BJP's economic policy - its 'shadow'
budget, published a week before the government's own budget in February - it
recommended the abolition of controls on production, cuts in tax and
interest rates, encouraging the infrastructure sector and special
concessions to small industries in rural India.
Mr Advani disagrees with those who say that the BJP's economic policy is no
different from that of the Congress party. 'The Congress introduced
liberalisation merely as a response to averting the country's balance of
payment crisis in 1991. For the BJP, a deregulated economy is a matter of
conviction and commitment,' he says.
Mr Jagdish Shettigar, an economist and member of the national executive
which formulates the party's policies, says: 'The BJP believes that India
should introduce delicensing in the fullest sense of the term, and starting
an enterprise should be as simple as using a road. You still need all sorts
of permissions and clearances today, which have to go if we are to progress.
What we need are guidelines, for safety, labour and the environment, not a
quota and permit raj.'
The party believes fewer controls would automatically eliminate corruption.
Party leaders see no contradiction between the advocation of swadeshi and
the opening up of the economy. 'We have a holistic and humanistic approach
to the economy,' says Mr Shettigar, an RSS member and part of the BJP's
economic think-tank.
'We define swadeshi as anything that is good for the country and reforms, if
introduced rationally, are good for the country. The government has no
business to be in business,' he says.
BJP leaders point out another basic difference between their economic
policies and those of Congress (I). The ruling party allows foreign
investment in all but a few core areas which have been reserved for the
public sector while the BJP has specified that it would not allow
multinationals in the consumer goods sector but only in high-technology
areas.
'We don't need consumer goods like soft drinks and potato chips, especially
when they are so much more expensive than Indian-made goods and only
slightly better in quality,' Mr Shettigar says. 'We cannot have
multinationals buying our potatoes at Rs2 and selling them as chips at 10
times the price,' he says.
But Mr Advani says that multinationals already operating in India 'will not
be asked to pack up and go' as Coke and IBM were in 1977 when the Janata
party took over. 'There will be economic continuity, but we shall not
encourage any new foreign investment in the consumer goods sector.'
The BJP's support for 'speedier reforms' and 'reforms in a phased manner' at
different forums indicates that the party has yet to iron out its economic
programme. The RSS has further confused the issue by announcing boycotts of
multinationals and Indian companies such as Godrej Soaps, which has linked
up with Procter and Gamble, the international soap company.
Mr Pramod Mahajan, the BJP leader in Bombay who has won the BJP much
business support, says the party's model for foreign trade is Japan, where
free trade is encouraged with subtle import controls. It advocates a legal
framework providing a level playing field for Indian businessmen.
The party, which has a traditional support base of small traders, has
started wooing big business in India. Businessmen usually fund and support
the ruling party but many now are veering towards the BJP, some because of
the party's growing importance, others because they believe that the BJP
would introduce a more liberal economy and present a credible alternative to
the Congress (I), which they blame for the current economic problems.
The party is in turn seeking the help of big business to gain power. More
than 40 top industrialists received a letter from Mr Advani this July, weeks
after he took over as president of the party for the second time. Mr Advani
was keen to reassure the business community after his predecessor, Murli
Manohar Joshi, and some of the party's old guard had attacked the Congress
(I)'s reforms package.
The letter was sent out together with taped speeches and newspaper clippings
spelling out the party's agenda. It asked businessmen for a 'token
contribution' to be paid by cheque. (Political offerings are usually
unaccounted for, so the insistence on cheques illustrated the party's
resolve 'to cleanse public life'.)
The party beat its target of Rs500m from the industrialists, who said they
would respond to Mr Advani's request for more funds 'in the course of time'.
The BJP's critics say it is easier to spell out a hypothetical economic
policy than to implement one when in power. A Congress (I) leader says that
some of the country's worst economic offenders are the BJP's traditional
support base of small traders. 'Will the BJP be able to clamp down on these
tax evaders and still retain their support?' he asks.
'How can the BJP talk of salvaging the economy when they have struck the
worst blows to it in the past year?' asks a senior opposition MP. 'The BJP
sought the destruction of the mosque in Ayodhya, which led to colossal
economic loss and the deaths of over 2,000 people, and the BJP is an ally of
the Shiv Sena who engineered the riots in Bombay in December and January.
They will have to give up their politics of destruction before telling us
how to improve the economy.'
