FT  29 APR 93 / Technology: Relieving tension at the checkout - Research
that could boost health and cut queues
The dangers of working at visual display units without suitable, properly
adjusted work surfaces and seating are well documented. Repetitive Strain
Injury (RSI) - a term used loosely to cover disorders of the neck, shoulder
and arm - is no longer an affliction solely of the manual worker.
One group at risk from RSI, but which has received little attention, is
supermarket checkout operators. Constant bending, twisting and lifting of
objects that vary greatly in weight can be hazardous when combined with
high-speed working, sometimes for several hours without a break.
RSI-type problems become inevitable, particularly with the latest electronic
point-of-sale scanning equipment, unless checkout counters and seating are
designed with ergonomic principles in mind. One Canadian study found, for
example, that half of all operators in one area had sought medical help for
carpal tunnel syndrome and other hand disorders.
However, some conditions take years to show themselves because many
supermarket workers are part-time. Some, especially female casual workers
with little employment protection, may simply change jobs or be forced by
their condition to give up work, without appearing in health statistics.
Research just completed by the University of Birmingham, in England, found
that a third of operators questioned had work-related aches and pains, even
before starting work for the day. By the end of their shift, two-thirds
complained of back pain, shoulder and neck discomfort, and wrist and hand
pain.
The research found Germany, France, the Netherlands, Denmark and Norway all
had legal guidelines for the design of checkouts, covering counter heights,
scanners, keyboards, cash drawers, chairs and footrests, In the absence of
British standards, the study makes the following recommendations:
The operator, who should have an easily-adjustable chair, should face the
worktop and not be side-on to it. The counter top should be below elbow
height.
There should be sufficient space to get in and out of the checkout, move the
chair and bend to pick items from the floor. There should be enough leg room
under the counter.
Layout of equipment should prevent twisting of the body and the operator
should not have to stretch to reach anything.
A combined scanner and weighing scale should be provided to reduce the
operator's workload.
The input belt should take at least one full trolley of shopping and there
should be at least two bays to collect scanned goods.
The last points are of particular value in cutting down on customer queueing
times, though the research says all improvements in working conditions for
operators are likely to be reflected in increases in productivity. W
Potrafke, a manufacturer of checkout and conveyor belts, based in Leighton
Buzzard, Bedfordshire, which commissioned the research, estimates that, with
proper ergonomic design, productivity could be increased by up to a third.
Ruth Haigh, the Birmingham University ergonomist who worked on the project,
says that if operators are comfortable and not fatigued, or physically or
mentally stressed, 'they can apply their whole attention to the job and work
just as productively for the whole day as in the first hour'. Good checkout
design also cuts sick leave and staff turnover, according to Haigh.
Collaboration with the university's Centre for Applied Gerontology has
produced additional information on checkout design and older workers -
relevant to stores which have courted older part-time employees.
In general, the maximum safe load for workers over the age of 50 to lift is
30 per cent less than for younger workers and that for women is 30 per cent
lower than for men. Changes in body shape that come with age make adjustable
seating and sufficient space within the checkout particularly important.
Reduced mobility may make it more difficult for workers to stretch to reach
things, and grip and vision also deteriorate.
