FT  23 DEC 93 / Paramount board recommends Dollars 10bn bid from QVC
The board of Paramount Communications last night recommended a hostile
Dollars 10bn (Pounds 6.7bn) bid from television shopping channel QVC Network
rather than a friendly, but lower, offer from cable company Viacom.
The board said it was terminating its existing merger pact with Viacom, but
said the cable group was considering raising its offer.
The move represents a psychological shift in the three-month battle for
Paramount. The board had previously shunned QVC's advances and insisted that
a merger with Viacom offered better long-term benefits.
However, it does not spell the end of the tortuous fight. Each bidder still
has a 10-day period in which it can increase the value of its offer, and
shareholders are free to accept either proposal.
Viacom was yesterday understood to be seeking finance for a higher offer,
approaching companies that have backed its bid. These include Nynex, the
regional telephone company serving the north-eastern US, and Blockbuster
Entertainment, the video rental chain.
Trading in shares of Paramount, QVC and Viacom was suspended when reports of
the decision began circulating, but later resumed. At the close, Paramount
stood at Dollars 79 5/8 , down Dollars  5/8 . QVC was down Dollars  3/4 at
Dollars 41 1/4 , and Viacom A was up Dollars 1 1/8 at Dollars 51. The
board's two days of deliberations follow a ruling by the Delaware supreme
court that the company must create a level playing field for both the Viacom
and QVC offers. Paramount agreed to auction itself off and set a deadline of
last Monday for offers.
QVC increased the value of its cash offer for 51 per cent of Paramount's
shares, from Dollars 90 to Dollars 92, while Viacom resubmitted its existing
cash offer, worth Dollars 85 a share.
Both bidders are offering stock for the remaining 49 per cent. Based on
their fluctuating share prices, QVC's entire bid was yesterday morning worth
about Dollars 10bn, or Dollars 83 1/2 a share, compared with Viacom's
Dollars 9.6bn, or Dollars 79 5/8 a share.
Analysts said the Paramount board had little choice but to recommend the QVC
bid since it was substantially higher than Viacom's.
The board is under close legal scrutiny to ensure it does not unfairly
favour Viacom.
US stocks, Page 27
