FT  06 APR 93 / Chief executive leaves FT
MR DAVID Palmer, chief executive of the Financial Times since 1990, has left
the paper.
Pearson, the publishing, banking and industrial group which owns the FT,
said yesterday Mr Palmer was 'leaving the Pearson Group with immediate
effect because of differences in management style'. Mr Palmer, 52, has been
replaced by Mr David Bell, currently advertisement and marketing director.
Neither Lord Blakenham, Pearson's chairman, nor Mr Frank Barlow, managing
director, would comment further.
Mr Palmer thanked FT staff for their 'hard work, friendship and camaraderie
over the past 29 years'. He said his successor would bring 'vision, drive,
competitiveness and warmth' to the management of the paper.
The signs were yesterday that behind Mr Palmer's abrupt departure lay an
accumulation of differences over many months rather than any single large
policy issue.
It is believed that Mr Palmer's relationship with Mr Barlow had become
increasingly tense. There was said to be a growing view that Mr Palmer was
not working effectively as a member of a management team.
As long ago as 1978 Lord Drogheda, a former FT managing director, wrote of
Mr Palmer in his memoirs: 'He can go as far as his defiant nature permits
him.' Mr Bell has a reputation for a more diplomatic approach.
Mr Palmer joined the paper in 1964 as a reporter, moving up the ranks to
become deputy editor and then general manager.
Mr Richard Lambert, the Financial Times' editor, emphasised the change at
the top of the FT had nothing to do with matters of editorial policy.
'David Palmer's flair and determination has played a large part in making
the FT a leader in its chosen field,' Mr Lambert said yesterday.
Colleagues emphasised three achievements:
As news editor, Mr Palmer broadened the paper's coverage away from its
narrow City origins.
In 1977, he played a key role in the move to overseas printing which turned
the FT into an increasingly international newspaper.
As general manager, Mr Palmer handled the introduction of new technology and
the paper's new printing plant in London's Docklands.
Mr Bell, 46, also started at the FT as a journalist, joining from the Oxford
Mail in 1972. He had been due to replace Mr Richard McClean, the deputy
chief executive, who is leaving to be chief executive of the International
Herald Tribune in Paris, but now takes the top job. Mr Barlow becomes
chairman of the FT in succession to Lord Blakenham.
