FT  02 APR 93 / Survey of Spain (10): Nothing is left to chance - The
tourism sector covers half the country's trade deficit
SPAIN can thank its bright sun for its tourism. Receipts from the tourism
sector were up by 6.6 per cent last year, against a GDP growth of 1.0 per
cent. As a result, they covered 50 per cent of the trade deficit.
1992 was admittedly the year when Spain staged the Barcelona Olympics and
the Seville universal exposition. Tourism could not fail to provide returns
but, given the onset of global recession, the final figures were impressive.
Mindful of the tightened European belts, the industry ministry forecasts a
modest 1 per cent growth in tourism receipts this year. The estimate could
be too conservative, for tourist entries grew by 5.3 per cent in January and
February against the first two months of last year. Although the sector's
income showed a strong growth last year, the number of actual visitors to
Spain - 55m - increased by only 3.4 per cent.
The tourist sector should certainly benefit, as far as French and German
visitors are concerned, from the 11 per cent devaluation of the peseta
within the ERM last autumn. The exchange rate boost is nevertheless tempered
by the peseta's appreciation against sterling and the lira.
Meanwhile, the continuing tragedy of former Yugoslavia will, once more, work
to Spain's advantage. Fears that once existed of cut-price competition for
the Costas from the eastern Mediterranean, as well from the North African
coast, have to a great extent been neutralised by political factors.
The fears were probably overstated. Tourism officials say that their surveys
show Spain still dominates the sun and sand market and enjoys a clear client
loyalty. Package tourists who venture elsewhere tend to return to the
well-worn Costas.
Nevertheless, the industry ministry is leaving nothing to chance. It has
boosted its advertising budget for this year by 14.6 per cent. At a time of
cost-cutting across the board, the increased expenditure is an indication of
the priority that the government gives to the tourism sector.
Beaches, naturally, form an important part of the advertising campaign
although they may look oddly solitary and wild to the package tour veterans
of the concrete high-rise resorts. There are apparently a few kilometres
left of virgin sand somewhere on the Mediterranean coast or in the Balearics
and in the Canary Islands.
Marinas and golf courses also receive due honours in a subliminal follow-up
to the sporty image created last year when Spain played host to the world's
athletes.
The main new thrust of the promotion is, however, to highlight interior
Spain with its genuinely empty landscapes punctuated by historic cities. The
tourism authorities have, for example, seized on the medieval pilgrimage
route across northern Spain that starts in the Pyrenees and ends near
Finisterre at the shrine of St James the Apostle in Compostella's cathedral.
What used to be a devotional exercise that energised hardy saints and
repentant sinners in the 11th century now threatens to become a giant
walkway for modern trekers. They might even sport the pilgrimage's
traditional cockleshell emblem on their designer backpacks.
Rarefied souls may be outraged by the high profile afforded to what the
medieval world used to know as the way of St James, but it makes sound
commercial sense.
It is a demanding month-long route that takes the walker through mountain
ranges, arid planes and, surprisingly for those who have never been to
northern Spain, lush scenery reminiscent of Ireland. Man-made highlights
include the cathedral cities of Burgos and Leon, as well as a string of
romanesque churches and convents set by isolated pueblos.
The authorities, quite properly, expect the vast majority of travellers to
shy away from the footpaths and drive to Compostella. They will not be
disappointed, either. It is one of the most memorable inland touring routes
in Europe.
The success of the Costa trade, which continues to be such a healthy golden
goose for the tourism sector, has blinded Spain's authorities to the
potential of an interior that rivals, and often surpasses, anything that
France or Italy has to offer. Major improvements to the road network have
now made it extremely accessible.
The Compostella campaign is one pilot scheme to right the balance and the
promotion of the Ruta de la Plata, or Silver Route, which links Roman mines,
cities and export centres is another. It runs parallel to Spain's border
with Portugal from Seville in the south to the north coast by Oviedo.
Again, the mix is one of breathtaking landscapes, with wildlife and
excellent birdwatching thrown in, and a lot of history. Cathedrals, castles,
Roman ruins and Roman bridges that remain in use pop up along the route, as
billboards do along a highway.
The authorities are in no urgent hurry to develop the interior although they
have their minds firmly set on doing so. Inland Spain will be opened up
gradually and thus escape the excesses that marked the sudden build-up of
the Costas. Fortunately the success of the sun and sand sector allows the
planners to take their time.
