FT  15 JAN 93 / ICI power talks trigger calls for cheaper deals
THE UK POWER generators were inundated with inquiries from industrial users
yesterday after news that the Department of Trade and Industry may allow a
special licence for PowerGen to sell electricity cheaply to Imperial
Chemical Industries.
Sharp increases in electricity prices over the past two years have been
criticised by big industrial users and they are eager to share in any
opportunity to cut power costs.
ICI says its power bills have gone up 60 per cent since April 1991. It now
pays Pounds 31 a megawatt-hour compared with the Pounds 25 it believes its
main German competitors are paying.
It is unclear, however, how the government can grant one company - albeit a
very large one - special access to cheaper electricity without making
similar offers across industry.
Power industry sources were warning yesterday that even if it did,
exemptions would drive up costs for everyone else.
It was not clear yesterday what stage the discussions with ICI had actually
reached. Mr Peter Rost, chairman of the Major Energy Users Council, said he
was told before Christmas by Mr Tim Eggar, energy minister, that the
separate deal was in the process of being negotiated.
The Office of Electricity Regulation, which would issue the licence, also
confirmed that it was discussing the matter with the DTI.
ICI said it was still talking to both the government and the generating
companies after 18 months and that no agreement had been reached. The
company reiterated that it was deeply concerned about the future of its
chlorine and derivatives business, which needed a rapid cut in electricity
costs if they were to survive against overseas competition.
Industrial concern about power prices dates back three years to when the
electricity industry was privatised. At that time, subsidies for large
electricity users were phased out, leaving large companies with sharp price
increases.
Part of the difficulty lies in the way the UK electricity market works.
The rules governing the newly privatised power industry include a
requirement that power generators sell all their output through the pool,
the wholesale market where prices are set every half hour throughout the
day.
Power sold through the pool, however, collects heavy charges to pay for
running the UK electricity system. They can add from 5 per cent to 10 per
cent to electricity bills.
The solution apparently being considered by the DTI is to allow generators
to sell a certain amount of power outside the pool, directly to large
industrial customers. Those deals would bypass the pool charges.
A further benefit might be that sales outside the pool would escape the
nuclear levy. The levy helps to fund the nuclear power industry's clean-up
costs and adds a further 10 per cent to electricity bills.
Exemption from the pool might reduce the cost of electricity by up to 20 per
cent. That happens to be about the size of the reduction that ICI says it
needs to remain competitive.
Appealing though that arrangement looks to industry, the majority of
electricity users would be losers. The pool's costs would remain the same -
and so would those of the nuclear power industry. The costs would only fall
even more heavily on non-exempted electricity users.
If a special dispensation were given to ICI it would also raise the issue of
which other users should benefit from similar licences.
The DTI said yesterday that it was talking to several companies in the Major
Energy Users Council. One suggestion is that only those using more than
100MW on a single site should benefit, which would cover large operations
such as British Steel, United Engineering Steel and Shotton Paper.
Mr Rost said that if the ICI deal went ahead it would open the gates for
other companies. 'It is unacceptable that one company can get a special
advantage when others are equally hard-pressed,' he said.
He argued that the government should restructure the electricity industry to
create more opportunity for companies to shop around.
Both the large power generators, PowerGen and National Power, emphasised
yesterday that any deals under new licences would be done on strictly
commercial terms. There was no question of price cutting.
PowerGen said it had always expressed sympathy at the plight of intensive
energy users after the removal of subsidies, but it was a matter for the
government if it wanted to offer support for ICI.
There would be other companies that believed their case for support was
every bit as strong as that for ICI, it said.
