FT  05 MAR 93 / Survey of European Airports - Manchester (11): Ripples may
spread far and wide - The economic impact
LIKE seaports and railway termini before them, airports, as they develop,
can have a dramatic economic impact on the surrounding hinterlands.
Manchester is forecasting tens of thousands of jobs to be generated by its
growth.
How realistic is this? For example, Ireland's Shannon airport is often
quoted as a case of a small regional airport which drove and led economic
development.
The Airports Association Council International, which is a worldwide
association representing 150 airports, undertook a study in November 1992
which looked at the economic impact of airports.
It quotes the case of Charles de Gaulle airport in Paris. The authority
there employed 2,648 people in 1991 while 377 other enterprises on site
including airlines, public services, commercial operations and others
employed 34,184 people.
In that year, these nearly 400 enterprises paid gross salaries of FFr9bn
(Dollars 1.67bn), spent FFr7.1bn on goods, services, energy etc, made
capital investments of FFr2bn and paid local taxes of FFr200m.
Manchester airport is the third largest in Britain after Heathrow and
Gatwick. The airport has grown from 3m passengers a decade ago to 12.4m
passengers in 1992.
Mr Geoff Muirhead, the director of business development, says the reason for
the growth has been, essentially, the huge rise in air travel, domestic and
international, in the past decade plus the fact that Manchester has had a
large catchment, around 20m people, to take advantage of the growth. But, he
adds: 'I have to say we have been very good at going out and getting the
business.'
With the first phase of the Pounds 570m second terminal opening this month
and plans for a second runway in four years, the airport could be handling
30m passengers by 2005 and 247,000 tonnes of freight, compared with 80,000
tonnes in 1990.
Such expansion would have significant impact on the wider economy not just
of Manchester, but of the whole of northern England.
The main study undertaken so far on the economic impact of Manchester
airports growth is called Towards An Economic Strategy for The Manchester
Airport Area. It was prepared in May 1992 by York Consulting on behalf of a
joint study group comprising representatives from Manchester, Stockport,
Trafford, Cheshire, Macclesfield councils and the Manchester Airport
Authority.
The York report, as it is known, concerned itself with land availability and
need and the employment aspects of the airport's presence.
The report found between 15,000 and 25,000 jobs in the sub-region are the
result of the airport's presence. There were 23,000 directly employed at the
airport.
The report says: 'The total number of jobs is, therefore, some 38,000 to
48,000 or 3.5 per cent of employment in Greater Manchester and Cheshire.'
The document estimates if the airport grows as predicted, then 50,000 new
jobs could be created by 2005. Around half would be aviation-related.
The document says the importance of these jobs 'cannot be overstated. The
local and regional economy is under-represented in service industries though
potentially strong in manufacturing.'
Since the report was published the airport has extrapolated some figures of
its own and broken down the jobs into particular categories.
Ms Louise Congdon, general manager, market strategy, says: 'Our figures are
very tentative. KMPG Peat Marwick is engaged in an exercise for us at the
moment to take the report further and examine the economic impact of our
expansion.'
However, Ms Congdon's figures estimate that by 2005 there could be between
78,000 and 104,000 jobs in the sub-region because of the airport. About half
of these would be aviation related. The sub-region is Greater Manchester and
parts of Cheshire as far as Macclesfield to the south and Warrrington to the
West.
The figures are divided into five categories. Four are aviation-related. The
fifth is the 'catalyst effect'. This refers to companies being drawn to new
business parks because they are international concerns and need an airport
for frequently travelling executives, or they export high-value, low-volume
products.
The four aviation-related categories are: on-site, off-site direct, off-site
indirect, and off-site induced. Off-site direct refers to local services,
such as newsagents and bakers. Off-site indirect means hotels and tour
operators. Off-site induced means new enterprises such as restaurants and
sandwich bars.
All told there could be between 53,000 and 64,000 jobs in these categories
compared with 23,000 today.
The catalyst effect is the hardest to gauge, and could be where the greatest
growth will lie. Ms Congdon's projections estimate 25,000 to 40,000 jobs in
this category.
What is certain is there are a number of international concerns wanting to
be near an airport. Mr Steve Carr, the principal economic development
officer of Manchester City Council, cites the case of Siemens, which set up
a regional headquarters at Didsbury, two miles from the airport, and now
employs 1,000.
Mr Carr says: 'The main consideration for Siemens was the proximity of an
international airport. Executives are always flying off to Frankfurt.'
Quantifying this demand, however, is difficult. Mr Carr says the Manchester
City Council has never attempted to estimate the amount of investment that
could flow from the airport's growth. But, he says: 'Manchester has always
been under-represented with Japanese high-technology concerns. We are also
looking to draw in European agencies.'
Nor need investment necessarily be confined to the sub-region around the
airport: the Channel Tunnel has led local authorities not only in Kent -
where the tunnel will emerge - but also as far away as Essex, Southampton,
East and West Sussex, to look at their plans for business accommodation.
Similarly, councils in Merseyside, Cheshire, Lancashire and even North Wales
and Yorkshire are examining the potential to attract investors because of
the airport. The ripples from the airport's growth could spread widely.
