FT  11 DEC 93 / Travel: When an elephant comes calling . . . - Michael J.
Woods goes on safari in remotest Tanzania
From outside the tent, a decisive hollow crunching sound, like a giant
peppermint being crushed in a railway tunnel, woke me suddenly. I lay still,
listening carefully.
The full moon had been up before I went to bed, and I had drifted off to
sleep to the sound of a lion roaring across the river, a deep groaning
followed by a series of fading grunts. Now, though, it was dark. A slight
rustle came to my ears; in my mind, it was a snake slithering over the
ground-sheet. Then there was another crunch, followed by the quietest of
steps.
Moonlight streamed through the tent window as the elephant withdrew its dark
bulk, its questing trunk seeking the next crunchy, contorted,
apricot-coloured acacia pod. The huge animal was right next to the tent, and
I held my breath as the bed creaked when I raised myself for a better look.
It padded very softly round to the front, sniffed enquiringly at my
toothpaste, and strolled away to join the rest of its family further up the
Great Ruaha river. I reached for my notebook. After all, it isn't every day
a wild elephant comes close enough for you to touch.
The incident occurred in Ruaha although my safari to southern Tanzania began
in the Selous - the largest game reserve in Africa, covering an area almost
the size of Ireland - where I stayed in Mbuyu camp on the banks of the
Rufiji river.
Mbuyu means baobab in Kiswahili and, beneath the vast bulk of the great tree
from which the camp takes its name, we drank tea and surveyed the sandbanks
and pools of a waterway much diminished by the dry season.
Here were beautiful birds: pied kingfishers hovering like terns; giant
kingfishers; grey and Goliath herons stalking through the water;
yellow-billed storks using their wings to shade the glare from the surface
as they fished; black-winged stilts and brown hammerkops.
Just as impressive as the baobab-shaded tea terrace was an elevated hide at
the other end of camp where we sat one evening drinking cold beer as the sun
set and a roost of bats exploded, like a Roman candle, from the hollow stem
of a headless palm. Wave after wave of black specks soared upwards and
disappeared in every direction.
We took walks from here and cruised up the palm-lined river in an aluminium
boat. The water was crowded with pods of bad-tempered hippos and
yellow-green crocodiles, the latter all about 8 ft long, sliding from their
sandbanks as we approached. On our way home, though, one did not shift. He
was black and barrel-chested, a full 15 ft long. He lay with his great mouth
agape, filthy teeth lit by the falling sun. Even when our boat nudged the
sandbank on which he lay, he showed not a flicker of acknowledgement.
From the Selous, we travelled over the Uzungwa mountains through Mikumi
national park to Ruaha. Most visitors to Tanzania concentrate on the north,
on the Serengeti, the Ngorongoro crater and Manyara national park. Few go
south to Selous and even fewer to Ruaha; so few that, in the first nine
months of 1993, this national park received fewer than 1,000 visitors from
outside Tanzania.
Yet it is almost as big as the Serengeti and an extremely varied and
beautiful place. There are mountains, sand rivers, open plains of golden
grass and thick bush. The Great Ruaha river is rocky and has falls and
rapids after the rains.
Our camp was a private one organised in the relaxed, yet stylish, way so
typical of Gibb's Farm Safaris. On a hidden site beside the river, the
tents, which have en suite facilities and comfortable beds, were shaded by
several grey-green, woolly-headed old tamarinds, and by acacias which leaned
solicitously over them and dropped their pods to tempt visiting elephants.
From the dining tent, with its evening fire and view down the rocky river,
safari leader Nigel Perks, as sharp-eyed as ever, pointed out a nervous
bushbuck slipping down to the river to drink at sunset.
The lions in the bush across the water were noisy but never showed
themselves. We saw lions elsewhere, though. One pride was guarding a buffalo
carcase against vultures, taking it in turns to leave the shade of the bush
where they were resting and lie panting beside the body in the hot sun.
With the general (temporary?) cessation in poaching, the elephants here are
relaxed and breeding well. Small family groups down near the water were
breaking up fallen palm fronds or plucking clumps of grass.
I had come to southern Tanzania expecting to be overwhelmed by the richness
of the Selous. Instead, it was Ruaha which cast its spell.
Michael Woods visited southern Tanzania with Art of Travel (London tel:
071-738 2038), which puts together tailor-made safaris to the Selous, Mikumi
and Ruaha run by Gibb's Farm Safaris. A 10-day safari, including flights,
costs from Pounds 2,500. Only a few UK operators go to this area: they
include Safari Consultants (0787-228 494) and Abercrombie &amp; Kent (071-730
9600).
