FT  06 FEB 93 / A head-on clash of the lucky number-crunchers: As Britain
gears up for a national lottery, Keith Wheatley meets two Australians who
aim to profit
'Britain's lottery is going to be huge. The biggest in the world,' predicts
Peter Gillooly from his office in Melbourne.
GILLOOLY heads Tattersalls, the world's biggest private operator of public
lotteries. 'Tatts,' as every Australian knows it, has already had an advance
team in the UK sniffing out the possibilities of an operator's licence. The
second reading of the parliamentary bill setting up the lottery has only
increased his interest.
'The only other thing you can be certain of is that every schemer in the
world will have plans to crack it. They'll be selling software, syndicated
investment plans - everything you can think of.'
In an adjacent suburb, barely 10 minutes distant on one of Melbourne's
charming trams, Stefan Mandel sits in an equally palatial office. Among
other business activities he describes himself as a lottery 'investor'. A
year ago his team won the USDollars 27m (Pounds 17.8m) jackpot in the
Virginia State Lottery after spending about USDollars 6m on tickets. This is
not hearsay. America's taxman took Mandel to court (unsuccessfully), hoping
to garner 30 per cent of the prize.
'I don't predict at present that we will be investing in the British
lottery,' says Mandel, somewhat airily. The prizes will not be big enough to
justify the risk. However, he does admit that his team has been invited to
do a little 'consulting' on the forthcoming British operation for parties he
is unwilling to name.
On the Australian lotteries scene, Gillooly and Mandel have become Punch &amp;
Judy, each man a nemesis for the other. Stefan Mandel and his team are now
precluded by state law from placing 'block' and 'syndicate' entries anywhere
in Victoria. Tattersalls needed legislation to protect itself from this
self-styled numbers genius who fled his native Romania in 1964 on the
proceeds (then equivalent to 100 months' average salary) of a national
lottery.
Throughout the 1980s Mandel staged betting coups against the various state
lotteries in Australia. So far he has documentary proof that his teams have
won or shared in 14 first prizes. There is no attempt to manipulate the
result, simply to wait for a situation where an accumulating jackpot has
reached the size where it will repay the formidable logistical effort of
buying tickets to cover every possible combination of numbers.
Although these winnings look like a just reward for formidable hard work,
authorities the world over make Mandel and his legmen unwelcome. 'We believe
the game is for the man in the street. What you're really selling is hope.
These syndicates destroy the game, eat into the pleasure of believing you
can win,' says Gillooly. His private remarks on the subject of Mandel are
unprintable.
'It's an unwritten law of lotteries that you've got to protect the innocent.
Since Adam was a boy these people have come out into the market place with
their get-rich-quick schemes. We've made a heap of material available to the
authorities in London and they have a real chance to avoid some of the
events that can destroy the credibility of a game.'
Mandel is still unwilling to explain the exact details of how his syndicate
pulled off the Virginia win - since he hopes to repeat it elsewhere in the
world - but the broad picture is known. Two coordinators worked with a team
of 35 couriers from three rented offices in Norfolk, Virginia. A firm of
accountants was hired to oversee the process.
Armed with scores of certified cheques for USDollars 10,000 the couriers
tried to buy - in the three days before the lottery closed - up to 1.4m
tickets from over 60 shops so that all 7,059,052 winning combinations were
covered. Lottery organisers said that Mandel's team managed 5m combinations.
Like most big-money lotteries in the organised world, in Virginia punters
choose combinations of six two-digit numbers. Tattersalls operates Lotto
this way, and the British scheme is likely to be similar. So, unlike the
raffle at the church fete, there may be not one single winning ticket but
several or many.
This led Mandel to deny his involvement in the days immediately after the
big win. 'I had to keep quiet,' said Mandel, who was subsequently
investigated by both the FBI and the American Secret Service as well as the
revenue service. 'People's lives depended on secrecy. We had winning tickets
worth Dollars 27m to the bearer and we were very concerned about being
robbed.'
Tell this bearded sophisticate from Transylvania that Tattersalls portrays
him as some sort of moral robber baron and he becomes highly agitated.
'Those people have no more business running a lottery than I have to be
Pope,' he says. 'Lotto is voluntary taxation, and a huge industry. Let us
not pretend anything else about it.'
Squabbling aside, the figures that Gillooly provides for the Tattersalls
operation are impressive. It is the fourth biggest provider of funds to the
state of Victoria, with ADollars 330m passing to the state government last
year in taxes and share of profit.
Each week about 52 per cent of the population buy a ticket. Gillooly usually
buys one on his way home. 'It's primarily a blue-collar audience but
widening all the time. Making it easy to buy tickets is the key.'
In Australia, Lotto tickets are bought at special electronic terminals
installed at newsagents and corner shops - exactly the kind of 8-till-late
stores becoming so common in Britain. Terminals are linked to the central
Tattersalls computer by a dedicated landline. It gives the company a secure
data network stretching huge distances, the equivalent of Glasgow to
Palermo.
Electronic security is going to be crucial in a European environment full of
bright technocrats, believes Gillooly - at least as important as barring
syndicate buyers such as Mandel.
'A few years ago we became worried about this aspect,' he recalls. 'We gave
some money and equipment to graduate computer students at the University of
Melbourne and asked them to crack our system. They hacked into damn near
everything else, including the foreign exchange dealings of one of the major
banks, and caused trouble that's still crashing around - but they didn't get
into Lotto. The key is to allow no modem access to the main computer and no
packet switching, or line sharing.'
Asked how he thought Britain's football pools promoters, already twitchy
about the coming UK lottery, would fare, Gillooly was downbeat. 'We've had
Vernons running pools against us here for the past 20 years; in fact they've
just given up and handed in their licences.'
Football pools are a traditional product that will always have a market in a
society like Britain, he reckoned. But in terms of ease of play,
accessability and understandibility, he claimed that the Liverpool pools
giants were still 'in the quill pen era', their cries of mass unemployment
if the pools were to suffer competition spurious.
'You'll be amazed when you see how much employment the start of Lotto in
Britain creates,' said Gillooly. 'The terminals have to be built, installed,
serviced and I'd expect to see a network of thousands. The printing alone
each week is a huge item.'
That Britain's lottery is going to be large beyond belief must be the first
item that Mandel and Gillooly have agreed on in a decade.
