FT  26 JAN 93 / Technology: Silencing the kitchen gadgets - Della Bradshaw
reports on the battle to stamp out electro-magnetic interference from the
airways
Blanche Cosgrove's Christmas decorations should have been above suspicion.
But when police in her home town of Lancaster, Pennsylvania found the only
sound they could pick up on their police radios was 'Jingle Bells', the
Cosgrove household fell under scrutiny.
There, investigators found a musical ornament decorated with three plastic
reindeer with illuminated noses. Unknown to Cosgrove, the decoration had
emitted a signal on the police radio frequency and the signal was amplified
by a local radio repeater antenna.
Fortunately, the police department found the incident amusing rather than
criminal. But, says Stephen Kirk, managing director of Radio Frequency
Investigation, which tests equipment for electro-magnetic noise, it vividly
demonstrates how emissions from the smallest electrical or electronic gadget
can interfere with important equipment, often causing serious problems and
even threatening lives. 'People often think that because a product is small
or cheap it won't cause interference, but it does,' he says.
Most of the time, electro-magnetic interference is an irritant - for
example, causing the 'snow' on television screens when an old-fashioned
electric drill is used - rather than a killer. The catalogue of actual
disasters caused by such interference is slim: disrupted railway signalling,
satellites veering off course and manic Japanese robots killing factory
workers are well-worn examples. During the 1991 Gulf conflict, interference
also caused an electronically-controlled missile to fire accidently.
But as the number of electronic gadgets increases, from the latest mobile
phone to the whizziest food mixer, so does the potential for disaster. And
on a commercial level, as computer systems proliferate, so does the
potential for computer discs to be corrupted and data destroyed.
In a European-wide move to cut down this electronic smog, the European
Community has issued regulations regarding electro-magnetic interference.
These say that from January 1 1996, all manufacturers and users of
electrical or electronic equipment will have to ensure that their equipment
does not interfere with other machines, nor is it susceptible to
interference. The penalty for non-compliance is a fine or even a prison
sentence.
But the impending regulations have Britain's smaller companies up in arms.
They say they cannot afford to comply with the new regulations.
Systek Controls, for example, finds itself in a dilemma faced by many small
electronics companies. It employs nine people and makes control systems for
machinery as diverse as food processing plant and machine tools. 'Basically
our customer would have a machine which was 20 or 30 years old but was
mechanically sound. However, it would need a new electric control system.
The company would come to us for that,' explains managing director Robert
Bent.
As a result, most of the pieces of equipment Systek makes are one-off
designs, ranging in price from between Pounds 800 and Pounds 30,000. Testing
each piece of equipment to ensure that it complied with the regulations
would cost at least Pounds 3,000 - in many cases more than the equipment
costs today to buy. And that assumes the equipment passes the test the first
time.
To head off criticism, the Department of Trade and Industry in the UK has
issued a document for smaller companies offering a cheaper option -
self-certification. Companies choosing this route only have to say they
believe their equipment complies with the standards.
Bent believes even this is a headache: 'We ought to be able to self-certify
 -but can we? One of our biggest problems is finding out what we can and
can't do. It has to involve extra work and one of our shortest resources is
time.'
Others are not so charitable. Colman Twohig, who runs his own company,
Twohig Electric Services, describes the self-certification route as
'ridiculous' in law. 'Why have a law and then say that you're allowed to
break it if you can't afford to comply with it?'
He likens it to Britain's MOT test for older cars. What would happen, he
asks, if car owners who could not afford to test their cars were allowed to
bypass the procedure by stating simply that they believed the car to be
road-worthy?
After 1996 - when the self-certified equipment is in use - Twohig believes a
small company would have no defence in the case of a prosecution if found to
have breached the rules.
Kirk argues that companies can minimise such risks by ensuring good design
practice and by doing partial testing on component parts which appear in all
their products. Victor Clements, sales and marketing director of
Interference Technology International, of Swindon, believes another way of
cutting costs is to take out a technical file on a family of products, which
could be done for as little as Pounds 1,000, and claim compliance of other
products on the grounds of similarity.
It is all a question of risk analysis, argues Kirk. For a company which
produces just one piece of equipment, there is little chance of interference
and therefore self-certification is appropriate.
A company which produces thousands of television sets, on the other hand,
would be in far greater danger of polluting the airwaves and therefore
should do more thorough testing, both before and during production.
Twohig, however, believes that testing is the only route to ensure
compliance. And, he says, the best solution would be for the DTI to give
grants to smaller companies to subsidise testing. But the DTI has ruled out
such a scheme.
John Redfern, of another one-man company, JR Engineering, also believes
testing should be the rule, but that certain categories of equipment should
be declared exempt. These would include prototypes and small production
runs. A good rule, he says, would be to say that if the cost of testing were
more than one-tenth of the revenue from the product family then the
equipment should be exempt.
The self-certification scheme could also undermine one of the big bonuses
put forward for electro-magnetic testing - that testing would guarantee the
quality of the product. Equipment which has undergone testing will
automatically bear the 'CE' sticker - a sign that the product meets the
required European standard.
'Companies look at the CE mark as a mark of quality, particularly in the Far
East,' points out Clements.
Now the DTI has confirmed that companies that opt for self-certification
will also be able to use the CE sticker. 'That means the CE mark means
absolutely nothing,' concludes Redfern.
Twohig, Redfern and Bent are not the only ones concerned about the problems
for small companies. The UK-circulated Electronics Weekly magazine has
initiated a campaign asking smaller companies to get in touch if they have
similar problems.
In the month the campaign has been running nearly 100 people have aired
their grievances. 'There is a ground swell of concern among small
electronics companies,' says assistant editor Paul Gregg. He says trade
magazines in France and Germany have noted a similar swell of complaints
there.
Critics of small businesses say it is the companies' own fault and that they
should have heeded DTI warnings over the past years that the regulations
were about to be introduced. Clements, for example, points out that his
company has done more work for US companies, wanting to sell into Europe,
than for British ones.
Kirk is more sympathetic. He believes the economic climate has done little
to encourage small companies to look into the the issues of electro-magnetic
compatibility: 'If you're not sure that you're going to be around in a
year's time then you're not going to worry about rules which will come into
effect in four years, are you?'
