FT  17 MAY 93 / Leading Article: Saving the whale
THE International Whaling Commission was right not to lift its moratorium on
commercial whaling at its 45th annual meeting in Kyoto last week. But the
way in which it came to that verdict did itself - and the whales - few
favours.
The IWC was set up after the second world war to protect whale numbers,
which were plummeting after decades of slaughter. There were 250,000 huge
blue whales early this century but only several hundred by the 1970s. The
number of humpbacks, right whales and sei whales has also fallen sharply.
But the IWC also recognised a responsibility to the whaling nations and in
the 1980s set itself the task of working out how many minke whales - the
smallest and most plentiful kind - could be caught without endangering the
species.
It has, however, increasingly departed from that second responsibility as
more anti-whaling nations have joined. At Kyoto, environmentalists stalled
scientific debate on how to calculate sustainable quotas; the UK switched
its main objections to commercial whaling from concern about sustainability
to the cruelty of the killing; and the US said for the first time that it
was opposed to any whaling at all.
The debate thus gave support to the claims of Japan, Norway and Iceland, the
three main whaling nations, that IWC concern about saving the whale has been
replaced by the romantic 'green' desire to save every single whale. The
result of the anti-whalers' filibustering is a short-term victory, but it
may prove counterproductive for protecting whales.
In protest, Norway has said that it will restart commercial whaling and is
expected to announce quotas this week of up to 800 minke whales. Japan has
separately hinted that it may leave the IWC.
Despite their frustration, both countries have acted prematurely. IWC
scientists still have legitimate misgivings about how many whales can
'sustainably' be caught. They now believe, after years of research, that
they have reliable estimates of minke whale numbers: about 87,000 in the
Barents sea north of Norway, and some 760,000 in the southern oceans. But
many feel the IWC still needs more research on breeding rates and the
different geographical distributions of males, females and young whales
before setting quotas.
There is good reason too for non-whaling IWC members to mistrust the ability
or willingness of whaling countries to observe quotas once commercial
whaling starts again. Much of the collapse in the numbers of the great
whales occured after the IWC's creation, and IWC members have not yet agreed
an adequate system of policing.
The IWC is currently the only forum for settling these issues. If it is to
regain credibility and save whales, its non-whaling members need to address
openly the question of its role and accept the principle of sustainable
whaling.
