FT  22 JUN 93 / The FT Review of Business Books (8): Capital without
adventure - Finance
VENTURE CAPITAL AT THE CROSSROADS by William D. Bygrave and Jeffry A Timmons
Harvard Business School Press. Dollars 35 356 pages
EUROPEAN venture capitalists, criticised for their move away from start-ups
and early stage finance, may take wry comfort from this fascinating study of
the US venture scene. American venture capital too has moved away from its
roots, backing innovative new businesses. It is now more aptly named
'merchant capital' or 'business development capital,' Bill Bygrave and Jeff
Timmons suggest. 'Venture capitalists don't create new businesses, they
steal them,' says one disillusioned entrepreneur.
The early days of venture capital in the US were exciting. The pioneers
played an important role in backing many companies which spearheaded
significant new industries. Many became powerful corporations. Digital
Equipment Corporation (DEC), Apple Computer, Sun Microsystems and Compaq
Computer all received venture backing.
The authors, academics with experience of founding businesses, describe the
creation of the personal computer industry, with considerable venture
capital money, as the largest legal creation of wealth in the US in the past
two decades.
They recount the story of the establishment, in 1946, of American Research &amp;
Development, the first firm to provide risk capital for new and growing
firms. New ventures had previously been financed by private individuals so
the creation of ARD is regarded as the decisive event in the establishment
of the industry.
ARD was set up to exploit technologies developed by the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology during the second world war. A co-founder, General
Georges Doriot, a Harvard professor, described its role as 'to watch, push,
worry and spread hope,' activities just as much needed now as in the
post-war period.
But as time has gone by venture capital's aspirations and role have changed.
This has been partly due to shifts in the sources of investment capital.
Private individuals have been replaced by pension funds with shorter time
horizons. Technology has developed but the late 1980s and 1990s have seen no
repetition of the technology wave based on the microprocessor, and
biotechnology.
The result has been that in the US and elsewhere venture capital has shifted
towards later stage investments in established, profitable businesses.
Technology investing has become a minority activity. Buy-outs now dominate
the sector.
But the shift of the venture industry to backing larger, established
companies threatens to lose the company-building skills so vital to the
entrepreneurial process. 'Classical' venture capital investing know-how has
been replaced with financial engineering skills. In Europe, in particular,
people coming into the industry have analytical and financial skills but no
business-building experience.
Does this matter? Bygrave and Timmons argue that it does. Stimulating
inventions and entrepreneurship is vital to national competitiveness and
requires not just tolerance by governments but active support.
They suggest, unconvincingly, that if Germany and Japan take up venture
capital in a big way the US could be relegated to second class status. In
fact, venture capital has had difficulty getting established in these
countries, which have different methods of financing industry. They are back
on firmer ground when arguing that small businesses create jobs, whereas, in
recent times, large corporations have destroyed them. Small companies are
also more innovative and more productive.
What of the future? They foresee an end to the current retrenchment of the
US venture industry by the mid-1990s and the beginnings of a shake-out in
Europe (this is already happening). By the year 2000 the US industry, with
Dollars 45bn to Dollars 50bn under management, will rank third behind Europe
and Japan while a new technology wave will prompt renewed interest in
start-ups and early stage investments. The attractiveness of a stock market
flotation will diminish. Entrepreneurs will plan increasingly for mergers or
trade sales.
This is open to challenge. Flotations fall in and out of favour depending on
the stock market and have recently proved popular in the US. Bygrave and
Timmons are also probably over-rating the vitality of classic venture
capital in Europe and Japan and underestimating its potential in the US.
More worrying for the industry is the importance the authors attach to a new
wave of technology. A financial sector which depends on the recurrence of
breakthroughs on the scale of the microprocessor would appear to be
vulnerable. Safer, surely, to rely, as European venture capital does, on
picking the best from a range of technologies and industry sectors?
