FT  05 OCT 93 / Up to 12 US troops die in Mogadishu battle: Two helicopters
shot down
PENTAGON officials said yesterday that as many as a dozen US soldiers were
killed in Mogadishu on Sunday night during a battle between United Nations
troops and militias loyal to Gen Mohammed Farah Aideed, Somalia's rebel
warlord.
One Malaysian UN peace-keeper was also killed in the fiercest confrontation
since the UN military took command of Somalia in May.
The International Committee of the Red Cross counted 500 Somali wounded in
Mogadishu's three hospitals. It gave no figures for the dead. Journalists in
the Somali capital, however, said they saw truck-loads of corpses being
driven from streets around the Bakara market where the battle raged until
dawn.
UN military officials said they had captured 24 of Gen Aideed's militiamen
in a search operation east of the market. Earlier they said five US soldiers
had died and a further six were believed to be missing after ground fire
shot down two US helicopters.
Hostile Somali crowds dragged the corpses of two American soldiers through
the streets of Mogadishu in a display of anti-US and anti-UN sentiment which
is becoming more entrenched with the rising Somali death toll in the United
Nations' war against Gen Aideed.
The high casualty rate among US troops is likely to harden the resolve of US
congressmen to pull their troops out of Somalia.
Already, there have been two votes on Capitol Hill requesting President Bill
Clinton to justify the continued US military presence in a country which
does not appear to appreciate the international intervention. Mr Clinton has
until October 15 to find a rationale that could turn the
anti-interventionist tide in the US.
'If the US decides Somalia is a loser and pulls out its troops, then other
countries which have sent troops to Somalia are unlikely to remain committed
to the UN operation,' Mr Terence Lyons, a policy director at the Brookings
Institution in Washington, said yesterday. Even scaling down US military
involvement would debilitate the UN mission, as American troops form the
backbone of the operation.
'If the multinational peacekeeping experiment is judged to be a failure in
Somalia, then other countries crying out for international action - Bosnia,
Angola, Mozambique - will be ignored,' Mr Lyons said.
The latest battle brought the number of UN peacekeepers killed to 63 since
the 27,000-strong UN force arrived in Somalia in May. Hundreds of Somalis
have been killed in the effort to trace Gen Aideed.
