FT  16 NOV 93 / International Company News: WMC in out-of-court settlement
ORD MINNETT and Western Mining Corporation are paying ADollars 20m
(USDollars 13m) to settle a court case in which it was alleged that a report
by the Sydney-based stockbroker - stating that WMC's sale of a 50 per cent
interest in the Lady Bountiful gold mine for ADollars 201m was 'fair and
reasonable' - was negligent.
Although neither party admitted liability, the out-of-court settlement is
the latest in a series of setbacks for WMC. Earlier this year, for example,
the Melbourne-based mining house was forced to relinquish its interest in
the valuable Ernest Henry copper/gold mine following litigation with Savage
Resources. The Ernest Henry debacle also ended in a settlement, and WMC took
a Dollars 20m charge in its 1992-93 accounts to cover the costs of this.
The latest lawsuit centres on the Lady Bountiful gold mine near Broad Arrow,
in Western Australia. In 1984, WMC acquired a half share in the Lady
Bountiful project from a small exploration company called Consolidated
Exploration, and became the mine's operator. Three years later, WMC sold the
stake back to Consex for ADollars 100m in cash and 27m Consex shares - then
worth about ADollars 101m.
At the time, Consex directors commissioned an independent valuation report,
for the benefit of non-WMC shareholders, from Ord Minnett. This stated that
the price of the WMC stake was fair and reasonable.
However, production forecasts for Lady Bountiful, which were once put at
120,000 ounces of gold per year, were never met, and the mine was closed in
1991. Consex shares, which reached almost ADollars 6 in 1987, slumped to a
few cents.
Consex itself underwent management changes, shifting its base from Melbourne
to Perth, and the new regime began the legal action which alleged that the
broker was negligent in preparing the valuation report and failed to
exercise reasonable skill and care. Ord Minnett joined WMC in the action,
and hearings began in the Victorian Supreme Court last month.
Under yesterday's settlement, Ord Minnett and its insurers will pay ADollars
10m to Consex, while WMC will put up a similar amount. Ord Minnett said that
the broking firm is fully indemnified for the cost of the settlement. WMC's
shares in Consex - which now represent a stake of around 18 per cent - will
also be cancelled. The mining house said that it has already written off
this stake, although it has not previously provided for any settlement
costs.
Yesterday, Mr Kevin Troy, Ord Minnett's chairman, said that there was a
related law suit, from a Consex shareholder, which was still outstanding.
This, he said, was being contested 'vigorously'.
Meanwhile, in Perth, Consex said that proceeds from the action would help
the company continue in the gold exploration business.
Consex shares, which had been buoyed on hopes of a lucrative victory, eased
1 1/2 cents to 7 cents. Western Mining added 9 cents to ADollars 5.85.
