FT  07 DEC 93 / Survey of Thailand (11): Frustration among Moslems
The port in Pattani province in southern Thailand is packed with fishing
boats off-loading their catch, mainly from the rich fishing grounds around
nearby Vietnam.
Young girls crouch over baskets, sorting the fish. All the girls wear the
hijab, the Moslem headress.
'The workers are all Moslems' says Mr Woravit Baru, a Moslem scholar and
lecturer at the local university. 'But the towkay (boss) is Thai Buddhist or
Chinese.'
There are nearly two million Moslems in southern Thailand. In Pattani
province, they make up about 80 per cent of the population. Thailand is a
state imbued with Buddhist values and ideals, with the monarchy and the
bureaucracy functioning as an integral part of that world.
Southern Thailand's Moslem community has long resented the imposition of the
Thai state and its Buddhist values - 'this is a Moslem area, yet the state
governor is not a Moslem, most important officials are not Moslems and many
teachers come from outside' says Mr Woravit.
A guerrilla group, the Pattani United Liberation Organisation (Pulo), though
believed to have only 300 members, still pursues the goal of a separate
state. Thai officials blame Pulo for attacks earlier this year on a train, a
Buddhist temple and a group of soldiers in which at least six people died.
Pulo is also held responsible for the burning of more than 30 schools in
August. But locals say the burnings are the result of infighting in the
armed forces and feuds between powerful local families.
Whatever the truth behind these incidents, there is no doubting the
frustration local Moslems feel with what they perceive as an uncaring and
insensitive administration.
The semi-derelict Kruze mosque in Pattani is one of the region's more
important Moslem sites. Locals say officials should not have allowed a
Chinese temple to expand next door. The temple has now become a tourist
attraction. Each day coach parties of Chinese arrive to let off fire
crackers and make offerings to their gods, disturbing Moslems at prayer.
Most Moslems live in the villages and work in agriculture, mainly in rubber.
Rubber prices have been falling and income levels have dropped. In Pattani,
unemployment is higher than in any other southern province. Moslems say the
province's fish processing industry, the rubber factories and the canneries
are controlled by outsiders and little benefit goes to locals.
'We want to set up Islamic banks so that we can do business' says Mr
Worawit. 'But the government won't let us.'
Pattani's Moslems are keenly aware of the privileges accorded to their
fellow Moslems south of the border in Malaysia. The new administration in
Bangkok has pledged to make more effort to improve the living standards of
Moslems. Investors are being encouraged to set up factories in the area.
