FT  18 SEP 93 / Motoring: Promising concepts for your family - Frankfurt
Show / Stuart Marshall has been looking at exciting cars of the future
IMAGINE a car that at four metres (13ft 4in) long is shorter than a Toyota
Corolla hatchback but has more rear seat room than a Toyota Lexus LS400
luxury saloon. The floor, front and back, is completely flat. Its 1.8 litre
lean-burn engine drives the front wheels through a four-speed automatic
transmission.
If you think it sounds like a very sensible family car for the mid-1990s, I
can only agree. But there is more. Accelerator, foot and parking brakes are
electronically operated, like the 'fly-by-wire' controls in the latest
aircraft, though with fail-safe mechanical back-up.
The driver sits high. To make parking in tight places easier, only the first
30 cm (12 in) of the bonnet are out of sight. The digital speedometer is a
'head up' display - you see the speed reflected in the windscreen without
having to lower your eyes from the road.
A single enormous motor-driven door on each side moves slightly out and then
back at a finger touch, with the rear view mirrors folding automatically.
Even if you have to park very closely to the car alongside, getting out will
not be a struggle.
This paragon of commonsense is called the Toyota Raum. I rated it the most
practical and promising of all the concept cars at Frankfurt Show. Although
Raum is clearly a concept car, it could be produced now, using existing
factory facilities. But will it? Toyota says it is not a technological tour
de force, just good old-fashioned innovation, and is a good indication of
what might find it way into Toyota dealerships in the not-too-distant
future.
Among other eye-catching concept cars at Frankfurt were the Buick Sceptre, a
rear wheel driven, supercharged 3-litre V6 engined four-door with active
suspension and styling that might grow on one, and the Mitsubishi HSR-IV and
ESR.
The HSR-VI has a 1.6-litre V6 but one complete bank of cylinders is shut off
at low speeds, reducing fuel consumption and exhaust emissions. All four
wheels drive and steer.
ESR (for ecology, science and research) is a futuristic hybrid vehicle,
driven by nickel-hydrogen batteries recharged by a 1.5-litre petrol engine.
It looks like a Star Wars prop, seats four, is fitted with six air bags for
all-round passenger protection, has a top speed of 124 mph (200 kph) and a
range of up to 625 miles (1,000 km).
I never dismiss concepts like ESR as flights of high-tech fancy. My
grandchildren may be driving them in 20 years time.
