FT  04 OCT 93 / The Russian Crisis: Yeltsin's opponents focus anger on
biased coverage by media
'THE conflict among the Russian people has gone too far,' were the prophetic
last words of the broadcaster before one of Russia's main TV channels came
off the air at 7:42pm last night.
The Ostankino TV centre, which broadcasts for both Russian and Commonwealth
television, was the most coveted of prizes for President Boris Yeltsin's
opponents who stormed the building last night.
If they had one justifiable complaint, since President Yeltsin won the April
referendum with the active support of the media, it was that of biased
coverage.
For the journalists themselves have openly taken sides in Russia's political
battles, either out of economic necessity or political conviction. Threats
by one parliamentary leader before last night's events to 'hang journalists'
played a considerable role in forcing them to choose sides.
Last night Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, the parliamentary speaker, warned
journalists they would otherwise be held responsible for 'crimes against the
nation'.
In the past two weeks, television has contented itself with bland reports of
Mr Yeltsin's decrees and his efforts to end the siege of parliament
peacefully. There has been little room for the views of those holed up
inside the White House and their supporters. A programme called Red Square
was taken off the air last week by the head of the Commonwealth television
station, on the grounds it could incite violence.
Red Square's producer, Mr Alexander Liubimov, himself a pro-Yeltsin deputy,
says he was prevented from informing the public 'of what is happening in
society' as a result of television's dependence on state subsidies.
'I don't blame Ostankino as such. I blame the people who exploit this
economic situation for political motives.' The state-owned Russian
Television company, for instance, receives Rbs30bn in state subsidies a
year, compared to just Rbs400m in advertising revenues.
The tragedy of Russia's media has been that in being forced to take sides
they have helped precipitate a backlash against them.
'Although I am not delighted by either side, Yeltsin is the lesser of two
evils,' Ms Svetlana Sorokina, the charming 36-year-old presenter of Russian
television news who has freely mixed the news with her pro-Yeltsin
sympathies, said in an interview before last night's events.
On Saturday night she concluded her broadcast with words echoing Mr
Yeltsin's calls for a peaceful end to the siege of the Russian parliament.
'Let us not give into passions, and let us chase hatred from our hearts.'
When Mr Yeltsin's mother died just as he was being driven into a corner by
parliament last April, Ms Sorokina exclaimed: 'Hang on in there, Boris
Nikolaevich.'
The day after Mr Yeltsin dissolved parliament, the board of Russian TV
issued a statement voicing unanimous support for his decision.
Mr Sergei Skvortsov, the suave deputy head of Russian Television, agreed in
a recent interview that Russian journalists' overt involvement in politics
could badly backfire against media freedoms in future. 'In theory you're
right, but this is Russia. If you look at the people in the White House, the
journalists' reaction is a natural response to the situation.'
The same voluntary bias is true of many newspapers. Izvestiya newspaper's
staunch support for Mr Yeltsin has been partly due to Mr Khasbulatov's
attempts to turn it into a parliamentary newspaper. But in publishing a
psychiatrist's statement declaring the occupants of the White House to be
mentally unsound, Komsomolskaya Pravda, the former Communist youth paper,
made a bizarre journey into the past - when both psychiatry and journalism
were under the thumb of the authorities.
Fears that unless the bias in television is corrected, Russia will be unable
to hold free and fair elections for a new president and parliament remain as
true today as ever before. 'Today, many people understand that under such
political pressure, television will be unlikely to secure objective coverage
of the election campaign,' warned Nezavisimaya (Independent) newspaper at
the weekend. It urged the creation of a body to enforce media impartiality
in the run-up to the elections.
'Both sides have been trying to get the media on their side while true
democrats want the media to be on the side of the people,' warned Mr Mikhail
Fedotov, the former information minister forced to quit last month by the
president's more interventionist aide for the media, Mr Mikhail Poltoranin.
