FT  08 APR 93 / Tax warning by oil industry
NORTH SEA oil operators are preparing to warn the government that they will
scale down oil exploration severely if changes to Petroleum Revenue Tax
proposed in the Budget become law.
The UK Offshore Operators' Association, the oil industry group, has drafted
a letter to the Department of Trade and Industry, saying that many companies
will be unable to meet previous commitments made to the government over
future drilling activity because of the planned PRT changes.
A survey published yesterday by Ernst and Young, the accountants, found that
85 per cent of oil companies expect job losses to result from the PRT
changes. Some 40 per cent of the respondents expected job losses to be much
higher than the Treasury's estimate of 10,000.
The changes to the PRT regime would reduce the tax rate for existing
oilfields from 75 per cent to 50 per cent and abolish it for new fields. The
chancellor also proposed to abolish tax relief for exploration and appraisal
work. This means that companies will have to pay 64p for every pound spent
on drilling activity, compared with 17p now.
Companies say they applied for previous licences to explore for oil in the
North Sea on the basis that the rules would stay the same. As part of those
applications, they committed themselves to drilling a certain number of
wells.
If no tax relief is available for exploration, many companies will be unable
to fulfil their obligations, the industry argues. But its response to the
new rules is complicated by a row between winners and losers from the
changes. Amerada Hess has said it will halve its exploration activity, but
British Petroleum said the changes would improve recovery of oil from
existing fields.
Many companies want some transitional relief - the chancellor has said that
if companies had already entered into contracts for drilling wells, they can
still apply for tax relief. Companies want that to be extended to firm
commitments for drilling wells.
Analysts reckon that as part of previous licensing arrangements, the
industry is commited to drilling 170 wells over the next couple of years.
Last year 116 wells were drilled in the North Sea, and some estimates expect
this to drop off to just 80 this year as a result of the depressed oil price
and the PRT changes. An average of one in seven wells strikes oil.
Oil sector at odds, Page 9
