FT  12 MAY 93 / Danish Referendum: Denmark's fishermen ready to sink treaty
 -Hugh Carnegy gathers views on quayside
Knut-Erik Vestfart and his brother Per, like many of Europe's fishermen, are
angry. Prices are at rock bottom for the cod, herring and other fish they
bring in from the Baltic and North Sea to their home port of Skagen, at
Denmark's northern tip. They want to catch more to compensate, but cannot
because they would exceed EC quotas.
Little wonder then, as they winch their nets aboard their 20-tonne
wooden-hulled vessel CK Vest and cast off for a night's fishing, that they
have no hesitation in saying how they will vote in next Tuesday's Danish
referendum on the Maastricht treaty.
'No]' exclaims Knut-Erik. 'In the Baltic I've never seen so much big cod as
this year but we can't catch them because of the Community rules. I'm sure
most of fishermen will vote No.'
The story is much the same all along the quayside in Skagen, which was
closed for three weeks last month by a fishermen's protest strike. It is
common also to find deeper resentments against the EC.
'I don't want Europe to become a new US,' says Marianne Henrikson, who works
in a dockside bar. 'We should buy and sell to each other, but not have the
same police or military. People fear the big countries, like Germany.'
But this is not the whole story either. Just a step away from the boats, a
less emotional response is evident that backs up forecasts that Danes will
reverse last year's No vote.
Kurt Rye Poulsen is chairman of the Skagen Fishermen's Association, which
represents 430 local boat owners and crew. Last year, he was forced to sell
his 150-tonne trawler because he could no longer make money fishing. He says
there are only 105 boats over five tonnes in Skagen against 200 a decade
ago.
He is campaigning hard for larger quotas - he disbelieves official reports
on low stocks - and a block on cheap imports from third countries.
Yet he and his association are recommending a Yes vote. 'Denmark has very
small waters, so most of the fish we catch is in EC waters. Most of our fish
is sold to other EC countries. I see big problems if we don't stay in the
EC.'
This is echoed by fish auctioneer Bach Andersen. He says things have never
been so bad in Skagen, where unemployment is 15 per cent. Cod prices are
down 40 per cent since 1990; quotas have fallen by the same proportion.
But he, too, will vote yes. 'Perhaps my heart says No, but my brain says
Yes. We cannot sell our fish in other markets. The solution is not to get
out of the system but to change the system.'
The fishing industry makes up 80 per cent of the local economy in Skagen,
the balance accounted for by tourism. Rune Larsson, the head of the local
chamber of commerce says he will vote Yes. He expects the majority of those,
like himself, in the fishing service industry to do likewise.
But he is far from confident about the outcome. He fears that what he sees
as rational arguments may be eclipsed as polling day approaches. 'The great
problem is that the discussion tends to be on a very emotional level.'
