FT  15 JUN 93 / Women's advance reflects a fast-changing Turkey: John Murray
Brown puts the Moslem country's first female prime minister in her place
THE ELECTION by Turkey's largest party of Mrs Tansu Ciller as party leader
and the country's first woman prime minister was explained in one Ankara
newspaper by the story that wives of the men who voted had threatened a
collective withdrawal of conjugal rights if she did not win.
Mischievous perhaps - the newspaper or the wives, depending on the truth -
but the story illustrates the point that there is a growing group of Turkish
women asserting themselves in ways which to the outsider may seem at odds
with Turkey's image as a conservative Moslem country. And Mrs Ciller is one
such woman.
She is unlikely to be quite as forthright as one of Turkey's most eminent
woman professors who told a recent conference that 'women's equality must
start in bed'.
But her advocacy of women's rights seems certain to occupy a high priority
in her policy agenda as she starts her first day as Turkey's new leader. The
47-year-old US-trained economist, is already well-known for having a husband
who took her maiden name.
Drop into her office in the new prime ministry and you are as likely to find
a group of Turkish girl guides lobbying her support, as a moustachioed male
adviser on the economy.
Turkey is changing dramatically, and women offer dramatic illustration of
those changes. Sociologists point out that the Turks were historically a
matriarchal society.
Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, the country's founder, enshrined women's equal
rights, gave them the vote in 1932 before much of Europe, banned the Moslem
'chador' or veil, saw women elected to the new parliament, even sent a
women's team to the 1936 Berlin Olympics.
Women account for two in 5 physicists and chemists; one in six lawyers,
judges and public prosecutors; one in six doctors; one in 10 government
administrators and one in 30 managers of private corporations.
In 1991, Turkey appointed its first woman provincial governor. Previously
the feeble reason given to exclude women from the post was that governors
were required to travel on horseback - something which was deemed unseemly
and quite possibly dangerous for a woman official.
By law women need their husbands' permission to work. Women are not allowed
to remarry within a year after a divorce. A number of municipalities have
established safe houses to treat women battered by their husbands, still a
widespread phenomenon.
But it is among the less-educated and particularly in rural areas where
women face the greater uphill struggle for their rights.
According to a study by the World Bank and the Erzurum University, women
account for a 59 per cent of the labour force, a statistic reinforced by the
briefest of contacts with the Turkish countryside where the sight of one man
'herding' a team of women in a field of chickpeas is not unusual.
Mrs Semra Ozal,wife of the late president Mr Turgut Ozal, did much to raise
the profile of women. Her Daisies foundation travelled the countryside
converting thousands of religious marriages into civil contracts, giving
women equal rights in inheritance and claims on children in a divorce.
The junior partners in the coalition, the Social Democrats have suggested a
quota system in parliament to ensure an even hand for women. People point
out that there were more women in parliament in Ataturk's time than today
where there are just eight deputies in the 450-member chamber. The strongest
female representation is in the right-wing Motherland party, with four women
members. Mrs Ciller's True Path party has two.
In the old coalition, Mrs Ciller was one of just two women ministers. Her
former ministerial colleague, Mrs Guler Ileri, a Social Democrat, was forced
to resign, the only casualty of the coalition government, over allegations
she purloined state funds allocated for a children's orphanage.
Today the only thing anyone remembers about Mrs Ileri is that she succeeded
in having a coiffure for women opened in the parliament building.
