FT  16 JUN 93 / Survey of Telecommunications in Business (13): Competition
is slow - New entrants beside Mercury
There has been a lot of huffing and puffing since the government lifted the
remaining restrictions on competition to BT and Mercury in 1991. But few of
the new telephone companies that announced plans around that time to build
new telephone networks are close to delivering a service.
British Rail Telecommunications, British Waterways and National Networks -
the start-up company which was going to use the Post Office's internal
network - all came up with plans to build networks that would connect the
main UK centres of population. But none are laying down telephone lines yet.
Meanwhile, US telephone companies Sprint and American Telephone and
Telegraph are banging their drums loudly but have no intention of
duplicating BT's, or even Mercury's less extensive network.
In fairness, most of the applicants are still waiting for the government to
process their licence applications. But even after licences have been
granted and the operators have secured financial backing and started
building their networks, most new telephone companies are only ever likely
to target a very small number of high-spending large business customers.
With BT, the cable television companies and Mercury Communications already
poised for a two- or three-way fight for small to medium-sized business and
residential customers - it will be a three-way fight if the cable television
companies stop working in partnership with Mercury  - it would be risky for
any other company to embark on a multi-billion pound venture to cable up the
whole of the country.
Most of the new competitors, therefore, are planning to build networks which
rely heavily on the national infrastructures already in place courtesy of BT
and Mercury.
A new breed of telephone companies called resellers are the clearest example
of how it is possible to compete with BT and Mercury using their telephone
network infrastructures.
Resellers lease private circuits on long-distance and international routes
from BT and Mercury, and resell capacity on these routes to their customers.
A reseller can connect its customer to the BT or Mercury private circuit
either with another private circuit, or by the public telephone network. In
either case, a reseller buys the service from BT or Mercury, repackages it,
and sells it to its customer.
Worldcom, the UK subsidiary of a Swiss telecommunications group, is one of
15 or so companies which consider that the UK offers attractive
opportunities for resale. But Worldcom is the only company which has firmly
established itself as a reseller and signed up big corporate accounts.
Worldcom offers services to the US and other leading international
destinations at lower prices than either BT or the cheaper Mercury
Communications.
It has more than 100 customers already and is well placed to benefit from
the liberalisation of resale services in Europe.
Today, the opportunity for resale services in Europe are limited. But the
European Commission intends to force member states to drop all restrictions
on resale within the Community by 1998.
Other resellers are planning to enter the UK market over the next one to two
years, all offering discounts to BT and Mercury on main routes. Most of
these are new companies which plan to exploit the huge discrepancies between
the actual cost and the price that is charged to the customer for delivering
international services. Others are public telephone operators such as
Swedish Telecom and Telecom Australia which will offer international
services to UK subsidiaries of Swedish and Australian companies.
This is clearly the attraction for AT&amp;T, the US telecommunications giant
which applied in April for a licence to operate a domestic and international
telephone network.
AT&amp;T has not decided whether it will build a trunk network across the UK. To
build a network from scratch would cost billions of pounds and it would take
tens of years to recoup the initial investment. One option would be for AT&amp;T
to partner one or more of those new competitors whose projects are already
far advanced.
One such project is the proposed trunk network to be built by Energis, a
company wholly owned by the National Grid company which operates the trunk
electricity network in England and Wales. Energis plans to open the UK's
third trunk telephone network in spring 1994. It will connect 17 of the
largest towns and cities in England and Wales. Energis is investing Pounds
100m a year in the network over the next five years and would welcome a
partner such as AT&amp;T to share some of the investment burden. Energis
received its licence from the DTI in May.
Energis will initially target business customers in city centres and offer
them cheaper private circuit and public network services than BT or Mercury.
It says it will make considerable savings on the construction costs of the
network through the use of existing national grid infrastructure. It plans
where possible to wrap optical fibre on overhead power lines as a cheap
alternative to installing cable below ground - and it hopes to link its
trunk network into local telephone networks that several regional
electricity companies are planning to build.
The other project most likely to succeed involves the delivery of local
telephone services by radio. Ionica is a start-up company which has
developed the technology to deliver local telephone services to residential
and small business customers using radio tails and bypassing the BT local
telephone network. Ionica reckons it can provide a service to half the UK
population over the next few years at prices considerably lower than BT or
Mercury.
Today, the only real alternative to BT and Mercury for most business
customers are the services delivered by the cable television companies. The
cable operators' franchise areas cover 14.9m households and businesses,
although most of these are still in the planning or network building phase.
Nevertheless, they have already installed more than 150,000 telephone lines
and more than 20 per cent of the BT customers they approach are signing up.
Cable television operators are mainly targeting small business and
residential customers, offering them prices some 10 to 20 per cent cheaper
than BT or Mercury. Many of them are offering new services such as call
waiting or call forwarding. Diamond Cable, the cable television operator in
Nottingham, has introduced free local calls if they are made between cable
television network subscribers.
