FT  29 SEP 93 / Smith prepares for union test: Labour party leader calls for
economic expansion and social justice
MR JOHN SMITH set the stage yesterday for the most important test of his
leadership with a keynote address at Labour's Brighton conference calling
for economic expansionism and social justice.
Speaking on the eve of today's knife-edge vote about his plans to
democratise the party's links with the trade unions, Mr Smith combined a
ferocious attack on Mr John Major's 'sleazy, shabby, secretive' government
with a plea for Labour unity.
With his political authority tied inextricably to victory in the
confrontation with Labour's union paymasters, Mr Smith sought to win the
support of conference delegates by stressing commitment to full employment,
a minimum wage, trade union rights and strong public services.
Deriding the economic record of 14 years of Conservative rule, he emphasised
that Labour would generate faster economic growth through increased
investment in education, training, infrastructure and industry.
Mr Smith won enthusiastic ovations with a series of mocking references to
the threat to Mr Major's party leadership, warning that if he were replaced
Labour would demand an immediate general election. He defined the choice
which would face the electorate as between 'a high-skill economy and a
bargain-basement Britain, a choice bet-ween investing in education and
health and the neglect that leads to rising crime, and a choice between a
more democratic and open society and a secretive and shabby government'.
To predictable applause, the Labour leader attacked the government's freeze
on the public sector pay bill as the 'price' that nurses, firefighters and
teachers had to pay for the Conservatives' 'miserable' failure. Labour would
also call a halt to 'dogmatic' privatisation.
But despite public confidence that Mr Smith would secure a
one-member-one-vote system for the selection of parliamentary candidates,
senior figures in the shadow cabinet admitted the outcome was 'too close too
call'.
Amid back-room bargaining the consensus was that the outcome would hinge on
the votes of a few small trade unions and the size of the majority for
reform among the constituency delegates.
The best guess of the party's psephologists was that Mr Smith needed the
support of two-thirds of the constituencies to counter a four-to-three
majority against change among the trade unions. One member of the leader's
camp summed up the latest mood with the comment: 'I am convinced he (Mr
Smith) will win, but I do not know how.' That impression was reinforced by
reports of nervousness among the two union delegations - the TGWU and the
GMB - most vehemently opposed to change. But neither appeared ready to back
down.
Mr John Edmonds, the leader of the GMB, praised Mr Smith's speech but his
call for a compromise over OMOV was immediately rejected by aides of the
Labour leader.
The extent of the Labour leader's difficulties was underlined last night by
Mr Bill Morris, general secretary of the TGWU, who warned a Tribune group
meeting that Labour must address the 'vacuum' that people perceived in the
party's policies.
Mr Smith postponed an explicit plea for loyalty until his second address to
the conference at the start of today's debate. But in a reference to the
tasks which would face a future Labour government, he insisted that the
party must first have 'the courage and confidence to reform our own
constitution as well'.
LABOUR AT BRIGHTON Page 12
Fresh battle looms over social chapter
Queue to praise Smith
Editorial Comment Page 25
