FT  11 JUN 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Palm oil smooths Malaysia's
troubled waters - The one bright spot in the country's troubled plantations
sector
THESE ARE bad times for Malaysia's commodity producers. Rubber and cocoa
growers, reeling from a prolonged period of low world prices, are going out
of business. Tin output has fallen by nearly 50 per cent in the last two
years, with miners despairing of ever seeing a return to higher prices and
profitable production. Palm oil is the one bright spot.
Malaysia is the world's biggest palm oil producer by far. In 1992 Malaysia
it more than 6.3m tonnes, accounting for about 55 per cent of total world
output. And palm oil is now one of Malaysia's biggest export items, with
export revenues of more than MDollars 6bn (USDollars 2.3bn) last year.
Prices have been generally buoyant with crude palm oil fetching between
MDollars 880-950 a tonne on the Kuala Lumpur palm oil exchange, compared
with average production costs of between MDollars 450-650 a tonne.
While rubber and cocoa production is contracting, Malaysia's planners have
ambitious plans for the palm oil sector. Forecasts put production this year
at 6.8m tonnes, rising to 7.5m tonnes by 1995 and to 9m tonnes by the year
2000.
This compares with production of only 51,000 tonnes in 1950 when less than
40,000 hectares was planted with palm oil. Now the crop is planted on about
2m hectares, mainly in peninsula Malaysia.
There are those who worry that palm oil risks the same fate as other
commodities, with fast expanding production creating oversupply and thereby
causing low prices. But producers point to the growing penetration of palm
oil in the world oil and fats market.
In 1980 palm oil accounted for about 20 per cent of the world edible oil and
fats market: it now has a 33 per cent share.
Mr Borge Bek-Nielsen runs 94,000 acres of plantations - mostly planted with
palm oil - on the west coast of peninsula Malaysia. A Dane who has been in
the palm oil business in Malaysia since the early 1950s, he is known as the
country's palm oil king.
'Palm oil now has far greater acceptance in the market,' he says. 'In terms
of world consumption it has overtaken sunflower and rapeseed oils and by the
end of the decade will have surpassed soyabean.'
Malaysia recently became involved in a bitter battle with US soyabean
growers, who alleged that palm oil was potentially dangerous to health. Mr
Bek-Nielsen says this was a blatant campaign to try to stop palm oil's
invasion of US soyabean markets. 'Palm oil is one of the healthiest oils,'
he insists, 'we are winning the health battle, that's for sure.'
But other battles and other problems beset the Malaysian palm oil industry.
There is a constant need to explore new markets. India was once Malaysia's
biggest palm oil buyer. Now its purchases have virtually ceased as it has
become self-sufficient in vegetable oil production. In 1989 the former
Soviet Union imported more than 400,000 tonnes of Malaysian palm oil: last
year, because of its economic problems, it only imported slightly more than
20,000 tonnes.
To encourage more palm oil sales the Malaysian government has instituted an
extended credit scheme for purchasers. Pakistan, Algeria, Iran, Egypt, Iran,
China and the US have now become big markets.
Europe as a whole imported 1.7m tonnes of Malaysian palm oil last year:
Malaysia continues to lobby for the abolition of European Community import
duties of 12 per cent on processed palm oil and 4 per cent on crude.
'All this talk of free trade means nothing when there are such duties,' says
Mr Bek-Nielsen. 'Yet at the same time the EC gives vast subsidies to its
rapeseed farmers. Rapeseed is sold at about half the cost of production to
India, Pakistan, China, Japan and elsewhere, meaning that EC taxpayers'
money is being used to undercut our palm oil exports. The US Export
Enhancement Program is also against the principles of free trade. It is very
unfair.'
As part of its programme to encourage more downstream, value-adding
enterprises, the Malaysian government ensures that most palm oil is exported
in processed form.
Now there are suggestions that to open up new markets Malaysia export more
crude palm oil in order to avoid the higher duties most countries put on
processed oil.
Some Malaysian producers have already set up palm oil refineries overseas.
But most of these are forced to buy their crude feedstock from outside
Malaysia. The refining lobby within Malaysia is politically very strong: the
refiners say multi-million dollar investments would be wiped out if more
crude was allowed to be exported.
Securing markets is vital in view of the increased competition coming from
neighbouring Indonesia. Indonesia's palm oil output, once the world's
biggest, declined in the post second world war years. But now it is
increasing dramatically - from 691,000 tonnes in 1980 to nearly 3m tonnes
last year. It is forecast that by 2010 Indonesia will be producing 12.3m
tonnes - ahead of forecast Malaysian production in the same year of 11m
tonnes.
Ironically part of the reason for the resurgence of Indonesian palm oil is
Malaysian official policy. When Kuala Lumpur began localising its plantation
industry in the late 1960s, phasing out foreign companies and managers, many
planters decamped across the water to Indonesia, taking their expertise with
them.
Indonesia has a ready supply of land available for palm oil plantations: its
government has subsidised fertilisers and other inputs to the industry; and,
most importantly, it has an abundant supply of cheap labour.
Estate workers cost three times as much in Malaysia as in Indonesia.
Malaysia is fast industrialising: workers, particularly the young, are
leaving the estate sector for urban areas and what they consider to be less
arduous jobs.
'Labour is our big problem,' says Mr Bek-Nielsen. 'On some of our estates 70
per cent are foreign workers. Many just come for a few months, get their
training, but then leave for the towns or cities.'
Efforts are being made to bring in more mechanisation: all Mr Bek-Nielsen's
estates have narrow gauge railway systems linking planted areas with on-site
refineries. Aerial fertiliser spraying has also cut down labour
requirements. But harvesting of the palm oil bunches still has to be by
hand.
'We provide housing and all sorts of amenities on our plantations, we even
have an old folks home,' says Mr Bek-Nielsen. (There is also a Danish
bakery).
The plantations object to paying a MDollars 300 government levy for every
foreign worker employed. 'Many of these workers end up in various
industries,' says Mr Bek-Nielsen. 'In a way we are subsidising the
industrial sector. Palm oil is the oil of the future, that's for sure. But
the government has to help the agricultural industry. If not Malaysia is
going to miss out on vital opportunities.'
 ---------------------------------------------------
Palm Oil Production ('000 tonnes)
 ---------------------------------------------------
Country               Average          Average
                   1982-83/84-85   1989-90/91-92
 ---------------------------------------------------
Malaysia               3,572            6,352
Indonesia              1,114            2,658
Nigeria                  273              622
Colombia                 115              256
Ivory Coast              167              245
Thailand                  79              237
PNG                      127              164
Ecuador                   76              143
Cameroon                  83              111
World                  6,120           11,589
 ---------------------------------------------------
Source: Economist Intelligence Unit
 ---------------------------------------------------
