FT  01 OCT 93 / Blueprint aims for pensions protection / A look at the
committee's detailed proposals for new safeguards
THE PENSIONS Law Review Committee, the advisory panel the government
appointed to advise it in the aftermath of the Maxwell scandal, has produced
a blueprint for sweeping reform of the way pension schemes are governed.
Broadly speaking, it calls on government to set out in law what has only
been enshrined in the concept of best practice, and to set up a pensions
regulator responsible for ensuring the law is followed.
The committee, chaired by Professor Roy Goode, made no bones about what is
saw as its mandate: to reassure pension-scheme members that benefits
promised in the past will actually be delivered while maintaining employers'
freedom to alter future commitments which they may not be able to afford.
'Many of our recommendations do little more than reflect best practice, and,
when taken with the simplification measures we have proposed, should add
few, if any, financial burdens to a well-run and properly funded scheme . .
. as a result, both employer and scheme members should feel confident that
the pension promise is more secure and that at the same time the employer's
future commitments can be limited to what is considered affordable,' the
committee wrote.
The committee's final conclusions include: An Occupational Pensions Act to
lay out a properly structured framework of rights and duties. There should
also be a new pensions regulator to see that the new law is enforced. 'The
root of the problem is that there is no comprehensive legal framework
governing occupational pensions.'
The Pensions Act should protect the 'pensions promise' that is, the pension
benefits which each worker has accrued up until either leaving employment or
the terms of the pension scheme for future service are altered.
Every breach of duty under such a pensions act should carry a sanction, some
of which would be imposed by the pensions regulator. Other breaches would be
treated as civil wrongs. The act would be supplemented with other measures,
including a code of practice which could cover such things as the frequency
and conduct of meetings of the boards of trustees.
There should be a Pension Compensation Board to administer a scheme in cases
of fraud, theft and other misappropriation only. It would be financed by a
levy on schemes and all disbursements by it would be in the form of a loan.
Any recoveries on behalf of the defunct scheme will reimburse the
compensation fund.
Pension-scheme members should have fuller and more frequent access to
information about their scheme.
Trust law is broadly satisfactory as the basis for the governance of pension
schemes. However, there is a need to modify some principles of trust law
with respect to the way pensions are governed. 'In particular, some curbs
need to be placed on the permissible content of scheme rules, especially in
relation to to certain of the powers that can be reserved to the employer
and the trustees and the scope of exemptions given to trustees from
liability for breach of duty.'
There shall be a minimum funding requirement for all schemes equal to 100
per cent of the liabilities of the scheme if it were wound up immediately.
However, there will be a margin allowed and a scheme shall not be in
violation of this standard unless assets fall below 90 per cent of
liabilities upon wind-up.
In the event that a shortfall below 90 per cent is discovered by the
actuary, the employer will have three months to make it good. Two weeks
after that the trustees must tell scheme members if the shortfall remains,
and try to recover the money from the employer. The regulator may also take
steps to force the employer to make the necessary payment.
Because actuarial valuations of pension schemes are relatively infrequent -
usually occurring every three years - trustees should be required to furnish
the regulator with an annual certificate of solvency from the appointed
actuary.
Cash payments to the employer from the pension scheme should not be
permitted without the express permission of the regulator, even if the
scheme's trust deed specifically permits it. In cases where the trust deed
does not allow withdrawals by the employer, the employer will have to notify
members that it has sought permission to do so from the regulator.
Generally, the regulator will not allow cash withdrawals unless future
pension benefits have been indexed against inflation and if there is no
danger that the surplus will be reduced to precarious levels.
There shall be no restrictions on an employer's ability to use a
pension-fund surplus to finance a so-called contributions holiday. However,
there shall be no contributions holidays either for employers or employees
if as a result, the scheme would fall below the minimum solvency standard.
The committee is also urging a change in tax rules to extend to 15 years
from five years the time in which surplus over 105 per cent of liabilities
must be disposed of.
Employers should not have the sole right to appoint trustees and should not
have the right to veto any trustee selected by scheme members. For
earnings-related schemes (with the exception of small schemes) active
members should be entitled to appoint from among themselves at least one
third of the trustee board, with a minimum of two trustees selected in this
way. For money-purchase schemes, active members should be entitled to
appoint at least two thirds of the trustee board.
Scheme members should be free to appoint a non-member of their scheme as a
trustee, such as a trade union representative, as long as the employer
agrees. Disputes may be referred to the regulator.
Member-appointed trustees can only be removed by the unanimous decision of
the other trustees and the regulator must be notified if this is done.
Certain rights must be reserved to the trustees, namely the right to appoint
the scheme's professional advisors including its actuary, accountant and
fund managers. They also have the right to decide the use of any unallocated
surplus in the event of a scheme wind-up and will direct the way in which
discretionary benefits are to be taken into account when members transfer
out of the scheme for any reason.
For early leavers, no change is recommended in the rules which require the
values of deferred pensions to uprated each year by either the retail price
index or five per cent, whichever is the lower, although the report notes
that some members favoured linking the uprating to an earnings index.
However, the actuarial profession should be required to tighten the bases
upon which transfer values are calculated. There are too many different
accepted practices to be used in calculating transfer values so that two
workers with similar working patterns and sala ries may have very different
sums upon leaving a scheme.
The regulator should have the power to fine schemes which do not pay
transfer values to early leavers within 12 months of departure.
In the case of scheme members who are transferred to a new scheme with the
sale of their employer, it is not reasonable to require the new employer to
provide future benefits equal to those granted by the previous employer.
Professional advisers to a scheme will be required to report serious or
persistent irregularities to the regulator.
On investment policy, a 'prudent man' rule should replace the complex
investment guidelines, and the committee sees no reason to ban the practice
of stock lending by schemes, provided it is done in conformity with
established practice. The minimum 5 per cent limit on self-investment should
be allowed to stand although there should be a bar on the provision of any
loans or other financial assistance to or the granting of guarantees for the
employer and associated companies.
Pension-fund trustees will not be required to place scheme assets with a
custodian independent from the fund manager as had been urged by some in the
fund management industry. The committee also decided against requiring that
all securities be held in the name of the customer.
The final report, some 1,000 pages long, was compiled after receiving 1,669
separate written submissions.
Pension Law Reform - The report of the Pension Law Review Committee. Volume
I: Report. HMSO. Pounds 50.00. Volume II: Research. HMSO Pounds 21.30
