FT  02 FEB 93 / International Company News: Metra takes majority stake in
Italy's Sanitari Pozzi
A FURTHER step towards the concentration of Europe's sanitaryware market was
taken yesterday with the purchase by the Finnish Metra group of 51 per cent
of Sanitari Pozzi, Italy's leading producer.
The holding is being bought by Allia, the French sanitaryware company
controlled by Metra.
The price of the deal, which will take place via a reserved capital
increase, has yet to be agreed. However, the sale should net at least L20bn
(Dollars 13.7m) for Finanziaria Pozzi Ginori, the quoted holding company
which owns both Sanitari Pozzi and the Richard Ginori fine china group.
Allia will have an option, expected to be exercised, on the remaining shares
in Sanitari Pozzi.
Sanitaryware accounted for about half Finanziaria Pozzi Ginori's 1991 sales
of L209bn.
Bankers say Sanitari Pozzi, controlled by Mr Salvatore Ligresti's Premafin
holding company, has been on sale for some time.
No figures for its earnings are available, but it is believed to have been
making losses in recent years. The sale will realise an unspecified capital
gain for Finanziaria Pozzi Ginori.
The deal marks the second foreign acquisition of a big Italian sanitaryware
maker in less than three years.
In July 1990, Blue Circle, the UK cement and home products group, bought
Ceramica Dolomite, the country's second-biggest sanitary and bathroomware
maker, for L80bn.
The latest deal consolidates Metra's position as one of Europe's leading
makers of sanitaryware.
Apart from Allia, Metra controls Keramag in Germany, as well as a number of
companies in Scandinavia. The group, listed in Helsinki and traded on SEAQ
in London, also makes diesel engines and locks.
Istituto Bancario San Paolo di Torino, the bank which floated 20 per cent of
its shares last year, has released preliminary figures for its first year as
a listed company.
Gross operating profits rose by 22.6 per cent to over L1,600bn, while
interest income jumped by 24.4 per cent to L2,900bn. Fee earnings increased
by 15.4 per cent to L3,600bn. The comparisons are all adjusted for changes
linked to the flotation.
Direct deposits from customers rose by almost 13 per cent to L69,000bn,
while total customer loans climbed 13.6 per cent to L70,000bn.
The proportion of the bank's troubled loans rose to 3.65 per cent from 3 per
cent in 1991 as a result of the recession in Italy.
However, the ratio remained below the Italian average, said the bank.
