FT  22 MAY 93 / Travel Focus (Touring Europe): Ferry companies sharpen their
act - The battle for a share of the cross-Channel travel market is hotting
up / Practical Traveller
JUST WHEN you thought it was safe to go under the water through the Channel
tunnel to France, that is - Jodie Foster has bitten back. The American film
actress is said to be starring in a forthcoming tunnel disaster movie which
will depict teeth-clenching scenes of terror and torment beneath the murky
water. Eurotunnel is understandably miffed.
But ferry companies, even before this Hollywood godsend, were already busy
fending off the tunnel's potential challenge with faster and spruced-up
services. Prices, too, have been sharpened. Such scrapping for market share
has generally spelt good news for the Channel-hopping motorist.
'If you go back 10 years,' says Ian Todd, head of information at P &amp; O
European Ferries, 'crossing the Channel was something to be endured rather
than enjoyed.' But in the past few years, P &amp; O has invested Pounds 400m -
in its Dover operations alone - on new ships, staff training and computer
ticketing. Its competitors have done likewise.
The jumbo ferries born of such investment are a far cry from the dowdy ships
of yesteryear. They boast silver-service restaurants (as well as
cafeterias), video lounges, children's play areas and duty-free shopping
'malls' large enough to swallow your entire holiday allowance before your
tyres hit the Paris peripherique.
Some have club lounges which, for an extra Pounds 5 or so, offer steward
service, fax machines, complimentary refreshments and newspapers.
Ferries are also straining to compete with the tunnel for speed. On the
Dover-Calais route, companies claim a motorway-to-motorway time of 100
minutes, compared with Eurotunnel's projected 60 minutes. Check-in times
have been cut - from an hour to 20 minutes - largely through computerised
ticketing. Improved operations at Dover harbour and relaxation of customs
checks have also helped.
P &amp; O hopes to save further time with the introduction of cameras and
computer-readable labels attached to car windscreens. These will enable
vehicles to drive straight on to ferries without queuing.
From Dover, P &amp; O runs ferries every 45 minutes, and Stena Sealink hourly -
a shuttle service designed to compete with Eurotunnel's planned four
departures an hour.
From June 21, when SeaCat (55-minute crossings) rejoins Hoverspeed's two
Hovercraft (35 minutes) on the Dover-Calais route, there will be a further
18 departures to choose from.
With cross-Channel traffic booming (P &amp; O alone carried 13.2m passengers and
2.2m cars last year), ferry companies are not savaging prices. But, as one
company spokesman said of the run-up to the tunnel-ferry face-off: 'Although
it's not a war yet, the battle lines are being drawn up.'
Even at peak season, a standard Dover-Calais return for a car and five
passengers can be as little as Pounds 135, admittedly at highly unsocial
hours. There are often discounted special offers available through
newspapers or motoring organisations. Sally Line, which operates from
Ramsgate to Dunkerque, is particularly cheap with fares ranging from Pounds
59-Pounds 234.
Motorists not attempting to beat the tunnel for speed might try the
Folkstone-Boulogne Ferry Company which is reviving the Boulogne route
recently abandoned by larger rivals. The aim, according to joint managing
director Ken Faulkner, is to hark back to the leisurely style and service of
a bygone era in an age of what he calls 'floating shopping arcades.'
The company is spending Pounds 250,000 on refurbishing a chartered Isle of
Man ferry which will have an 'old worldy feel' replete with enclosed teak
promenade and lounge chairs. Faulkner promises steward service, free
refreshments and live entertainment. Prices are likely to be 15 per cent
below those on the Dover-Calais route.
Reservations: Brittany Ferries (tel: 0705-827-701); Folkstone-Boulogne Ferry
Company (0303-246-880); Hoverspeed (0304-240-241); P &amp; O European Ferries
(0304-203-388); Sally Line (0843-595-522); Stena Sealink Line
(0233-647-047).
