FT  07 JAN 93 / UK Company News: Storm clouds facing tour bosses - Airtours'
hostile bid for Owners Abroad
HOLIDAYMAKERS heading for the sun this summer may never notice the
difference. But their tour operators are likely to be in the midst of one of
the most fundamental shake-ups in the holiday industry since Harry Goodman's
International Leisure Group crashed in 1991.
Yesterday, Airtours, the UK's third largest tour operator, launched its much
flagged hostile bid for Owners Abroad, the number two in the industry.
Should the deal go through, the enlarged Airtours will have nearly as large
a share of the UK market as Thomson, the dominant market leader for much of
the last decade.
Apart from any regulatory hurdles on competition grounds, the main obstacles
to this being a straightforward takeover battle is the presence of Thomas
Cook, once a subsidiary of Midland Bank but now controlled by Westdeutsche
Landesbank, the Dusseldorf-based state bank.
Last month, Owners Abroad and Thomas Cook agreed a tie-up which would give
Thomas Cook a 10.3 per cent stake in Owners.
The German-controlled company said its wanted to be a part of Owners' plan
to develop a pan-European travel company.
In return, Owners would get access to the well known brand name for
marketing purposes and increased access to the extensive Thomas Cook chain
of retail outlets.
All eyes are, therefore, on WestLB, LTU, the rapidly growing German tour
operator in which the bank has a 34 per cent stake, and Thomas Cook.
'There is a big difference between putting Pounds 237m in a bid and what
they (the Germans) are proposing,' said Mr David Crossland, chairman of
Airtours. 'Are they really that serious or do they just want a tricky
arrangement.'
The proposed deal was not good for Owners' shareholders, when compared with
the benefits of accepting the Airtours share offer, he said.
Mr Howard Klein, Owners chairman, said yesterday that he still believed in
the commercial logic of the deal with Thomas Cook and that the Airtours
offer undervalued the benefits of the tie-up.
'The Thomas Cook deal is right for Owners shareholders; we are fully
committed and Cooks and LTU and Westdeutsche are fully committed,' he said.
'We believe it is a better deal.'
But there is little doubt that should WestLB and Thomas Cook want to push
through with the alliance, Owners shareholders may require a rather sweeter
deal to be put to them if they are not to be tempted by an Airtours offer.
That is not to say that Airtours offer is a knockout blow. The offer, worth
Pounds 221m at yesterday's close, represents a substantial discount to the
market's prospective earnings multiple. As one City observer said yesterday:
'The price does look a bit mean if Airtours is gaining control and doubling
its market share.'
But there again, Airtours boasts a substantially glossier track record.
In the five years since Mr Crossland floated Airtours, with a market
capitalisation of Pounds 27m, earnings per share have grown at a compound
annual rate of 59 per cent and market share in tour operations has grown
from 4 per cent to about 13 per cent, much of it at Thomson's expense. In
1990 and 1991, Airtours was among the fastest growing stocks in the London
market and now has a market capitalisation of nearly Pounds 300m after
issuing only Pounds 17m of new shares.
By comparison, Owners Abroad has not shone. In particular, it missed its
footing in the early marketting of its 1992 holidays, believing the market
would sustain a price increase, and did not take as much advantage of the
ILG collapse.
While Airtours' profits in the year to September last year rose 33 per cent
and sales grew 40 per cent, Owners' profits fell nearly 20 per cent on sales
that grew only half as quickly. In the real acid test for shareholders,
Owners' earnings grew only 6 per cent on a compound basis over the last five
years.
In announcing its deal with Thomas Cook, Owners said it would benefit from
Pounds 7m of cost savings in the first year of the tie-up.
Airtours said yesterday that its savings from a merger would be
significantly in excess of this. Mr Crossland said their combined marketing
operations would benefit as Owners was stronger in the south of England
while Airtours was stronger in the north and in Scotland.
The combined group would also be in a far stronger position in the buying of
40m bed nights a year in Europe - it did not take a calculator to see what
impact a 10p per bed saving would have on profits, Mr Crossland said. And
finally, Airtours would reduce what it sees as a confusing number of Owners
holiday brands.
Ultimately, Owners seems likely to maintain its independence if it can
convince shareholders that the commercial logic of developing a pan-European
holiday company is worth more than Airtours offer.
Potential shareholders in an enlarged group should remember, however, that
Thomson may well try to defend its relative market position by initiating
yet another price war.
