FT  28 APR 93 / Israel announces plan to reorganise bank system
THE ISRAELI finance ministry and central bank yesterday unveiled a
comprehensive reorganisation of the country's banking system. The reforms
are designed to increase competition among banks, decrease their holdings in
non-financial companies and reduce their role in the capital markets.
Under the programme, to be presented to the cabinet for approval on
Sunday,the banks will not be allowed to hold more than 25 per cent of the
shares in non-financial companies, and their total investment in non-banking
assets will be limited to 25 per cent of their capital.
This proposal will force Israel's two largest banks - Hapoalim and Leumi -
to sell off a significant share of their non-banking holdings, mainly in
industry, real estate and energy.
Hapoalim holds 40 per cent of Clal, one of Israel's largest holding
companies, which has
interests in electronics, textiles, trade and property.
Mr Amiram Sivan, managing director of Hapoalim, said the reorganisation plan
would severely damage the international standing of Israel's banking system.
To increase competition among the banks, the three largest banking groups
will also be forced to sell off some of their smaller banks. Under this
proposal, Leumi will have to sell Bank Igud, Hapoalim will be forced to sell
Bank Otsar Hahayal, and Israel Discount Bank will have to sell Barclays.
The three largest banks control more than 80 per cent of the banking
activity in Israel.
'In my view, these decisions are right and necessary for the good of the
economy,' said Mr Avraham Shohat, finance minister. 'On the one hand, they
do not undermine the stability of the banking system, and on the other hand,
they will lead to more competition and prevent conflicts of interest
within the system.'
The government in effect became the owner of the banks in 1983 when it
bailed out the four largest banks, to the tune of Dollars 7bn (Pounds
4.4bn), following a share manipulation scandal. Under an agreement, due to
expire this October, the banks continued to be run by their original owners
and were never formally nationalised.
As part of the reorganisation programme, an accord will be put into effect
in October under which shares in the banks will be transferred to public
trusts which will elect directors in each bank and control policy until the
banks are sold in the next three years.
The reorganisation is meant to pave the way for a public offering of 20 per
cent of the shares in Hapoalim at the end of May. An earlier plan to sell
the shares was torpedoed three months ago by parliament, which demanded the
government present it first with a concrete plan for structural changes in
the banks.
