FT  13 APR 93 / Leeds Permanent close to use of bonds in mortgage funding
LEEDS Permanent Building Society may soon become the first society to fund
mortgages by issuing bonds. The move comes partly in response to societies'
increasing difficulty in attracting deposits from small investors.
Leeds is among a number of societies understood to be planning to diversify
their funding by securitising mortgages.
It may offer investors in the capital markets bonds on which the return is
provided by mortgage borrowers' interest payments.
Leeds said yesterday that it believed it would be capable of securitising
its mortgages, possibly through the vehicle of an off-balance sheet company,
by September, its financial year-end.
Societies are likely to come under increasing pressure this year to find
alternatives to retail funding - using individual savers' deposits to
provide mortgages - if demand for mortgages rises. Their deposit base is
threatened as building society savings accounts face renewed competition
from National Savings and equity products.
If societies gained approval from the Building Societies Commission, the
industry regulator, to offer securities backed by mortgages through off
balance sheet companies, they could achieve more leeway within funding
limits.
Societies as a whole are barred from raising more than 40 per cent of funds
on capital markets under the Building Societies Act, but each society is set
an individual, lower limit, thought to average 30 per cent, by the
commission, according to its view of the strength of their financial
position and experience in the capital markets.
Mr Jon Katovsky, structured finance manager at Leeds, said he believed the
society was closest to being able to provide detailed enough information on
its mortgage lending to satisfy the agencies which give credit ratings,
essential for bonds issued on the capital markets.
Mr Katovsky said the society had already altered the terms of mortgages to
gain permission from borrowers to securitise. He said it was in the process
of changing its computer system to be able to track cash flow and mortgage
accounts.
He said societies would probably be cautious initially, and try out
securitisation techniques on instruments such as mortgage-backed
non-recourse loans from banks. Such loans might also be backed by collateral
from cash funds.
Mr John Wriglesworth, building societies analyst at UBS, said the issue of
mortgage-backed securities could allow societies to 'avoid a potential
funding constraint' due to attacks on their retail funding base.
Centralised mortgage lenders, which started competing with building
societies in the mid-1980s, have used securitisation of mortgages
extensively, but societies have been constrained by technical difficulties
to do with their status.
The commission is not thought to object in principle to the securitisation
of mortgages by societies, although borrowers would lose their status as
society members if their mortgages were held by a vehicle company.
