FT  15 DEC 93 / Arts: Svetlanov's colourful Tchaikovsky - Concert
If the Philharmonia has been popping champagne corks, it is keeping them
quiet. For all the speculation it seems politic to wait until the Arts
Council formally announces its verdict on the funding for London's
orchestras, a decision which has widely been reported to favour the
Philharmonia.
For the time being it is business as usual. On Monday, that entailed a
Russian concert at the Royal Festival Hall, where its main rival, the London
Philharmonic, is orchestra-in-residence (but for how long?) The programme
offered the popular coupling of Rachmaninov and Tchaikovsky, while there is
still the excuse that it is a commemorative year for both of them. (The BBC
documentary on the mysterious circumstances surrounding Tchaikovsky's death
will have been fresh in people's minds.)
There was just one work by each. Of the pianists that I have heard playing
Rachmaninov's Third Piano Concerto recently, Vladimir Ovchinikov is the one
best equipped to tackle the concerto on the scale it demands. He has the
notes, including the long cadenza, and judges the balance with the orchestra
well. He is not too barnstorming like Donohoe, not over poetic like Hough,
never just the dextrous technician.
Unfortunately, it is those negative virtues that one comes away with at the
end. If only he could be more daring expressively, Ovchinikov might
communicate more of what he feels about the music. It might seem ungenerous
to say so, after he had laboured so diligently for nearly an hour, but it
was only Yevgeny Svetlanov's brazen whipping-up of the final orchestral
climax that brought the concerto triumphantly sailing into port.
Svetlanov is one of the musical world's showmen. His performance of
Tchaikovsky's Fourth Symphony was flamboyant and colourful, uncomplicated in
its assessment of the issues the symphony addresses. None of that 'What did
Tchaikovsky die of?' nonsense for him. Svetlanov's Tchaikovsky is in the
grip of raging high blood pressure and exhibits a dangerous excess of red
corpuscles.
Asked to play boldly and loudly, the Philharmonia has no trouble delivering
the goods. It could even play the last movement with panache at the speed
that Svetlanov wanted. But there is limited sensitivity to colour and
internal balance in the orchestra's playing, of the kind it will need to
show if it is to live up to the 'international first division' reputation
being thrust upon it. The Philharmonia needs an experienced orchestral
trainer at its head. Its choice of new Music Director, due to be announced
as soon as the Arts Council is ready, will be crucial.
Gala concert in aid of Cancerkin, sponsored by Elf
