FT  21 JUN 93 / Voice of the little guy: The small shareholder's right to
speak
And now old Jolyon (Forsyte) rose to present the report and accounts.
Veiling under a Jove-like serenity that perpetual antagonism deep-seated in
the bosom of a director towards his shareholders, he faced them calmly -
John Galsworthy, The Man of Property, 1906
Lord Hanson's recent attempt to curb his shareholders at their annual
general meetings has a distinguished pedigree. Hanson, it may be recalled,
aimed to restrict the scope for members to ask questions, nominate directors
or put forward resolutions. Last week, under pressure from big institutional
shareholders, he backed down. But his attempt will have struck a chord with
generations of chairmen, chivvied at their AGMs by activists on any topic
from apartheid to Aids and the environment.
Hanson was perhaps an unexpected company to try such a tactic. On the one
hand, its activities ought to make it a sitting target. It rips up large
tracts of countryside for coal and gravel, blots out even larger tracts with
monocultural forestry and makes a quarter of its profits from a dangerous
and addictive drug, tobacco. But its tightly controlled AGMs are calm and
complacent affairs, with only the occasional muted protest on behalf of
Navajo Indians or the medical profession.
The whole episode nevertheless raises the question of the purpose of AGMs.
For the professional investor, the sole interest normally lies in the
chairman's statement, which might or might not contain price-sensitive clues
on current trading. The rest is mostly ritual: the reappointment of
directors and auditors, a few token questions, a laudatory address from an
institutional shareholder and a cup of tea. If the meeting is formally
restricted to this, is any of its original purpose lost?
The law gives remarkably little guidance. The Companies Act sets down that a
company must hold an AGM at least once each calendar year. It says nothing
about what should happen at it. The handful of other things a company must
do, such as appoint auditors and lay the accounts before shareholders, need
not strictly be done at the AGM. The whole ritual is in fact a matter of
custom and practice, partly enshrined in the London Stock Exchange's
rulebook, but mostly at the company's own discretion.
There are rather more clues in the AGM's history. Mr Richard Fleck, a
partner in City law firm Herbert Smith, says: 'In the old days, everything
was done by partnerships. That required partners to agree on a course of
action, which could only be done in meetings, by majority vote. When limited
companies were allowed by law in the mid-19th century, that concept was
embodied in legislation.'
The next step was to allow a company to act on a majority not of its
members, but of those attending the meeting. 'That gave the meeting a status
it didn't have before,' Mr Fleck observes. 'It also meant a weakening of the
ways in which a company's members could act. What Hanson proposed would have
made it more restrictive again, by further concentrating power in the hands
of the board and a minority of powerful shareholders.'
It could be argued that this concentration of power happened long ago. The
financial institutions, acting alone or in established pressure groups, tell
companies what they want behind closed doors. The AGM functions chiefly as a
threat: if companies do not knuckle under, the argument will be conducted in
the open. Ironically, this is just what happened with Hanson. The
institutions made their objections in private, and a public vote on the
proposals was abandoned.
As might be expected, not all the institutions were opposed to Hanson. One
of the larger ones privately dismissed the objections as hot air.
Resolutions, it said, had to be given careful thought, not dreamt up at
meetings. There was no case for 'corporate governance by guerrilla ambush'.
Whether the institutions should be allowed to get away with this is another
matter. For one thing, around a quarter of the shares in the average UK
company are still held by individuals. For another, the institutions cannot
always be relied upon to speak with one voice, or in the right cause. In the
matter of excessive executive salaries and pensions, for instance, many are
hampered by the salaries they pay themselves.
There is another, more fundamental reason for not gagging the small
shareholder. Company directors and fund managers tend to be rather
conventional people. Being harangued by cranks and visionaries may be a
wearisome business. But on some issues, such as apartheid and the
environment, companies occasionally end up wishing they had listened to the
cranks earlier.
