FT  31 JUL 93 / Clinton budget to face final vote
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton's budget will face a final vote in Congress next week
after negotiators from the House of Representatives and the Senate yesterday
wrapped up a compromise bill.
Negotiators settled on an increase of 4.3 cents per American gallon in the
federal petrol tax, slashing the revenue Mr Clinton had planned to raise
from a broader energy tax and in the process disappointing both left wingers
who wanted more money for social programmes and fiscal hawks who wanted a
more serious effort at curbing the budget deficit.
Passage of the budget next week is by no means assured. The House passed its
original version in May by only six votes, while in the Senate
Vice-President Al Gore's casting vote broke a 49-49 tie last month.
'It'll be tight as a tick in the Senate, but I think in the last analysis
we'll push the ball over the goal line in both bodies,' Mr Roger Altman, the
deputy Treasury secretary, said yesterday.
Even if the budget does pass, it will bear only a passing resemblance to the
economic programme originally outlined by Mr Clinton when he took office.
The centrepiece of that programme was a new energy tax levied at 25.7 cents
per million British thermal units on most fuels, with an additional 34.2
cents per million BTUs on oil, to raise Dollars 71.4bn over five years.
House negotiators this week went along with the Senate's decision to drop
this broad energy tax in favour of simply increasing the petrol tax, and on
Thursday night they even gave up their efforts to cajole the Senate into
accepting an increase greater than the 4.3 cents per gallon it passed in
June.
The result is only Dollars 23bn of revenue over five years, making it much
harder to pay for the urban and low income spending programmes that some
House members have made the price of their support.
Congress has also resuscitated many of its favourite pork barrel spending
programmes, such as honey subsidies and rural electrification loans, as well
as preserving tax loopholes such as the tax deductibility of business meals,
while slashing Mr Clinton's proposals to shift spending into new areas he
classified as 'investments'.
In the end, Congress's unwillingness either to raise energy taxes or to cut
spending has even forced the Clinton administration to give way on its
overriding goal of trimming the federal budget deficit by Dollars 500bn over
five years from its current projected path.
The compromise budget bill seemed sure to fall short of the Dollars 500bn
target, although Democratic leaders were still scrambling to ensure it beat
the Dollars 482bn cut claimed by the 1990 budget agreement.
