FT  29 JAN 93 / Arts: Power of the Bolshoy Effect - Ballet
Sitting in the Albert Hall, surrounded by 3,000 eager Bolshoy Ballet
watchers, it is impossible not to feel that exhilaration which I can best
identify as 'The Bolshoy Effect'. It is a tribute to Moscow's Finest that,
over a period of 36 years and in a dozen theatres round the world (all of
them more congenial to the company than this hall), I have sensed this same
extraordinary power that the Bolshoy exerts over its public.
It has to do with bigness of scale, in production as in dance manner, so
that audiences surrender to the massive forces - emotional as well as
muscular - that are on display. It has to do with theatrical purpose, a
dedication to the work in hand, which touches every artist on stage. (In the
Stone Flower suite on Tuesday night, a gypsy girl and a hunchback musician
played a small drama at one edge of the stage with a conviction that must
have reached to the furthest eyries of the hall. Marvellous communicative
skill.) It has to do with the cinemascope swathes of energy and drama with
which Grigorovich paints his choreographic scenes.
The 'orgy' in Spartacus is a combination of roguishness and goose-stepping
(Walpurgisnacht at Berchtesgarten) that should make one laugh, and actually
works as drama. The fair scene in Stone Flower is Petrushka without the
puppets, and yet brilliantly conceived as dance-action, and even more
brilliantly done in its peasant enthusiasms. The street brawl in Romeo is a
whirlpool of bodies which convinces because at every moment the Bolshoy's
dancers are exactly tuned to a mood and to a level of physical grandeur in
performance that silences doubts about this view of Verona and Shakespeare.
Here is the secret of our belief in these arena evenings. For the most part
the central interpretations are minimised or defeated by the lack of a stage
frame, and at best we can respond to technical aspects of performance. I
find the men more interesting than the women this season, with the exception
of Elina Palshina and Inna Petrova, both of whom show poetic artistry as
well as physical skill - but one looks in vain for the ballerina glories of
earlier seasons, for any stimulation from differing temperament and style.
(I recall the miraculous variety between Ulanova, Plisetskaya, Struchkova,
Maximova and Bessmertnova on earlier visits.)
This week I have again admired the princely Andrey Uvarov, the blaze of
Nikolay Tsiskaridze's virtuosity (as Mercutio he enlarged and re-charged the
role in amazing split leaps and running capers; his death scene was
astonishing, not least because he somehow forced our attention upon the
beautiful arch of his insteps), and the finesse of Sergey Filin's dancing in
Swan Lake's ball-room. Yury Klevtsov, a fine, idealistic Danila in Stone
Flower, does not yet have the dynamic scale for Spartacus.
The season is unlike anything we have known before from the Bolshoy, or any
other company. It has shown that an audience can be inspired - through an
insistent advertising campaign, I'd hazard - to pay high prices for an arena
dance event, and that in the Bolshoy Ballet we have the one company in the
world that can sustain the demands of such surroundings, and such hype.
The choice of repertory for the event is astute. It is not what
Bolshoy-lovers, even ballet-lovers, want to see, since it cuts corners and
ultimately denies ballet as a theatre art to which Moscow's troupe has
brought an immense glamour. But this is not theatre - though it is ballet -
and the dire imperatives of the Russian economy and the no less dire
imperatives of Western costs indicate this formula as a way forward (a
temporary one, pray Heaven) for Russian ballet and Western impresarios. It
is ballet for a time of crisis. It is also a mutation. And no one - least of
all the Bolshoy's directorate - must forget what the Bolshoy Ballet has
meant in the past and will, pray Heaven again, mean in a happier future.
The Bolshoy Ballet continues at the Royal Albert Hall until February 14
