FT  26 FEB 93 / The ICI Demerger: Simple cash raising finds support
THE DECISION to choose a 'plain vanilla' rights issue from Zeneca, to
coincide with the demerger in early June, may have been the price it had to
pay for investor support for the plan.
ICI shares rose sharply yesterday although the size of the issue at about
Pounds 1.3bn is higher than the stock market had expected.
Sir Denys Henderson, chairman, has had extensive discussions with
institutional shareholders in recent weeks and said yesterday that investors
were in favour of the deal.
One banker involved said that shareholders had indicated that they would
support the deal if their pre-emption rights were maintained.
An underwritten deal - underwriting will take place in mid-May before the
shareholders meet to vote on the demerger - will also give ICI the desired
certainty of finance for the split.
That will ensure that both of the demerged businesses are well-capitalised,
with relatively low gearing. Both companies will be cash positive, ICI said,
and able to fund growth and capital expenditure.
Even though the issue will be a standard rights, Zeneca wants the demerger
and the fund-raising to give it an opportunity to broaden its investor base.
It is keen to find new shareholders outside the UK. At present more than 90
per cent of ICI's shares are held in the UK, and only 5 per cent in the US.
Nearly half of Zeneca's business is in the US.
Mr John Mayo, the former Warburg corporate financier who is the new finance
director of Zeneca, said yesterday: 'We are examining all the options to
make sure Zeneca gets launched on an international basis.'
He said Zeneca was looking at transaction structures which would 'fully
honour pre-emption rights' but give the opportunity for an international
road show and one-to-one presentations to potential investors. These would
take Zeneca's team to the US and continental Europe.
'We will make sure that should foreign investors wish to invest during the
rights period they can come and buy in the secondary market,' Mr Mayo said.
These investors could either buy the rights shares in nil-paid form or buy
the shares issued through the demerger.
Bankers involved expect that there will be loose shares available and are
looking at ways, for example, to match demand in one country with supply in
another. Investment bankers are being invited to put forward proposals.
As part of the process Zeneca's shares will be registered with the
Securities and Exchange Commission in the US and an American depositary
receipt programme will be put in place.
Mr Mayo said that the 27.5p net dividend promised on Zeneca's shares would
be paid on the rights shares as well. That is expected to give Zeneca a
yield above that of similar companies, which, bankers said, could support
the shares until investors could see more clearly the new products in the
research pipeline.
Financial advisers to the demerger and issue will be SG Warburg, Goldman
Sachs International and de Zoete &amp; Bevan.
