FT  17 JUN 93 / Technology: A little camera with big ideas - The latest
smart vision system
Motorists around the world may soon no longer be blinded by headlight glare
in their rear-view mirrors thanks to a microchip camera and image processing
system invented by a Scottish start-up company.
That is only the first commercial application of what has the potential to
be world-beating semiconductor technology developed by a group of scientists
at Edinburgh University three years ago.
Last month, VLSI Vision Ltd (VVL), the company set up to develop this
technology, introduced the world's first image-processing system on a single
microchip.
Donnelly, the big Massachusetts-based manufacturer of rear-view mirrors, has
snapped up the combined camera and computer on a chip, known as the imputer,
to control a new self-adjusting anti-glare mirror. Using electrochromic
technology, the mirror's surface (containing the imputer) darkens to cope
with outside glare. The deal is a valuable one for VVL, one of a new
generation of small design houses which have limited resources but must
survive on the uniqueness of their ideas.
'Without VVL, Donnelly would not have thought about putting a camera into a
rear-view mirror,' says Stewart Smith, VVL's marketing manager. Peter
Denyer, the Edinburgh University professor who invented the technology and
is now managing director of VVL, believes it can grow into a Pounds 20m
company within five years. 'I have learnt to speak cautiously,' said Denyer,
'but that's possible if one of our products takes off and I believe any of
them is capable of it.'
Denyer and his team have created a smart vision system which can be made
small enough and cheaply enough to introduce image-processing technology
into new applications from production-line monitoring to supermarket
checkout scanners. 'Nowhere in the world can you find a camera at such a
size and price. It will be unique for a while,' says Denyer.
Japanese companies such as Sony lead the world in miniature optical sensors
called charge coupled devices (CCDs) which are used in camcorders. US
companies specialise in fast microprocessors which can turn optical data
into usable information. VVL, which has Pounds 2m of development capital,
combined the CCD sensor with a microprocessor which can process digital
picture information at 1bn bits per second on a single integrated circuit
costing less than Dollars 10 (Pounds 6.40). But the first production order
from Donnelly, the world's largest company in its sector, is likely to be
priced at less than Dollars 5 per circuit.
Denyer and his team have none of the financial resources usually thought
necessary in the semiconductor industry. The VVL microchip is made in France
by custom chip-maker ES2. Their asset is the ability to innovate in
semiconductor chip design and software development.
To help find commercial applications for the imputer - such as inspection,
traffic control, navigation, and robotics - VVL has produced a development
system, with special software, costing Pounds 500. It can be used as an
image processor in its own right, but Denyer says its real aim is to enable
customers to develop applications.
Once the application is found, VVL will compress the system into an
integrated circuit the size of a postage stamp. Denyer believes this will
give VVL atechnological edge over Japan and the US.
VVL is typical of the small, high-tech start-up companies scattered across
California which have done so much to give the US its world lead in
computer, semiconductor and software design.
It has long been suggested that the reluctance of British investors to back
new technology companies has stifled the start-up culture in the UK. Denyer
believes this is a myth. He had no trouble in raising the necessary capital
from private investors.
He believes inventing something is not enough for university scientists if
they want a successful product. The ideas must have a commercial
application.
