FT  22 MAY 93 / Money Markets: Sterling contracts up
THERE was a fractionally more bullish tone about UK base rate cuts yesterday
after Britain's inflation figures came in slightly better than had been
expected, writes James Blitz. The retail prices index showed a 1.3 per cent
rise in inflation in the year to April after a year-on-year increase of 1.9
per cent in March. This meant that there was an overall fall of 0.6
percentage points in the inflation rate.
The move from the poll tax to the council tax had a big impact in forcing
down the inflation rate.
Dealers in interest rate futures markets took the view that the lower
inflation rate would make a cut in UK base rates possible if the authorities
decided to introduce one later this year.
However, the June contract rose only 3 basis points closing at 93.95, a
level that was more or less consonant with 3-month sterling cash.
The September contract rose 10 basis points at one stage, to a high of
94.06, later falling back to close at 94.02. Trading in the September
contract was a great deal heavier than for June, indicating that the market
believes a cut is more likely to happen in the autumn, if at all.
Rates in the sterling cash market softened slightly during the day.
Three-month interest rates closed at 6 per cent, having been at 6 1/16 per
cent earlier in the day. There was a daily shortage of Pounds 1.5bn in the
discount market, with only Pounds 125m left as late assistance. The
overnight rate fell as low as 4 per cent.
In Europe, Finland and Portugal joined in the general round of official
interest rate cutting that has dominated the week of the Danish referendum.
Finland reduced its tender rate from 8.59 per cent to 8.37 per cent.
Portugal reduced its discount rate by 100 basis points to 13 1/2 per cent
and its reference rate by 150 basis points to 14 1/2 per cent.
German futures contracts fell back yesterday as dealers took the view that
the D-Mark's weakness on the currency markets might threaten the established
pace of German monetary easing.
The September Euromark contract fell 7 basis points to close at 93.46. Call
money also remained firm near Wednesday's level of 7.85 per cent with the
drain on liquidity caused by this month's tax payments prompting the central
bank to provide the market with short term funds.
