FT  23 JUL 93 / Government Bonds: Fresh rate cut hopes drive up most
European prices
PRESSURE on the European exchange rate mechanism intensified yesterday,
sending many government bond markets higher as hopes for rate cuts soared.
France took centre stage as the French central bank suspended its 5- to
10-day lending facility. Dealers said it also intervened in the money
markets to support the currency.
On the Matif, the Notionnel fell sharply during morning trading on growing
economic uncertainty and the prospect of tighter monetary policy. The
September contract was down 0.34 at its lowest, marking a fall of nearly one
percentage point in the past two days.
Then, the Banque de France suspended its 7.75 per cent repo and replaced it
with 24-hour funding at the same rate. There was some surprise that it did
not raise rates as it did in January during the last bout of currency
selling.
However, it sent a warning signal to the domestic banks, and the refusal to
guarantee the level of lending for more than a day prompted a rise in a
number of short-term rates. Two-year bond yields rose to reflect concern
that short-term interest rates were on the turn.
All this was compounded by speculation that France was about to devalue the
currency, effectively decoupling from the ERM. OAT futures bounced back
sharply to close 0.18 higher at 119.92.
Mr Brian Hilliard, European economist with SGST said: 'French bond futures
bounced on rumours that the franc would be devalued and, although it seems
unlikely, there is a battle royal in the making.'
SPANISH government bond futures rose almost a full percentage point as a
crumbling peseta led to a strong belief that the country would soon be
forced to cut interest rates.
Unsupported by any central bank intervention, the peseta crashed through its
central ERM rate of 79.1172 against the D-Mark to hit Pta80. Dealers
scrambled into 10-year bonds futures partly to hedge against the currency
and partly to pre-empt what they considered an essential rate cut. The
September contract jumped 0.93 to 92.83.
GERMAN debt prices gained yesterday in spite of a host of worrying economic
data. Bund futures closed 0.28 up at 96.15.
The Bundesbank had already said it was unwilling to cut rates if, as
happened, monetary supply figures came in above central bank targets.
Economists also expect a disappointing inflation figure when regional
statistics begin to roll in either today or early next week.
If inflation has risen, there is no domestic justification to cut rates and
it remains to be seen whether the central bank will step in nevertheless to
relieve the ERM tension.
UK government bonds slipped in early trading ahead of last night's crucial
vote on the Social Chapter of the Maastricht Treaty.
Although international sellers were seen at all points of the yield curve,
the falls were overdone and a futures-led rally saw most maturities claw
back their losses with the short- and medium-dated stocks showing a net gain
by the close.
JAPANESE government bond prices fell on expectations of a boost in supply as
Japan's finance ministry offered Y800bn of 10-year government bonds
The latest issue, which has a 4.5 per cent coupon, reopens the two tranches
of the No 157 10-year bond to create a Y2,400bn issue likely to become the
next benchmark bond. The current benchmark, the JGB No 145 saw the yield
rise from 4.22 per cent at Thursday's close of dealing in London to 4.24 per
cent last night.
AFTER edging higher on encouraging comments on inflation from Federal
Reserve chairman Mr Alan Greenspan, US Treasury prices fell when he warned
interest rates would have to go up some time.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government bond was down  13/16 at
106 1/32 , yielding 6.653 per cent. At the short end, the two-year note was
down  1/16 at 99 7/8 , to yield 4.175 per cent.
Prices were firmer in early trading following a bullish jobless claim report
showing a 24,000 jump in the number claiming state unemployment insurance
during the second week of July.
During uncertain mid-morning trading, longer-dated securities posted modest
gains after Mr Greenspan told Congress he saw no signs of inflation beyond
the limits of longer-term market expectations, which themselves seem to be
receding.
Bonds turned tail during the afternoon, however, once the market had
digested Mr Greenspan's remarks that an interest rate rise was 'somewhere
out there'. Although this was obvious, it was enough to unsettle a fragile
market. Even later, prices fell further on rumours that Mr Dan Rostenkowski,
a key figure in the Congressional negotiations over the deficit reduction
bill, was about to resign.
