FT  21 AUG 93 / Despatches: Poachers close in on the tiger - India is home
to two-thirds of the world's tigers. From 1973 to 1989 numbers doubled. But
the poachers have returned and extinction again looms
PROTECTING the tigers of Ranthambhore, India's best-known wildlife reserve,
almost cost Devi Singh Rathore his life. The 24-year-old forest guard was
shot in the head, face and shoulder by a suspected poacher who fired at his
Jeep with a shotgun. The guard sitting next to him took the full force of
the blast and died instantly. A third man in the back of the vehicle was
also killed and a fourth was injured.
'What happened was terrible,' says Rathore, wincing from the pain of the two
pellets which are still lodged in his body. 'If this carries on it will be
impossible to save the tigers.'
The guards were attacked last April after being called out to track
suspected poachers on the edge of the Ranthambhore reserve in the hot
sandstone hills of southern Rajastan. After three days travelling from
village to village in search of information, they stumbled across three men
camping in a makeshift tent. They arrested two, but the third escaped.
On the way to back to their HQ, the guards stopped for a meal and a rest.
The delay proved fatal. The escaped poacher had got ahead of the guards and,
knowing the road they would have to take, had laid an ambush. Choosing a
steep-sided gorge, he rolled rocks into the road and hid behind the trees.
When the Jeep arrived, the poacher opened fire with a crude muzzle-loading
shotgun. Police later arrested a man and charged him with murder.
Poachers have long been active in India's reserves, hunting tigers, leopards
and other cats for their fur and small animals for meat. Most have been
villagers living near parks with few other means of support.
In the 1970s and 1980s, India had great success in protecting tigers through
a national campaign called Project Tiger, launched in 1973. From one year to
the next the numbers of Indian tigers went up.
From about 2,000 in 1973, India's tiger population rose to 4,300 by 1989,
out of an estimated world total of 6,000-7,000. Over the same period,
India's human population rose by 60 per cent and the economy doubled in
size. India's experience seemed to prove that even in a poor and
over-populated country, protection of the environment and economic
development were not incompatible.
Ranthambhore, the beautiful former hunting preserve of the maharajahs of
Jaipur, achieved particular fame because its tigers forsook traditional
habits and became active during the day - supposedly because they now felt
safe from man. The park, with its ancient forts, Moghul pavilions and lakes,
attracted plenty of tourists.
It was not until last year that conservationists realised that something was
seriously wrong - when reports indicated alarming declines in the numbers of
tigers at India's leading national parks.
At Ranthambhore, the tiger tally dropped from 45 in 1991 to 17 last year,
though the figure was revised this year to 28. For wildlife experts the
conclusion seemed inescapable: tigers were disappearing so fast that their
survival was at stake.
Experts were quick to identify the origin of the new threat - an upsurge in
demand for tiger bone for Chinese medicine. Chinese apothecaries believe
tiger bone has the power to restore energy and sexual prowess. Factories in
China, Taiwan and South Korea produce tens of thousands of bottles of tiger
bone medicine for sale in east Asia and in Chinese communities around the
world.
Conservationists say these factories have in the past used bone from Chinese
tigers, including a vast stock which was accumulated when over 1,000 tigers
were hunted and killed as pests in the 1950s in southern China.
In the last few years this stock seems to have run low, just at a time when
fast economic growth has created millions of new customers for tiger bone
medicine. The trade is quite open. Until recently apothecaries in Tihwa
Street in Taipei displayed tiger bones in their windows, selling at a retail
price of up to Dollars 1,500 per kilogramme.
The Huangshi Long March pharmaceutical factory in Hubei province, northern
China, puts a tiger emblem on its packets of musk and tiger-bone plasters
for use in treating rheumatism.
The first evidence of tigers being killed for their bones in India came in
1987 when poachers operating in the foothills of the Himalaya, in Uttar
Pradesh, were found to have discarded a skin. Proof came last year at
Ranthambhore when a local poacher named Gopal Mogya and an accomplice, a
meat trader, were caught on the edge of the park carrying a gun and a bag of
bones.
The police say that Mogya confessed to selling bones and skins to a butcher
in the nearby town of Sawai Madhopur. In turn, the butcher said he supplied
Mohamed Ashiq and Mohamed Ahmed, two brothers who own a tanning business in
Fatehpur, a centre of the leather industry, some 200 miles from Sawai
Madhopur.
Mohan Singh Bhati, the police superintendent at Sawai Madhopur, who
estimates that 14-18 tigers have been poached from Ranthambhore, says it is
the first time Indian police have broken such an extensive poaching ring.
From Fatehpur, the trail led to New Delhi where the police are investigating
several fur and skin traders but have made no further arrests. Wildlife
experts working for Traffic, a unit of the World Wide Fund for Nature, which
monitors trade in endangered species, say that Delhi is an important centre
for dealing in skins, bones and other products.
The principal traders are often Kashmiris, who have moved their businesses
to Delhi. Kashmiris have a tradition of fur-making; they also have
long-standing experience of trading with foreigners. They established
world-wide networks in the fur trade before international agreements in the
1970s suppressed the legitimate trade in wild animal products.
A few fur shops trade openly in New Delhi, for example in Yashwant Place, a
run-down shopping centre favoured by hawkers dealing in smuggled wrist
watches and Russian champagne. But Traffic's experts believe that most of
the skins are smuggled out of India, mainly to Kathmandu in Nepal, where
there is also a sizeable Kashmiri community.
Nepal, like India, has tough laws against trading wild animal skins, but
they are barely enforced. Tourists can easily buy coats made of leopard and
other skins in shops near big hotels. Traffic researchers who visited the
area last year counted 294 coats made from the skins of over 100 leopards,
14 clouded leopards and 2,500 other wild cats.
Traffic says tiger skins and bones are smuggled out of India by the same
route but are rarely seen because of the international publicity that tigers
attract. The bones are mostly ground into powder and carried by couriers
overland into Tibet or by air to Bangkok and Hong Kong. Vivek Menon, of
Traffic's Delhi office, says it is futile trying to estimate how much bone
is taken out of India. 'Very few people are arrested. And they are always
the minions.'
The conservationists' top priority is to try to stop the bone-related
poaching. India, Nepal and China are all signatories of the 1973 Convention
on Trade in Endangered Species, the main international agreement restricting
trade in wildlife.
In line with the convention, all these countries have passed tough laws
against trade in the products of endangered species. But enforcement varies
greatly. Even in India, which has a comparatively good record, there is a
loophole that allows traders in Kashmir to deal in skins taken from pre-1979
stocks.
Under pressure from conservationists, governments are starting to act. China
has announced plans for an east Asian wildlife protocol, an agreement to
restrict trade in wildlife, to be signed later this year by ministers from
east Asian countries. But it is difficult to see what benefits the protocol
will bring, other than to remind governments of their existing commitments.
Kamal Nath, the Indian minister for the environment and forests, says
protecting the tiger is an issue for all countries. 'We need help,' he says.
The help he has in mind is pressure on east Asian countries brought by the
US and other export markets.
Conservationists also believe that important changes are needed in the
running of the 19 reserves which now come under Project Tiger. These
reserves are the pick of India's wildlife parks, sanctuaries not only for
tigers but for numerous other species, including leopards, elephants and the
country's last surviving rhinoceroses. The decline in the numbers of tigers
has drawn attention to serious shortcomings in the management of these
parks.
Valmik Thapar, author of studies on the tigers of Ranthambhore, says the
only way forward is to involve local people more in the running of the park.
Former poachers would make good gamekeepers. Villagers could be encouraged
to work as forest guards. Informants could be paid for tips about poachers.
Without such efforts, the tiger may be doomed.
Christian Tyler (Private View) and James Morgan (As They Say In Europe) are
on holiday.
