FT  04 OCT 93 / Risk and Reward: Setback for active quantitative fund
management sector
The active quantitative ('active quant') fund management sector suffered a
setback last week when it was revealed that the performance statistics of
one of the most successful managers is being questioned.
Hill Samuel Investment Management is one of the few active quantitive fund
managers to be able to attract the attention of the pension fund
consultants, and consequently their clients, with its Active Value
Management product. Its chief attraction was that it had a five-year track
record based on actual returns from money under management and did not rely
on hypothetical 'back-testing' to show prospective clients how it performed.
Active quant is a broad term encompassing a mathematical approach to stock
picking and asset allocation by collecting and analysing vast quantities of
data about each stock. Active quant managers decide which stock
characteristics are likely to lead to outperformance and tilt their
portfolios accordingly.
Last week, Mr Richard Bernays, chief executive of HSIM, said he had notified
IMRO, the self-regulatory body for the fund management industry, that the
internally generated performance data which had been used for marketing
purposes had overstated the returns of some clients who had their own pools
measured externally.
The disparities occurred primarily in 1992. One pension fund client, who
said he took on Hill Samuel in 1992, said he did so after seeing performance
returns showing that until then AVM had been delivering returns 4 percentage
points above the FT-A all-share index. Mr Bernays said that for 1992 and
1993 the product had been just matching the FT-A all-share index.
While the client said he believed Hill Samuel had made every effort to deal
with the problem, his pension fund board of trustees will be meeting later
this week to decide whether they still retain confidence in the product.
So far, Mr Bernays said, HSIM has lost only one of its 11 clients, and a
small one at that. The account left 'not for performance reasons. We made
some pretty rash claims which did not materialise,' he said.
Within the past few months, HSIM has made some revisions to its product,
broadening to 60 from 40 the number of stocks it holds in each portfolio.
'When we analysed the portfolio, we found that the tilts were basically
right. However, we had too many stock-specific and sector-specific risks,'
he said.
Pension consultants said that in addition to the reported performance
figures, questions have been raised about the data for 1987. It is not clear
whether the returns represent that of an actual portfolio or whether an
'intellectual' portfolio was being run for a part of the year.
The problems were discovered after the departure of the team which developed
the product. The team moved to State Street Global Asset Management, where
it is now developing a product to compete with Hill Samuel's AVM.
Consultants said the affair may raise as many questions about performance
measurement as it does about active quant as a technique.
'The industry was prepared to allow managers with good track records to show
only three years of performance data,' said one. Typically, five years of
performance data are required for client presentations but, because active
quant managers are much more clearly able to explain how they achieve their
results, some consultants were prepared to recommend them based on only
three years of performance.
Mr Alan Greenhorn, the former HSIM official who developed the AVM product,
said he could not discuss the matter because of a confidentiality agreement.
But he says that 'performance measurement is the most difficult aspect of
fund management. It is a kind of reverse engineering.' Current methods are
most appropriate for classic balanced management in which the manager
allocates assets among different classes and picks securities within them.
But for specialist fund management, new forms of measurement are needed, he
said.
'You have got to be able to determine what was added by asset allocation,
stock selection and currency overlay,' Mr Greenhorn said. 'Current
performance measurement technique doesn't do that.'
