FT  23 FEB 93 / International Company News: Turkey to sell cement companies
TURKEY hopes to raise Dollars 218m by selling five state-owned cement
companies in the latest stage of an ambitious plan to sell TL25,000bn
(Dollars 2.7bn) of state shares in 1993.
For the second time, the Public Participation Administration, the state
agency handling privatisation, yesterday issued an offer for the block sale
of the Adiyaman, Askale, Bartin, Ladik and Sanliurfa factories, setting a
minimum price above which negotiations will start. Bids have to be submitted
by March 29.
Cement has proved to be the most attractive investment sector for foreign
investment in Turkey. The market, with sales of around 26,000 tonnes in
1991, equals those of France and Spain, and is growing by some 5 per cent a
year.
Ciments Francais, now owned 86 per cent owned by Italcementi, already has
seven plants, having invested around Dollars 350m. Lafarge Coppee and Vicat
of France have also bought Turkish factories.
Industry officials expect further foreign interest in the latest offer.
Lafarge, the world's largest concrete and aggregates producer, is expected
to make a bid for Askale, which the PPA has valued at Dollars 30m.
Holderbank of Switzerland is also understood to be interested in acquiring
Turkish operations.
In November, the PPA raised Dollars 281m through the sale of six cement
companies but, despite foreign interest, all were sold to local concerns.
The PPA yesterday announced plans to sell by public offering its outstanding
20 per cent stake in Netas the local subsidiary of Northern Telecom of
Canada.
The timing was probably influenced by the sharp upturn in the Istanbul stock
market, with the index reaching an all-time high on Thursday, following
government moves to bring down bank interest rates.
Earlier this month, the PPA concluded the block sale of 20 per cent to
Northern Telecom, raising Dollars 215m and making the Canadian company
Netas's majority partner.
The PPA also raised Dollars 115m this month by selling two state-owned power
utilities to the local Uzan group. Uzan's Rumeli Holding also bought two
state cement factories.
